A TOUR THROUGH SICILY AND MALTA. IN A SERIES OF LETTERS TO WILLIAM BECKFORD,
Esquire. OF SOMERLY IN SUFFOLK; FROM P. BRYDONE, F. R. S.

IN TWO VOLUMES. A NEW EDITION.

BOSTON: Printed by JOSEPH BUMSTEAD, for JOHN BOIL, DAVID WEST, and E. LARKIN,
jun. M.DCC.XCII.

HAD there been any book in our language on the subject of the following
letters, they never should have seen the light. The Author wrote them for the
amusement of his friends, and as an assistance to his memory; and if it will in
any degree apologize for their imperfections, he can with truth declare that
they never were intended for publication: Nor indeed was that idea suggested to
him, 'till long after they were written. One principal motive he will own, was
the desire of giving to the world, and perhaps of transmitting to posterity, a
monument of his friendship with the gentleman to whom they are addressed.

WHEN Mr Forster's translation of Baron Reidesel's book first appeared, these
letters were already in the press, and the Author apprehended an anticipation
of his subject; however, on perusal he had the satisfaction to find, that the
two works did not much interfere.

IN transcribing them for the press, he found it necessary both to retrench and
to amplify; by which the ease of the epistolary style has probably suffered,
and some of the letters have been extended much beyond their original length.

HE now presents them to the Public with the greatest diffidence; hoping that
some allowance will be made for the very inconvenient circumstances, little
favorable to order or precision, in which some of them were written: But he
would not venture to new-model them; apprehending, that what they might gain in
form and expression, they would probably lose in ease and simplicity; and well
knowing that the original impressions are better described at the moment they
are felt, than from the most exact recollection.

CONTENTS OF THE TWO VOLUMES.
LETTER I. p. 1. CLIMATE of Naples -- Compared with that of Rome. -- Sirocc
wind -- Antidote against its effects. -- Coast. of Baia, etc. LETTER II. p. 9.
Voyage from Naples to Messina. -- Bay of Naples. -- Lipari islands. --
Strombolo. -- Scylla. -- Calabria, etc. LETTER III. p. 27. Harbor of Messina.
-- Charybdis. -- Galleys. -- Visit to a convent. -- Feast of St. Francis. --
Advantages of Messina for valetudinarians. LETTER IV. p. 37. Sicilian banditti.
-- A famous diver. -- Charybdis. -- Feast of the Vara. -- Singular phenomenon.
LETTER V. p. 50. Journey to Tourominum. -- Coast of Sicily. -- Nebrodes. --
Theater of Taurominum. -- Na^machia. -- Reservoirs, etc. LETTER VI. p. 56.
Journey to Jaci. -- Mount Aetna. -- Piedmonte. -- Small Volcanos. -- Torrent of
boiling water. -- Great chestnut trees. -- Age of the lava. -- River of Acis.
LETTER VII. p. 68. Journey from Jaci to Catania. -- Coast formed of lava. --
Conflict betwixt the fire and water. -- Harbor of lava. -- St. Agatha's veil
-- Its power over Mount Aetna. -- Great antiquity of the eruptions of this
mountain. LETTER VIII. p. 72. Prince of Biscaris -- His museum. -- Convent of
Benedictines. -- Lava run over the walls of Catania -- Antiquity of this city.
-- Revenue of the bishop raised from the sale of the (...) of Aetna. --
Earthquake 1693. -- Antiquities. -- Elephant of lava. -- Heathen temple
converted into a church. -- Resemblance of the Catholic to the Pagan rites. --
Saints disgraced. -- Devotion of the Catholics. Preparations for ascending
Mount Aetna. LETTER. IX. p. 84. Journey up Mount Aetna. -- Three regions of the
mountain. -- Common progress of an eruption. -- Lesser mountains formed on
Aetna. -- Difference of Aetna and Vesuvius. -- Fate of the country near Hybla.
-- Montpelieri. -- Celebrated statues covered by the lava -- eruption of 1669.
-- Dreadful effects of the lava. -- Singular fate of a vineyard. -- Mouth from
whence this eruption issued. -- A cavern. -- Wildness of the inhabitants of
Aetna. -- Conversation with them. -- La Regione Sylvosa. -- La Spelonca del
Capriole. View of the setting sun. -- Pass the night in a cavern. -- Eruption
of 1766. -- Lava not yet cold. -- Its vast depth. LETTER X. p. 98. Continuation
of the journey up Mount Aetna. -- Difficulties attending it. Torre del
Filososo. -- Distinctness of vision. -- Conical mountain. -- Summit of Aetna.
-- Prospects from it. -- Regions of the mountain. -- Crater. -- Reflections. --
Descent from Aetna. LETTER XI. p. 112. Mensuration of heights by the barometer.
-- Not reduced to a certainty. -- Supposed height of Aetna. -- Magnetical
needle agitated on the mountain. -- Electricity of the air near volcanos. --
Singular effects of electricity. -- Lightning from the smoke of Aetna. --
Variety of waters on the mountain. -- Subterraneous river. -- Periodical and
poisonous springs. -- Caverns. -- Plants and flowers of Aetna. -- Wild beasts.
-- Horses. -- Cattle. -- Crater falls in every century. -- Ansinomus and
Anapius, their filial piety. -- Earthquake 1169. -- Eruption 1669. -- Poetical
descriptions of Aetna. LETTER XII. p. 138. Voyage from Catania to Syracuse. --
Coast formed by Mount Aetna. -- Homer takes no notice of this mountain. --
Virgil lands his hero at the foot of it. -- View of mountain from the sea. --
Circumference of Aetna. -- River Simetus. -- Amber found near its mouth. --
Lakes of B^viere and Pantana. -- Leontine fields. -- Augusta. -- Syracuse. --
Remains of antiquity. -- Latomie. -- Ear of Dionysius. -- Amphitheatre. --
Catacombs. -- Temples. -- Ortigia. -- Fortification. -- Fountain of Arethusa.
-- Fictions concerning it. -- Alphaeus. -- Harbors of Syracuse. -- Archimedes.
-- His burning-glasses. -- Magnificence of the ancient Syracuse. Poverty of the
modern. LETTER XIII. p. 157. Voyage to Pachinus or Capo Passero. -- Maltese
sparonaros -- Method of rowing them. -- A hurricane. -- Capo Passero. --
Barrenness of the country -- Danger of this coast -- Method of avoiding it.
LETTER XIV. p. 165. Sulphurous lake. -- Serpent. -- Voyage to Malta. LETTER
XV. p. 169. Malta -- Its productions -- Corn -- Cotton -- Oranges. -- Industry
of the Maltese -- Departure of a Maltese fleet. -- Harbor of Malta --
Fortifications -- Public buildings. -- Church of St. John. -- Conspiracy of the
Turkish slaves. LETTER XVI. p. 177. Ancient city of Melita. -- Catacombs. --
Bosquetta. -- Statue and grotto of St. Paul. -- Miraculous property. -- Grand
master. -- His power. -- Land force of the island. -- Sea force. -- Singular
piece of ordnance. -- Police. -- Duelling. -- Punishment of a knight. --
Remarkable storm. -- Horse races. -- Malta an epitome of Europe. -- Its
connection with Sicily. LETTER XVII. p. 189. Said for agrigentum. -- Island of
Gozzo. -- Coast of Sicily. -- American aloes. -- City of Agrigentum. LETTER
XVIII. p. 193. Antiquities of Agrigentum. -- Temples of Venus -- Of Concord --
Of Hercules -- Of Jupiter Olympus, etc. -- Celebrated picture of Zeuxis. --
Statue of Apollo. -- Catacombs and sepulchers. -- Mountain of Agrigentum.
LETTER XIX. p. 198. Luxury of the ancient Agrigentini. -- Hospitality. --
Anecdote. -- Humanity and gratitude to their horses. -- Agrigentum long subject
to tyrants. -- Phalaris, anecdote of him. -- Melanippus and Cariton, their
friendship. -- Death of Phalaris. LETTER XX. p. 206. Country around Agrigentum.
-- A feast. -- Hospitality of the Agrigentini -- Their character. -- The
bishop. -- Departure for Trapani. -- Sea storm. -- Driven back to Agrigentum.
-- Journey by land to Paler^^. -- Richness and beauty of the country. --
Pove^^^ and oppression of the peasants. LETTER XXI. p. 218. Conclusion of the
Journey to Palermo. -- Contrast betwixt Sicily and Switzerland -- Inns, etc.
LETTER XXII. p. 225. City of Palermo. -- Marin^ -- Conversations where held.
Sicilian ladies. -- Reflections. LETTER XXIII. p. 230. The viceroy -- His table
-- Nobility. -- Their temperance -- Gallantry -- Young ladies -- Their
education. LETTER XXIV. p. 234. Bagaria -- Palace of the Prince Patagonia.
LETTER XXV. p. 240. Sirocc wind. -- Convent of capuchins -- Their burial place.
-- Method of preserving the dead. -- Anecdote. -- Address of a Sicilian
servant. LETTER XXVI. p. 257. Account of a comet. -- Reflections. LETTER XXVII.
p. 271. Cathedral of Palermo. -- Jesuits church. -- Cathedral of Monreale. --
The archbishop. -- Preparations for a festival. -- Superstition of the people.
LETTER XXVIII. p. 276. St. Rosolia. -- Subject of an Epic poem. -- Some account
of her. -- St. Viar. -- Reflections. LETTER. XXIX. p. 281. Sirocc wind. --
Review of a Swiss Regiment. -- Entertainment. -- Difference of education here
and on the continent. -- Prince of Resuttana. LETTER XXX. p. 291. Feast of St.
Rosolia. LETTER XXXI. p. 307. Antiquities. -- Camesena. -- Temple of Ceres at
Enna. -- Temple of Venus Er^tina. -- Difference of Homer and Virgil in their
accounts of Sicily. LETTER XXXII. p. 314. Monte Pelegrino. -- St. Rosolia. --
Ancient fortress. -- Situation of Palermo. -- Antiquity of that city. --
Inscriptions. LETTER XXXIII. p. 323. Utility of ices in a hot climate. --
Sicilian fisheries. -- The Tunny fish. -- The Pesce Spada, or Sword fish. --
Method of fishing in the night. -- Coral fishing. -- Oppression of the
government. -- Foundation of the feudal system in Sicily. -- Parliament. --
Inquisition. -- Power of the viceroy. -- Military force. -- Bandiere men.
LETTER XXXIV. p. 335. Sicilian titles. -- Luxury of the Sicilians in their
carriages. -- Ridiculous prejudice. LETTER XXXV. p. 339. Sicilians animated in
conversation. -- Marriage ceremonies. -- Beauty of the ladies. -- Anecdote. --
Poetry the universal passion of the Sicilians. LETTER XXXVI. p. 345. The opera.
-- Gabrieli, her wonderful performance. -- Her taprice -- Ballet of the opera.
-- English characters taken off. -- Enmity betwixt the Sicilians and
Neapolitans. LETTER XXXVII. p. 354. Remarkable springs in Sicily. --
Sulphurous baths. -- Springs of warm water in the sea. -- Gigantic bones. --
Crops of wheat. -- Method of preserving their grain. -- Commodities of Sicily.
-- Soda. -- Wild honey. -- Sugar. -- Liquorice. -- Oranges. -- Pistachio nuts.
-- Manna. -- Cantharides. -- Marbles. -- Pietra Saponaro. -- Mushroom stone,
etc. -- Mount Aetna. -- Advantages resulting from it. LETTER XXXVIII. p. 361.
Return to Naples.
A TOUR THROUGH SICILY AND MALTA.
LETTER I.
Naples, May 14, 1770. Dear Beckford,
I Remember to have heard you regret, that in all your peregrinations through
Europe, you had ever neglected the island of Sicily; and had spent much of your
time in running over the old beaten track, and in examining the threadbare
subjects of Italy and France; when probably there were a variety of objects,
not less interesting, that still lay buried in oblivion in that celebrated
island. We intend to profit from this hint of yours. Fullarton has been urging
me to it with all that ardour, which a new prospect of acquiring knowledge ever
inspires in him; and Glover, your old acquaintance, has promised to accompany
us.

The Italians represent it as impossible: as there are no inns in the island,
and many of the roads are over dangerous precipices, or through bogs and
forests, infested with the most resolute and daring banditti in Europe.
However, all these considerations, formidable as they may appear, did not deter
Mr. Hamilton Now knight of the Bath.
, his lady, and Lord Fortrose. Now earl of Seaforth.
They made this expedition last summer; and returned so much delighted with it,
that they have animated us with the strongest desire of enjoying same pleasure.

Our first plan was to go by land to Regi^m, and from thence, cross over to
Messina; but on making exact inquiry, with regard to the state of the country,
and method of traveling, we find that the danger from the banditti in Calabria
and Apulia is so great, the accommodations so wretched, and inconveniences of
every kind so numerous, without any consideration whatever to throw into the
opposite scale, that we soon relinquished that scheme; and in spite of all the
terrors of Scylla and Charybdis, and the more real terrors of sea-sickness (the
most formidable monster of the three) we have determined to go by water: And,
that no time may be lost we have already taken our passage onboard an English
ship, which is ready to sail with the first fair wind.

Now, as this little expedition has never been considered as any part of the
grand tour; and as it will probably present many objects worthy of your
attention, not mentioned in any of our books of travels; I flatter myself that
a short account of these will not be unacceptable to you; and may in some
degree make up for your having neglected to visit them. You may therefore
expect to hear of me, from every town where we stop; and when I meet with any
thing deserving of notice, I shall attempt to describe it in as few words as
possible. We have been waiting with impatience for a fair wind, but at present
there is little prospect of it. The weather is exceedingly rough, and not a
ship has been able to get out of the harbor for upwards of three weeks past.
This climate is by no means what we expected to find it; and the serene sky of
Italy, so much boasted of by our traveled gentlemen, does not altogether
deserve the great eulogiums bestowed upon it. It is now the middle of May, and
we have not as yet had any continuance of what may be called fine weather. It
has, indeed, been abundantly warm, but seldom a day has passed without sudden
storms of wind and rain, which render walking out here to the full as dangerous
to our invalids, as it is in England.

I am persuaded that our physicians are under some mistake with regard to this
climate. It is certainly one of the warmest in Italy; but it is as certainly
one of the most inconstant; and from what we have observed, disagrees with the
greatest part of our valetudinarians; but more particularly with the gouty
people, who have all found themselves better at Rome; which, though much colder
in winter, is, I believe, a healthier climate. Naples to be sure is more
eligible in summer, as the air is constantly refreshed by the sea breeze, when
Rome is often scorched by the most insupportable heat. Last summer,
Fahrenheit's thermometer never rose higher at Naples than 76. At Rome it was at
89. The difference is often still more considerable. In winter it is not less
remarkable. Here, our greatest degree of cold was in the end of January; the
thermometer stood at 36; at Rome it fell to 27; so that the distance between
the two extremes of heat and cold last year at Naples, was only 40 degrees:
whereas at Rome it was no less than 62. Yet, by all accounts, their winter was
much more agreeable and healthy than ours. For they had clear frosty weather,
whilst we were deluged with rains, accompanied with very high wind. The people
here assure us, that in some seasons it has rained every day for six or seven
weeks. But the most disagreeable part of the Neapolitan climate is the sirocc
or south-east wind, which is very common at this season. It is infinitely more
relaxing, and gives the vapors in a much higher degree, than the worst of our
rainy Novembers. It has now blown for these seven days without intermission;
and has indeed blown away all our gaiety and spirits; and if it continues much
longer, I do not know what may be the consequence. It gives a degree of
lassitude, both to the body and mind, that renders them absolutely incapable of
performing their usual functions. It is not perhaps surprising, that it should
produce these effects on a phlegmatic English constitution; but we have just
now an instance, that all the mercury of France must sink under the load of
this horrid leaden atmosphere. A smart Parisian marquis came here about ten
days ago; he was so full of animal spirits that the people thought him mad. He
never remained a moment in the same place; but, at their grave conversations,
used to skip from room to room with such amazing elasticity, that the Italians
swore he had got springs in his shoes. I met him this morning, walking with the
step of a philosopher; a smelling bottle in his hand, and all his vivacity
extinguished. I asked what was the matter? "Ah; mon ami," said he, je m'ennui a
la mort; -- moi, qui n'ai jamais sce l'ennui. Mais cet execrable vent
m'accable; et deux jours de plus, et je me pend.

The natives themselves do not suffer less than strangers; and all nature seems
to languish during this abominable wind. A Neapolitan lover avoids his mistress
with the utmost care in the time of the sirocc, and the indolence it inspires,
is almost sufficient to extinguish every passion. All works of genius are laid
aside, during its continuance; and when any thing very flat or insipid is
produced, the strongest phrase of disapprobation they can bestow is, Era
scritto in tempo del sirocco; that it was writ in the time of the sirocc. I
shall make no other apology for this letter; and whenever I happen to tire you,
be kind enough to remember (pray do) that it is not me you are to blame, but
the sirocc wind. This will put me much at my ease, and will save us a world of
time in apologies.

I have been endeavoring to get some account of the cause of this very
singular quality of the sirocc; but the people here seldom think of accounting
for any thing, and I do not find, notwithstanding its remarkable effects, that
it has ever yet been an object of enquiry amongst them.

I have not observed that the sirocc makes any remarkable change in the
barometer. When it first set in, the mercury fell about a line and a half; and
has continued much about the same height ever since; but the thermometer was at
43 the morning it began, and and rose almost immediately to 65; and for these
two days past it has been at 70 and 71. However, it is certainly not the warmth
of this wind, that renders it so oppressive to the spirits; it is rather the
want of the genial quality, which is so enlivening; and which ever renders the
western breeze so agreeable: The spring and elasticity of the air seems to be
lost; and that active principle which animates all nature, appears to be dead.
This principle we have sometimes supposed to be nothing else than the subtle
electric fluid that the air usually contains; and indeed, we have found, that
during this wind, it appears to be almost annihilated, or at least, its
activity exceedingly reduced. Yesterday, and today, we have been attempting to
make some electrical experiments; but I never before found the air so
unfavourable for them.

Sea-bathing we have found to be the best antidote against the effects of the
sirocc; and this we certainly enjoy in great perfection. Lord Fortrose, who is
the soul of our colony here, has provided a large commodious boat for this
purpose. We meet every morning at eight o'clock, and row about half a mile out
to sea, where we strip and plunge into the water: Were it not for this, we
should all of us have been as bad as the French marquis. My lord has ten
watermen, who are in reality a sort of amphibious animals, as they live one
half the summer in the sea. Three or four of these generally go in with us, to
pick up stragglers, and secure us from all accidents. They dive with ease to
the depth of forty, and sometimes of fifty feet; and bring up quantities of
excellent shellfish during the summer months; but so great is their devotion,
that every time they go down they make the sign of the cross, and mutter an Ave
Maria, without which they think should certainly be drowned; and were not a
little scandalized at us for omitting this ceremony. To accustom us to swimming
in all circumstances, my lord has provided a suit of clothes, which we wear by
turns; and from a very short practice, we have found it almost as commodious to
swim with as without them; we have likewise learned to strip in the water, and
find it no very difficult matter: And I am fully persuaded, from being
accustomed to this kind of exercise, that in case of shipwreck we should have
greatly the advantage over those who had never practiced it; for it is by the
embarrassment from the clothes, and the agitation that people are throw into,
from finding themselves in a situation they had never experienced before, that
so many lives are lost in the water.

After bathing, we have an English breakfast at his lordship's and after
breakfast, delightful little concert, which lasts for an hour and a half.
Barbella, the sweetest fiddle in Italy, leads our little band. This party, I
think, constitutes one principal part of the pleasure we enjoy at Naples. We
have likewise some very agreeable society amongst ourselves, though we cannot
boast much of that with the inhabitants. There are to be sure many good people
amongst them; but in general, there is so very little analogy betwixt an
English and a Neapolitan mind, that the true social harmony, that great
sweetener of human life, can seldom be produced. In lieu of this, (the exchange
you will say is but a bad one) the country round Naples abounds so much in
every thing that is curious, both in art and nature, and affords so ample a
field of speculation for the naturalist and antiquary, that a person of any
curiosity may spend some months here very agreeably, and not without ^^^fit.

Besides the discoveries of Herculaneum and Pompeia which, of themselves,
afford a great fund of entertainment, the whole coast that surrounds this
beautiful bay, particularly that near Puzzoli, Cuma Micenum, and Baia, is
covered with innumerable monuments of Roman magnificence* But, alas! how are
the mighty fallen! This delightful coast, once the garden of all Italy, and
inhabited only by the rich, the gay, and luxurious, is now abandoned to the
poorest and most miserable of mortals. Perhaps, there is no spot on the globe,
that has undergone so thorough a change; or that can exhibit so striking a
picture of the vanity of human grandeur. Those very walls that once lodged a
Caesar, a Lucullus, an Anthony, the richest and most voluptuous of mankind; are
now occupied by the very meanest and most indigent wretches on earth, who are
actually starving for want in those very apartments that were the scenes of the
greatest luxury. There we are told that suppers were frequently given, that
cost fifty thousand pounds; and some, that even amounted to double that sum.

The luxury indeed of Baia was so great, that it became a proverb, even amongst
the luxurious Romans themselves; and, at Rome, we often find them upbraiding
with effeminacy and epicurism, those who spent much of their time in this scene
of delights; Clodius throws it in Cicero's teeth more than once: And that
orator's having purchased a villa here, hurt him not a little in the opinion of
the graver and more austere part of the senate. The walls of these palaces
still remain, and the poor peasants, in some places, have built up their
miserable huts within them; but, at present, there is not one gentleman or man
of fashion residing in any part of this country; (...) former state of which,
compared with the present, certainly makes the most striking contrast
imaginable. Yesterday we rode over the greatest part of it a shooting
porcupines, a new species of diversion, which I had never heard of before. We
killed several of these animals on the Monte Barbaro, the place that formerly
produced the Falernian wine, but now a barren waste. I don't know if you are
acquainted with this kind of sport. To me, I own, its novelty was its greatest
merit; and I would not at any time give a day of partridge for a month of
porcupine shooting. Neither indeed is the flesh of these animals the most
delicious in the world, though today most of us have dined upon it. It is
extremely luscious, and soon palls upon the appetite.

We are now going to lay in our sea-store, as there is some probability that we
shall sail in a day or two. -- Farewell -- you shall hear from me again at
Messina, if we are not swallowed up by Charybdis.

LETTER II.
On Board the Charming Molly, off the Island of Capre, May 15.
WE have now begun our expedition with every auspicious omen. This morning the
melancholy force left us; and in place of it we have gotton a fine brisk
tramontane (or northwind) which in a few hours blew away all our vapors, and
made us wonder how much the happiness of mankind depends on a blast of wind.
After eating a hearty dinner with many of our friends at Mr. Walter's, and
drinking plentifully of his excellent burg^^^y, we took leave in the highest
spirits. Had the sirocc blown as yesterday, we should probably have been in
tears; and not one of us would have suspected that we were crying, only because
the wind was in the south. We are not apt to suppose it; but probably a great
part of our pleasures and pains depend upon such trivial causes, though always
ascribed to something else; few people being willing to own themselves like a
weathercock, affected by every blast. Indeed we should have naturally imputed
it to the grief of parting with that excellent family whom you know so well;
which no person could ever leave without regret, or see without pleasure; but
the agreeable prospect of soon meeting again, (probably better qualified to
amuse and entertain them) absorbed all melancholy thoughts; and even added to
that alacrity, which the delightful tour before us had already inspired.

We sailed at five; and after firing our farewell signals to our friends on
shore, (whom we discovered with our glasses at some miles distance) we soon
found ourselves in the middle of the bay of Naples, surrounded by the most
beautiful scenery in the world. It fell calm for an hour, on purpose to give us
time to contemplate all its beauties.

The bay is of a circular figure; in most places upwards of 20 miles in
diameter; so that including all its breaks and inequalities, the circumference
is considerably more than 60 miles. The whole of this space is so wonderfully
diversified, by all the riches both of art and nature, that there is scarce an
object wanting to render the scene complete; and it is hard to say, whether the
view is more pleasing from the singularity of many of these objects, or from
the incredible variety of the whole. You see an amazing mixture of the ancient
and modern; some rising to fame, and some sinking to ruin. Palaces reared over
the tops of other palaces, and ancient magnificence trampled under foot -- by
modern folly -- Mountains and islands, that were celebrated for their
fertility, changed into barren wastes; and barren wastes into fertile fields
and rich vineyards. Mountains sunk into plains, and plains swelled into
mountains. Lakes drunk up by volcanos, and extinguished volcanos turned into
lakes. The earth still smoking in many places; and in others throwing out
flame. -- In short, nature seems to have formed this in her most capricious
mood; for every object is a lusus naturae. She never seems to have gone
seriously to work; but to have devoted this spot to the most unlimited
indulgence of caprice and frolic.

The bay is shut out from the Mediterranean by the island of Capre, so famous
for the abode of Augustus; and afterward so infamous for that of Tiberius. A
little to the west lie those of Ischia, Procida, and Nisida; the celebrated
promontory of Micaenum, where Aeneas landed; the classic fields of Baia, Cuma,
and Puzzoli; with all the variety of scenery that formed both the Tartarus and
Elysium of the ancients; the Campi Phlegr^i, or burning plains where Jupiter
overcame the giants; the Monte Novo, formed of late years by fire, the Monte
Barbaro; the picturesque city of Puzzoli, with the Solfaterra smoking above
it; the beautiful promontory of Pausillippe, exhibiting the finest scenery that
can be imagined; the great and opulent city of Naples, with its three castles,
its harbor full of ships from every nation, its palaces, churches, and
convents innumerable. The rich country from thence to Portici, covered with
noble houses and gardens, and appearing only a continuation of the city. The
palace of the king, with many others surrounding it, all built over the roofs
of those of Herculaneum, buried near a hundred feet, by the eruptions of
Vesuvius. The black fields of lava that have run from that mountain, intermixed
with gardens, vineyards, and orchards. Vesuvius itself, in the back ground of
the scene, discharging volumes of fire and smoke, and forming a broad track in
the air over our heads, extending without being broken or dissipated to the
utmost verge of the horizon. A variety of beautiful towns and villages, round
the base of the mountain, thoughtless of the impending ruin that daily
threatens them. Some of these are reared over the very roofs of Pompeia and
Stabia, where Pliny perished; and with their foundations have pierced through
the sacred abodes of the ancient Romans; thousands of whom lie buried here, the
victims of this inexorable mountain. Next follows the extensive and romantic
coast of Castello Mare, Sorrentum, and Mola; diversified with every picturesque
object in nature. It was the study of this wild and beautiful country that
formed our greatest landscape-painters. This was the school of Poussin and
Salvator Rosa, but more particularly of the last, who composed many of his most
celebrated pieces from the bold craggy rocks that surround this coast; and no
doubt it was from the daily contemplation of these romantic objects, that they
stored their minds with that variety of ideas they have communicated to the
world with such elegance in their works.

Now, should I tell you that this extensive coast, this prodigious variety of
mountains, valleys, promontories and islands, covered with an everlasting
verdure, and loaded with the richest fruits, is all the produce of
subterraneous fire; it would require, I am afraid, too great a stretch of faith
to believe me; yet the fact is certain, and can only be doubted by those who
have wanted time or curiosity to examine it. It is strange, you will say, that
nature should make use of the same agent to create as to destroy; and that what
has only been looked upon as the consumer of countries, is in fact the very
power that produces them. Indeed, this part of our earth seems already to have
undergone the sentence pronounced upon the whole of it: But like the phoenix,
has risen again from its own ashes, in much greater beauty and splendor than
before it was consumed. The traces of these dreadful conflagrations are still
conspicuous in every corner; they have been violent in their operations, but in
the end have proved salutary in their effects. The fire in many places is not
yet extinguished, but Vesuvius is now the only spot where it rages with any
degree of activity.

Mr. Hamilton, our minister here, who is no less distinguished in the learned,
than in the polite world, has lately examined it with a truly philosophic eye,
and this is the result of all his observations; however, at present, I only sit
down to give you an account of the prospect of this singular country, and not
to write its natural history; which would lead me into too vast a field: I
shall reserve that curious subject 'till our return, when I shall have more
leisure to make you acquainted with it. -- I beg therefore you would at least
suspend your judgment for the present, and do not condemn me before I am heard.

After contemplating this delightful prospect, 'till sunset, the wind sprung up
again, and we have now almost reached Capre, 30 miles distant from Naples. We
have just spoken with an English ship. They tell us, that the Marquis of
Carmarthen, Lord Fortrose, and Mr. Hamilton observing the calm, took a boat to
make us a visit; but unfortunately mistaking their vessel for ours, we have had
the mortification to miss them.

The night is very dark, and mount Vesuvius is flaming at a dreadful rate: We
can observe the redhot stones thrown to a vast height in the air; and, after
their fall rolling down the side of the mountain. Our ship is going so smooth,
that we are scarce sensible of the motion; and if this wind continues, before
tomorrow night we shall be in sight of Sicily. Adieu. The captain is making a
bowl of grog, and promising us a happy voyage.

16th. All wrong -- Sick to death -- Execrable sirocc wind, and directly
contrary -- Vile heaving waves -- A plague of all sea voyages. -- That author
was surely right, who said, that land voyages See Tour to the East.
were much to be preferred.

17th in the morning. For these 24 hours past we have been groaning to one
another from our beds; execrating the waves, and wishing that we had rather
been at the mercy of all the banditti of Calabria. We are now beginning to
change our tune. The sirocc is gone, and the wind is considerably fallen;
however, we are still three woeful figures. Our servants too are as sick and as
helpless as we. The captain says, that Philip, our Sicilian man, was frightened
out of his wits; and has been praying to St. Januarius with all his might. He
now thinks he has heard him, and imputes the change of the weather entirely to
his interest with his saint.

17th. Three o'clock. Weather pleasant and favorable -- A fine breeze since
ten; -- have just come in sight of Strombolo. -- Our pilot says it is near 20
leagues off. We have likewise a view of the mountains of Calabria, but at a
very great distance. Ship steady; and sea-sickness almost gone.

Eleven at night. The weather is now fine, and we are all well. After spying
Strombolo, by degrees we came in sight of the rest of the Lipari islands, and
part of the coast of Sicily. These islands are very picturesque, and several of
them still emit smoke, particularly Volcano and Volcanello; but none of them,
for some ages past, except Strombolo, have made any eruptions of fire. We are
just now lying within about three miles of that curious island, and can see its
operations distinctly. It appears to be a volcano of a very different nature
from Vesuvius, the explosions of which succeed one another with some degree of
regularity, and have no great variety of duration. Now I have been observing
Strombolo, ever since it fell dark, with a good deal of pleasure, but not
without some degree of perplexity, as I cannot account for its variety.
Sometimes its explosions resemble those of Vesuvius, and the light seems only
to be occasioned by the quantity of fiery stones thrown into the air; and as
soon as these have fallen down, it appears to be extinguished, 'till another
explosion causes a fresh illumination: This I have observed always to be the
case with Vesuvius; except when the lava has risen to the summit of the
mountain, and continued without variety to illuminate the air around it. -- The
light from Strombolo evidently depends on some other cause. Sometimes a clear
red flame issues from the crater of the mountain, and continues to blaze
without interruption, for near the space of half an hour. The fire is of a
different color from the explosions of stones, and is evidently produced from
a different cause. It would seem as if some inflammable substance were suddenly
kindled up in the bowels of the mountain. It is attended with no noise, nor
explosion that we are sensible of. It has now fallen calm, and we shall
probably have an opportunity of examining this volcano more minutely tomorrow.
We are told at Naples that it had lately made a violent eruption, and had begun
to form a new island at some little distance from the old; which piece of
intelligence was one of our great inducements to this expedition. We think we
have discovered this island, as we have observed several times the appearance
of a small flame rising out of the sea, a little to the southwest of Strombolo;
and suppose it must have issued from this new island; but it is possible this
light may come from the lower part of the island of Strombolo itself. We shall
see tomorrow.

18th. We are still off Strombolo, but unfortunately at present it intercepts
the view of that spot from whence we observed the flame to arise, and we can
see no appearance of any new island, nor indeed of any lava that has of late
sprung from the old one. We have a distinct view of the crater of Strombolo,
which seems to be different from Vesuvius, and all the old volcanos that
surround Naples. Of these, the craters are without exception in the center, and
form the highest part of the mountain. That of Strombolo is on its side, and
not within 200 yards of its summit. From the crater to the sea, the island is
entirely composed of the same sort of ashes and burnt matter as the conical
part of Vesuvius; and the quantity of this matter is perpetually increasing
from the uninterrupted discharge from the mountain; for of all the volcanos we
read of, Strombolo sems to be the only one that burns without ceasing. Aetna
and Vesuvius often lie quiet for many months, even years, without the least
appearance of fire, but Strombolo is ever at work, and for ages past has been
looked upon as the great light-house of these seas.

It is truly wonderful, how such a constant and immense fire is maintained for
thousands of years, in the midst of the ocean! that of the other Lipari islands
seems now almost extinct, and the force of the whole to be concentered in
Strombolo, which acts as one great vent to them all. We still observe Volcano
and Volcanello throwing out volumes of smoke, but during the whole night we
could not perceive the least spark of fire from either of them.

It is probable, that Strombolo, as well as all the rest of these islands, is
originally the work of subterraneous fire. The matter of which they are
composed, in a manner demonstrates this; and many of the Sicilian authors
confirm it. There are now eleven of them in all; and none of the ancients
mention more than seven. Fazzello, one of the best Sicilian authors, gives an
account of the production of Volcano, now one of the most considerable of these
islands. He says it happened in the early time of the republic, and is recorded
by Eusebius, Pliny, and others. He adds, that even in his time, in the
beginning of the 16th century, it still discharged quantities of fire and of
pumice stones; but that in the preceding century, in the year 1444, on the 5th
of February, there had been a very great eruption of this island, which shook
all Sicily, and alarmed the coast of Italy as far as Naples. He says the sea
boiled all around the island, and rocks of a vast size were discharged from the
crater; that fire and smoke in many places pierced through the waves, and that
the navigation amongst these islands was totally changed; rocks appearing where
it was formerly deep water; and many of the straits and shallows were entirely
filled up.

He observes, that Aristotle, in his book on meteors, takes notice of a very
early eruption of this island, by which not only the coast of Sicily, but
likewise many cities in Italy were covered with ashes. It has probably been
that very eruption which formed the island. He describes Strombolo to have
been, in his time, pretty much the same as at this day; only that it then
produced a great quantity of cotton, which is not now the case. The greatest
part of it appears to be barren. On the north side there are a few vineyards;
but they are very meagre: Opposite to these, there is a rock at some distance
from land; it seems to be entirely of lava, and is not less than 50 or 60 feet
above the water.

The whole island of Strombolo is a mountain that rises suddenly from the sea;
it is about ten miles round, and is not of the exact conical form, supposed
common to all volcanos. We were determined to have landed on the island, and to
have attempted to examine the volcano; but our Sicilian pilot assures us, that
the crater is not only inaccessible (which indeed I own it appears to be) but
that we shall likewise be obliged to perform a quarantine of 48 hours at
Messina; and that besides, we should run a great risk of being attacked by the
natives, who are little better than savages, and always on the alarm against
the Turks. -- On weighing these reasons, and putting the question, it was
carried, to proceed on our voyage.

I own it is with much regret that I leave this curious island, without being
better acquainted with it. I have been looking with a good glass all round, but
can see no marks of the eruption we heard so much of at Naples; indeed, the
south-west part, where we saw the appearance of fire, is still hid from us by
the interposition of the island; and if there has been an eruption, it was
certainly on that side: It is probable we shall never be able to learn whether
there has been one or not; or, at least, to make ourselves masters of any of
the particulars relating to it; for events of that kind do not make such a
noise in this ignorant and indolent country, as the blowing of an aloe, or a
gooseberry bush at Christmas, does in England. Strombolo rises to a great
height; our pilot says, higher than Vesuvius; but I think he is mistaken. Both
the captain and he agree, that in clear weather it is discoverable at the
distance of 25 leagues; and that at night its flames are to be seen still much
farther; so that its visible horizon cannot be less than 500 miles, which will
require a very considerable elevation.

The revenue these islands bring to the king of Naples is by no means
inconsiderable. They produce great quantities of alum, sulphur, nitre,
cinnabar, and most sorts of fruits, particularly raisins, currants, and figs in
great perfection; some of their wines are likewise much esteemed; particularly
the Malvasia, well known all over Europe.

The island of Lipari (from which all the rest take the name) is by much the
largest, as well as the most fertile. By the description of Aristotle, it
appears that it was in his time, what Strombolo is in ours, considered by
sailors as a light-house, as its fires were never extinguished. It has not
suffered from subterraneous fires for many ages past, though it every where
bears tho marks of its former state. This is the island supposed by Virgil (who
is one of our traveling companions) to be the habitation Aeolus; but indeed all
of them were formerly called Aeolian. As they were full of vast caverns,
roaring with internal fires, the poets feigned that Aeolus kept the winds
prisoners here, and let them out at his pleasure. This allegorical fiction is
of great use both to Virgil and Homer, when they want to make a storm, and
forms no inconsiderable part of their machinery. A goddess has nothing to do
but take a flight to the Lipari islands, and Aeolus, who was the very pink of
courtesy, has always a storm ready at her command.

Homer indeed, departing sadly from his usual dignity, supposes that Aeolus
kept the winds here, each tied up in their respective bags; and when any
particular wind was demanded, he made them a present of a bag full of it, to
use at discretion. Some of the ancient historians (Diodorus I think) says that
this fable took its rise from a wise king named Aeolus; who, from observing the
smoke of these burning islands, and other phenomenon attending them, had
learned to foretell the weather; and from thence was said to have the command of
the winds.

The forge of Vulcan too has been supposed by the poets to be placed in Hiera,
one of these islands. Virgil sends him here, to make the celestial armor for
Aeneas, and gives a noble description of this gloomy habitation Amid the
Hesperian and Sicilian flood
All black with smoke, a rocky island stood,
The dark Vulcanian land, the region of the god.
Here the grim Cyclops ply, in vaults profound,
The huge Aeolian forge that thunders round.
The eternal anvils ring the dungeon over;
From side to side the fiery caverns roar, etc.

, where he found the Cyclops busy forging a thunderbolt for Jupiter; the
account of which is very singular Beneath their hands, tremendous to survey!
Half rough, half formed, the dreadful engine lay.
Three points of rain; three forks of hail conspire;
Three armed with wind, and three were barb'd with fire,
The mass they tempered thick with livid rays,
Fear, wrath, and terror, and the lightning's blaze.
PIT.
. This island is now called Volcano, the same that is recorded to have been
produced by fire in the time of the Republic. So that Virgil commits here a
very great anachronism, in sending Vulcan to a place which at that time did not
exist, nor for many ages after. But this bold poetical license he amply repays
us for, by the fine description he gives of it. These islands, he says, were
called Volcanian as well as Aeolian: "Volcani domus, et Volcania nomine
tellus." So that the change of the name from Hiera to Volcano was a very
natural one. This is the island that Pliny calls Terasia; and both Strabo and
he gave an account of its production.

19th. Found ourselves within half a mile of the coast of Sicily, which is low,
but finely variegated. The opposite coast of Calabria is very high and the
mountains are covered with the finest verdure. It was almost a dead calm, our
ship scarce moving half a mile in an hour, so that we had time to get a
complete view of the famous rock of Scylla, on the Calabrian side, Cape Pylorus
on the Sicilian, and the celebrated Straits of the Faro that runs between them.
Whilst we were still some ^iles distant from the entry of the Straits, we heard
the roaring of the current, like the noise of some large impetuous river
confined between narrow banks. This increased in proportion as we advanced,
'till we saw the water in many places raised to a considerable height, and
forming large eddies or whirlpools. The sea in every other place was as smooth
as glass. Our old pilot told us, that he had often seen ships caught in these
eddies, and whirled about with great rapidity, without obeying the helm in the
smallest degree. When the weather is calm, there is little danger; but when the
waves meet with this violent current, it makes a dreadful sea. He says, there
were five ships wrecked in this spot last winter. We observed that the current
set exactly for the rock of Scylla, and would infallibly have carried any thing
thrown into it against that point; so that it was not without reason the
ancients have painted it as an object of such terror. It is about a mile from
the entry of the Faro, and forms a small promontory, which runs a little out to
sea, and meets the whole force of the waters, as they come out of the narrowest
part of the Straits. The head of this promontory is the famous Scylla. It must
be owned that it does not altogether come up to the formidable description that
Homer gives of it: the reading of which (like that of Shakespeare's cliff)
almost makes one's head giddy. Neither is the passage so wondrous narrow and
difficult as he makes it. Indeed it is probable that the breadth of it is
greatly increased since his time, by the violent impetuosity of the current.
And this violence too must have always diminished, in proportion as the breadth
of the channel increased.

Our pilot says, there are many small rocks that show their heads near the base
of the large ones. These are probably the dogs that are described as howling
round the monster Scylla. There are likewise many caverns that add greatly to
the noise of the water, and tend still to increase the horror of the scene. The
rock is near 200 feet high. There is a kind of castle or fort built on its
summit; and the town of Scylla or Sciglio, containing three or four hundred
inhabitants, stands on its south side, and gives the title of prince to a
Calabrese family.

As the current was directly against us, we were obliged to lie to, for some
hours, 'till it turned. The motion of the water ceased for some time, but in a
few minutes it began in the opposite direction, though not with such violence.
We lay just opposite to Cape Pylorus (where the light-house is now built.) It
is said to have been thus named by Hannibal, in recompense to Pelorus his
pilot, for having put him to death on this spot, on a false suspicion of his
wanting to betray him: For seeing himself land-locked on all sides, he thought
there was no escaping, and that Pelorus had been bribed to deliver him up; but
as soon he discovered the Straits, he repented of his rashness, and some years
afterward erected a statue here, in atonement to the manes of Pelorus.
Pomponius Mela tells this story; from whence he draws two very wise inferences:
That Hannibal must have been extremely passionate: and that he knew nothing at
all of geography. Others deny this authority, and say it was named Pelorus from
Ulysses's pilot, who was drowned near to this place; but there can be no sort
of foundation for this conjecture; for Ulysses's whole crew were drowned at the
same time, and he himself was driven through these Straits; mounted on the
broken mast of his ship. It is like most disputes amongst antiquaries, a matter
of mighty little consequence; and I leave you at full liberty to choose which of
the two accounts you please.

From hence we had an opportunity of observing a pretty large portion of
Calabria, which formerly constituted a considerable part of that celebrated
country, known by the name of Great Greece, and looked upon as one of the most
fertile in the empire. These beautiful hills and mountains are covered with
trees and brushwood to the very summit; and appear pretty much in the same
state as some of the wilds of America, that are just beginning to be
cultivated. Some little spots where the woods are cleared away, just serve to
show the natural fertility of the soil, and what this country might soon be
brought to, were industry and population encouraged; but it still remains a
good deal in the same situation as when the barbarous nations left it; and I
believe it is hard to say, whether their tyranny or that of Spain has been the
most oppressive. After the invasion of those nations, and during the time of
the dark and barbarous ages, this country (like many others) from the highest
state of culture and civilization, became a wild and barren wilderness,
overgrown with thickets and forests; and, indeed, since the revival of arts and
agriculture, perhaps of all Europe this is the country that has profited the
least; retaining still, both in the wildness of its fields and ferocity of its
inhabitants more of the Gothic barbarity than is to be met with any where else.
Some of these forests are of a vast extent, and absolutely impenetrable; and no
doubt conceal in their thickets many valuable monuments of its ancient
magnificence. Of this indeed we have a very recent proof in the discovery of
Pestum, a Grecian city, that had not been heard of for many ages; 'till of
late, some of its lofty temples were seen, peeping over the tops of the woods;
upbraiding mankind for their shameful neglect; and calling upon them to bring
it once more to light. Accordingly curiosity, and the hopes of gain, a still
more powerful motive, soon opened a passage, and exposed to view these valuable
and respectable relics. But here it would be out of place to give you an
account of them; I shall reserve that 'till my return.

As soon as our ship entered the current, we were carried along with great
velocity toward Messina, which is twelve miles from the entry of the Straits.
However, as the passage widens in proportion as you advance, the current of
consequence becomes less rapid. At Messina it is four miles broad. At the mouth
of the straits, betwixt the promontories of Pelorus in Sicily, and the Coda de
Volpe (or the Fox's tail) in Calabria, it appears scarcely to be a mile. Most
of the ancient writers are of opinion that Sicily was formerly joined to the
continent in this spot, and that the separation must have been made by some
violent convulsion of the earth. If this is true, which indeed does not appear
improbable, it must have happened far beyond the reach of all historians, as
none of them, at least that I have seen, pretend any thing but conjecture for
the foundation of their opinion. Indeed Claudian (were credit to be given to
poets) says positively, "Trinacria quondam Italiae pars una fuit." And Virgil
too, in his third Aeneid, tells the same story: "Haec loca vi quondam, et vasta
convulsa ruina, etc." Pliny, Strabo, Diodorus, and many others, both historians
and philosophers, are of the same sentiments, and pretend that the strata in
the opposite side of the Strait perfectly correspond: Like the white rocks near
Dover and Bologne, which have given rise to an opinion of the same kind.
However, the similarity in that case, is much more striking to the eye at least
than in this.

The approach to Messina is the finest that can be imagined; it is not so grand
as that of Naples, but it is much more beautiful, and the key exceeds any thing
I have ever yet seen, even in Holland. It is built in the form of a crescent,
and is surrounded by a range of magnificent buildings, four stories high, and
exactly uniform, for the space of an Italian mile. The street betwixt these and
the sea is about an hundred feet wide, and forms one of the most delightful
walks in the world. It enjoys the freest air, and commands the most beautiful
prospect: It is only exposed to the morning sun, being shaded all the rest of
the day by these buildings. It is besides constantly refreshed by the cooling
breeze from the Straits; for the current of the water produces likewise a
current in the air, that renders this one of the coolest habitations in Sicily.

We cast anchor about four this afternoon, near the center of this enchanted
semicircle, the beauty of which greatly delighted us; but our pleasure was
soon interrupted by a discovery that the name of one of our servants had been
omitted in our bills of health; and an assurance from the captain, that if he
was discovered we should certainly be obliged to perform a long quarantine.
Whilst we were deliberating upon this weighty matter, we observed a boat with
the people of the health-office approaching us. We had just time to get him
wrapped up in a hammock, and shut down below the hatches; with orders not to
stir in case of a search, and not to appear again above deck 'till he should be
called. The poor fellow was obliged to keep in his hole 'till it was dark, as
our consul and some people of the health-office stayed on board much longer
than we could have wished, and we are still obliged to conceal him; for if he
be discovered, we shall probably get into a very bad scrape. They are
particularly strict here in this respect: and indeed they have great reason to
be so; since this beautiful city was almost annihilated by the plague in the
year 1743, when upwards of 70,000 people are said to have died in it and its
district in the space of a few months.

We have now got on shore, and are lodged in the most wretched of inns;
although said to be a first-rate one for Sicily: but we are contented; for
surely after bad ship accommodation and sea-sickness, any house will appear a
palace, and any bit of dry land a paradise.

I shall send this off by the post, which goes tomorrow for Naples, and shall
continue from day to day to give you some account of our transactions; trifling
as they are, there will probably be something new; and it will add greatly to
the pleasure of our expedition, to think that it has contributed to your
entertainment. Adieu.

Ever yours, etc.

LETTER III.
Messina, May 20.
THE harbor of Messina is formed by a small promontory or neck of land that
runs off from the east end of the city, and separates that beautiful basin from
the rest of the Straits. The shape of this promontory is that of a reaping
hook, the curvature of which forms the harbor, and secures it from all winds.
From the striking resemblance of its form, the Greeks who never gave a name
that did not either describe the object or express some of its most remarkable
properties, called this place Zancle or the Sickle, and feigned that the ^^^kle
of Saturn fell on this spot, and gave it its form. But the Latins, who were not
quite so fond of fable, changed its name to Messina (from messis, a harvest)
because of the great fertility of its fields. It is certainly one of the safest
harbors in the world after ships have got in; but it is likewise one of the
most difficult access. The celebrated gulf or whirlpool of Charybdis lies near
to its entry, and often occasions such an intestine and irregular motion in the
water, that the helm loses most of its power, and ships have great difficulty
to get in, even with the fairest wind that can blow. This whirlpool, I think,
is probably formed by the small promontory I have mentioned; which contracting
the Straits in this spot, must necessarily increase the velocity of the
current; but no doubt other causes, of which we are ignorant, concur, for this
will by no means account for all the appearances which it has produced. The
great noise occasioned by the tumultuous motion of the waters in this place,
made the ancients liken it to a voracious sea monster perpetually roaring for
its prey; and it has been represented by their authors as the most tremendous
passage in the world. Aristotle gives a long and a formidable description of it
in his 125th chapter De Admirandis, which I find translated in an old Sicilian
book I have got here. It begins, "Adeo profundum, hor^i^umque spectaculum,
etc." but it is too long to transcribe. It is likewise described by Homer, Dire
Scylla there a scene of horror forms,
And here Charybdis fills the deep with storms:
When the tide rushes from her rumbling caves,
The rough rock roars; tumultous boil the waves;
They toss, they foam, a wild confusion raise,
Like waters bubbling over the fiery blaze;
Eternal mists obscure the aerial plain,
And high above the rock she spouts the main,
When in her gulphs the rushing sea subsides,
She drains the ocean with her refluent tides.
The rock re-bellows with a thundering sound;
Deep, wondrous deep, below appears the ground.
POPE.
1^th of the Odyssey; Virgil That realm of old, a ruin huge was rent,
In length of ages from the continent.
With force convulsive burst the isle away;
Through the dread opening broke the thundering sea.
At once the thundering sea Sicilia tore,
And sunder'd from the fair Hesperian shore;
And still the neighboring coasts and towns divides
With scanty channels and contracted tides.
Fierce to the right tremendous Scylla roars,
Charybdis on the left the flood devours:
Thrice swallowed in her womb subsides the sea,
Deep, deep as hell; and thrice she spouts away
From her black bellowing gulphs disgorg'd on high
Waves after waves, that dash against the sky.
PIT.
, 3d Aeneid; Lucretius, Ovid, Sallust, Seneca, as also by many of the old
Italian and Sicilian poets, who all speak of it in terms of horror; and
represent it as an object that inspired terror, even when looked on at a
distance. It certainly is not now so formidable: and very probably, the
violence of this motion, continued for so many ages, has by degrees worn smooth
the rugged rocks, and jutting shelves, that may have intercepted and confined
the waters. The breadth of the Straits too, in this place, I make no doubt is
considerably enlarged. Indeed, from the nature of things it must be so; the
perpetual friction occasioned by the current must wear away the bank on each
side, and enlarge the bed of water.

The vessels in this passage were obliged to go as near as possible to the
coast of Calabria, in order to avoid the suction occasioned by the whirling of
the waters in this vortex; by which means when they came to the narrowest and
most rapid part of the Straits, betwixt Cape Pelorus and Scylla, they were in
great danger of being carried upon that rock. From whence the proverb, still
applied to those, who in attempting to avoid one evil fall into another,
"Incidit in Scyllam, cupiens evitare Charybdem." There is a fine fountain of
white marble on the key, representing Neptune holding Scylla and Charybdis
chained, under the emblematical figures of two sea monsters, as represented by
the poets.

The little neck of land, forming the harbor of Messina, is strongly
fortified. The citadel, which is indeed a very fine work, is built on that part
which connects it with the main land. The farthermost point, which runs out to
sea, is defended by four small forts, which command the entry into the harbor.
Betwixt these lie the lazaret, and a light-house to warn sailors of their
approach to Charybdis, as that other on Cape Pelorus is intended to give them
notice of Scylla.

It is probably from these light-houses (by the Greeks called Pharoi) that the
whole of this celebrated Strait has been denominated the Faro of Messina.

There are a number of galleys and galliots in this beautiful harbor, which
still add greatly to its beauty. Three of these sailed this morning, in order
to cruize round the island and to protect it from the sudden invasions of the
Barbarians, who are often very troublesome on the south-coast. These vessels
made a very picturesque appearance as they went out of the harbor; their oars
moving all together, with the greatest regularity. I think there are nine or
ten ^en to each oar; and indeed it appears to be the hardest work you can
imagine. They all rise, every stroke of the oar, and when they pull, they
almost throw themselves on their backs, and seem to exert their utmost force.
These wretches are chained to their oars, and sleep every night on the bare
benches, without any thing to throw over them. Yet, what is strange,
notwithstanding all the misery they suffer, I am told there was never known an
instance of any of them putting themselves to death. They often, indeed, confer
that favor upon one another, but it is only in their quarrels, and by no means
out of kindness. In a company of English in the same circumstances, promotion
would probably go on much faster, as there would be no want of vacancies,
provided only ropes and knives were to be had.

We intended this morning to have paid our respects to the prince of Villa
Franca, the governor, and to have delivered our letters; but he is gone to his
country house, and as there are no carriages to be had, we are obliged to wait
his arrival in town, which, will probably be tomorrow or next day.

We are still under a good deal of uneasiness about our servant, and are
obliged to conceal him carefully from the people of the health-office, who seem
to haunt us, as we have met them this morning in all our walks. Were he to be
discovered, perhaps some of us might have the pleasure of making a little
voyage, on board one of those galleys, for our amusement. Indeed the captain of
the ship, poor fellow, would run the greatest risk, who is obliged to answer
for every person on board. -- We shall leave this place as soon as possible;
for I do not believe there is much more to be seen about it.

20th at night. After dinner our depute-consul (a Sicilian) carried us to
several convents, where we were received by the nuns with great politeness and
affability. We conversed with them for some hours through the grate, and found
some of them by no means deficient, either in point of knowledge or
sprightliness; but none of them had sincerity enough (which we met with in
Portugal more than once) to acknowledge the unhappiness of their situation. All
pretended to be happy and contented, and declared they would not change their
prison for the most brilliant situation in life. However, some of them had a
soft melancholy in their countenances, that gave the lie to their words; and I
am persuaded, in a tete-a-tete, and on a more intimate acquaintance, they would
have told a very different story. Several of them are extremely handsome; but,
indeed, I think, they always appear so; and am very certain, from frequent
experience, that there is no artificial ornament, or studied embellishment
whatever, that can produce half so strong an effect, as the modest and simple
attire of a pretty young nun, placed behind a double iron grate. To see an
amiable, unaffected, and unadorned person, that might have been an honor and
an ornament to society, make a voluntary resignation of her charms, and give up
the world and all its pleasures, for a life of fasting and mortification, it
cannot fail to move our pity; "And pity melts the mind to love." There is
another consideration which tends much to increase these feelings; that is, our
total incapacity ever to alter her situation. The pleasure of relieving an
object in distress, is the only refuge we have against the pain which the
seeing of that object occasions; but here, this is utterly denied us, and we
feel with sorrow, that pity is all we can bestow.

From these, and the like reflections, a man generally feels himself in bad
spirits after conversing with amiable nuns. Indeed, it is hardly possible,
without a heavy heart, to leave the grate; that inexorable and impenetrable
barrier. -- At last we took our leave, expressing our happiness, in being
admitted so near them; but at the same time deploring our misery, in seeing
them for ever removed at so unmeasurable a distance from us. They were much
pleased with our visit, and begged we would repeat it every day during our stay
at Messina; but this might prove dangerous.

On leaving the convent, we observed a great concourse of people on the top of
a high hill, at some distance from the city. The consul told us, it was the
celebration of a great festival in honor of St. Francis, and was worth our
going to see. Accordingly, we arrived just as the saint made his appearance. He
was carried through the crowd with vast ceremony, and received the homage of
the people with a becoming dignity; after which he was again lodged in his
chapel, where he performs a number of miracles every day, to all those who have
abundance of money and abundance of faith. His ministers, however, are only a
set of poor greasy capuchins; who indeed do not seem to have enriched
themselves in his service. In general, he is but a shabby master if one may
judge by the tattered clothes of his servants; and St. Benedict, who does not
pretend to half his sanctity, beats him all to nothing. The people continued to
dance, in soft Sicilian measures, 'till after sunset, when they retired. Many
of the country girls are extremely handsome, and dance with a good grace. The
young fellows were all in their sunday's clothes, and made a good appearance.
The assembly room was a fine green plain on the top of the hill. It pleased us
very much, and put us in mind of some of Theocritus's descriptions of the
Sicilian pleasures. But Theocritus, if he could have raised up his head, would
probably have been a good deal puzzled what to make of the shabby figure of St.
Francis, marching through amongst them with such majesty and solemnity. Another
part of the ceremony too would have greatly alarmed him, as indeed it did us.
The whole court before the church was surrounded with a triple row of small
iron cannon, about six inches long; these were charged to the muzzle, and
rammed very hard; after which they were set close to each other, and a train
laid, that completed the communication through the whole number, which must
have exceeded 2000. Fire was set to the train, and in two or three minutes, the
whole was discharged, by a running fire; the reports following one another so
quick, that it was impossible for the ear to separate them. The effect was very
grand; but it would have been nothing without the fine echo from the high
mountains on each side of the Straits, which prolonged the sound for some
considerable time after the firing was finished.

The view from the top of this hill, is beautiful beyond description. The
Straits appear like a vast majestic river, flowing slowly betwixt two ridges of
mountains, and opening by degrees from its narrowest point, 'till it swells to
the size of an ocean. Its banks, at the same time, adorned with rich
cornfieldsd, vineyards, orchards, towns, villages, and churches. The prospect
is terminated on each side by the tops of high mountains covered with wood.

We observed in our walks today, many of the flowers that are much esteemed in
our gardens, and others too that we are not acquainted with. Larkspur, flos
Adonis, Venus' looking-glass, hawksweed, and very fine lupins grow wild over
all these mountains. They have likewise a variety of flowering shrubs;
particularly one in great plenty, which I do not recollect ever to have seen
before: It appears a beautiful round fruit, of a bright shining yellow. They
call it, Il pomo d'oro, or golden apple. All the fields about Messina are
covered with the richest white clover, intermixed with a variety of aromatic
plants, which perfume the air, and render their walks exceedingly delightful.
But what is remarkable, we were most sensible of this perfume, when walking on
the harbor which is at the greatest distance from these fields. I mentioned
this peculiarity to a Messinese gentleman, who tells me, that the salt produced
here by the heat of the sun, emits a grateful odor, something like violets;
and it is that, probably, which perfumes the seashore. On consulting Fazzello
De rebus Siculis, I find he takes notice of the same singularity; and likewise
observes, that the water of the Straits has a viscous or glutinous quality,
which by degrees cements the sand and gravel together, and at last consolidates
them to the solidity of rock.

There are fine shady walks on all sides of Messina; some of these run along
the seashore, and are for ever fanned by the cooling breeze from the Straits.
The houses are large, and most of the articles of life are cheap and in plenty;
particularly fish which are reckoned better here, than any where else in the
Mediterranean. The hire of lodgings is next to nothing; almost one half of that
noble range of buildings I have described, being absolutely uninhabited since
the desolation of 1743; so that the proprietors are glad to get tenants on any
terms. It now occurs to me, that from all these considerations, there is no
place I have seen, so admirably calculated for the residence of that flock of
valetudinarians, which every ^utumn leave our country with the swallows, in
search of warm climates. I have been inquiring with regard to their winter
season, and find all agree, that, in general, it is much preferable to that of
Naples. They allow they have sometimes heavy rain for two or three weeks; but
it never lasts longer: And besides, they have always some fair hours every day,
when people can go out for exercise; for the moment the rain is over, the walks
are dry, the soil being a light gravel.

The advantages of Messina over Naples in other respects, I think, are
considerable. At Naples there are no walks; and, the truth is, they have no
occasion for them, no more indeed than they have for legs; for you know as well
as I, that walking there, is little less infamous than stealing; and any person
that makes use of his limbs is looked upon as a blackguard, and despised by
all-good company. The rides too are all at a great distance; and you are
obliged to go some miles on streets and pavement before you get into the
country; besides passing the vile grotto of Pausillipe, where you are in danger
of being blinded, and stifled with dust. There are seldom any public diversions
here; the attending of which at Naples, and complying with their bad hours,
does often more than counteract all the benefit obtained from the climate. That
detestable practice of gaming too, is by no means so prevalent here; which from
the anxiety it occasions to the mind, and lassitude to the body, must be death
to all hectic people, weak breasts, or delicate nerves. I could say much more
on this subject, but as I have many of these circumstances only from the report
of the inhabitants, it makes me more diffident, than if I had known them from
my own experience.

We found our banker, Mr. M --, a very sensible man, and spent some hours with
him, both this morning and evening, very agreeably. He has given us some
account of the police of the country, the most singular, perhaps, of any in the
world, to such a degree, indeed, that I shall not venture to tell it you, 'till
I have talked it over with some other people, to see if the accounts agree; --
though from the character that gentleman bears, both here and at Naples, he is
as good authority as any in the island.

The prince of Villa Franca is arrived: so that we shall probably have our
audience tomorrow morning. Adieu -- We are just going to sup upon steaks made
of the pesce spada or sword-fish, which are caught in great plenty in these
seas. The sword of this one, is upwards of four feet long; and a formidable
weapon it is; -- not unlike a Highland bro^d sword. This fish, when cut, bears
a perfect resemblance to flesh; so much, that none of us doubted it was
beef-steaks they were dressing for us, and expressed our surprise at finding
that dish in Sicily. -- Good night.

LETTER IV.
21st.
WE are just returned from the prince's. He received us politely, but with a
good deal of state. He offered us the use of his carriages, as there are none
to be hired; and, in the usual style, desired to know in what he could be of
service to us.. We told him (with an apology for our abrupt departure) that we
were obliged to set off tomorrow, and begged his protection on our journey. He
replied, that he would give orders for guards to attend us, that should be
answerable for every thing; that we need give ourselves no farther trouble;
that whatever number of mules we had occasion for, should be ready at the door
of the inn, at any hour we should think proper to appoint: He added, that we
might entirely rely on those guards, who were people of the most determined
resolution, as well as of the most approved fidelity, and would not fail to
chastise on the spot, any person who should presume to impose upon us.

Now, who do you think these trusty guards are composed of? Why, of the most
daring, and most hardened villains, perhaps, that are to be met with upon
earth, who, in any other country, would have been broken upon the wheel, or
hung in chains; but are here publicly protected, and universally feared and
respected. It was this part of the police of Sicily, that I was afraid to give
you an account of: But I have now conversed with the prince's people on the
subject, and they have confirmed every circumstance Mr. M -- made me acquainted
with.

He told me, that in this east part of the island called Val Demoni, (from the
devils that are supposed to inhabit mount Aetna) it has ever been found
impracticable to extirpate the banditti; there being numberless caverns and
subterraneous passages in that mountain, where no troops could possibly pursue
them: that besides, as they are known to be perfectly determined and resolute,
never failing to take a dreadful revenge on all who have offended them, the
prince of Villa Franca has embraced it, not only as the safest, but likewise as
the wisest, and most political scheme, to become their declared patron and
protector. And such of them as think proper to leave their mountains and
forests, though perhaps only for a time, are sure to meet with good
encouragement, and security in his service; they enjoy the most unbounded
confidence, which, in no instance, they have ever yet been found to make an
improper or a dishonest use of. They are clothed in the prince's livery, yellow
and green, with silver lace; and wear likewise a badge of their honorable
order, which entitles them to universal fear and respect from the people.

I have just been interrupted by an upper servant of the prince's, who both by
his looks and language, seems to be of the same worthy fraternity. He tells us,
that he has ordered our muleteers, at their peril, to be ready by daybreak;
but that we need not go 'till we think proper; for it is their business to
attend on nostri eccellenzi. He says he has likewise ordered two of the most
desperate fellows in the whole island to accompany us; adding, in a sort of
whisper, that we need be under no apprehension; for if any person should
presume to impose upon us to the value of a single baiocc, A small coin.
they would certainly put them to death. I gave him an ounce, About eleven
shillings.
which I knew was what he expected; on which he redoubled his bows and his
eccellenzis, and declared we were the most honorabili Signori he had ever met
with, and that if we pleased, (...) himself should have the honor of attending
us, and would chastise any person that should dare take the wall of us, or
injure us in the smallest trifle. We thanked him for his zeal, showing him we
had swords of our own. On which, bowing respectfully, he retired.

I can now, with more assurance, give you some account of the conversation I
had with Seignior M --, who as I said appears to be a very intelligent man, and
has resided here, for these many years.

He says, that in some circumstances these banditti are the most respectable
people of the island; and have by much the highest, and most romantic notions
of what they call their point of honor. That however criminal they may be with
regard to society in general, yet, with respect to one another, and to every
person to whom they have once professed it, they have ever maintained the most
unshaken fidelity. The magistrates have often been obliged to protect them, and
even pay them court, as they are known to be perfectly determined, and
desperate; and so extremely vindictive, that they will certainly put any person
to death, who has ever given them just cause of provocation. On the other hand,
it never was known that any person who had put himself under their protection,
and showed that he had confidence in them, had cause to repent of it, or was
injured by any of them, in the most minute trifle; but on the contrary, they
will protect him from impositions of every kind, and scorn to go halves with
the landlord, like most other conductors and traveling servants; and will
defend him with their lives, if there is occasion. That those of their number,
who have thus enlisted themselves in the service of society, are known and
respected by the other banditti all over the island; and the persons of those
they accompany are ever held sacred. For these reasons, most travelers choose
to hire a couple of them from town to town; and may thus travel over the whole
island in safety. To illustrate their character the more, he added two stories,
which happened but a few days ago, and are still in every body's mouth:

A number of people were found digging in a place where some treasure was
supposed to have been hid during the plague: As this had been forbid under the
most severe penalties, they were immediately carried to prison, and expected to
have been treated without mercy; but, luckily for the others, one of these
heroes happened to be of the number. He wrote to the Prince of Villa Franca,
and made use of such powerful arguments in their favor, that they were all
immediately set at liberty.

This will serve to show their consequence with the civil power; the other
story will give you a strong idea of their barbarous ferocity, and the horrid
mixture of stubborn vice and virtue (if I may call it by that name) that seems
to direct their actions. I should have mentioned, that they have a practice of
borrowing money from the country people, who never dare refuse them; and if
they promise to pay it, they have ever been found punctual and exact, both as
to the time and the sum; and would much rather rob and murder an innocent
person, than fail of payment at the day appointed: And this they have often
been obliged to do, only in order (as they say) to fulfill their engagements,
and to save their honor.

It happened within this fortnight, that the brother of one of these heroic
banditti having occasion for money, and not knowing how to procure it,
determined to make use of his brother's name and authority, an artifice which
he thought could not easily be discovered; accordingly he went to a country
priest, and told him his brother had occasion for twenty ducats which he
desired he would immediately lend him. The priest assured him that he had not
then so large a sum, but that if he would return in a few days it should be
ready for him. The other replied, that he was afraid to return to his brother
with this answer; and desired, that he would by all means take care to keep out
of his way, at least 'till such time as he had pacified him; otherwise he could
not be answerable for the consequences. As bad fortune would have it, the very
next day the priest and the robber met in a narrow road: the former fell a
trembling, as the latter approached, and at last dropped on his knees to beg
for mercy. The robber, astonished at his behavior, desired to know the cause
of it. The trembling priest answered, "Il denaro, il denaro," the money, the
money -- but send your brother tomorrow, and you shall have it. The haughty
robber assured him, that he disdained taking money of a poor priest; adding,
that if any of his brothers had been low enough to make such a demand, he
himself was ready to advance the sum. The priest then acquainted him with the
visit he had received the preceding night from his brother, by his order;
assuring him, that if he had been master of the sum, he should immediately have
supplied it. Well, says the robber, I will now convince you whether my brother
or I are most to be believed; you shall go with me to his house, which is but a
few miles distant. On their arrival before the door, the robber called on his
brother, who never suspecting the discovery, immediately came to the balcony;
but on perceiving the priest he began to make excuses for his conduct. The
robber told him, there was no excuse to be made; that he only desired to know
the fact, Whether he had gone to borrow money of that priest in his name or
not? On his owning he had, the robber with deliberate coolness lifted his
blunderbuss to his shoulder, and shot him dead; and turning to the astonished
priest, "You will now be persuaded, (said he) that I had no intention of
robbing you at least."

You may now judge how happy we must be in the company of our guards. I don't
know but this very hero may be one of them; as we are assured they are two of
the most intrepid and resolute fellows in the island. I will not close this
letter, till I give you some account of our journey. In the mean time, adieu.
We are going to take a look of the churches and public buildings; but with
these I shall trouble you very little.

21st at night. We have been very well entertained, both from what we have seen
and heard. We used to admire the dexterity of some of the diverse at Naples,
when they went to the depth of forty eight or fifty feet, and could not
conceive how a man could remain three minutes under water without drawing
breath; but these are nothing to the feats of one Colas, a native of this
place, who is said to have lived for several days in the sea, without coming to
land; and from thence got the surname of Pesce, or the fish. Some of the
Sicilian authors affirm, that he caught fish merely by his agility in the
water; and the credulous Kircher asserts, that he could walk across the Straits
at the bottom of the sea. Be that as it will, he was so much celebrated for
swimming and diving, that one of their kings (Frederick) came on purpose to see
him perform: which royal visit proved fatal to poor Pesce; for the king, after
admiring his wonderful force and agility, had the cruelty to propose his diving
near the gulf of Charybdis; and to tempt him the more, threw in a large golden
cup, which was to be his prize should he bring it up. Pesce made two attempts,
and astonished the spectators by the time he remained under water; but in the
third, it is thought he was caught by the whirlpool, as he never appeared more;
and his body is said to have been found some time afterward near Taurominum
(about thirty miles distant) it having been observed, that what is swallowed up
by Charybdis is carried south by the current, and thrown out upon that coast.
On the contrary nothing wrecked here was ever carried through the Straits, or
thrown out on the north side of Sicily, unless we believe what Homer says of
the ship of Ulysses.

We have been again to take a view of the Straits at this famous whirlpool, and
are more and more convinced, that it must be infinitely diminished; indeed, in
comparison of what it was, almost reduced to nothing. The sea appeared to have
no extraordinary motion there, and ships and boats seemed to pass it with ease.
When we compare this its present state, with the formidable description of so
many ancient authors, poets, historians, and philosophers, it appears indeed
not improbable that this island has been torn from the continent by some
violent convulsion, and that near to this spot, huge caverns have been opened,
which, drinking in the waters in one course of the current, and throwing them
out in the other, may perhaps in some measure account for the phenomenon of
Charybdis. I find it is described both by Homer and Virgil, as alternatively
swallowed up, and throwing out every object that approached it. Dextrum Scylla
latus, laevum implacata Charybdis
Obsidet, atque imo barathri ter gurgite vastos
Sorbet in abruptum fluctus, rursusque sub auras
Erigit alteros, et fi^era verberat unda.

Now is it not probable, that these caverns in process of time have been, in a
great measure, filled up by the immense quantities of rocks, sand, gravel, etc.
that were perpetually carried in by the force of the current? I own I am not
quite satisfied with this solution, but at present I cannot think of a better:
The fact, however, is certain, that it must have been a dreadful object even in
Virgil's time, else he never would have made Aeneas and his fleet perceive its
effects at so great a distance, and immediately run out to sea to avoid it; nor
would he have made Helenus at such pains to caution him against that dangerous
gulf, and advise him rather to make the whole tour of Sicily than attempt to
pass it. Indeed, it is so often mentioned both in the voyage of Aeneas and
Ulysses, and always in such frightful terms, that we cannot doubt of its having
been a very terrible object. Seneca gives this account of it in a Letter to
Lucillus: Scyllam saxum esse, et quidem terribile navigantibus optime scio;
Charybdis an respondeat fabulis perscribi mihi desidero, fac nos certiores,
utrum uno tantum vento agatur in vortices, an omnis tempestas, ac mare illud
contorqueat, et an verum sit quidquid illo freti turbine abreptum est, etc.

And the following is a translation from Strabo.

Ante urbem Pa^lulum in trajectu Charybdis ostenditur: Profundum quidem
immensum: Quo inundationes freti: mirum in modum navigia detrahunt: magnas per
circumductiones, et vortices precipitata, quibus absorptis, ac dissolutis;
naufragiorum fragmenta ad Tauromitanum littus attrahuntur, etc.

Est igitur Charybdis," says Sallust, mare periculosum nautis; quod contrariis
fluctuum cursibus, collisionem sacit, et rapta quoque absorbet.

But these are moderate indeed when compared to the descriptions of the poets.




After seeing the beautiful harbor of Messina, we have found nothing much
worthy of notice in the city. Some of the churches are handsome, and there are
a few tolerable paintings. One ceremony, from the account they give of it, I
should like much to have seen: The celebration of the feast of the Vara. It
appears, indeed, to be a very singular exhibition, and I am heartily sorry it
does not happen at this season. In order to the more dignified appearance of
the Virgin Mary on this occasion, they have invented a very curious machine,
which I am told represents heaven, or at least a part of it. It is of a huge
size, and move through the street with vast pomp and ceremony. In the center is
the principal figure, which represents the Virgin; and, a little higher, there
are three others to denote the Trinity. Round these, are a number of wheels,
said to be of a very curious construction. Every wheel contains a legion of
angels, according to their different degrees of precedence; seraphims,
cherubims, and powers. These are represented by a great number of beautiful
little children, all glittering in clothes of gold and silver tissue; with
wings of painted feathers fixed to their shoulders. When the machine is set in
motion, all these wheels move round, and the different choirs of angels
continue in a constant flutter, singing hallelujahs round the Trinity and the
Virgin during the whole of the procession, and are said to make a most
beautiful appearance. This is all I could learn of this singular show, neither
were we admitted to see the machine; conscious, I suppose, of the ridicule of
which it is susceptible, they did not choose to unveil so sacred an object to
the eyes of heretics. -- This island has ever been famous for the celebration
of its feasts, even in ancient as well as modern times. They spare no expense;
and as they have a large share both of superstition and invention, they never
fail to produce something either very fine, or very ridiculous. The feast of
St. Rosolia at Palermo is said to be the finest show in Europe, and costs that
city every year a large sum. They assure us there is more taste and
magnificence displayed in it, than in any thing of the kind in Italy; and
advise us by all means to attend it, as it happens some time near the middle of
summer, when we shall probably be in that end of the island.

If you please we shall now take leave of Messina; -- I did not expect to make
so much out of it. But it would not be fair neither; without at least putting
you in mind of the great veneration it has ever been held in by the rest of
Sicily, for the assistance it gave to Count Rugiero in freeing the island from
the yoke of the Saracens; in consideration of which, great privileges were
granted it by the succeeding kings; some of which are said still to remain. It
was here that the Normans landed; and this city, by the policy of some of its
own inhabitants, was the first conquest they made; after which their victorious
arms were soon extended over the whole island; and a final period put to the
Saracen tyranny. Count Rugiero fixed the seat of government at Palermo; and put
the political system of the island upon a solid basis; of which the form (and
the form alone) still remains to this day. He divided the whole island into
three parts: one he gave to his officers, another to the church, and a third he
reserved for himself. Of these three branches he composed his parliament, that
respectable body, of which the skeleton only now exists; for it has long ago
lost all its blood, nerves, and animal spirits; and for many ages past has been
reduced to a perfect caput mortuum. The superstitious tyranny of Spain has not
only destroyed the national spirit of its own inhabitants, but likewise that of
every other country which has fallen under its power. Adieu.

Ever yours.
P. S. Apropos! There is one thing I had almost forgot, and I never should have
forgiven myself. Do you know, the most extraordinary phenomenon in the world
is often observed near to this place? I laughed at it at first, as you will do;
but I am now convinced of its reality; and am persuaded too, that if ever it
had been thoroughly examined by a philosophical eye, the natural cause must
long ago have been assigned.

It has often been remarked, both by the ancients and moderns, that in the heat
of summer, after the sea and air have been much agitated by winds, and a
perfect calm succeeds, there appears, about the time of dawn, in that part of
the heavens over the Straits, a great variety of singular forms, some at rest
and some moving about with great velocity. These forms, in proportion as the
light increases, seem to become more aerial; 'till at last, some time before
sunrise, they entirely disappear.

The Sicilians represent this as the most beautiful sight in nature; Leanti,
one of their latest and best writers, came here on purpose to see it: He says,
the heavens appear crowned with a variety of objects: He mentions palaces,
woods, gardens, etc. besides the figures of men, and other animals, that appear
in motion amongst them. No doubt the imagination must be greatly aiding, in
forming this aerial creation; but as so many of their authors, both ancient and
modern, agree in the fact, and give an account of it from their own
observation, there certainly must be some foundation for the story. There is
one Giardina, a Jesuit, who has lately written a treatise on this phenomenon,
but I have not been able to find it. The celebrated Messinese Gallo has
likewise published something on this singular subject; if I can procure either
of them in the island, you shall have a more perfect account of it. The common
people, according to custom, give the whole merit to the devil; and indeed it
is by much the shortest and easiest way of accounting for it: Those who pretend
to be philosophers, and refuse him this honor, are greatly puzzled what to
make of it. They think it may be owing to some uncommon refraction, or
reflection of the rays, from the water of the Straits; which, as it is at that
time carried about in a variety of eddies and vortexes, must consequently, say
they, make a variety of appearances on any medium where it is reflected. This,
I think, is nonsense; or at least very near it; and 'till they can say more to
the purpose, I think they had much better have left it in the hands of the old
gentleman. I suspect it is something in the nature of our Aurora Borealis; and
like many of the great phenomenon of nature, depends upon electrical causes;
which, in future ages, I have little doubt, will be found to be as powerful an
agent in regulating the universe, as gravity is in this age, or as the subtle
fluid was in the last.

The electrical fluid, in this country of volcanos, is probably produced in
much greater quantity than in any other. The air strongly impregnated with his
matter, and confined betwixt two ridges of mountains; at the same time
exceedingly agitated from below, by the violence of the current, and the
impetuous whirling of the waters; may it not be supposed to produce a variety
of appearances? And may not the lively Si^ili^^ imaginations, animated by a
belief in demons, and all the wild offspring of superstition, give these
appearances as great a variety of forms? Remember, I do not say it is so; and
hope yet to have it in my power to give you a better account of this matter.
However, if you should suppose me in this story, or in any future one I may
tell you, to be inclined to the fabulous, you will please to remember, that I
am now in the country of fable; this island having given rise to more perhaps,
except Greece, than all the world beside. You have, therefore, only to suppose
that these regions are still contagious; and call to mind that mount Aetna has
ever been the great mother of monsters and chimeras both in the ancient and the
modern world. However, I shall, if possible, keep free of the infection, and
entertain you only with such subjects as fall under my own observation. But
indeed, from what I have already heard of that wonderful mountain, the most
moderate account of it would appear highly fabulous to all such as are
unacquainted with objects of this kind. Adieu. We think of setting off
tomorrow by daybreak. I am sorry it has not been a storm, that we might have
had a chance of seeing Pandemonium reared over heads, and all the devils at
work around it.

I shall leave this to be sent by the first post, and shall write to you again
from Catania, if we escape unhurt from all the perils of Aetna.

Adieu.


LETTER V.
Giardini, near Taurominum, May 22d.
WE have had a delightful journey, and if all Sicily be but as agreeable, we
shall not repent of our expedition. We left Messina early this morning, with
six mules for ourselves and servants, and two for our baggage. This train, I
assure you, makes no contemptible appearance; particularly when you call to
mind our front and rear guard; by much the most conspicuous part of it. These
are two great draw-cansir figures, armed cap-a-pie, with a broad hanger, two
enormous pistols, and a long arq^ebuse: This they kept cocked and ready for
action in all suspicious places; where they recounted abundances of wonderful
stories of robberies and murders; some of them with such very minute
circumstances, that I am fully persuaded they themselves were the principal
actors. However, I look upon our situation as perfectly secure; they pay us
great respect, and take the utmost pains that we shall not be imposed upon.
Indeed, I think they impose upon every body except us; for they tax the bills
according to their pleasure; and such cheap ones I never paid before. To-day's
dinner for eleven men (our three muleteers included) and feeding for ten mules
and horses, did not amount to half a guinea. And, although we pay them high,
(an ounce a day each) yet I am persuaded they save us at least one half of it
on our bills. They entertained us with some of their seats, and make no scruple
of owning their having put several people to death; but add, Mas tutti tutti
honorabilmente, -- That is to say, they did not do it in a dastardly manner,
nor without just provocation.

The seacoast of Sicily is very rich; the sides of some of the mountains are
highly cultivated, and present the most agreeable aspect that can be imagined;
corn, wine, oil, and silk, all mixed together, and in the greatest abundance:
However, the cultivated part is but small in proportion to what is lying waste,
and only serves to show the great fertility of this island, were it peopled,
and in industrious hands. The sides of the road are covered with a variety of
flowers and of flowering shrubs; some of them exceedingly beautiful. The
enclosures are many of them fenced with hedges of the Indian fig, or prickly
pear, as in Spain and Portugal; and our guides assure us, that in many of the
parched ravines round Aetna, there are plenty of trees which produce both
cinnamon and pepper; not so strong, they allow, as those of the spice islands,
but which are sold to the merchants at a low price, by a set of banditti, who
dress themselves like hermits: These spices are mixed with the true pepper and
cinnamon from the Indies, and sent over all Europe.

The road from Messina to this place is extremely romantic. It lies the whole
way along the coast, and commands the view of Calabria, and the south part of
the Straits; covered with chebecks, galleys, galliots, and a quantity of
fishing boats. The view on the right hand is confined by high mountains, on the
very summits of which they have built several considerable towns and villages,
which with their churches and steeples, make a very picturesque appearance.
They have chosen this elevated situation, I suppose, with a double view; to
protect them both from their enemies, and from the violent heat of the climate.
This forenoon we found it excessive, but had the finest swimming in the world
before dinner; which kept us cool and fresh for all the rest of the day. We
have besides provided ourselves with umbrellas, without which, at this season,
traveling would be impracticable.

Betwixt this place and Messina, a little to the right, lie the mountains,
formerly called the Nebrodes; and likewise the mountain of Neptune, which is
reckoned the highest of that chain. It is celebrated for a gulf or crater on
its summit, from whence, at particular times, there issues an exceeding cold
wind, with such violence that it is difficult to approach it. I was sor^y to
pass this singular mountain, but it would have delayed us a day or two to visit
it; and we are hastening with impatience to a much greater object; It is now
named Il monte Scuderio, and is said to be so high that the Adriatic can be
seen from its summit. From the description they give of it, it appears
evidently to be an old volcano. The Nisso takes its rise from this mountain; a
river renowned in antiquity for the gold found in its channel; for which
reason, it was by the Greeks called Chrysothoas. It is said, the remains of the
ancient gold mines are still to be soen near the source of this river; but the
modern masters of Sicily have never been enterprising enough to explore them.
It was on this charming coast, where the flocks of Apollo were kept by his
daughters, Phaethusa and Lampetie; the seizing of which by Ulysses' companions,
proved the cause of their deaths, and of all his subsequent misfortunes. The
mountain of Tauromina is very high and steep, and the road up to it is
exceedingly rugged.

This once famous city is now reduced to an insignificant burgh; yet even these
small remains give a high idea of its former magnificence. The theater, I
think, is accounted the largest in the world. It appears to me greatly superior
to that of Adrian's villa, near Rome. It is entire enough, to give a very
tolerable idea of the Roman theater, and indeed astonishes by its vastness; nor
can I conceive how any voice could extend through the prodigious number of
people it must have contained. I paced about one quarter of it; over the boxes
that were intended for the women, which is not near the outward circle of all;
the rest is so broken, that I could get no farther. It measured about 120
ordinary steps, so that you may conceive the greatness of the whole. The seats
front mount Aetna, which makes a glorious appearance from this place; and no
doubt has often diverted their attention from the scene. It arises from an
immense base, and mounts equally on all sides to its summit: It is just now
throwing out volumes of white smoke, which do not rise in the air, but seem to
roll down the side of the mountain like a vast torrent. The ascent of Aetna on
each side is computed at about 30 miles, and the circumference of its base at
150: I think it does not appear to be so much; but I shall probably be enabled
to give you a fuller account of it afterward.

After admiring the great theater of Taurominum, we went to examine the
Naumachia, and the reservoirs for supplying it with water. About 150 paces of
one side of the wall of the Naumachia remains; but as this is not complete,
there is no judging of its original dimensions. This is supposed to have been a
large square, enclosed with strong walls, and capable of being filled with
water on occasion; intended for the exhibition of sea fights, and all naval
exercises: There were four reservoirs for supplying this with water. All are
upon the same grand scale. One of these is almost entire; it is supported by a
great number of strong pillars, in the same manner as those of Titus' baths at
Rome, and several others you may have seen in Italy. I would dwell longer on
objects of this kind, but I am persuaded descriptions can give but a very
imperfect idea of them; and to mark out the precise dimensions with a
mathematical exactness, where there is nothing very remarkable, must surely be
but a dry work, both to the writer and reader. I shall therefore content myself
(I hope it will content you too) with endeavoring to communicate, as entire as
possible, the same impression I myself shall receive, without descending too
much to particulars, or fatiguing myself or you with the mensuration of antique
walls, merely because they are such, except where there is indeed something
very striking, and different too, from what has already been described in Italy.

I own I despair of success: Few things I believe in writing being more
difficult than thus s'emparer de l'imagination, to seize -- to make ourselves
masters of the reader's imagination, to carry it along with us through every
scene, and make it in a manner congenial with our own; every prospect opening
upon him with the same light, and arising in the same colors, and at the same
instant too, as upon us: For where description fail in this, the pleasure of
reading them must be very trivial. Now, perhaps, this same journal style is the
most favorable of any to produce these effects. It is at least the most
agreeable to the writer; who never has his subject to seek, but needs only
recollect what has passed since he last laid down the pen, and travel the day
over again; and if he travels it to good purpose, it ought to be equally
agreeable to the reader too, who thereby becomes one of the party, and bears a
share in all the pleasures of the journey without suffering from the fatigues
of it.

One of my greatest difficulties, I see, will be the finding proper places to
write in, for the inns are altogether execrable, and there is no such thing as
getting a room to one's self: I am just now writing on the end of a barrel,
which I chose rather than the table, as it is further removed from noise. I
must therefore entreat you, once for all, to excuse incorrectness and want of
method. How can one be methodical upon a barrel! It has ever been the most
declared enemy to method. You might as well expect a sermon from Bacchus or a
coherent speech from our friend lord -- after he has finished the third bottle.
You will be pleased than just to take things as they occur. Were I obliged to
be strictly methodical, I should have no pleasure in writing you these letters;
and then, if my position is just, you could have no pleasure in reading them.

Our guards have procured us beds; though not in the town of Taurominum, but in
Giardini, a village at the foot of the mountain on stands. The people are
extremely attentive, and have produced us an excellent supper and good wine,
which now waits -- but shall wait no longer. Adieu. Tomorrow we intend to
climb mount Aetna on this (its east) side, if we find it practicable.

Ever yours.

LETTER VI.
Catania, May 24th.
I AM already almost two days in arrears. Yesterday we were so much fatigued
with the abominable roads of mount Aetna, that I was not able to wield a pen;
and today, I assure you, has by no means been a day of rest; however, I must
not delay any longer, otherwise I shall never be able to make up my lee-way. I
am afraid you will suffer more from the fatigues of the journey than I at first
apprehended.

We left Giardini at five o'clock. About half a mile farther the first region
of mount Aetna begins, and here they have set up the statue of a saint, for
having prevented the lava from running up the mountain of Taurominum, and
destroying the adjacent country; which the people think it certainly must have
done, had it not been for this kind interposition, but he very wisely, as well
as humanely, conducted it down a low valley to the sea.

We left the Catania road on the left, and began to ascend the mountain, in
order to visit the celebrated tree, known by the name of Il Castagno de Cento
Cavalli (The chesnut-tree of a hundred horse;) which for some centuries past
has been looked upon as one of the greatest wonders of Aetna. We had likewise
proposed, if possible, to gain the summit of the mountain by this side, and to
descend by the side of Catania; but we were soon convinced of the impossibility
of this, and obliged, with a good deal of reluctance, to relinquish that part
of our scheme.

As we advanced in the first region of Aetna, we observed that there had been
eruptions of fire all over this country at a great distance from the summit, or
principal crater of the mountain. On our road to the village of Piedmonte, I
took notice of several very considerable craters; and stones of a large size,
scattered all around, that had been discharged from them. These stones are
precisely such as are thrown out of the crater of mount Vesuvius; and indeed
the lava too seems to be of the same nature, though rather more porous.

The distance from Giardini to Piedmonte is only ten miles, but as the road is
exceedingly rough and difficult, we took near four hours to travel it. The
barometer, which at Giardini (on the seaside) stood at 29 inches ten lines,
had now fallen to 27: 3. Fahrenheit's thermometer made by Mr. Adams in London,
73 degrees. We found the people extremely curious and inquisitive to know our
errand, which when we told, many of them offered to accompany us. Of these we
chose two; and after drinking our tea, which was matter of great speculation to
the inhabitants, who had never before seen a breakfast of this kind, we began
to climb the mountain.

We were directed for five or six miles of our road by an aqueduct, which the
prince of Palagonia has made at a great expense, to supply Piedmonte with
water. After we left the aqueduct, the ascent become a good deal more rapid,
'till we arrived at the beginning of the second region, called by the natives
la Regione Sylvosa, or the woody region; because it is composed of one vast
forest, that extends all around the mountain. Part of this was destroyed by a
very singular event, not later than the year 1755. -- During an eruption of the
volcano, an immense torrent of boiling water issued, as is imagined, from the
great crater of the mountain, and in an instant poured down to its base:
overwhelming and ruining every thing it met with in its course. Our conductors
showed us the traces of this torrent, which are still very visible; but are now
beginning to recover verdure and vegetation, which for some time appeared to
have been lost. The track it has left, seems to be about a mile and a half
broad; and in some places still more.

The common opinion, I find, is, that this water was raised by the power of
suction, through some communication betwixt the volcano and the sea; the
absurdity of which is too glaring to need a refutation. The power of suction
alone, even supposing a perfect vacuum, could never raise water to more than
thirty-three or thirty-four feet, which is equal to the weight of a column of
air the whole height of the atmosphere. But this circumstance, I should
imagine, might be easily enough accounted for; either by a stream of lava
falling suddenly into one of the valleys of snow, that occupy the higher
regions of the mountain, and melting it down: Or, what (...) think is still
more probable, that the melted snow, finding vast caverns and reservoirs in the
mountain, where it is lodged for some time, 'till the excessive heat of the
lava below bursts the sides of these caverns, produces this phenomenon, which
has been matter of great speculation to the Sicilian philosophers, and has
employed the pens of several of them. The same thing happened in an eruption of
Vesuvius last century, and in an instant swept away about 500 people, who were
marching in procession at the foot of the mountain, to implore the meditation
of St. Januarius.

Near to this place we passed through some beautiful woods of cork and
ever-green oak, growing absolutely out of the lava, the soil having as yet
hardly filled the crevices of that porous substance; and not a great way
farther, I observed several little mountains that seemed to have been formed by
a late eruption. I dismounted from my mule, and climbed to the top of them all.
They are seven in number; every one of them with a regular cup or crater on the
top, and in some the great gulf or (as they call it) Voragine, that had
discharged the burnt matter of which these little mountains are formed, is
still open. I tumbled stones down into these gulphs, and heard the noise for a
long time after. All the fields round to a considerable distance, are covered
with large burnt stones discharged from these little volcanos.

From this place, it is not less than five or six miles to the great
chesnut-trees, through forests growing out of the lava, in several places
almost impassable. Of these there are many of an enormous size; but the
Castagno de Cento Cavalli is by much the most celebrated. I have even found it
marked in an old map of Sicily, published near a hundred years ago; and in all
the maps of Aetna, and its environs, it makes a very conspicuous figure. I own
I was by no means struck with its appearance, as it does not seem to be one
tree, but a bush of five large trees growing together. We complained to our
guides of the imposition; when they unanimously assured us, that by the
universal tradition and even testimony of the country, all these were once
united in one stem; that their grandfathers remembered this, when it was looked
upon as the glory of the forest, and visited from all quarters; that for many
years past it had been reduced to the venerable ruin we beheld. We began to
examine it with more attention, and found that there was indeed an appearance
as if these five trees, had really been once united in one. The opening in the
middle is at present prodigious; and it does indeed require faith to believe,
that so vast a space was once occupied by solid timber. But there is no
appearance of bark on the inside of any of the stumps, nor on the sides that
are opposite to one another. Mr. Glover and I measured it separately, and
brought it exactly to the same size; viz. 204 feet round. If this was once
united in one solid stem, it must with justice indeed have been looked upon as
a very wonderful phenomenon in the vegetable world, and was deservedly styled
the glory of the forest.

I have since been told by the Canonico Recupero, an ingenious ecclesiastic of
this place, that he was at the expense of carrying up peasants with tools to
dig round the Castagno de Cento Cavalli, and he assures me, upon his honor,
that he found all these stems united below ground in one root. I alleged that
so extraordinary an object must have been mentioned by many of their writers.
He told me that it had, and produced several examples; Philateo, Carrera, and
some others. Carrera begs to be excused from telling its dimensions, but says,
he is sure there was wood enough in that one tree to build a large palace.
Their poet Bagolini too has celebrated a tree of the same kind, perhaps the
same tree; Supremos inter montes monstrosior omni
Monstrosi faetum stipitis Aetna dedit
Castaneam genuit, cujus modo ^oncava cortex
Turmam equitum haud parvam continet, atque greges, etc.

and Massa, one of their most esteemed authors, says he has seen solid oaks
upwards of 40 feet round; but adds, that the size of the chesnut-trees was
beyond belief, the hollow of one of which, he says, contained 300 sheep; and 30
people on horseback had often been in it at a time. I shall not pretend to say,
that this is the same tree he means; or whether it was ever one tree or not.
There are many others that are well deserving the curiosity of travelers. One
of these about a mile and a half higher on the mountain, is called Il Castagno
del Galea; it rises from one solid stem to a considerable height, after which
it branches out, and is a much finer object than the other. I measured it about
two feet from the ground and found it 76 feet round. There is a third called Il
C^s^agno del Nave, that is pretty nearly of the same size. All these grow on a
thick rich soil, formed originally, I believe, of ashes thrown out by the
mountain.

The climate here is much more temperate than in the first region of Aetna,
where the excessive heats must ever prevent a very luxuriant vegetation. I
found the barometer had now fallen to 26: 5; which announces an elevation of
very near four thousand feet: equivalent in the opinion of some of the French
academicians, to 18 or 20 degrees of latitude in the formation of a climate.

The vast quantity of nitre contained in the ashes of Aetna, probably
contributes greatly to increase the luxuriance of this vegetation; and the air
too, strongly impregnated with it from the smoke of the volcano, must create a
constant supply of this salt, termed by some, not without reason, the food of
vegetables.

There is the ruins of a house in the inside of the great chesnut-tree which
had been built for holding the fruit it bears, which is still considerable:
here we dined with excellent appetite, and being convinced, that it was in vain
to attempt getting to the top of the mountain on that side, we began to
descend; and after a very fatiguing journey over old lavas, now become fertile
fields and rich vineyards, we arrived about sunset at Jaci Reale, where, with
no small difficulty, we at last got lodging in a convent of Dominicans.

The last lava we crossed before our arrival there, is of a vast extent, I
thought we never should have had done with it; it certainly is not less than
six or seven miles broad, and appears in many places to be of an enormous depth.

When we came near the sea, I was desirous to see what form it had assumed in
meeting with the water. I went to examine it and found it had driven back the
waves for upwards of a mile, and had formed a large black high promontory,
where before it was deep water. This lava, I imagined, from its barrenness, for
it is as yet covered with a very scanty soil, had run from the mountain only a
few ages ago; but was surprised to be informed by Signor Recupero, the
historiographer of Aetna, that this very lava is mentioned by Diodorus Siculus
to have burst from Aetna in the time of the second Punic war, when Syracuse was
besieged by the Romans. A detachment was sent from Taurominum to the relief of
the besieged. They were stopped on their march by this stream of lava, which
having reached the sea before their arrival at the foot of the mountain, had
cut off their passage; and obliged them to return by the back of Aetna, upwards
of 100 miles about. His authority for this, he tells me was taken from
inscriptions on Roman monuments found on this lava, and that it was likewise
well ascertained by many of the old Sicilian authors. Now as this is about 2000
years ago, one would have imagined, if lavas have a regular progress in
becoming fertile fields, that this must long ago have become at least arable;
this however is not the case, and it is as yet only covered with a very scanty
vegetation, and incapable of producing either corn or vines. There are indeed
pretty large trees growing in the crevices, which are full of a rich earth; but
in all probability it will be some hundred years yet, before there is enough of
it to render this land of any use to the proprietors.

It is curious to consider, that the surface of this black and barren matter,
in process of time, becomes one of the most fertile soils upon earth: But what
must be the time to bring it to its utmost perfection, when after 2000 years it
is still in most places but a barren rock? -- Its progress is possibly as
follows. The lava being a very porous substance, easily catches the dust that
is carried about by the wind; which at first, I observe only yields a kind of
moss; this rotting, and by degrees increasing the soil, some small meagre
vegetables are next produced; which rotting in their turn, are likewise
converted into soil. But this progress, I suppose, is often greatly accelerated
by showers of ashes from the mountain, as I have observed in some places the
richest soil, to the depth of 5 or 6 feet and upwards; and still below that
nothing but rocks of lava. It is in these spots that the trees arrive at such
an immense size. Their roots shoot into the crevices of the lava, and lay such
hold of it, that there is no instance of the winds tearing them up; though
there are many, of its breaking off their largest branches. A branch of one of
the great chesnut-trees, where we passed yesterday, has fallen across a deep
gully, and formed a very commodious bridge over the rivulet below. The people
say it was done by St. Agatha, the guardian saint of the mountain, who has the
superintendence of all its operations.

In the lowest part of the first region of Aetna, the harvest is almost over;
but in the upper parts of the same region, near the confines of the Regione
Sylvosa, it will not begin for several weeks.

The reapers, as we went along, abused us from all quarters, and more excellent
blackguards I have never met with; but indeed, our guides were a full match for
them. They began as soon as we were within hearing, and did not finish till we
were got quite without reach of their voices; which they extended as much as
they could. As it was all in Sicilian, we could make very little of it, but by
the interpretation of our guides; however we could not help admiring the
volubility and natural elocution with which they spoke. This custom is as old
as the time of the Romans, and probably much older, as it is mentioned by
Horace, and others, of their authors. It is still in vogue here as much as
ever; the masters encourage it; they think it gives them spirits, and makes the
work go on more cheerfully; and I believe they are right, for it is amazing
what pleasure they seemed to take in it, and what laughing and merriment it
occasioned.

I forgot to mention that we passed the source of the famous cold river (il
fium^ Freddo.) This is the river so celebrated by the poets in the fable of
Acis and Galatea. It was here that Acis was supposed to have been killed by
Poliphemus, and the gods out of compassion converted him into this river;
which, as still retaining the terror inspired by the dreadful voice of the
Cyclops, runs with great rapidity, and about a mile from its source throws
itself into the sea. It rises at once out of the earth a large stream. Its
water is remarkably pure, and so extremely cold, that it is reckoned dangerous
to drink it; but I am told it has likewise a poisonous quality, which proceeds
from its being impregnated with vitriol; to such a degree, that cattle have
often been killed by it. It never freezes; but, what is remarkable, it is said
often to contract a degree of cold greater than that of ice.

These particulars I was informed of by the priests at Aci; which place,
anciently called Aci Aquileia, and several others near it, Aci Castello, Aci
Terra, etc. take their names from the unfortunate shepherd Acis.

A little to the east of the river Acis, is the mouth of the river Alcantara,
one of the most considerable in the island. It takes its rise on the north side
of mount Aetna, and marks out the boundary of the mountain for about 60 miles.
Its course has been stopped in many places, by the eruptions of the volcano; so
that strictly speaking, the skirts of Aetna extend much beyond it; though it
has generally been considered as the boundary. We passed it on our way to
Piedmonte, over a large bridge built entirely of lava; and near to this the bed
of the river is continued for a great way, through one of the most remarkable,
and probably one of the most ancient lavas that ever run from Aetna. In many
places the current of the river, which is extremely rapid, has worn down the
solid lava to the depth of 50 or 60 feet. Recupero, the gentleman I have
mentioned, who is engaged in writing the natural history of Aetna, tells me, he
had examined this lava with great attention, and he thinks that its course,
including all its windings, is not less than 40 miles. It issued from a
mountain in the north side of Aetna, and finding some valleys that lay to the
east, it took its course that way; interrupting the Alcantara in many places,
and at last arrived at the sea not far from the mouth of that river.

The city of Jaci or Aci, and indeed all the towns on this coast, are founded
on immense rocks of lava, heaped one above another, in some places to an
amazing height; for it appears that these flaming torrents, as soon they
arrived at the sea, were hardened into rock, which not yielding any longer to
the pressure of the liquid fire behind, the melted matter continuing to
accumulate, formed a dam of fire, which, in a short time, run over the solid
front, pouring a second torrent into the ocean: this was immediately
consolidated, and succeeded by a third, and so on.

Many of the places on this coast still retain their ancient names; but the
properties ascribed to them by the ancients are now no more. The river Acis,
which is now so poisonous, was of old celebrated for the sweetness and
salubrity of its waters Quique per Aetnaeos Acis petit aequora fines,
Et dulce gratum Nercide perluit unda.
SIL. ITAL.
; which Theocritus says, were ever held sacred by the Sicilian shepherds.

We were surprised to find that so many places retained the name of this swain,
who I imagined had never existed, but in the imagination of the poets: But the
Sicilian author say, that Acis was the name of a king who reigned in this part
of the island, in the time of the most remote antiquity; in confirmation of
which, Massa gives the translation of an inscription found near Aci Castello.
DIAE OGNIAE, SATURNIAE, AETNAEAE DEORUM, MARTI, FILIAE, UXORI, IN PORTU
SEPULCHRUM, TEMPLUM, ET ARCEM ACIS, FAUNI FILIUS, PICI NEPOS, SATURNI PRONEPOS,
LATINI FRATER.
He is said to have been slain in a fit of jealousy by Poliphemus, one of the
giants of Aetna; which gave rise to the fable. Anguillara, a Sicilian poet, in
relating this story gives a tremendous idea of the voice of Poliphemus; the
passage has been greatly admired. "Tremor per troppo horrore Aetna; e Tifeo
"Fece maggior la fiamma uscir del monte;
"E Pacchino, e Pelo^o, e Lilibeo
"Quasi at^uffar nel mar l'altera front;
"Cadde il martel di man nel monte Aetnaeo,
"All Re di Lenno, a Sterope, e a Bronte;
"Fugir ^iere and augei di lor ricetto
"E si strinse ogni madre il figlio al Petto."


You will observe however, that the Sicilian poet cannot in justice claim the
entire merit of these lines, as they are evidently borrowed from Virgil's
description of the sound of the fury Alecto's horn, in the 7th Aeneid. The last
line, perhaps the most beautiful of the whole, is almost word for word, "Et
trepidae matres pressere ad pectoral natos."

It has been observed too, by some critics, that even this description of
Virgil is not his own, but copied from the account that Apollonius Rhodius
gives of the roaring of the dragon that guarded the golden fleece; so that you
see there is nothing new under the sun. Rhodius probably stole it from somebody
else, and so on. Poets have ever been the greatest of all thieves, and happy it
is, that poetical theft is no felony; otherwise, I am afraid, Parnassus would
have been but thinly peopled.

Farewell; tomorrow I shall endeavor to bring you up with us, for at present
you will please to observe, that you have got no farther than the city of Jaci;
and have still many extinguished volcanos to pass before your arrival here.

Ever yours, etc.

LETTER VII.
Catania, May 25th.
THE road from Jaci to this city is entirely over lava, and consequently very
fatiguing and troublesome. Within a few miles of that place, we counted eight
mountains formed by eruption, with every one its crater, from whence the burnt
matter was discharged. Some of these are very high, and of a great compass. It
appears evidently, that the eruptions of mount Aetna have formed the whole of
this coast, and in many places have driven back the sea for several miles from
its ancient boundary. The account the Sicilian authors give betwixt these two
averse elements is truly tremendous; and in relating it, they seem to have been
shaken with horror. Conceive the front of a torrent of fire, ten miles in
breadth, and heaped up to an enormous height, rolling down the mountain; and
pouring its flames into the ocean! The noise, they assure us, is infinitely
more dreadful than the loudest thunder; and is heard through the whole country
to an immense distance. The water seemed to retire and diminish before the
fire, and to confess its superiority; yielding up its possessions, and
contracting its banks, to make room for its imperious master, who commands it:
"Thus far shall thou come, and no farther." -- The clouds of salt vapor darken
the face of the sun, covering up this scene, under a veil of horror and of
night; and laying waste every field and vineyard in those regions of the
island. The whole fish on the coast are destroyed, the color of the sea itself
is changed, and the transparency of its waters lost for many months.

There are three rocks of lava at some little distance from shore, which Pliny
takes frequent notice of, and calls them the Three Cyclops. It is pretty
singular, that they are still distinguished by the same name.

The fate of Catania has been very remarkable, and will ever appear fabulous.
It is situated immediately at the foot of this great volcano, and has been
several times destroyed by it: That indeed is not extraordinary; it would have
been much more so had it escaped: But what I am going to relate, is a
singularity that probably never happened to any city but itself. It was always
in great want of a port, 'till by an eruption in the 16th century; and no
doubt, by the interposition of St. Agatha, what was denied them by nature, they
received from the generosity of the mountain. A stream of lava, running into
the sea, formed a mole which no expense could have furnished them. This lasted
for some time a safe and commodious harbor, 'till at last, by subsequent
eruption, it was entirely filled up and demolished; so that probably the poor
saint had sunk much in her credit. For at this unfortunate period, her
miraculous veil, looked upon as the greatest treasure of Catania, and esteemed
an infallible remedy against earthquakes and volcanos, seems to have lost its
virtue. The torrent burst over the walls, sweeping away the images of every
saint that were placed there to oppose it; and laying waste great part of this
beautiful city, poured into the sea. However, the people say, that at that time
they had given their saint very just provocation, but that she has long ago
been reconciled to them; and has promised never to suffer the mountain to get
the better of them for the future. Many of them are so thoroughly convinced of
this (for they are extremely superstitious) that I really believe if the lava
were at their walls, they would not be at the pains to remove their effects.
Neither is it the veil of St. Agatha alone, that they think possessed of this
wonderful dominion over he mountain; but every thing has touched that piece of
sacred attire, they suppose is impregnated in a lesser degree with the same
miraculous properties. Thus there are a number of little bits of cotton and
linen fixed to the veil; which, after being blessed by the bishop, are supposed
to acquire power enough to save any person's house or garden; and wherever this
expedient has failed, it is always ascribed to the want of faith of the person,
not any want of efficacy in the veil. However, they tell you many stories of
these bits of cotton being fixed to the walls of houses and vineyards, and
preserving them entirely from the conflagration.

On our arrival at Catania, we were amazed to find, that in so noble and
beautiful a city, there was no such thing as an inn. Our guides, indeed,
conducted us to a house they called such; but it was so wretchedly mean and
dirty, that we were obliged to look out for other lodgings; and by the
assistance of the Canonico Recupero, for whom we had letters, we soon found
ourselves comfortably lodged in a convent. The prince of Biscaris (the
governor of the place) a person of very great merit and distinction, returned
our visit this forenoon, and made us the most obliging offers.

Signor Recupero, who obligingly engages to be our Cicerone, has shown us some
curious remains of antiquity; but they have been all so shaken and shattered by
the mountain, that hardly any thing is to be found entire.

Near to a vault, which is now thirty feet below ground, and has probably been
a burial place, there is a draw-well, where there are several strata of lavas,
with earth to a considerable thickness over the surface of each stratum
Recupero has made use of this as an argument to prove the great antiquity of
the eruptions of his mountain. For if it requires two thousand years or
upwards, to from but a scanty soil on the surface of a lava, there must have
been more than that space of time betwixt each of the eruptions which have
formed these strata. But what shall we say of a pit they sunk near to Jaci of a
great depth. They pierced through seven distinct lavas one under the other, the
surfaces of which were parrellel, and most of them covered with a thick bed of
rich earth. Now, says he, the eruption which formed the lowest of these lavas,
if we may be allowed to reason from analogy, must have flowed from the mountain
at least 14000 years ago.

Recupero tells me he is exceedingly embarrassed, by these discoveries, in
writing the history of the mountain. That Moses hangs like a dead weight upon
him, and blunts all his zeal for inquiry; for that really he has not the
conscience to make his mountain so young, as that prophet makes the world. --
What do you think of these sentiments from a Roman Catholic divine? -- The
bishop, who is strenuously orthodox, for it is an excellent see, has already
warned him to be upon his guard: and not to pretend to be a better natural
historian than Moses: nor to presume to urge any thing that may in the smallest
degree be deemed contradictory to his sacred authority. Adieu.

Ever yours.

LETTER VIII.
Catania, May 26th.
THIS morning we went to see the house and museum of the prince of Biscaris;
which, in antiques, is inferior to none I have ever seen, except that of the
king of Naples at Portici. What adds greatly to the value of these is, that the
prince himself has had the satisfaction of seeing most of them brought to
light. He has dug them out of the ruins of the ancient theater of Catania, at
an incredible expense; but happily his pains have been amply repaid, by the
number and variety of curious objects he has discovered. It would be endless to
enter into an enumeration of them; even during our short stay. We had the
satisfaction of seeing part of a rich Corinthian cornice and several pieces of
statues, produced again to the light, after lying for so many ages in darkness
and oblivion. His collection of medals, cameos, and intaglios is likewise very
princely, and so are the articles in natural history: But the polite and
amiable behavior of the owner, gives more pleasure than all his curiosities.
He did not, ostentatiously, like the prince of Villa Franca, tell us, that his
house and carriages were at our command; but without any hint being given of
it, we found his coach waiting at our door; and we shall probably be obliged to
make use of it during our stay. His family consists of the princess his wife, a
son, and a daughter, who seem to emulate each other in benignity. They put me
in mind of some happy families I have seen in our own country, but resemble
nothing we have yet met with on the continent. He is just now building a
curious villa on a promontory formed by the lava of 1669. The spot where the
house stands was formerly at least 50 feet deep of water; and the height of the
lava above the present level of the sea, is not less than 50 more.

This afternoon I walked out alone to examine the capricious forms and singular
appearances that this destructive branch has assumed in laying waste the
country. I had not gone far when I spied a magnificent building at some
distance, which seemed to stand on the highest part of it. My curiosity led me
on, as I had heard no mention of any palace on this side of the city. On
entering the great gate, my surprise was a good deal increased on observing a
facade almost equal to that of Versailles; a noble staircase of white marble,
and every thing that announced a royal magnificence. I had never heard that the
kings of Sicily had a palace at Catania, and yet I could not account for what I
saw in any other way. I thought the vast front before me had been the whole of
the palace; but conceive my amazement, which on turning the corner, I found
another front of equal greatness; and discovered that what I had seen was only
one side of a square.

I was no longer in doubt, well knowing that the church alone could be mistress
of such magnificence. I hastened home to communicate this discovery to my
friends; when I found the Canonico Recupero already with them. He abused me
exceedingly for presuming to go out without our Cicerone, and declared he had
never been so much disappointed in his life; as he had come on purpose to carry
us there, and to enjoy our surprise and astonishment. He then told us, that it
was no other than a convent of fat Benedictine monks; who were determined to
make sure of a paradise, at least in this world, if not in the other. He added,
that they were worth about 15,000 l. a year; an immense sum indeed for this
country.

We went with Recupero to pay our respects to these sons of humility,
temperance, and mortification; and we must own, they received and entertained
us with great civility and politeness, and even without ostentation. Their
museum is little inferior to that of the prince of Biscaris, and the apartments
that contain it are much more magnificent. But their garden is the greatest
curiosity: Although it be formed on the rugged and barren surface of the lava,
it has a variety and a neatness seldom to be met with. The walks are broad, and
paved with flints; and the trees and hedges (which by the bye are in a bad
taste, and cut into a number of ridiculous shapes) thrive exceedingly. The
whole soil must have been brought from a great distance, as the surface of this
lava (only 150 years old) is as hard and bare as a piece of iron. The church
belonging to this convent, if finished, would be one of the finest in Europe;
but as it is founded on the surface of the porous and brittle lava, part of the
foundation has given way to the pressure of so huge a fabric; and several of
the large arches that were intended to form the different chapels, have already
fallen down. Only the west limb of the cross (not a fifth of the whole) is
finished; and even this alone makes a very fine church. Here they have the
finest organ I ever heard, even superior, I think, to that at Harlem.

We went next to examine where the lava had scaled the Walls of Catania. It
must have been a noble fight. The walls are 64 palms high, (near 60 feet) and
of a great strength; otherwise they must have been borne down by the force of
the flaming matter which rose over this height, and seems to have mounted
considerably above the top of the wall before it made its entry; at last it
came down, were sweeping before it every saint in the calendar, who were drawn
up in order of battle on purpose to oppose its passage and marching on in
triumph, annihilated, in a manner, every object that dared to oppose it. Among
other things, it covered up some fine fountains; one of which was so much
esteemed, that they have at a great expense pierced through the lava, and have
now recovered their favorite spring. This excavation is a very curious work,
and worthy of the attention of travelers.

Catania is looked upon as one of the most ancient cities in the island, or
indeed in the world. Their legends bear, that it was founded by the Cyclops, or
giants of Aetna, supposed to have been the first inhabitants of Sicily after
the deluge; and some of the Sicilian writers pretend that it was built by
Deucalion and Pyrrha, as soon as the waters subsided, and they had got down
again to the foot of the mountain. Its ancient name was Catetna, or the city of
Aetna.

It is now reckoned the third city in the kingdom; though since Messina was
destroyed by the plague, it may well be considered as the second. It contains
upwards of 30,000 inhabitants; has a^ University, the only one in the island;
and a bishopric. The bishop's revenues are considerable, and arise principally
from the sale of the snow on mount Aetna. One small portion of which, lying on
the north of the mountain, is said to bring him in upwards of 1000 l. a year;
for Aetna furnishes snow and ice, not only to the whole island of Sicily, but
likewise to Malta and a great part of Italy, and makes a very considerable
branch of commerce; for even the peasants in these hot countries, regale
themselves with ices during the summer heats; and there is no entertainment
given by the nobility, of which these do not always make a principal part: a
famine of snow they themselves say, would be more grievous, than a famine of
either corn or wine. It is a common observation amongst them, that without the
snows of mount Aetna, their island could not be inhabited; so essential has
this article of luxury become to them. But Aetna not only keeps them cool in
summer, but likewise keeps them warm in winter; the fuel for the greatest part
of the island being carried from the immense and inexhaustible forests of this
volcano, and constitutes too, a very large branch of commerce. But this amazing
mountain perpetually carries me away from my subject: I was speaking of this
city. What of it was spared by the eruption 1669, was totally ruined by the
fatal earthquake 1693; when the greatest part of its inhabitants were buried
under the walls of their houses and churches. Yet, after such repeated, and
such dismal disasters, so strange is their infatuation, that they never could
be prevailed upon to change their situation. The whole city was soon rebuilt,
after a new and an elegant plan, and is now much hand^^omer than ever. There is
^^arc^ any doubt, that in some future commotion of the mountain^ it will be
again laid in ashes. But at present they are in perfect security: The Virgin
and St. Agatha have both engaged to protect them; and under their banner they
hold Aetna with all the devil^ it contains, at defiance.

There are many remains of antiquity in this city, but indeed most of them are
in a very ruinous state. One of the most remarkable is an elephant of lava,
with an obelisk of Egyptian granite on his back. There are likewise
considerable remains of a great theater, besides the one belonging to the
prince of Biscaris; a large bath almost entire; the ruins of the great
aqueduct, 18 miles long; the ruins of several temples, one of Ceres, another of
Vulcan: The church called Bocca (...) F^^^^ was likewise a temple. But the most
entire of all, is a small rotundo, which, as well as the pantheon at Rome, and
some others to be (...) with in Italy, in my opinion; demonstrates that (...)
to be the most durable of any.

It has now been purged and purified from all the infection contracted from the
heathen rites, and is become a christian church, dedicated to the blessed
Virgin; who has long been constituted universal legatee, and executrix to all
the ancient goddesses, celestial, terrestrial, and infernal: and indeed, little
more than the names are changed, the things continuing pretty much the same as
ever. -- The Catholics themselves do not attend to it: but it is not a little
curious to consider how small is the deviation in almost every article of their
present rites from those of the ancients. I have somewhere seen an observation,
which seems to be a just one: That during the long reign of heathenism,
superstition had altogether exhausted her talent for invention; so that when a
superstitious spirit seized christians, they were under a necessity of
borrowing from their predecessors, and imitating some part of their idolatry.
This appears to be strictly the case. I took notice of it to Signor R --, who
is not the most zealous sectary in the world, and who frankly owned the truth
of the observation.

In some places the very same images still remain: They have only christened
them; and what was Venus or Proserpine, is now Mary Magdalene, or the Virgin.
The same ceremonies are daily performed before these images; in the same
language, and nearly in the same manner. The saints are perpetually coming down
in person, and working miracles, as the heathen gods did of old. The walls of
the temples are covered with the vows of pilgrims, as they were formerly. The
holy water, which was held in such detestation by the first christians, is
again revered, and sprinkled about with the same devotion as in the time of
paganism. The same incense is burnt, by priests arrayed in the same manner,
with the same grimaces and genuflections, before the same images, and in the
same temples too. In short, so nearly do the rites coincide, that were the
pagan high priest to come back, and reassume his functions, he would only have
to learn a few new names; to get the Mass, the Paters, and the Aves by heart;
which would be much easier to him, as they are in a language he understands,
but which his modern successors are often ignorant of. Some things, to be sure,
would puzzle him; and he would swear that all the mysteries of Eleusis were
nothing to the amazing mystery of transubstantiation; the only one that ever
attempted to set both our understanding and our senses at defiance, and baffles
equally all the faculties both of the soul and body. He would, likewise, be a
good deal at a loss to account for the strange metamorphosis of some of his old
friends. That (he would say) I can well remember, was the statue of Venus
Meretrix, and was only worshipped by the loose and voluptuous. She seems to be
wonderfully improved since you made her a christian; for I find she is now
become the great protectress of chastity and of virtue. -- Juno too, who was so
implacable and so revengeful, you have softened down into a very moderate sort
of deity; for I observe you address her with as little fear or ceremony as any
of the rest of them; I wish you would make the Furies christians too, for
surely they would (...) much the better for it. But observing the figure of St.
Anthony, he would exclaim with astonishment. But what do I behold! Jupiter, the
sovereign of gods and men, with a ragged cloak over his shoulders! What a
humiliating spectacle! Well do I remember, with what awe we bent before that
once respectable image. But what is become of the thunderbolt, which he held in
his hand to chastise the world; and what is that he has got in its place? His
conductor would tell him, that it was only a piece of rope, with knots upon it
to chastise himself; adding, that he was now doing penance for his long
usurpation; and that the thunder had long ago been put into better hands.
However, he would soon find, that even these saints sometimes change their
names, according to the enthusiastic caprice of the people; and from this
versatility, he would still be in hopes, in process of time, to see his friend
Jupiter reassume his bolt and his dignity.

Do you remember old Huet; the greatest of all originals? One day, as he passed
the statue of Jupiter in the capitol, he pulled off his hat, and made him a
bow. -- A jacobite gentleman, who observed it, asked him why he paid so much
respect to that old gentleman. -- For the same reason, replied Huet, that you
pay so much to the Pretender. Besides, added he, I think there is rather a
greater probability that his turn will come round again, than that of your
hero; I shall therefore endeavor to keep well with him, and hope he will never
forget that I took notice of him in the time of his adversity.

Indeed, within the course of my own observation, I can recollect some of the
most capital saints in the calendar, who have been disgraced by the people, and
new names given to their statues. When we were in Portugal last war, the people
of Castle Branc^ were so enraged at St. Antonio, for following the Spaniards to
plunder the town, contrary, as they affirmed, to his express agreement with
them, that they broke many of his statues to pieces; and one that had been more
revered than the rest, they took the head off, and clapped on one of St.
Francis in its place; whose name the statue ever after retained. Even the great
St. Januarius himself, I am told, was in imminent danger during the last famine
at Naples. A Swiss gentleman assured me, that he had heard them load him with
abuse and invective; and declared point blank, that if he did not procure them
corn by such a time, he should no longer be their saint. However, such
instances are but rare; and in general the poor catholics are fully indemnified
for these sudden fits of passion and resentment, from the full persuasion of
the immediate presence and protection of their beloved patrons.

I have observed, with pleasure, that glow of gratitude and affection that has
animated their countenances; and am persuaded that the warmth of enthusiastic
devotion they often feel before their favorite saints, particularly their
female ones, must have something extremely delightful in it; resembling;
perhaps, the pure and delicate sensations of the most respectful love. I own I
have sometimes envied them their feelings; and in my heart cursed the pride of
reason and philosophy, with all its cool and tasteless triumphs, that lulls
into a kind of stoical apathy these most exquisite sensations of the soul. Who
would not choose to be deceived, when the deception raises in him these
delicious passions, that are so worthy of the human heart; and for which, of
all others, it seems to be the most fitted? But if once you have steeled it
over with the hard and impenetrable temper of philosophy; these fine-spun
threads of weakness and affection, that were so pliable, and so easily tied,
become hard and inflexible; and for ever lose that delicate tone of sensibility
that put them into a kind of unison and vibration with every object around us:
For it is certainly true, what has been said of one part of our species, and
may almost with equal justice be applied to the whole, "That to their weakness
half their charms we owe."

I remember Dr. Tissot told me, he had a patient that actually died of love for
Christ and when in the last extremity, seemed still to enjoy the greatest
happiness; calling upon him with all the fondness of the most enthusiastic
passion. And from what I have often observed before the statues of the Virgin
and St. Agatha, I am persuaded, they have many inamorato^ that would willingly
lay down their lives for them.

Now, pray don't you think too, that this personal kind of worship is much
better adapted to the capacities of the vulgar, than the more pure and sublime
modes of it; which would only distract and confound their simple
understandings, unaccustomed to speculation; and that certainly require
something gross and material, some object of sense to fix their attention? This
even seems to have been the opinion of some of the sacred writers, who often
represent God under some material form.

Were you to attempt to give a country fellow an idea of the Deity; were you to
tell him of a being that is immaterial, and yet whose essence penetrates all
matter; who has existed from all eternity, and whose extension is equally
boundless with his duration; who fills and pervades millions of worlds, and
animates every object they contain; and who, in the sublime language of our
poet, "Though changed through all, is yet in all the same,
"Great in the earth, as in the aetherial frame:
"Warms in the sun, refreshes in the breeze,
"Glows in the stars, and blossoms in the trees;
"Lives through all life, extends through all extent;
"Spreads undivided, operates unspent.
"To him no high, no low, no great, no small;
"He fills, he bounds, connects and equals all."
Now, what do you imagine he would think of such a being? I am afraid his
understanding would be so bewildered, that he could not think at all. But, set
up before him the figure of a fine woman, with a beautiful child in her arms,
the most interesting object in nature; and tell him she can procure him every
thing he wants; he knows perfectly well what he is about; feels himself
animated by the object, and prays to her with all his might.

Adieu. We are going to be very busy; and are preparing every thing for one of
the greatest objects of our expedition: the examination of mount Aetna. Indeed,
we have received but bad encouragement; and are beginning to doubt of the
possibility of success. Recupero tells us, that the season is not far enough
advanced yet, by some months; and that he does not think it will be possible to
get near the summit of the mountain. The last winter, he says, was so
uncommonly severe, that the circle of snow extended much nearer the foot of the
mountain than usual; that although this circle is now greatly contracted, it
still extends nine or ten miles below the crater. He advises us to return this
way in the month of August; and, if possible, make Aetna the last part of our
expedition. If we do not succeed tomorrow, we shall probably follow his
advice; but we are all determined to make a bold push for it. The weather is
the most favorable that can be imagined: Here is a delightful evening; and by
the starlight we can observe the smoke rolling down the side of the mountain
like a vast torrent. Recupero says, this is a sure indication of the violence
of the cold in these exalted regions of the atmosphere, which condenses the
vapor, and makes it fall down the moment it issues out of the crater. He
advises us, by all means, to provide plenty of liqueurs, warm fur cloaks, and
hatchets to cut wood; as we shall probably be obliged to pass the night in the
open air, in a climate, he assures us, as cold as that of Greenland. It is very
singular if this be true; for at present we are melting with heat in thin suits
of taffeta. Adieu. You shall know it all in our return, if we do not share the
sat of Empedocles.

Ever yours.

LETTER IX.
Catania, May 29th.
ON the 27th, by daybreak, we set off to visit mount Aetna, that venerable and
respectable father of mountains. His base, and his immense declivities, are
covered over with a numerous progeny of his own: For every great eruption
produces a new mountain: and perhaps, by the number of these, better than by
any other method, the number of eruptions, and the age of Aetna itself, might
be ascertained.

The whole mountain is divided into three distinct regions, called La Regione
Culta, or Piedmontese, The fertile Region; la Regione Sylvosa, or Nemorosa, The
woody Region; and la Regione Deserta, or Scoperta, The Barren Region.

These three are as different, both in climate and productions, as the three
zones of the earth; and perhaps, with equal propriety, might have been styled
the Torrid, the Temperate, and the Frigid zone. The first region surrounds the
foot of the mountain, and constitutes the most fertile country in the world on
all sides of it, to the extent of about fourteen or fifteen miles, where the
woody region begins. It is composed almost entirely of lava, which, after a
number of ages, is at last converted into the most fertile of all soils.

At Nicolosi, which is twelve miles up the mountain, we found the barometer at
27: 1; at Catania it stood at 29: 8; although the former elevation is not very
great, probably not exceeding 3000 feet, yet the climate was totally changed.
At Catania the harvest was entirely over, and the beats were insupportable;
here they were moderate, and in many places the corn is as yet green. The road
for these twelve miles is the worst I ever traveled; entirely over old lavas
and the mouths of extinguished volcanos, now converted into cornfieldsd,
vineyards and orchards.

The fruit of this region is reckoned the finest in Sicily, particularly the
figs, of which they have a great variety. One of these of a very large size,
esteemed superior in flavor to all the rest, they pretend is peculiar to Aetna.

The lavas, which as I have already said form this region of the mountain, take
their rise from an infinite number of the most beautiful little mountains on
earth, which are every where scattered on the immense declivity of Aetna. These
are all of a regular figure; either that of a cone, or a semisphere; and all,
but a very few, are covered with beautiful trees, and the richest verdure:
Every eruption generally forms one of these mountains. As the great crater of
Aetna itself is raised to such an enormous height above the lower regions of
the mountain, it is not possible, that the internal fire raging for a vent,
even round the base, and no doubt vastly below it, should be carried to the
height of twelve or thirteen thousand feet, for probably so high is the summit
of Aetna. It has therefore generally happened, that after shaking the mountain
and its neighborhood for some time, it at last bursts open its side, and this
is called an eruption. At first it only sends forth a thick smoke and showers
of ashes that lay waste the adjacent country: These are soon followed by
red-hot stones, and rocks of a great size, thrown to an immense height in the
air. The fall of these stones, together with quantities of ashes discharged at
the same time, at last from the spherical and conical mountains I have
mentioned. Sometimes this process is finished in the course of a few days,
sometimes it lasts for months, which was the case in the great eruption 1669.
In that case, the mountain formed is of a great size; some of them are not less
than seven or eight miles round, and upwards of one thousand feet in
perpendicular height; others are not more than two or three miles round, and
three or four hundred feet high.

After the new mountain is formed, the lava generally bursts out from its lower
side; and bearing every thing before it, is for the most part terminated by the
sea. This is the common progress of an eruption; however, it sometimes happens,
though rarely, that the lava bursts at once from the side of the mountain,
without all these attending circumstances; and this is commonly the case with
the eruptions of Vesuvius, where the elevation being so much smaller, the
melted matter is generally carried up into the crater of the mountain, which
then exhibits the phenomenon I have described; discharging showers of stones
and ashes from the mouth of the volcano without forming any new mountain but
only adding considerably to the height of the old one; 'till at last the lava,
rising near the summit, bursts the side of the crater, and the eruption is
declared. This has literally been the case with two eruptions I have been an
attentive witness of in that mountain; but Aetna is upon a much larger scale,
and one crater is not enough to give vent to such oceans of liquid fire.

Rucupero assures me, he saw in an eruption of that mountain large rocks of
fire discharged to the height of some thousand feet, with a noise much more
terrible than that of thunder. He measured from the time of their greatest
elevation 'till they reached the ground, and found they took twenty-one seconds
to descend; which, according to the rule of the spaces, being as the squares of
the times, amounts, I think, to upwards of 7000 feet. A most astonishing height
surely, and requiring a force of projection beyond what we have any conception
of. I measured the height of the explosions of Vesuvius by the same rule, and
never observed any of the stones thrown from it to take more than nine seconds
to descend, which shows they had risen to little more than 1200 feet.

Our landlord at Nicolosi gave us an account of the singular fate of the
beautiful country near Hybla, at no great distance from hence. It was so
celebrated for its fertility, and particularly for its honey, that it was
called Mel Passi, 'till it was overwhelmed by the lava of Aetna; and having
then become totally barren, by a kind of pun its name was changed to Mal Passi.
In a second eruption, by a shower of ashes from the mountain, it soon
reassumed its ancient beauty and fertility; and for many years was called Bell
Passi. Last of all, in the unfortunate era of 1669, it was again laid under an
ocean of fire, and reduced to the most wretched sterility, since which time it
is known again by its second appellation of Mal Passi. However, the lava, in
its course over this beautiful country, his left several little islands or
hillocks; just enough to show what it formerly was. These make a singular
appearance, in all the bloom of the most luxuriant vegetation, surrounded and
rendered almost inaccessible by large fields of black and rugged lava. The
mountain from whence the first eruption issued, that covered the Mel Passi, is
known by the name of Monpelieri; I was struck with its beautiful appearance at
a distance, and could not resist the desire I had of examining it minutely, as
well as of observing the effects of the two eruptions that overwhelmed this
celebrated country.

Monpelieri is rather of a spherical than a conical shape, and does not rise in
perpendicular height above 300 feet, but it is so perfectly regular on every
side, and so richly overspread with fruits and flowers, that I could not leave
so heavenly a spot, without the greatest regret. Its cup or crater is large in
proportion to the mountain, and is as exactly hollowed out as the best made
bowl. I walked quite round its outward edge, and think the circumference must
be somewhat more than a mile.

This mountain was formed by the first eruption that destroyed the country of
Mel Passi, and is of a very old date. It buried a great number of villages and
country houses; and particularly two noble churches, which are more regreted
than all the rest, on account of three statues, reckoned at that time the most
perfect in the island. They have attempted, but in vain, to recover them; as
the spot where the churches stood could never be justly ascertained. Indeed it
is impossible it should; for these churches were built of lava, which it is
well known is immediately melted, when it comes into contact with a torrent of
new, erupted matter: And Massa, says, that in some eruptions of Aetna, the lava
has poured down with such a sudden impetuosity, that in the course of a few
hours, churches, palaces, and villages, have been entirely melted down, and the
whole run off in fusion without leaving the least mark of their former
existence. But if the lava has had any considerable time to cool, this singular
effect never happens.

The great eruption of 1669, after shaking the whole country around for four
months, and forming a very large mountain of stones and ashes, burst out about
a mile above Monpelieri, and descending like a torrent, bore directly against
the middle of that mountain, and (they pretend) perforated it from side to
side; this however I doubt, as it must have broken the regular-form of the
mountain, which is not the case. But certain it is, that it pierced it to a
great depth. The lava then divided into two branches; and surrounding this
mountain, joined again on its south side; and saying waste the whole country
betwixt that and Catania, scaled the walls of that city, and poured its flaming
torrent into the ocean. In its way, it is said to have destroyed the
possessions of near 30,000 people, and reduced them to beggary. It formed
several hills where there were formerly valleys, and filled up a large like, of
which there is not now the least vestige to be seen.

As the events of this eruption are better known than any other, they tell a
great many singular stories of it; one of which, however incredible it may
appear, is well ascertained. A vineyard, belonging to a convent of Jesuits, lay
directly in its way. This vineyard was for; for (...) an ancient lava, probably
a thin one, with a number of cavern and crevices under it. The liquid lava
^^^^ring into these cavern, soon filled them up, and by degrees bore up the
vineyard, and the Jesuits, who every moment expected to see it buried, beheld
with amazement the whole field begin to move off. It was carried on the surface
of the lava to a considerable distance; and though the greatest part was
destroyed, yet some of it remains to this day.

We went to examine the mouth from whence this dreadful torrent issued; and
were surprised to find it only a small hole, of about three or four yards
diameter. The mountain from whence it sprung, I think, is little less than the
conical part of Vesuvius.

There is a vast cavern on the opposite side of it, where people go to shoot
wild pigeons, which breed there in great abundance. The innermost parts of this
cavern are so very dismal and gloomy, that our landlord told us some people had
lost their senses from having advanced too far, imagining they saw devils and
the spirits of the damned; for it is still very generally believed here, that
Aetna is the mouth of hell.

We found a degree of wildness and ferocity in the inhabitants of this
mountain, that I have not observed any where else. It put me in mind of an
observation the Padre della Torre (the historiographer of mount Vesuvius) told
me he had often made in the confines of Naples; that in the places where the
air is most impregnated with sulphur and hot exhalations, the people were
always most wicked and vicious. Whatever truth there may be in the observation,
the people about Nicolosi at least seem to confirm it. The whole village
flocked round us, and the women in particular abused us exceedingly; the cause
of which we at last found was that F -- 's blooming complexion and white skin
had made them take him for one of their own sex. They made a great clamor, and
it was with difficulty we could appease them. The person whom Recupero had
appointed to accompany us, known by the name of the Cyclops, (the man in the
island that is best acquainted with mount Aetna) was ordered by them not to go
with us; and if we had not at last obtained their consent by soothing and
flattery, the best method with women, he durst not have disobeyed them. At
first we had been obliged to shut the gate of the court, they were so very
noisy and tumultuous; but when our landlord (a priest) for whom we had letters
from Catania, assured them that we were Christians, and came with no bad
intentions, they became more moderate, and we ventured out amongst them. This
confidence soon acquired theirs, and in a short time we became good friends,
and had a great deal of conversation.

It was with much difficulty I could persuade them that we were not come to
search for hidden treasures, a great quantity of which they believe is to be
found in Monpelieri; and when I went to that mountain they were then fully
convinced that this was our intention. Two of the men followed me, and kept a
close eye on every step that I took; and when I lifted any bit of lava or
pumice, they came running up, thinking it was something very precious; but when
they observed they were only bits of stone, and that I put them into my pocket,
they laughed heartily, talking to one another in their mountain jargon, which
is unintelligible even to Italians. However, as most of them speak Italian so
as to be understood, they asked me what I was going to make of those bits of
stone? I told them they were of great value in our country; that the people
there had a way of making gold of them: At this they both seemed exceedingly
surprised, and spoke again in their own tongue. However, I found they did not
believe me; one of them told me, if that had been true, I certainly would not
have been so ready in telling it: But, said he, if it is so, we will serve you
for ever, if you will teach us that art; for then we shall be the richest
people on earth. I assured them that I had not yet learned it myself, and that
it was a secret known only to a very few. They were likewise a good deal
surprised to see me pull out of my pocket a magnetical needle and a small
electrometer, which I had prepared at Catania to examine the electrical state
of the air; and I was at first afraid they should have taken me for a conjurer
(which you know already happened amongst the Appenines) but luckily that idea
did not strike them.

On our way back to Nicolosi we were joined by three or four more, with their
wives. I began to be a little afraid of myself, lest they should insist on
knowing the secret. However, I took out my bits of lava, and told them they
were at their service, if they had any occasion for them. But they refused
them, saying, they wished to the Virgin, and St. Agatha, that I could take away
the whole of it; as it had ruined the finest country in all Sicily.

One fellow, who assumed an air of superior wisdom and dignity to the rest,
made them form a circle round him, and began to interrogate me with great
gravity and composure. It was with difficulty I could keep my countenance; but
as I was alone with them, at some distance from the village, I was afraid of
offending. He desired me to answer him with truth and precision, what were the
real motives of our coming so fatiguing and disagreeable a journey? I told him,
on my word, that we had no other motive but curiosity to examine mount Aetna.
On which, laughing to one another with great contempt; Un bell ragione questa,
non e vero, said they (a very pretty reason, truly.) The old fellow then asked
me what country we were of. I told him, we were Inglese. E dove loro paese?
said he; whereabouts does their country lie? I told him it was a great way off,
on the other side of the world. Da vero, said the fellow, e credono in Christo
quelli Inglese? I told him (laughing) that they did. Ah, said he, shaking his
head, mi pare che non credono troppo. One of the company then observed, that he
remembered several of these Inglese, that, at different times, bad paid visits
to mount Aetna, and that they never yet could find out their motive; but that
he recollected very well, to have heard many of their old people say, that the
Inglese had a queen that had burnt in the mountain for many years past; and
that they supposed these visits were made from some devotion or respect to her
memory. I assured them that the Inglese had but too little respect for their
queens when they were alive, but that they never troubled themselves about them
after they were dead; however, as all the others confirmed this testimony, I
thought it was best to say little against it; but I was extremely curious to
know who this queen might be. They alleged that I knew much better than they;
but added, that her name was Anna.

I could not conceive what queen Anne had done to bring her there; and was
puzzling myself to find it out; when one of them soon cleared up the matter; he
told me she was wife to a king that had been a Christian, and that she had made
him an Heretic, and was in consequence condemned to burn for ever in mount
Aetna. In short, I found it was no other than poor Anne Bolo^ne. As soon as I
mentioned the name, Si s^^or, said the fellow, ^islessa, ^islessa, la connosee
meglio che noi. I asked, if her husband was there too, for that he deserved it
much better than she; sicuro, said he, and all his heretic subjects too; and if
you are of that number, you need not be in such a hurry to get thither, you
will be sure of it at last. I thanked him, and went to join our company, not a
little amused with the conversation.

We soon after left Nicolosi, and in an hour and a half's traveling, over
barren ashes and lava, we arrived on the confines of the Regione Sylvosa, or
the Temperate Zone. As soon as we entered these delightful forests, we seemed
to have got into another world. The air, which before was sultry and hot, was
now cool and refreshing; and every breeze was loaded with a thousand perfumes,
the whole ground being covered over with the richest aromatic plants. Many
parts of this region are surely the most heavenly spots upon earth; and if
Aetna resembles hell within, it may with equal justice be said to resemble
paradise without.

It is indeed a curious consideration, that this mountain should reunite every
beauty and every horror; and in short, all the most opposite, and dissimilar
objects in nature. Here you observe a gulf that formerly threw out torrents of
fire, now covered with the most luxuriant vegetation; and from an object of
terror, become one of delight. Here you gather the most delicious fruits,
rising from what was but lately a black and barren rock. Here the ground is
covered with every flower; and we wander over th^se beauties, and contemplate
this wilderness of sweets, without considering that hell, with all its terrors,
is immediately under our feet; and that but a few yards separate us from lakes
of liquid fire and brimstone.

But our astonishment still increases, on calling our eyes on the higher
regions of the mountain. There we behold, in perpetual union, the two elements
that are at perpetual war; an immense gulf of fire, for ever existing in the
midst of snows, which it has not power to melt; and immense fields of snow and
ice for ever surrounding this gulf of fire, which they have not power to
extinguish.

The woody region of Aetna ascends for about eight or nine miles and forms a
zone or girdle, of the brightest green, all around the mountain. This night we
passed through little more than the half of it; arriving some time before
sunset at our lodgings, which was no other than a large cave, formed by one of
the most ancient and venerable lavas. It is called La Spelonca del Capriole, or
the goat's cavern, because frequented by those animals; who takes refuge there
in bad weather.

Here we were delighted with the contemplation of many grave and beautiful
objects; the prospect on all sides is immense; and we already seem to be lifted
up from the earth, and to have got into a new world.

Our cavern is surrounded by the most stately and majestic oaks; of the dry
leaves of which, we made very comfortable beds; and with our hatchets, which we
had brought on purpose, we had cut down great branches, and, in a short time,
had a fire large enough to roast an ox. I observed my thermometer, and found,
from 71 at Nicolosi, it had now fallen below 60. The barometer stood at 24: 2.
In one end of our cave we still found a great quantity of snow, which seemed to
be sent there on purpose for us, as there was no water to be found. With this
we filled our tea-kettle, as tea and bread and butter was the only supper we
had provided; and probably the best one to prevent us from being overcome by
sleep or fatigue.

Not a great way from this cavern, are two of the most beautiful mountains of
all that number that spring from Aetna. I mounted one of our best mules, and
with a good deal of difficulty arrived at the summit of the highest of them,
just a little before sunset. The prospect Sicily, with the surrounding sea and
all its islands, was wonderfully noble. The whole course of the river Semetus,
the ruins of Hybla, and several other ancient towns; the rich cornfieldsd and
vineyards on the lower region of the mountain, and the amazing number of
beautiful mountains below, made a delightful scene. The hollow craters of these
two mountains are each of them considerably larger than that of Vesuvius. They
are now filled with stately oaks, and covered to a great depth with the richest
soil. I observed that this region of Aetna, like the former, is composed of
lava; but this is now covered so deep with earth, that it is no where to be
seen, but in the beds of the torrents. In many of these it is worn down by the
water to the depth of fifty or sixty feet, and in one of them still
considerably more. -- What an idea does not this give of the amazing antiquity
of the eruptions of this mountain!

As soon as it was dark we retired to our cave, and took possession of our bed
of leaves. Our rest, however, was somewhat disturbed by the noise of a mountain
that lay a good way off on our right. It discharged quantities of smoke, and
made several explosions like heavy cannon at a distance; but what is singular,
we could observe no appearance of fire. This mountain was formed by an eruption
1766, now upwards of four years ago; the fire of which is not yet extinguished,
neither is the lava by any means cold. This lava spent its fury on a delightful
forest, which it laid waste to the extent of a good many miles. In many places
it has run into gullies of a great depth, which it has filled up to the height,
we are told, of 200 feet. It is in these places where it retains the greatest
heat. On our road today we scrambled up this lava, and went a considerable way
over its surface, which appeared perfectly cold; but it is certain, that in
many places it still emits volumes of smoke, particularly after rain; and the
people say, what lean readily believe, that this will continue to be the case
for some years where the lava is thickest. A solid body of fire some hundreds
of feet thick, and of so great an extent, must certainly retain its heat for
many years. The surface indeed soon becomes black and hard, and incloses the
liquid fire within, in a kind of solid box, excluding all impressions from the
external air or from the weather. Thus I have seen, many months after eruptions
of mount Vesuvius, a bed of lava, though only of a few feet thick, has
continued red hot in the center long after the surface was cold; and a stick
thrust into its crevices, instantly took fire, although there was no
perceptible heat without.

Massa, a Sicilian author of credit, says, he was at at Catania eight years
after the great eruption in 1669, and that he still found the lava in many
places was not cold: But there is an easy method of calculating the time that
bodies take to cool. Sir Isaac Newton, I think, in his account of the comet of
1680, supposes the times to be as the squares of their diameters: and finding
that a solid ball of metal of two inches, made red hot, required upwards of an
hour to become perfectly cold, ma^le the calculation from that to a body of the
diameter of the earth, and found it would require upwards of twenty thousand
years. If this rule be just, you may easily compute the time that the lava will
take to become thoroughly cold; and that you may have time to do so, I shall
here break off my letter, which I am obliged to write in bed, in a very awkward
and disagreeable posture; the cause of which shall be explained to you in my
next. Adieu.

Ever yours.

LETTER X.
Catania, May 29th, at night.
AFTER getting a comfortable nap on our bed of leaves in the Spelonca del
Capriole, we awoke about eleven o'clock; and melting down a sufficient quantity
of snow^ we boiled our tea-kettle, and made a hearty meal, to prepare us for
the remaining part of our expedition. We were nine in number; for we had our
three servants, the Cyclops (our conductor) and two men to take care of our
mules. The Cyclops now bagan to display his great knowledge of the mountain,
and we followed him with implicit confidence. He conducted us "Antres vast, and
Deserts wild," where scarce human foot had ever trod. Sometimes through gloomy
forests, which by daylight were delightful; but now, from the universal
darkness, the rustling of the trees, the heavy, dull, bellowing of the
mountain, the vast expanse of ocean stretched at an immense distance below us,
inspired a kind of awful horror. Sometimes we found ourselves ascending great
rocks of lava, where if our mules should make but a false step, we might be
thrown headlong over the precipice. However, by the assistance of the Cyclops,
we overcame all these difficulties; and he managed matters so well, that in the
space of two hours, we found we had got above the regions of vegetation; and
had left the forests of Aetna far behind. These appeared now like a dark and
gloomy gulf below us, that surrounded the mountain.

The prospect before us was of a very different nature; we beheld an expanse of
snow and ice that alarmed us exceedingly, and almost staggered our resolution.
In the center of this, but still at a great distance, we descried the high
summit of the mountain, rearing its tremendous head, and vomiting out torrents
of smoke. It indeed appeared altogether inaccessible, form the vast extent of
the fields of snow and ice that surrounded it. Our diffidence was still
increased by the sentiments of the Cyclops. He told us, it often happened, that
the surface of the mountain being hot below, melted the snow in particular
spots, and formed pools of water, where it was impossible to foresee our
danger; that it likewise happened, that the surface of the water, as well as
the snow, was sometimes covered with black ashes, that rendered it exceedingly
deceitful; that however, if we thought proper, he would lead us on with as much
caution as possible. Accordingly, after holding a council of war, which you
know people generally do when they are very much afraid, we detached our
cavalry to the forest below, and prepared to climb the snows. The Cyclops,
after taking a great draught of brandy, desired us to be of good cheer; that we
had plenty of time, and might take as many rests as we pleased. That the snow
could be little more than seven miles, and that we certainly should be able to
pass it before sunrise. Accordingly, taking each of us a dram of liqueur,
which soon removed every objection, we began our march.

The ascent for some time was not steep; and as the surface of the snow sunk a
little, we had tolerable good footing; but as it soon began to grow steeper, we
found our labor greatly increase: However, we determined to persever, calling
to mind in the midst of our labor, that the emperor Adrian and the philosopher
Plato had undergone that same; and from the same motive too, to see the rising
sun from the top of Aetna. After incredible labor and fatigue, but at the same
time mixed with a great deal of pleasure, we arrived before dawn at the ruins
of an ancient structure, called Il Torre del Filosofo, supposed to have been
built by the philosopher Empedocles, who took up his habitation here the better
to study the nature of mount Aetna. By others it is supposed to be the ruins of
a temple of Vulcan, whose shop, all the world knows (where he used to make
excellent thunderbolts and celestial armor, as well as nets to catch his wife
when she went astray) was ever kept in mount Aetna. Here we rested ourselves
for some time, and made a fresh application to our liqueur bottle, which I am
persuaded, both Vulcan and Empedocles, had they been here, would have greatly
approved of after such a march.

I found the mercury had fallen to 20: 6. We had now time to pay our adorations
in a silent contemplation of the sublime objects of nature. The sky was clear,
and the immense vault of the heavens appeared in awful majesty and splendour. We
found ourselves more struck with veneration than below, and at first were at a
loss to know the cause; 'till we observed with astonishment, that the number of
stars seemed to be infinitely increased; and the light of each of them appeared
brighter than usual. The whiteness of the milky way was like a pure flame that
shot across the heavens; and with the naked eye we could observe clusters of
stars that were invisible in the regions below. We did not at first attend to
the cause, nor recollect that we had now passed through ten or twelve thousand
feet of gross vapor, that blunts and confuses every ray, before it reaches the
surface of the earth. We were amazed at the distinctness of vision, and
exclaimed together, What a glorious situation for an observatory! Had
Empedocles had the eyes of Gallileo what discoveries must he not have made! We
regretted that Jupiter was not visible, as I am persuaded we might have
discovered some of his satellites with the naked eye, or at least with a small
glass which I had in my pocket. We observed a light a great way below us on the
mountain, which seemed to move amongst the forests, but whether an Ignus
Fatuus, or what it was, I shall not pretend to say. We likewise took notice of
several of those meteors called Falling-Stars, which still appeared to be as
much elevated above us, as when seen from the plain; so that in all
probability; those bodies move in regions much beyond the bounds that some
philosophers have assigned to our atmosphere.

After cont^mplating these objects for some time, we set off, and soon after
arrived at the foot of the great crater of the mountain* This is of an exact
conical figure, and rises equally on all sides. It is composed solely of ashes
and other burnt materials, discharged from the mouth of the volcano, which is
in its center. This conical mountain is of a very great size; its circumference
cannot be less than ten miles. Here we took a second rest, as the greatest part
of our fatigue still remained. The mercury had fallen to 20: 4. -- We found
this mountain excessively steep; and although it had appeared black, yet it was
likewise covered with snow, but the surface (luckily for us) was spread over
with a pretty think layer of ashes, thrown out from the crater. Had it not been
for this, we never should have been able to get to the top; as the snow was
every where frozen hard and solid, from the piercing cold of the air.

In about an hour's climbing, we arrived at a place where there was no snow;
and where a warm and comfortable vapor issued from the mountain, which induced
us to make another halt. Here I found the mercury at 19: 6. The thermometer was
fallen three degrees below the point of congelation; and before we left the
summit of Aetna, it fell two degrees more, viz. to 27. -- From this spot it was
only about 300 yards to the highest summit of the mountain, where we arrived in
full time, to see the most wonderful and most sublime sight in nature.

But here description must ever fall short; for no imagination has dared to
from an idea of so glorious and so magnificent a scene. Neither is three on the
surface of this globe, any one point that unites so many awful and sublime
objects. -- The immense elevation from the surface of the earth, drawn as it
were to a single point, without any neighboring mountain for the senses and
imagination to rest upon; and recover from their astonishment in their way down
to the world. This point or pinnacle, raised on the brink of bottomless gulf,
as old as the world, often discharging rivers of fire, and throwing out burning
rocks, with a noise that shakes the whole island. Add to this, the unbounded
extent of the prospect, comprehending the greatest diversity and most beautiful
scenery in nature; with the rising sun, advancing in the east, to illuminate
the wondrous scene.

The whole atmosphere by degrees kindled up, and showed dimly and faintly the
boundless prospect around. Both sea and land looked dark and confused, as if
only emerging from their original chaos; and light and darkness seemed still
undivided; till the morning by degrees advancing, completed the separation. The
stars are extinguished, and the shades disappear. The forests, which but now
seemed black and bottomless gulphs, from whence no ray was reflected to show
their form or colors, appear a new creation rising to the sight; catching life
and beauty from every increasing beam. The scene still enlarges, and the
horizon seems to widen and expand itself on all sides: 'till the sun, like the
great Creator, appears in the east, and with his plastic ray completes the
mighty scene. All appears enchantment; and it is with difficulty we can believe
we are still on earth. The senses, unaccustomed to the sublimity of such a
scene, are bewildered and confounded; and it is not 'till after some time, that
they are capable of separating and judging of the objects that compose it. The
body of the sun is seen rising from the ocean, immense tracts both of sea and
land intervening; the islands of Lipari, Panari, Alicudi, Strombolo, and
Volcano, with their smoking summits, appear under your feet; and you look down
on the whole of Sicily as on a map; and can trace every river through all its
windings, from its source to its mouth. The view is absolutely boundless on
every side; nor is there any one object, within the circle of vision, to
interrupt it; so that the sight is every where lost in the immensity: And I am
persuaded it is only from the imperfection of our organs, that the coasts of
Africa, and even of Greece, are not discovered, as they are certainly above the
horizon on the top of Aetna cannot be less than 2000 miles: At Malta, which is
near 200 miles distant, they perceive all the eruption from the second region;
and that island is often discovered from about one half the elevation, of the
mountain; so that at the whole elevation, the horizon must extend to near
double that distance, or 400 miles, which makes 800 for the diameter of the
c^rcle, and 2400 for the circumference. But this is by much too vast for our
senses, not intended to grasp so boundless a scene* I find, indeed, by some of
the Sicilian authors, particularly Massa, that the African coast as well as
that of Naples, with many of its islands, have been discovered from the top of
Aetna. Of this, however, we cannot boast, though we can very well believe it.
Indeed, if we knew the height of the mountain, it would be easy to calculate
the extent of its visible horizon; and (vice versa) if its visible horizon was
exactly ascertained, it would be an easy matter to calculate the height of the
mountain. -- But the most beautiful part of the scene is certainly the mountain
itself; the island of Sicily, and the numerous islands lying round it. All
these, by a kind of magic in vision, that I am a loss to account for, seem as
if they were brought close round the ski^ts of Aetna; the distances appearing
reduced to nothing. -- Perhaps this singular effect is produced by the rays of
light passing from a rarer medium into a denser; which (from a well-known law
in optics) to an observer in the rare medium, appears to lift up objects that
are at the bottom of the dense one; as a piece of money placed in a basin
appears lifted up as soon as the basin is filled with water.

The Regione Deserta, or the frigi^ zone of Aetna, is the first object that
calls your attention. It is marked out by a circle of snow and ice, which
extends on all sides to the distance of about eight miles. In the center of
this circle, the great ^rater of ^he contain ^ears its burning head, and the
regions of intense cold and and of intense heat seem for ever to be united in
the same point. -- On the north side of the snowy region, they assure us, there
are several small lakes that are never thawed; and that in many places, the
snow, mixed with the ashes and salts of the mountain, is accumulated to a vast
depth: And indeed I suppose the quantity of salts contained in this mountain,
is one great reason of the preservation of its snows. The Regione Deserta is
immediately succeeded by the Sylvosa, or the woody region; which forms a circle
or girdle of the most beautiful green, which surrounds the mountain on all
sides, and is certainly one of the most delightful spots on earth. This
presents a remarkable contrast with the desert region. It is not smooth and
even like the greatest part of the latter; but it is finely variegated by an
infinite number of those beautiful little mountains that have been formed by
the different eruptions of Aetna. All these have now acquired a wonderful
degree of fertility, except a very few that are but newly formed; that is,
within these five or six hundred years: For it certainly requires some
thousands to bring them to their greatest degree of perfection. We looked down
into the craters of these, and attempted, but in vain, to number them.

The circumference of this zone or great circle on Aetna is not lets than 70 or
80 miles. It is every where succeeded by the vineyards, orchards, and
cornfields that compose the Regione Culta, or the fertile region. This last
zone is much broader than the others, and extends on all sides to the foot of
the mountain. Its whole circumference, according to Recupero, is 183 miles. It
is likewise covered with a number of little conical and spherical mountains,
and exhibits a wonderful variety of forms and colors, and makes a delightful
contrast with the other two regions. It is bounded by the sea to the south and
south-east, and on all its other sides by the rivers Semetus and Alcantara,
which run almost round it. The whole course of these rivers is seen at once,
and all their beautiful windings through these fertile valleys, looked upon as
the favorite possession of Ceres herself, and the very scene of the rape of
her daughter Proserpine.

Cast your eyes a little farther, and you embrace the whole island, and see all
its cities, rivers and mountains, deleinated in the great chart of nature: All
the adjacent islands, the whole coast of Italy, as far as your eye can reach;
for it is no where bounded, but every where lost in the space. On the sun's
first rising, the shadow of the mountain extends across the whole island, and
makes a large tract visible even in the sea and in the air. By degrees this is
shortened, and, in a little time, is confined only to the neighborhood of
Aetna.

We now had time to examine a fourth region of this wonderful mountain, very
different, indeed, from the others, and productive of very different
sensations; but which has, undoubtedly, given being to all the rest; I mean the
region of fire.

The present crater of this immense volcana is a circle of about three miles
and a half in circumference. It goes shelving down on each side, and forms a
regular hollow like a vast amphitheatre. From many places of this space, issue
volumes of sulphurous smoke, which, being much heavier than the circuma^bient
air, instead of rising in it, as smoke generally does, immediately on its
getting out of the crater, rolls down the side of the mountain like a torrent,
'till coming to that part of the atmosphere of the same specific gravity with
itself, it shoots off horizontally, and forms a large tract in the air,
according to the direction of the wind; which, happily for us, carried it
exactly to the side opposite to that where we were placed. The crater is so
hot, that it is very dangerous, if not impossible, to go down into it; besides,
the smoke is very incommodious, and, in many places, the surface is so soft,
there have been instances of people sinking down in it, and paying for their
temerity with their lives. Near the center of the crater is the great mouth of
the volcano. That tremendous gulf so celebrated in all ages, looked upon as
the terror and scourge both of this and another life; and equally useful to
ancient poets, or to modern divines, when the muse or when the Spirit inspires.
We beheld with awe and with horror, and were not surprised that it had been
considered as the place of the damned. When we reflect on the immensity of its
depth, the vast cells and caverns whence so many lavas have issued; the force
of its internal fire, to raise up those lavas to so vast a height, to support
it as it were in the air, and even force it over the very summit of the crater,
with all the dreadful accompaniments; the boiling of the matter, the shaking of
the mountain, the explosions of slaming rocks, etc. we must allow, that the
most enthusiastic imagination, in the midst of all its terrors, hardly ever
formed an idea of a hell more dreadful.

It was with a mixture both of pleasure and pain, that we quitted this awful
scene. But the wind had risen very high, and clouds began to gather round the
mountain: In a short time they formed like another heaven below us, and we were
in hopes of seeing a thunder-storm under our feet: A scene that is not uncommon
in these exalted regions, and which I have already seen on the top of the high
Alps. But the clouds were soon dispelled again by the force of the wind, and we
were disappointed in our expectations.

I had often been told of the great effect produced by discharging a gun on the
top of high mountains. I tried it here, when we were a good deal surprised to
find, that instead of increasing the sound, it was almost reduced to nothing.
The report was not equal to that of a pocket-pistol: We compared it to the
stroke of a stick on a door; and surely it is consistent with reason, that the
thinner the air is, the less its impression must be on the ear; for in a
vacuum, there can be no noise, or no impression can be made; and the nearer the
approach to a vacuum, the impression must always be the smaller. Where those
great effects have been produced, it must have been amongst a number of
mountains, where the sound is reverberated from one to the other.

When we arrived at the foot of the cone, we observed some rocks of an
incredible size, that have been discharged from the crater. The largest that
has been observed from Vesuvius, is a round one of about twelve feet diameter.
These are much greater; indeed almost in proportion of the mountains to each
other.

On our arrival at the Torre del Filosofo, we could not help admiring, that the
ruins of this structure have remained uncovered for so many ages, so near the
top of Aetna, when thousands of places at a great distance from it, have been
repeatedly buried by its lavas in a much shorter time. A proof that few
eruptions have risen so high in the mountain.

Empedocles was a native of Agrigentum, and is supposed to have died 400 years
before the Christian era. Perhaps his vanity more than his philosophy led him
to this elevated situation; nay, it is said to have carried him still much
farther: That he might be looked upon as a god, and that the people might
suppose he was taken up to heaven, he is recorded to have thrown himself
headlong into the great gulf of mount Aetna, never supposing that his death
could be discovered to mankind; but the treacherous mountain threw out his
slippers, which were of brass, and announced to the world the fate of the
philosopher, who, by his death, as well as life, wanted only to impose upon
mankind, and make them believe that he was greater than they.

However, if there is such a thing as philosophy on earth, this surely ought to
be its seat. The prospect is little inferior to that from the summit; and the
mind enjoys a degree of serenity here, that even few philosophers, I believe,
could ever boast of on that tremendous point. -- All nature lies expanded below
your feet, in her gayest and most luxuriant dress, and you still behold united
under one point of view, all the seasons of the year, and all the climates of
the earth. The meditations are ever elevated in proportion to the grandeur and
sublimity of the objects that surround us: and here, where you have all nature
to arouse your admiration, what mind can remain inactive?

It has likewise been observed, and from experience I can say with truth; that
on the tops of the highest mountains, where the air is so pure and refined; and
where there is not that immense weight of gross vapors pressing upon the body;
the mind acts with greater freedom, and all the functions both of soul and body
are performed in a superior manner. It would appear, that in proportion as we
are raised above the habitations of men, all low and vulgar sentiments are left
behind; and that the soul, in approaching the aetheral regions, shakes off its
earthly affections, and already acquires something of their celestial purity.
-- Here, where you stand under a serene sky, and behold, with equal serenity,
the tempest and storm forming below your feet: The lightning, darting from
cloud to cloud, and the thunder rolling round the mountain, and threatening with
destruction the poor wretches below; the mind considers the little storms of
the human passions as equally below her notice. -- Surely the situation alone,
is enough to inspire philosophy, and Empedocles had good reason for choosing it.

But, alas! How vain are all our reasonings; in the very midst of these
meditations, my philosophy was at once overset, and in a moment I found myself
relapsed into a poor miserable mortal; was obliged to own, that pain was the
greatest of evils; and would have given the world to have been once more
arrived at those humble habitations, which but a moment before, I had looked
down upon with such contempt. -- In running over the ice, my leg folded under
me, and I received so violent a sprain, that in a few minutes it swelled to a
great degree, and I found myself unable to put my foot to the ground. Every
muscle and fiber was at the time chilled and froze by the extreme cold, the
thermometer continuing still below the point of congelation. It was this
circumstance, I suppose, that made the pain so violent; for I lay a
considerable time on the ice in great agony: However, in these exalted regions,
it was impossible to have a horse, or a carriage of any kind; and your poor
philosopher was obliged to hop on one leg, with two men supporting him for
several miles over the snow; and our wags here allege, that he left the
greatest part of his philosophy behind him, for the use of Empedocles's heirs
and successors.

I was happy to get to my mule, but when I once more found myself on our bed of
leaves in the Spelonca del Capriole, I thought I was in paradise: So true it
is, that a removal of pain is the greatest of pleasures. The agony I suffered,
had thrown me into a profuse sw^^t and fever; however, in an instant I fell
fast asleep, and in an hour and a half, awaked in perfect health. We had an
excellent dish of tea, the most refreshing and agreeable I ever drank in all my
life.

We left the summit of the mountain about 6 o'clock, and it was eight at night
before we reached Catania. We observed, both with pleasure and pain, the change
of the climate as we descended. -- From the regions of the most rigid winter,
we soon arrived at those of the most delightful spring. On first entering the
forests, the trees were still bare as in December, not a single leaf to be
seen; but after we had descended a few miles, we found ourselves in the
mildest, and the softest of climates; the trees in full verdure, and the fields
covered with all the flowers of the summer; but as soon as we got out of the
woods, and entered the torrid zone, we found the heats altogether
insupportable, and city. On the road I saw many mountains which I Intended to
have visited, but my sprain put it out of my power. One of the most remarkable
is called the Monte Pelluse, the lava of which destroyed the great aqueduct of
Catania for eighteen miles. It has here and there left a few arches; but
nothing of any consequence.

Not far from this mountain stands the Monte Victoria, one of the most
beautiful of all the numerous family of Aetna. It is of a pretty large size,
and perfectly regular, and seems to be in the gayest dress of any. Many of its
trees, which, at a distance, we took to be oranges and citrons, appeared to be
in full blow. It was the lava of this mountain that is said to have covered up
the port of Ulysses, which is now three miles distant from the sea; but I
should suppose this eruption to have been much older than either Ulysses or
Troy.

On our arrival at Catania, we went immediately to bed, being exceedingly
oppressed by the fatigue of our expedition; but still more by the violent heat
of the day: A day, in which, I think, I have enjoyed a greater degree of
pleasure, and suffered a greater degree of pain, than any other day of my life.

As my leg continues very much swelled, I am still confined to my room, and
mostly, indeed, to my bed, from whence I have written you the greatest part of
these two epistles, the enormous length of which I am ashamed of. However, as I
have still omitted several articles, that I intended to take notice of, I shall
add a sequel tomorrow; and so conclude my account of mount Aetna. Had it not
been for this abominable sprain, that holds me fast by the foot, you probably
had not got off so easily; but I am obliged to drop all farther thoughts of
climbing mountains, through there are many things I still wanted to examine.
Adieu.

Ever yours.

LETTER XI.
Catania, May 30th.
WE took care to regulate two barometers at the foot of the mountain. One of
which was left with the Canonico Recupero, and the other we carried along with
us. The former our friend assures us, had no sensible variation during our
absence. We both left it and found it at 29 inches 8 lines and a half, English
measure. On our arrival at Catania, the one we carried up with us had risen
again exactly to the same point.

I have likewise a good quicksilver thermometer, which I borrowed from the
Neapolitan Philosopher, the Padre della Torre, who furnished us with letters
for this place, and would have accompanied us, could he have obtained leave of
the king. It is made by Adams at London, and (as I myself proved) exactly
graduated from the two points of freezing and boiling water. It is upon
Fahrenheit's scale. I shall mark the heights in the different regions of Aetna,
with the rules for estimating the elevation of mountains by the barometer,
which, I am sorry to say, have been hitherto so very ill ascertained. Cassini,
Boguer, and the others who have written on the subject, to the reproach of
science, differing so much amongst themselves, that it is with difficulty we
can come near the truth.

Aetna has been often measured, but I believe never with any degree of
accuracy; and it is really a shame; to the ^^ciety established in this place,
called the Aetnean Academy, whose original institution was to study the nature
and operations of this wonderful mountain. It was my ^ull intention to have
measured it geometrically; but I am sorry to say; although this is both the
sent of an Academy and University, yet there was no quadran^ to be had. Of all
the mountains I have ever seen, Aetna would be the easiest to measure, and with
the greatest certainty, and perhaps the properest place on the globe to
establish an exact rule of me^s^^^tion b^ the barometer. There is a beach of a
va^t extent that begins exactly at the foot of the mountain, and runs for a
great many miles along the coast* The sea-mark of this beach forms the meridian
to the summit of the mountain. Here you are sure of a perfect level, and may
make the base of your triangle of what length you please. But unfortunately
this mensuration has never been executed, at least with any tolerable degree of
precision.

Kircher pretends to have measured it, and to have found it 4000 French toises
in height; which is more than any of the Andes, or indeed than any mountain
upon earth. The Italian mathematicians are still more absurd. Some of them make
it eight miles, some six, and some four. Amici, the last, and I believe the
best who has made the attempt, reduces it to three miles, 264 paces; but even
this must be exceedingly erroneous; and probably the perpendicular height of
Aetna does not exceed 12000 feet, or little more than two miles. I shall mark
the different methods of determining heights by the barometer; and you may
choose which you please. I believe the allowance in all of them, particularly in
great elevations, where the air is so exceedingly thin and light, is much too
small. Mikeli, whose mensurations are esteemed more exact, has ever found it
so. Cassini allows, I think, ten French toises of elevation, for every line of
mercury, adding one foot to the first ten, two to the second, three to the
third, and so on: But surely the weight of the air diminishes in a much greater
proportion.

Boguer takes the difference of the logarithms of the height of the barometer
in lines (supposing these logarithms to consist only of five figures;) from
this difference he takes away a 30th part, and what remains he supposes to be
the difference of elevation. I do not recollect his reason for this
supposition; but the rule seems to be still more erroneous than the other, and
has been entirely laid aside. I am told, that accurate experiments have been
made at Geneva, to establish the mensuration with barometer; but I have not yet
been able to procure them. Mr. de la Hire allows twelve toises, four feet, for
the line of mercury: And Picart, one of the most extract of the French
academicians, fourteen toises, or about ninety English feet.

Height of Farenheit's Thermometer.
At Catania, May 26, at midday 76 Ditto, May 27, at five in the morning 72 At
Nicolosi, 12 miles up the mountain, midday 73 At the cave, called Spelonca del
Capriole, in the second region, where there was still a considerable quantity
of snow, at seven at night. 61 In the same cave at half an hour (...) 52 At the
Torre del Filosofo, in the third region, at three in the morning 34 At the foot
of the crater of Aetna 33 About half way up the crater 29 On the summit of
Aetna, a little before sunrise 27
Height of the barometer in inches and lines.
At the seaside at Catania 29 8 At the village of Piedmonte, in the first
region of Aetna 27 8 At Nicolosi, in the same region 27 1 At the Castagno de
Cento Cavalli, in the second region 26 5 At the Spelonca del Capriole in the
second region, 24 2 At the Torre de Filosofo, in the third region 20 5 At the
foot of the crater 20 4 Within about 300 yards of the summit 19 6 At the summit
of Aetna (supposed to be about) 19 4
The wind at the summit was so violent that I could not make the observation
with perfect exactness; however, I am pretty certain that it was within half a
line.

I own I did not believe we should find Aetna so high. I had heard indeed that
it was higher than any of the Alps, but I never gave credit to it: How great
then was my astonishment to find that the mercury fell almost two inches lower
than I had ever observed it on the very highest of the accessible Alps; at the
same time I am pers^^^ed there are many inaccessible points of the Alps,
^^^^^cularly (Mont. Blanc) that are still much higher than Aetna.

I found the magnetical needle greatly agitated near the summit of the
mountain; (the Padre dello Torre told me, he had made the same observation on
Vesuvius) however, it always fixed at the north point, though it took longer time
in fixing than below. But what Recupero told me happened to him, was very was
very singular. Soon after the eruption 1775, he placed his compass on the lava.
The needle, he says, to his great astonishment, was agitated with much violence
for some considerable time, till at last it entirely lost its magnetical power,
standing indiscriminately at every point of the compass; and this it never
after recovered, 'till it was again touched with the loadstone.

The wind, and my unfortunate sprain together, in a great measure prevented our
electrical experiments, ^n which we had built not a little; however, I found
that round Nicolosi, and particularly on the top of Nonpelieri, the air was in
a very favorable state for electrical operations. Here the little pith-balls,
when insolated, were sensibly affected, and repelled each other above an inch.
I expected this electrical state of the air would have increased as we advanced
on the mountain; but at the cave where we slept, I could observe no such
effect. Perhaps, it was owing to the exhalations from the trees and vegetables,
which are there exceedingly luxuriant; whereas about Nicolosi, and round
Monpelieri, there is hardly any thing but lava and dry hot sand. -- Or perhaps
it might be owing to the evening being farther advanced, and the dews beginning
to fall. However, I have no doubt, that upon these mountains formed by
eruption, where the air is strongly impregnated with ^^^bureous effluvia, great
electrical discoveries might ^^^ade. And perhaps, of all the reasons assigned
for the wonderful vegetation that is performed on this mountain, there is none
that contributes so much toward it, as this constant electrical state of the
air: For from a variety of experiments it has been found, that an increase of
the electrical matter adds much to the progress of vegetation. It probably acts
there in the same manner as on the animal body; the circulation we know is
performed quicker; and the juices are driven through the small vessels with
more ease and celerity. This has often been proved from the immediate removal
of obstructions by electricity; and probably the rubbing with dry and warm
flannel, esteemed so efficacious in such cases, is doing nothing more than
exciting a greater degree of electricity in the part; but it has likewise been
demonstrated, by the common experiment of making water drop through a small
capillary ^yphon, which the moment it is electrified runs in a full stream. I
have, indeed, very little doubt, that the fertility of our seasons depends as
much on this quality in the air, as either on its heat or moisture.

Electricity will probably soon be considered as the great vivifying principle
of nature, by which she carries on most of her operations. It is a fifth
element, distinct from, and of a superior nature to the other four, which only
compose the corporeal parts of matter: But this subtle and active fluid is a
kind of a soul that pervades and quickens every particle of it. When an equal
quantity of this is diffused through the air, and over the face of the earth,
every thing continues calm and quiet; but if by any accident one part of matter
has acquired a greater quantity than another, the most dreadful consequences
often ensue before the equilibrium, can be res^^ed. Nature seems to fall into
convu^sions, and any of her works are destroyed: All the great pha^^^mena are
produced; thunder, lightning, earthquakes, and whirlwinds: For, I believe,
there is little doubt, that all these frequently depend on this sole cause. And
again, if we look down from the sublime of nature to its minutiae, we shall
still find the same power acting; though perhaps in less legible characters;
for as the knowledge of its operations is still in its infancy, they are
generally misunderstood, or ascribed to some other cause. However, I have no
doubt, that in process of time these will be properly investigated; when
mankind will wonder how much they have been in the dark. It will then possibly
be found, that what we call sensibility of nerves, and many of those diseases
that the faculty have as yet only invented names for, are owing to the body's
being possessed of too large or too small a quantity of this subtle and active
fluid; that very fluid, perhaps, that is the vehicle of all our feelings; and
which they have so long searched for in vain in the nerves: For I have
sometimes been led to think, that this sense was nothing else than a slighter
kind of electric effect, to which the nerves serve as conductors; and that it
is by the rapid circulation of this penetrating and animating fire that our
sensations are performed. We all know, that in damp and hazy weather, when it
seems to be blunted and absorbed by the humidity; when its activity is lost,
and little or none of it can be collected; we ever find our spirits more
languid, and our sensibility less acute: but in the sirocc wind at Naples, when
the air seems totally deprived of it, the whole system is unstrung, and the
nerves seem to lose both their tension and elasticity, 'till the north or west
wind awakens the activity of this animating power, which soon restores the
tone, and enlivens all nature, which seemed to droop and languish during its
absence.

It is likewise well known, that ther^ have been instances of the human body
becoming electric without the mediation of any electric substance, and even
emitting sparks of fire with a disagreeable sensation, and an extreme degree of
nervous sensibility.

About seven or eight years ago, a lady in Switzerland was affected in this
manner, and though I was not able to learn all the particulars of her case, yet
several Swiss gentlemen have confirmed to me the truth of the story. -- She was
uncommonly sensible of every change of weather, and had her electrical feelings
strongest in a clear day, or during the passage of thunder-clouds, when the air
is known to be replete with that fluid. Her case like most others which the
doctors can make nothing of, was decided to be a nervous one, for the real
meaning of that term I take to be only, that the physician does not understand
what it is.

Two gentlemen of Geneva had a short experience of the same sort of complaint,
though still in a much superior degree. Professor Saussure and young Mr.
Jalabert, when traveling over one of the high Alps, were caught amongst
thunder-clouds; and to their utter astonishment, found their bodies so full of
electrical fire, that spontaneous flashes darted from their fingers with a
crackling noise, and the same kind of sensation as when strongly electrified by
art. This was communicated by Mr. Jalabert to the Academy of Sciences at Paris,
I think, in the year 1763; and you will find it recorded in their memoirs.

It seems pretty evident, I think, that these feelings were owing to the bodies
being possessed of too great a share of electric fire. This is an uncommon
case; but I do not (...) it at all improbable, that many of our invalids,
particularly the hypochondriac, and those we call Malades Imaginaires, owe
their disagreeable feelings to the opposite cause, or the bodies being
possessed of too small a quantity of this fire; for we find that a diminution
of it in the air seldom fails to increase their uneasy sensations, and vice
versa.

Perhaps it might be of service to these people to wear some electric substance
next to their skin, to defend the nerves and fibers from the damp, or
non-electric air. I would propose a waistcoat of the finest flannel, which
should be kept perfectly clean and dry; for the effluvia of the body, in case
of any violent perspiration, will soon destroy its electric quality: This
should be covered by another of the same size of silk. The animal heat, and the
friction that exercise must occasion betwixt these two substances, produce a
powerful electricity; and would form a kind of electric atmosphere around the
body, that might possibly be one of the best preservatives against the effect
of damps.

As for our Swiss lady, I have little doubt that her complaints were owing in
great part, perhaps entirely, to her dress; and that a very small alteration,
almost in any part of it, would effectually have cured her. A lady who has her
head surrounded with wires, and her hair stuck full of metal pins, and who at
the same time stands upon dry silk, is to all intents and purposes an
electrical conductor insolated, and prepared for collecting the fire from the
atmosphere: And it is not at all surprising, that during thunder-storms, or
when the air is extremely replete with electrical matter, she should ^mit
sparks, and exhibit other appearances of electricity. -- I imagine a very
trifling change of dress, which from the constant versatility of their modes
may some day take place, would render this lady's disease altogether epidemical
amongst the sex. Only let the soles of their shoes be made of an electric
substance, and let the wires of their caps, and pins of their hair, be somewhat
lengthened and pointed outward^; and I think there is little doubt, that they
will often find themselves in an electrified state: But, indeed, if they only
wear silk or even worsted stockings, it may sometimes prove sufficient; for I
have often insolated electrometers as perfectly by placing them on a piece of
dry silk or flannel, as ^n glass.

How little do our ladies imagine, when they surround their heads with wire,
the most powerful of all conductors; and at the same time wear stockings,
shoes, and gowns of silk, one of the most powerful repellents, that they
prepare their bodies in the same manner, and according to the same principles
as electricians prepare their conductors for attracting the fire of lightning!
if they cannot be brought to relinquish their wire caps and their pins, might
they not fall upon some such preservative as those which of late years have
been applied to objects of less consequence?

Suppose that every lady should provide herself with a small chain or wire, to
be hooked on at pleasure during thunder-storms. This should pass from her cap
over the thickest part of her hair, which will prevent the fire from being
communicated to her head; and so down to the ground. It is plain this will act
in the same manner as the conductors on the tops of steeples, which from the
metal spires that are commonly placed there, analogous to the pins and wires,
were so liable to accidents. You may laugh at all this, but I assure you I
never was more serious in my life. A very amiable lady of my acquaintance, Mrs.
Douglas, of Kelso, had almost lost her life by one of those caps mounted on
wire. She was standing at an open window during a thunder-storm: The lightning
was attracted by the wire, and the cap was burnt to ashes; happily her hair was
in its natural state, without powder, pomatum, or pins; and prevented the fire
from being conducted to her head; for as she felt no kind of shock, it is
probable that it went off from the wires of the cap to the wall, close to which
she then stood. If it had found any conductor to carry it to her head or body,
in all probability she must have been killed. -- A good strong head of hair, if
it is kept perfectly clean and dry is probably one of the best preservatives
against the fire of lightning. But so soon as it is stuffed full of powder and
pomatum, and bound together with pins, its repellent force is lost, and it
becomes a conductor. Since the writing of these letters, the author has made
some experiments on the electricity of hair; which tend still to convince him
the more of what he has advanced. A lady had told him, that on combing her hair
in frosty weather, in the dark she had sometimes observed sparks of fire to
issue from it. This made him think of attempting to collect the electrical fire
from hair alone, without the assistance of any other electrical apparatus. To
this end, he desired a young lady to stand on a cake of beeswax, and to comb
her sister's hair, who was sitting on a chair before her. Soon after she began
to comb, the young lady on the wax was greatly astonished to find her whole
body electrified; darting out sparks of fire against every object that
approached her. The hair was extremely electrical, and affected an electrometer
at a very great distance: He charged a metal conductor from it with great case;
and in the space of a few minutes collected as much fire immediately from the
hair, or to kindle common spirits; and by means of a small phial gave many
smart shocks to all the company. A full account of these experiments was lately
read before the Royal Society. They were made during the time of a very hard
frost and on a strong head of hair, where no powder or pomatum had been used
for many months.
But I beg pardon for these surmises: I throw them in your way only for you to
improve upon at your leisure: For we have it ever in our power to be making
experiments in electricity: And although this fluid is the most subtle and
active of any we know, we can command it on all occasions; and I am now so
accustomed to its operations, that I seldom comb my hair, or pull off a
stocking, without observing them under some form or other. How surprising is it
then, that mankind should have lived and breathed in it for so many thousand
years, without almost ever supposing that it existed! but to return to our
mountain.

Recupero told me he had observed the same phenomenon here that is common in
the eruptions of mount Vesuvius, viz. red forked lightning darting from the
smoke, without being followed by noise of thunder. The reason possibly is, that
the crater and smoke is at that time so highly electrical, that, like a
cylinder or globe, heated by friction, it throws off spontaneous flashes into
the air, without being brought into the attraction of any conductor, or body
less electric than itself; (indeed the spontaneous discharges from a good
electrical globe, often bear a perfect resemblance to this kind of lightning:)
however, if a non-electric cloud were to pass near the crater at that time, the
crash of thunder would probably be very violent, which indeed is often the case
when the air is full of wet clouds in the time of an eruption; but when this
does not happen, the equilibrium is probably restored by degrees, and without
any shock, from the surplus of electrical matter being gradually communicated
to the earth and sea all around the mountain; the immense ^avas that have run
from it, serving as conductors.

So highly electric is the vapor of volcanos, that it has been observed in
some eruptions both of Aetna and Vesuvius, that the whole tract of smoke, which
sometimes extended above 100 miles, produced the most dreadful effects; killing
shepherds and flocks on the mountains; blasting trees, and setting fire to
houses; wherever it met with them on an elevated situation. Now probably the
flying of a kite, with a wire round its string, would soon have disarmed this
formidable cloud. These effects, however, only happen when the air is dry and
little agitated, but when it is full of moist vapor, the great rarefaction
from the heat of the lava generally brings it down in violent torrents of rain,
which soon convey the electrical matter from the clouds to the earth, and
restores the equilibrium.

As Recupero, who is a facetious and an agreeable companion was kind enough to
^it a good deal with me during my confinement, I have gathered many remarks
from h^^ conversation, that may perhaps be worthy of your attention.

The variety of waters about Aetna, he tells me, is surprising. I have already
mentioned the Flume Freddo, or the river of Acis: Recupero confirms what I had
been told of it. There is a lake on the north of the mo^^t^^n, of about three
miles in circumference, which receives several considerable rivers; yet, although
there is no apparent outlet, it never overflows its banks. I suggested the
probability of a subter^aneous communication betwixt this and the F^ume Freddo.
He said there was no resemblance in the quality of their waters; however, I
think it is probable that in a course of so many miles, through the caverns of
Aetna, full of salts and minerals, it may acquire both its cold and its
vitriolic qualities.

There is another lake on the top of a mountain to the west of Aetna, the
bottom of which could never be found. It is observed never either to rise or
fall, but always to preserve the same level. It is undoubtedly the crater of
that mountain (which is all of burnt matter) converted into a lake. The river
which supplies the baths of Catania is of a very different nature: It never
continues the same, but is perpetually changing. Its current is for the most
part confined under ground by the lavas; but sometimes it bursts out with such
violence that the city has suffered greatly from it; and what is still more
unfortunate, these eruptions are generally followed by some epidemical
distemper. It has now been constantly diminishing for these two years past, and
is at present almost reduced to nothing. They are in perpetual dread of its
breaking out, and laying waste their fields, as it has so often done before.
What is singular, it generally bursts out after a long tract of the driest and
warmest weather. The Aetnean academy have never been able to account for this
circumstance think it is most probable, that it arises from the melting of the
snow on Aetna, but I shall not pretend to say how. These, perhaps, overfilling
the caverns that usually receive their water, the surplus is carried off into
this river.

The river of Alcantara certainly takes its rise from the melting of these
snows. Its waters, I observed, are of the same whitish color as all the rivers
are, that run from the Glacieres amongst the Alps. There are several periodical
springs on Aetna, that flow only during the day, and stop during the night.
These are naturally and easily accounted for from the melting of the snow; for
it melts only during the day, being hard frozen every night, even in the
hottest season. There are likewise a variety of poisonous springs, some of so
deadly a quality, that birds and beasts have been found lying dead on their
banks, from having drunk of their water. But (what is perhaps still more
singular) Recupero told me, that about twenty years ago, a rent opened in the
mountain, that for a considerable time sent forth so mephitic a vapor, that
like the Avernus, birds were suffocated in flying over it.

There are many caverns where the air is so extremely cold, that it is
impossible to support it for any time. These the peasants make use of as
reservoirs for the snow; and indeed they make the finest ice-houses in the
world, preserving it hard frozen during the hottest summers. It would be
endless to give an account of all the caverns, and other curious appearances
about Aetna. Kircher speaks of a cave which he saw, capable, he says, of
containing 30,000 men. Here, he adds, numbers of people have been lost from
their temerity in going too far. One of these caverns still retains the name of
Proserpine, from its being supposed by the ancients, the passage by which Pluto
conveyed her into his dominions; on this occasion Ovid describes Ceres, as
searching for the daughter, with two trees which she had plucked from the
mountain, and lighted by way of torches. These he calls Teda, which is still
the name of a tree, I have seen no where but on mount Aetna. It produces a
great quantity of rosin, and was surely the most proper tree Ceres could have
pitched upon for her purpose. This rosin is called Catalana, and is esteemed a
cure for sores.

I have mentioned the great variety of flowers, trees, etc. on mount Aetna. I
have found a long list of them in Massa; but as I am not acquainted with their
Sicilian names, I can make little out of it. I have engaged a person here to
procure me a collection of their seeds in the season. I find of the number, the
cinnamon, sarsaparilla, sassafras, rhubarb, and many others that I thought had
not been natives of Europe. The Palma Christi too, that plant so much
celebrated of la^e, from the seed of which the castor-oil is made, grows both
here and in many other places of Sicily, in the greatest abundance. Our
botanish have called it Ricinus Americanus, supposing it only to be produced in
that part of the world. A Bath physician, I remember, has lately written a
treatise on this plant, and the virtues of the oil extracted from its seed,
which he makes a sort of Catholicon. You may believe we shall not leave Sicily
without providing ourselves with a quantity of this precious seed.

Mount Aetna, I find, is as much celebrated by the ancients as the moderns, for
the variety of its odor ferous productions. Plutarch says, their smell was so
strong, that on many places of the mountain it was impossible to hunt. I shall
transcribe the passage as it is before me in an old translation I have
borrowed: Circum Aetnam in Sicilia nemin^^n ferunt cum canibus venatum iri;
quia enim multos perpetuo illic ut in viridario prata* collesque flores mittunt
a fragrantia, q^ae eam oram occupat, obfuscare ferarum anhelationes, etc.
Aristotle has likewise a passage to the very same purpose; but this may suffice.

There were formerly a variety of wild beasts in the woody regions of Aetna;
but notwithstanding this advantage they had over the dogs and hunters, the
number of these is now greatly reduced. They have still however the wild boar,
the ^oebuck, and a kind of wild goat; but the race of stags, which was much
celebrated, as well as that of bears, is thought to be extinct. Several places
of the mountain are still named from those animals.

The horses and cattle of mount Aetna were esteemed the best in Sicily. The
cattle are still of a large size, and have horns of such a length, that they
are preserved as curiosities in some ^useum^. The horses, I am ^^^aid, have
degenerated.

There are said to be quantities of porcupines and land tortoises on some parts
of Aetna, but we had not the good fortune to meet with any of them. Neither did
we fee any eagles or vultures, which are likewise said to be inhabitants of
this mountain.

The accounts given of mount Aetna by the old Sicilian authors (several of whom
I have borrowed from Recupero) are very various. Some of them describe the
hollow of the crater at being seven or eight miles in circumference, some make
it fi^e, and others only three. And probably all of them are right; far I find,
by all their accounts that generally once in about 100 years, the whole crater
has fallen down into the bowels of the mountain: That in process of time, a now
crater is seen peeping out of the gulph^^ which, perpetually increasing by the
matter thrown up, is by degrees raised again to its ancient height, '^ill at
last becoming too heavy for its hollow foundations, (...) again gives way, and
at once sinks down into the mountain. This happened about ^00 years ago, in the
year 1669, as recorded by Borelli, whose account of it I have before me.
Universum cacumen, quod ad inst^r speculae, seu tu^ris, ad ingentem altitud^nem
elevabatur, quod una cum vasta planitie arenosa depressa, atque absorpta est in
profundum vo^^ginem, etc. The same likewise happened in the year 1536, as
recorded by Fazzello and Filotoo; and in the years 1444, 1329, and 1157. Of all
these I have read an account; but probably betwixt the two last mentioned,
there has been another, that is not recorded, as the intervals betwixt all the
rest are pretty nearly equal.

Some of them give a dreadful account of it. Folcando, one of their historians,
tells us, it shook the whole island, and resounded through all its shores. And
their poet Errico says, on the same occasion: "S'ode il suo gran mugito
"Per mill piagge e ^^^i."
"The bellowing dire a thousand lands resound,
"Whose trembling shores return the dreadful sound."
In all probability, this event will very soon happen, as the circumference of
the crater is no where recorded to have been reduced to less than three miles;
and Recupero says, it is at present only three miles and a half; besides, 100
years, the common period, has now elapsed since its last fall.

There are many stories of people perishing by their temerity, in being too
curious spectators of the eruptions of this mountain; but there are still many
more, of those that have been miraculously saved by the interposition of some
saint or the virgin, who are supposed to be in a perpetual state of warfare
with the devils in mount Aetna. That part of the island where Aetna stands, has
ever been named il Val Demoni, from the frequent apparitions of these devils.
It makes one third of the island. The other two are named the Val di Not^, and
the Val di Mazzara.

There is one story, though a very old one, that is still related at Catania;
it is taken notice of by Seneca, Aristotle, Strabo, and others. In the time of
a great eruption, when the fire was pouring down upon the city, and every one
was carrying off his most valuable effects; two rich brothers, named Anfinomus
and Anapias, neglecting all their wealth, escaped from the conflagration with
their aged parents on their backs. These authors add, that the fire, respecting
such filial piety, spared them, whilst many others that took the same road were
consumed.

This action has been wonderfully extolled, and proves, I think, that seats of
this kind were by no means common in those days. -- Now, pray, don't you think,
in the world at present, bad as it is supposed to be, there are few sons, who
would not have acted in the same manner? And sure I am, the rest of mankind
would not have made such a fuss about it. Humanity and natural affection, I
believe, in those ages we are inclined to extol so much, were not by many
degrees so powerful as they are at present. Even the pious Aeneas himself, one
of the most renowned of all their heroes, was in effect but a savage,
notwithstanding all that Virgil says to persuade us of the contrary; for you
find him sacrificing his weak and captive enemies, at the same time that he is
canting and preaching up piety and justice.

These two brothers were so celebrated for this action, that there was a
dispute betwixt Syracuse and Catania, which of these cities had given them
birth; and temples were erected in both of them, dedicated to Filial Piety, in
memory of the event.

In the accounts of the more recent destructions of Catania, there occurs no
instance of this sort. We find them only lamenting the loss of priests and
nuns, and very much out of humor at their saints, for allowing the devils to
get the better of them. I have been a good deal entertained with some of those
authors. Selvaggio, one of their poets, speaking of the terrible earthquake in
the year 1169, that destroyed Catania, and buried multitudes of people in the
ruins, describes it in the following manner, which may serve as a specimen of
the poetry of that time: "Cataneam doleo, dolor est miserabile dictu:
Clara potens antiqua fuit; plebe, milite, ciero,
Divitiis, auro, specie, virtute, triumphis.
Heu teri^^ motu ruit illa potentia rerum ^
Morte ruitjuvenis, meritur vir, sponsa, maritus.
Unde superbit homo? Deus una diruit hora
Turres, ornatus, vestes, couctosque paratus.
In tanto gemitu periit pars maxima gentis,
Proh dolor! et monachi quadraginta quatuor et plus:
Et periit pastor patriae, pater ipse Johannes
Pontificalis honor, lux regni sic periere."
But another, Gustanavilla, one of their historians, gives a very different
account of this affair; as it is likewise somewhat curious in its way, I shall
copy it for your amusement: In omnem terram, et in fines orbis t^rrae jam exiit
plaga illa, qua nuper in Sicilia percussi sunt Catanenses in vigilia B.
Agathae: cum episcopus ille damnatissimus, qui, sicut scitis, sibi sumpsit
honorem, non vocatus a Domino, tanquam Aaron, et qui ad sedem illam, non
electione canonica, sed Giezitica venalitate intravit; cum, inquam,
abominationis offerret incensum, intonuit de coelo Dominus, et ecce terrae
motus factus est magnus; angelus enim Domini percutiens episcopum in furore
Domini cum populo, (...) universa civitate subvertit.

He adds, that if St. Agatha's veil had not been produced, the angel of the
Lord was in such a fury, that he would not have left one soul alive.

There is a curious painting of the great eruption in 1669, in the cathedral of
this place. It is but indifferently painted, but gives a dreadful idea of that
event. Borrelli, who was upon the spot, describes it. -- He says, on the 11th
of March, sometime before the lava burst out, after violent earthquakes and
dreadful subterraneous bellowing, a rent was opened in the mountain twelve
miles long: in some places of which, when they threw down stones, they could
not hear them strike the bottom. He says, that burning rocks, sixty palms in
length, were thrown to the distance of a mile; and that the giants supposed to
be buried under mount Aetna, seemed to have renewed their war against heaven:
That stones of a lesser size were carried upwards of three miles; and that the
thunder and lightning from the smoke was scarce less terrible than the noise of
the mountain. He adds, that after the most violent struggles and shaking of the
whole island, when the lava at last burst through, it sprung up into the air to
the height of sixty palms. -- In short, he describes that event, as well as the
universal terror and consternation it occasioned, in terms full of horror. For
many weeks the sun did not appear, and the day seemed to be changed into night.
Soon after the lava g^t vent, which was not 'till four months from the time
that the mountain began to labor, all those dreadful symptoms abated, and it
was soon after perfectly quiet.

He says, this deluge of fire, after destroying the finest country in Sicily,
and sweeping away churches, villages, and convents, broke over the lofty walls
of Catania^ and covered up five of its bastions with the intervening curtains.
From thence pouring down on the city, it destroyed every object it met with,
overwhelming and burying all in one promiseuous ruin.

What he regrets most, was some precious remains of antiquity; the names, the
situation, and even the memory of whose existence, is now lost in the place. He
mentions an amphitheatre, which he calls Golliseo, the Circus Maximus, the
Naumachia, and several temples.

An account of this great eruption was sent to Charles II. by Lord Winchelsea,
who was then returning from his embassy at Constantinople, and stopped here on
purpose to see so remarkable an event. But his lordship has not been at that
pains to examine it as we could have wished. His curiosity was satisfied in one
day; and he seems to have been contented only to look at the lava at a great
distance; but did not think of examining its source, or ascending the mountain,
although at that time all the most formidable circumstances of the eruption were
already over.

I should not finish this account of mount Aetna, without saying something of
the various fables and allegories to which it has given rise; but it would
probably lead me into too vast a field, and give this more the air of a
dissertation than a letter or a journal. These you will easily recollect: They
have afforded ample employment for the muse, in all ages, and in all languages;
and indeed the philosopher and natural historian, have found, in the real
properties of this mountain, as ample a fund of speculation, as the poets have
done in the fictitious. It is so often mentioned by the ancient writers, that
it has been said of Aetna, as well as of Greece: "Nullum est sine nomine
saxum." Indeed, I am afraid this saying was much more applicable to it formerly
than it is at present; for we even found several large mountains that had no
name; and it does not at all appear, that the number of philosophers in Sicily
have by any means increased in the later ages. Their ambition is now changed;
and if they can get a saint to keep the devils of Aetna in order, they trouble
themselves very little about the cause of its operations, and do not value
their island half so much for having given birth to Archimedes or Empedocles,
as to St. Agatha and St. Rosolia.

The ancients, as well as the moderns, seem ever to have considered Aetna as
one of the highest mountains on the globe. There are many massages in their
authors that show this; though perhaps, none more strongly than their making
Deucalion and Pyrrha take refuge on the top of it, to save themselves from the
universal deluge. Cataclysmus, quod nos diluvium dicimus, cum factus est, omne
genus bumanum interiit praeter Deucalionem et Pyrrham, qui in inontem Aetnam
qui altissimus in Sicilia esse dicitur fugerunt, etc.


I shall now concluded this long account of mount Aetna with Virgil's
celebrated description of it in the third Aeneid, which has been so much
admired. You may compare it with the following description of the famous poet
Raitano, held, I assure you, in full as high estimation by the Sicilians.

"Nel mezzo verso l'ethere avviccina
Aetna la front sua cinta di orrori,
E con ispavantevole rovina
Rimbomba, e con orribili fragori.
Sovente negri nubi al ciel destina
Fumanti di atro turbine, e di ardori,
Ergi globbi di fiamma, e su lambisce;
Le stelle omai con infuocate striscie
Scogli, e divelte viscere di monte
Erruttando tal volta avido estolle;
E con gemiti vomita, e con onte
Liquifatti macigni, e in fondo bolle."
So sings the Sicilian muse; yon will not however hesitate to give the
preference to the Roman one; although the former is evidently stolen from her.
" -- Horrificis juxta tonat Aetna ruinis,
Interdumque atram prorumpit ad aethera nubem,
Turbine fumantem piceo et candente favilla,
Attollitque globos flammarum, et sidera lambit.
Interdumque scopulos, avolfaque viscera montis
Erigit eructans, liquefactaque saxa sub auras
Cum gemi^^ glomerat, fundoque exaestuat imo."


But both these have been greatly outdone by the wonderful imagination of our
great countryman Sir Richard Blackmore; who accounts at once for the whole
phenomenon of Aetna, by the simple idea of giving; the mountain a fit of the
colic: A thought that had escaped all the poets and philosophers of antiquity,
and seems for ever to have been reserved for the profound genius of this great
master and father of the Bathes. I have forgot the passage; but you will find
it, I think, in prince Arthur.

The philosophical poet Lucretius, has likewise mentioned the eruptions of
mount Aetna; but Pindar is the oldest poet we know of, that has taken any
notice of them. His description is, I think, the most satisfactory of all, and
conveys a clearer idea both of the mountain itself, and an eruption of the
mountain, than either the Roman o^ Sicilian poet, though it is not near so much
labored, nor worked up with all that variety of circumstances, they have found
means to introduce. Its greatest fault is, that Pindar had still kept in view
that absurd idea of the ancients, that Jupiter had buried the giants under
mount Aetna; and that their struggling to get loose, was the cause of its
eruptions: But even this he touches but slightly, as if ashamed to give such a
reason. The passage is translated into English by Mr. West. "Now under smoking
Cuma's sulfurous coast
And vast Sicilia, lies his tortured breast.
By snowy Aetna, nurse of endless frost,
The mighty prop of heaven for ever pressed.
Forth from whose flaming caverns issuing rise
Tremendous fountains of pure liquid fire,
Which veil in ruddy mists the noonday skies,
While rapt in smoke the eddying flames aspire;
Or gleaming through the night with hideous roar,
Far over the red'ning main huge rocky fragments pour."


This passage decides what has been much disputed, that Aetna, was in these
early ages, of as great an elevation as at present. It has been alleged, that
volcanos always increase in height 'till they are extinguished, when they are
supposed to moulder down, and by degrees sink into the caverns that are below
them, like the astruni, and the solfaterra at Naples: However we find that
Aetna was at that time as now, covered with eternal snows, and was supposed,
like Atlas, to be one of the great props of heaven. But what pleases me the
most in this description is, that it proves beyond the possibility of a doubt,
that in these very remote eruptions, it was common for the lavas of Aetna to
run a great way out to sea. The conclusion, I think, is fully as just, and
perhaps not less sublime, than the "avolsaque viscera montis erigit eructans"
of Virgil, which, I must own, I think rather comes too near Sir Richard's (...).

Thucydides speaks of three eruptions of this mountain; but is not so
particular as we could have wished. He does not mention the date of the first;
but says, it was the earliest after the arrival of the Greeks in Sicily. The
second happened about the time of the 77th Olympiad, and the last in that of
the 88th, which was nearly about the period when Pindar wrote; so that we
cannot doubt that his description is taken from the accounts he had heard of
some of those eruptions, the circumstances of which, no doubt, at that time,
had afforded matter of conversation all over Greece.

I think we may now try to take leave of Aetna, though I am afraid, during the
remainder of our expedition, we shall meet with nothing worthy to succeed it.
We shall sail from hence tomorrow morning; and expect to sleep at Syracuse, as
it is only about fifty miles distant. I shall write to you again from the ruins
of that celebrated city. Farewell.

Ever yours.

LETTER XII.
Syracuse, June 1st.
ON the 31st of May we embarked on board a felucca, and set sail for the mighty
Syracuse. The wind was favorable, and for some time we went at a great rate.
The view of mount Aetna, for the whole of this little voyage, is wonderfully
fine, and the bold black coast formed for near thirty miles, of the lava of
that immense volcano, gives the most awful idea of its eruptions. There is no
part of this coast nearer than thirty miles to its summit; and yet there has
hardly been any great eruption, where the lava has not reached the sea, and
driven back its waters to a great distance, leaving high rocks and
promontories, that for ever set its waves at defiance, and prescribe their
utmost limits. What a tremendous scene must the meeting betwixt these adverse
elements have formed!

We may easily conceive the variety of changes this coast has undergone in the
space of some thousands of years, as every great eruption must have made a
considerable difference. Virgil is wonderfully minute and exact in his
geography of Sicily; and this is the only part of the island that seems to be
materially altered since his time. He says there was a very large port at the
foot of Aetna, were ships were secure from every wind; "Portus ab accessu
ventorum immotus et ingens;" of which, at present, there are not the least
remains. It is probably the same that was called by the Sicilians the port of
Ulysses; which is often mentioned by their writers. The place of its existence
is still shown betwixt three and four miles up the country, amongst the lavas
of Aetna. However, I can see no sort of reason why they have called this the
port of Ulysses: For surely Homer does not bring his hero near the precincts of
mount Aetna. Indeed I think it is evident, that this volcano did not burn
during the time of Homer, nor for some ages preceding it, otherwise it is not
possible, that he would have said so much of Sicily, without taking any notice
of so great and capital an object, which, of all others, the daring and sublime
imagination of Homer would have been the most eager to grasp at. It is evident,
from his account, that Ulysses (...) at the west end of Sicily, opposite to the
island of Lachaea, now Favignana, almost two hundred miles distant from this
port.

Virgil, with more judgment, lands his hero at the foot of Aetna, which gives
him an opportunity of introducing some of the finest descriptions in the
Aeneid. But it is somewhat odd, that here he makes Aeneas find one of Ulysses's
companions, who had escaped the rage of Polyphemus, and had lived for several
months in the woods and caverns of this mountain. Virgil must have been aware
of this impropriety, as he well knew that Homer had landed Ulysses, and placed
the cave of Polyphemus at the most distant point of the island. But he could
not prevail on himself to pass mount Aetna. He was so thoroughly convinced,
that this was the most proper landing-place for an epic hero, as well as the
most proper habitation for the Cyclops, that, by a bold poetical license, he
has fairly taken it for granted, that Homer really made it so. Indeed, in this
passage, the pleasure he affords to the imagination of his reader, makes an
ample amends for his having imposed on his judgment. But to return to our
voyage.

The view of the mountain from the sea is more complete and satisfactory than
any where on the island. The eye takes in a greater portion of the circle, and
you observe, with more distinctness how it rises equally on all sides, from its
immense base, overspread with the beautiful little mountains I have mentioned;
and at once can trace the progress of vegetation from its utmost luxuriance, to
where it is checked by the two extremes of heat and of cold. The different
regions of the mountain are distinctly marked out, by their different colors,
and different productions; exposing at once to the ravished eye every climate,
and every season, with all their variety; "Where blossoms, fruits, and flowers
together rise,
"And the whole year in gay confusion lies."


The first region exhibits every object that characterises summer and autumn;
the second, those of the most delightful spring; the third, an eternal and
unrelenting winter; and the fourth, to complete the contrast, the regions of
unextinguishable fire.

The circumference of the great base of Aetna, Recupero told me, he had been at
a good deal of pains to ascertain; as it had generally been computed only at a
hundred miles, or little more, although the radii of that circle had ever been
esteemed at thirty of those miles; an absurdity in computation that had put him
upon making this inquiry. The result was, that taking the supposed distances of
one place from another, all the way round, the sum of the whole amounted to one
hundred and eighty three miles: An immense circle surely, and which is still
enlarged by every considerable eruption. The whole of this circle is formed of
lava and burnt matter; and I have observed, that near the very outermost
borders of it, there have been many little eruptions that have pierced through
some of the thickest lavas of Aetna. These small eruptions, at so vast a
distance from the great furnace of the mountain, are probably occasioned by the
intense heat of the lava, which continues for many years rarefying the air, in
the caverns it has run over, which bursting forth from its prison, the lava
sinks down, and kindling the sulphur and nitre with which these caverns are
filled, exhibits in miniature the phenomenon of a great eruption.

There is a large sandy beach that extends from the mouth of the river Simetus,
a great way to the south of Catania, and was probably continued the whole way
to the foot of the mountain of Taurominum, (where there are still some remains
of the east end of it) 'till it was broken in upon many thousand years ago by
the lavas of Aetna; which, from a flat sandy shore, have now converted it into
a high, bold, black iron coast. What is a strong proof of this, in many places
where they have sunk deep wells, after piercing through ^^e lava, they have at
last come to beds of shells, and sea sand.

There is nothing else very interesting in the voyage from Catania to Syracuse.
If you will read the conclusion of the third book of the Aeneid, you will find
a much better description of it than any I can give you. The coast lies low,
and, except Aetna, there are no very striking objects.

We passed the mouths of several rivers: The first and most considerable is the
Giarretta, or river of St. Paul, formerly the Simetus; and under that name
celebrated by the poets. The nymph, Thalia, after her amor with Jupiter, is
supposed to have been changed into this stream; and, to avoid the resentment of
Juno, sunk under ground near mount Aetna, and continued her subterraneous
course to the sea. This river was navigable in the time of the Romans, and
Massa says, the only one in the island that was so. It takes its rise on the
north side of Aetna, and surrounding the west skirts of the mountain, falls
into the sea near the ruins of the ancient Morgantio. It no longer sinks under
ground as it did formerly; but it is now celebrated for a quality it does not
appear to have possessed in the times of antiquity, as none of the old writers
take notice of it. It throws up near its mouth great quantities of fine amber:
This is carefully gathered by the peasants in the neighborhood, and brought to
Catania, where it is manufactured into the form of crosses, beads, saints, etc.
and is sold at high prices to the superstitious people on the continent. We
bought several of these respectable figures, and found them electrical in a
high degree, powerfully attracting feathers, straws, and other light bodies;
somewhat emblematical, you will say, of what they represent. Some pieces of
this amber contain flies and other insects curiously preserved in its
substance; and we were not a little entertained with the ingenuity of one of
the artists, who has left a large blue-bottle fly, with its wings expanded,
exactly over the head of a saint, to represent, he told us, l^ spirito santo
descending upon him. I have got some fine pieces of this amber, more electric,
I think, and emitting a stronger smell, than that which comes from the Baltic.
The generation of this substance has long been a controverted point amongst
naturalists; nor do I believe it is as yet ascertained, whether it is a sea or
a land production. It is generally supposed to be a kind of gum or bitumen,
that is^ues from the earth in a liquid state, at which time the flies and other
insects that light upon it are caught, and by their struggles to get loose,
soon work themselves into its substance, which hardening round them, they are
for ever preserved in the greatest perfection. Large fine pieces are constantly
found at the mouth of the Simetus, supposed to have been brought down by the
river; but it is singular, that none of it is ever found any where but on the
seashore: They have likewise here a kind of artificial amber, made I am told,
from copal; but it is very different from the natural.

Not far from the mouth of this river there are two of the largest lakes in
Sicily; the Beviere, and the Pantana; the first of which is supposed to have
been made by Hercules; in consequence of which it was held sacred by the
ancients. They are full of a variety of fish; one species of which, called
Molletti, is much esteemed: The salting and exportation of these makes a
considerable branch of commerce at Leontini, which is in that neighborhood:
That city is one of the most ancient in the island, and is supposed to have
been the habitation of the Lestrigons.

The Leontine fields have been much famed for their fertility: Both Diodorus
and Pliny assert that they yielded wheat an hundredfold, and that grain grew
spontaneously here without culture: But this was only during the reign of
Ceres, and is not now the case.

In a few hours sailing we came in sight of the city of Augusta, which is
beautifully situated in a small island that was formerly a peninsula: It was
therefore called by the Greeks Chersonesus. Both the city and fortifications
seem considerable, and are said to contain about 9000 inhabitants. The ruins of
the Little Hybla, so celebrated for its honey, lie within a few miles of this
place.

Some time before our arrival at Syracuse, it fell a dead calm, and we spied a
fine turtle fast asleep on the surface of the water. Our pilot ordered a
profound silence, and only two oars to row very gently, that if possible we
might surprise him. Every thing was put in order, and two men were placed ready
at the prow to secure the prize. We were all attention and expectation, and
durst hardly breathe for fear of disturbing him.

We moved slowly on, and the turtle lay stone-still; the two men bent down
their bodies, and had their arms already in the water to seize him. No
alderman, with all deference be it spoken, ever beheld his turtle with more
pleasure and security; nor feasted his imagination more lusciously upon the
banquet. -- He was already our own in idea, and we were only thinking of the
various ways in which he should be dressed: When, how vain and transitory all
human possessions! the turtle made a plunge, slipped through their fingers, and
disappeared in a moment, and with him all our hopes. We looked very foolish at
each other, without uttering a word, 'till Fullarton asked me in the most
provoking manner in the world, whether I would choose a little of the callipash
or the callipee. The two men shrugged up their shoulders, and said Pazienza;
but Glover told them in a rage, that all the pazienza on earth was not equal to
a good turtle.

Soon after this, the remains of the great Syracuse appeared; the remembrance
of whose glory, magnificence, and illustrious deeds both in arts and arms, made
us for some time even forget our turtle. But, alas! how are the mighty fallen!
this proud city, that vied with Rome itself, is now reduced to a heap of
rubbish; for what remains of it deserves not the name of a city. We rowed round
the greatest part of its walls without seeing a human creature; those very
walls that were the terror of the Roman arms; from whence Archimedos battered
their fleets, and with his engines lifted their vessels out of the sea, and
dashed them against the rocks. We found the interior part of the city agreed
but too well with its external appearance. There was not an inn to be found;
and after visiting all the monasteries and religious fraternities in search of
beds, we found the whole of them so wretchedly mean dirty, that we preferred at
last to sleep on straw; but even that we could not have clean, but are eat up
with vermin of every kind.

We had letters for the Count Gaetano, who made an apology that he could not
lodge us, but in other respects showed us many civilities; particularly in
giving us the use of his carriage, in explaining the ruins, in pointing out
every thing that was worthy of our attention; and likewise in giving us letters
of recommendation for Malta. He is a gentleman of good sense, and has written
several treatises on the antiquities of Sicily.

Of the four cities that composed the ancient Syracuse, there remains only
Ortigia, by much the smallest, situated in the island of that name. It is about
two miles round, and supposed to contain about 14,000 inhabitants. The ruins of
the other three, Tycha, Acradina, and Neapoli, are computed at twenty-two miles
in circumference, but almost the whole of this space is now converted into rich
vineyards, orchards, and cornfieldsd; the walls of these are indeed every where
built with broken marbles full of engravings and inscriptions, but most of them
defaced and spoiled. The principal remains of antiquity are a theater and
amphitheatre; many sepulchers, the Latomie, the Catacombs, and the famous ear
of Dionysius, which it was impossible to destroy. The Latomie now makes a noble
subterraneous garden, and is indeed one of the most beautiful and romantic
spots I ever beheld. Most of it is about one hundred feet below the level of
the earth, and of an incredible extent. The whole is hewn out of a rock as hard
as marble, composed of a concretion of shells, gravel, and other marine bodies.
The bottom of this immense quarry, from whence probably the greatest part of
Syracuse was built, is now covered with an exceeding rich soil; and as no wind
from any point of the compass can touch it, it is filled with a great variety
of the finest shrubs and fruit trees, which bear with vast luxuriance, and are
never blasted. The oranges, citrons, bergamots, pomegranates, figs, etc. are
all of a remarkable size and fine quality. Some of these trees, but more
particularly the olives, grow out of the hard rock; where there is no visible
soil; and exhibit a very uncommon and pleasing appearance.

There is a variety of wild and romantic scenes in this curious garden; in the
midst of which we were surprised by the appearance of a figure under one of the
caverns, that added greatly to the dignity and solemnity of the place. -- It
was that of an aged man, with a long flowing white beard that reached down to
his middle. His old wrinkled face and scanty gray locks pronounced him a member
of some former age as well as of this. His hands, which were shook by the
palsy, held a sort of pilgrim's staff; and about his neck there was a string of
large beads with a crucifix hanging to its end. Had it not been for these marks
of his later existence, I don't know but I should have asked him, whether in
his youth, he had not been acquainted with Theocritus and Archimedes, and if he
did not remember the reign of Dionysius the tyrant. But he saved us the
trouble, by telling us he was the hermit of the place, and belonged to a
convent of Capuchins on the rock above; that he had now bid adieu to the upper
world, and was determined to spend the rest of his life in this solitude, in
prayer for the wretched mortals that inhabit it.

This figure, together with the scene in which it appears, are indeed admirably
well adapted, and reflect a mutual dignity upon each other. We left some money
upon the rock: For the Capuchins, who are the greatest beggars on earth, never
touch money, but save their too tender consciences, and preserve their vows
unbroken, by the simple device of lifting it with a pair of pincers, and
carrying it to market in their sack or cowl. This I have seen more than once.
We were much delighted with the Latomie, and left it with regret: It is the
very same that has been so much celebrated by Cicero about 1800 years ago; Opus
est ingens (says he) magnificum regum, ac tyrannorum, Totum ex saxo in mirandam
altitudinem depresso, etc. A little to the west of it is supposed to have stood
the country house, the sale of which you will remember he gives so lively and
pleasant an account of; by which a goldsmith (I have forgot his name) cheated a
Roman nobleman in a very ingenious manner.

The ear of Dionysius is no less a monument of the ingenuity and magnificence,
than of the cruelty of that tyrant. It is a huge cavern cut out of the hard
rock; in the form of the human ear. The perpendicular height of it is about 80
feet, and the length of this enormous ear is not less than 250. The cavern was
said to be so contrived, that every sound made in it, was collected and united
into one point, as into a focus; this was called the Tympanum; and exactly
opposite to it the tyrant had made a small hole, which communicated with a
little apartment where he used to conceal himself. He applied his own ear to
this hole, and is said to have heard distinctly every word that was spoken in
the cavern below. This apartment was no sooner finished, and a proof of it
made, than he put to death all the workmen that had been employed in it. He
then confined in it all that he suspected were his enemies; and by over-hearing
their conversation, judged of their guilt, and condemned and acquitted
accordingly.

As this chamber of Dionysius is very high in the rock, and now totally
inaccessible, we had it not in our power to make proof of this curious
experiment, which our guides told us had been done some years ago by the
captain of an English ship.

The echo in the ear is prodigious; much superior to any other cavern I have
seen. The hole in the rock, to which the prisoners were chained, still remain,
and even the lead and iron in several of them. We surprised a poor young
porcupine who had come here to drink, of whom our guides made lawful prize.
Near to this there are caverns of a great extent, where they carry on a
manufactory of nine, which is found in vast abundance on the sides of these;
caves.

The amphitheatre is in the form of a very eccentric ellipse, and is much
ruined; but the theater is so entire, that most of the gradini or seats still
remain. Both these are in that part of the city that was called Neapoli, or the
New City. Quarta autem est urbs (says Cicero) quae quia postrema aedificata
est, Neapolis nominatur, quam ad summam theatrum est maximum, etc. However, it
is but a small theater in comparison of that Taurominum. We searched amongst
the sepulchers, several of which are very elegant, for that of Archimedes; but
could see nothing resembling it. At his own desire it was adorned with the
figure of a sphere inscribed in a cylinder, but had not been lost by his
ungrateful countrymen, even before the time that Cicero was quaestor of Sicily.
It is pleasant to observe, with what eagerness this great man undertakes the
search of it, and with what exultation he describes his triumph on the
discovery. Ego autem cum omnia collustrarem oculis (est enim ad portas
Agragianas magna frequentia sepulchrorum) animadverti columnellam non multum e
dumis eminentem, in qua inerat sphaerae figura et cylindri. Atque ego statim
Syracusanis (erant autem principes mecum) dixi, me illud ipsum arbitrari esse
quod quaererem. Immissi cum falcibus multi purgarunt, et aperuerunt locum; quo
cum patefactus esset aditus ad adversam basim acce^^imus; apparebat epigramma
exesis posterioribus partibus versiculorum dimidiatis fere: Ita nobilissima
Graeciae civitas, quondam vero etiam doctissima sui civis unius acutissimi
monumenttum ignorasset, nisi ab homine Arpinate didicisset, etc.

The Catacombs are a great work; little inferior either to those of Rome or
Naples, and in the same style. There are many remains of temples. The Duke of
Montalbano, who has written on the antiquities of Syracuse, reckons near
twenty; but there is hardly any of these that are now distinguishable. A few
fine columns of that of Jupiter Olympus still remain; and the temple of Minerva
(now converted into the cathedral of the city, and dedicated to the Virgin) is
almost entire. They have lately built a new faccade to it; but I am afraid they
have not improved on the simplicity of the antique. It is full of broken
pediments, and I think in a bad style.

Ortigia, the only remaining part of Syracuse, was anciently an island; it is
often denominated such by Virgil, Cicero, and many of the Greek and Latin
historians. In latter ages, and probably by the ruins of this mighty city, the
strait that separated it from the continent, was filled up; and it had now been
a peninsula for many ages; 'till the present king of Spain, at a vast expense,
cut through the neck of land that joined it to Sicily, and has again reduced it
to its primitive state.

Here he has raised a noble fortification, which appears to be almost
impregnable. There are four strong gates, one within the other, with each a
glacis, covered way, scarp and counterscarp, and a broad deep ditch filled with
seawater, and defended by an immense number of embrasures; but not so much as
one single piece of artillery. This you will no doubt think ridiculous enough,
but the ridicule is still heightened, when I assure you there is not a cannon
of any kind belonging to this noble fortress, but one small battery of six
pounders for saluting ships that go in and out of the port. If you are at a
loss to account for this, you will please remember that it is a work of the
king of Spain. However, the ditches are very useful; they are perpetually
covered with fishing boats; and they can use their nets and lines here with the
greatest success, even in the most stormy weather; though I dare say this was
none of the motives that induced his majesty to make them. The nobility of the
place have likewise barges here, for their amusement.

As the celebrated fountain of Arethusa has ever been looked upon as one of the
greatest curiosities of Syracuse, you may believe we were not a little
impatient to examine it: And indeed only by observing Cicero's account of it,
In hoc insula extrema est fons aquae dulcis, cui nomen Arethusa est,
incredibili magnitudine plenissimus piscium, qui fluctu totus operiretur, nisi
munitione, ac mole lapidum a mari disjunctus esset, etc.
we soon found it out, It still exactly answers the description he gives,
except with regard to the great quantities of fish it contained, which seem now
to have abandoned it.

The fountain of Arethusa was dedicated to Diana, who had a magnificent temple
near it, where great festivals were annually celebrated in honor of the
goddess. We found a number of nymphs, up to the knees in the fountain, busy
washing their garments, and we dreaded the fate of Actaeon and Alpheus: But if
these were of Diana's train, they are by no means so coy as they were of old;
and a man would hardly choose to run the risk of being changed either into a
^^ag or a river for the best of them.

It is indeed an astonishing fountain; and rises at once out of the earth, to
the size of a river. The poetical fictions concerning it are too well known to
require that I should enumerate them. Many of the people here believe to this
day, that it is the identical river Arethusa, that sinks under ground near
Olympia in Greece, and continuing its course for five or six hundred miles
below the ocean, rises again in this spot.

It is truly astonishing that such a story as this should have gained such
credit amongst the ancients, for it is not only their poets, but natural
historians and philosophers too, that take notice of it. Pliny mentions it more
than once; and there are few or none of the Latin poets that it has escaped.

This strange belief has been communicated to the Sicilian authors, and, what
is amazing, there is hardly any of them that doubts of it. Pomponius Mela,
Pausanias, Mas^a, and Fazzello, are all of the same sentiments; to support
which they tell you the old story of the golden cup won at the Olympic games,
which was thrown into the Grecian Arethusa, and was soon after cast up again by
the Sicilian one.

They likewise add, that it had always been observed that after the great
sacrifices at Olympia, the blood of which fell into that river, the waters of
Arethusa rose for several days, tinged with blood.

This, like many modern miracles, was probably a trick of the priests. Those of
Diana had the charge of the fountain of Arethusa, and no doubt were much
interested to support the credit of the story; for it was that goddess that
converted the nymph Arethusa into a river, and conducted her subterraneous
passages from Greece to Sicily, to avoid the pursuit of Alpheus, who underwent
the same fate.

At a little distance from the fountain of Arethusa, there is a very large
spring of fresh water, that boils up in the sea. It is called Occhi di Zilica,
and by some Alpheus, who is supposed by the poets to have pursued Arethusa
below the sea all the way to Sicily.

As this spring is not taken notice of by any of the great number of the
ancients that speak of Arethusa, it is most probable that it did not then
exist; and is a part of that fountain that has since burst out before its
arrival at the island of Ortigia. Had it been visible in the time of the
Greeks, there is no doubt that they would have made use of this, as a strong
argument to prove the submarine journey of Arethusa; as it in fact rises at
some distance in the sea, and pretty much in the same direction that Greece
lies from Ortigia. It sometimes boils up so strongly, that after piercing the
salt water, I am told it can be taken up very little affected by it.

Syracuse has two harbors; the largest of which, on the south-west side of
Ortigia, is reckoned six miles round, and was esteemed one of the best in the
Mediterranean. It is said by Diodorus to have run almost into the heart of the
city, and was called Mar^^or^o, because entirely surrounded with buildings of
marble; the entry into this harbor was strongly fortified, and the Roman
fleets could never penetrate into it.

The small port is on the north-east of Ortigia, and is likewise recorded to
have been highly ornamented. Fazzello says, there is still the remains of a
submarine aqueduct, that runs through the middle of it, which was intended to
convey the water from the fountain of Arethusa to the other parts of the city.

Near this port, they show the spot where Archimedes' house stood; and likewise
the tower from whence he is said to have set fire to the Roman galleys with his
burning-glasses; a story which is related by several authors, but which is now
almost universally exploded, from the difficulty to conceive a burning-glass or
a concave speculum, with a focus of such an immense length as this must have
required.

However, I should be apt to imagine if this be not entirely a fiction (of
which there is some probability) that it was neither performed by refracting
burning-glasses nor speculums, but only by means of common looking-glasses, or
very clear plates of metal. Indeed, from the situation of the place it must
have been done by reflection; for Archimedes' tower stood on the north of the
little port where the Roman fleet are said to have been moored; so that their
vessels lay in a right line betwixt him and the sun at noon; and at a very,
small distance from the wall of the city where this tower stood. But if you
will suppose this to have been performed by common burning-glasses, or by those
of the parabolical kind, it will be necessary to raise a tower of a most
enormous height on the island of Ortigia, in order to interpose these glasses
betwixt the sun and the Roman galleys; and even this could not have been done
'till late in the afternoon, when his rays are exceedingly weak. But I have
very little doubt that common looking-glasses would be found all-sufficient to
perform these effects.

Let us suppose that a thousand of these were made to reflect the rays to the
same point: The heat, in all probability, must be increased to a greater degree
than in the focus of most burning-glasses; and abundantly capable of setting
fire to every combustible substance. This experiment might be easily made by
means of a battalion of men, arming each with a looking-glass instead of a
firelock; and setting up a board at two or three hundred yards distance for
them to fire at. I suppose it would take a considerable time before they were
expert at this exercise; but, by practice, I have no doubt that they might all
be brought to hit the mark instantaneously at the word of command; like the
lark-catchers in some countries, who are so dextrous at this maneuver, that
with a small mirror they throw the rays of light on the lark, let her be ever
so high in the air; which, by a kind of fascination, brings down the poor
animal to the snare.

You may laugh at all this; but I don't think it is impossible that a
looking-glass may one day be thought as necessary an implement for a soldier as
at present it is for a beau. I am very apprehensive the French will get the
start of us in this signal invention; as I have been assured long ago, that few
of their men ever go to the field, without first providing themselves with one
of these little warlike engines, the true use of which, happily for us, they
are as yet unacquainted with. You will easily perceive, that if this experiment
succeeds, it must a^^r the whole system of fortification, as well as of attack
and defense; for every part of the city that is exposed to the view of the
besiegers, may be easily set in a flame; and the besieged would have the same
advantage over the camp of the besieging army. Since the writing of these
letters, the author has been informed, that Mr. Buffoon actually made this
experiment. -- He constructed a kind of frame, in which were fixed four hundred
small mirrors, disposed in such a manner, that the rays reflected from each of
them fell exactly on the same point. By means of this he melted lead at the
distance of 120 feet, and set fire to a haystack at a much greater distance.


We are already completely tired of Syracuse, which of all the wretched places
we have yet met with, is by many degrees the most wretched: For besides that
its inhabitants are so extremely poor and beggarly, many of them are so
overrun with the itch, that we are under perpetual apprehensions, and begin to
be extremely well satisfied that we could not procure beds. -- It is truly
melancholy to think of the dismal contrast that its former magnificence makes
with its present meanness. The mighty Syracuse, the most opulent and powerful
of all the Grecian cities, which, by its own proper strength alone, was able,
at different times, to contend against all the power of Carthage and of Rome:
which is recorded (what the force of united nations is now incapable of) to
have repulsed fleets of two thousand sail, and armies of two hundred thousand
men; and contained within its own walls, what no city ever did before or since,
fleets and armies that were the terror of the world. This haughty and
magnificent city, reduced even below the conference of the most insignificant
burgh! "Sic transit gloria mundi." -- I have not even been able to procure a
table to write upon, but by way of succedanoum am obliged to lay a form over
the back of two chairs. We have got into the most wretched hovel you can
conceive, and the most dirty; but what is still worst of all, we can find
nothing to eat; and if we had not brought some cold fowls along with us, we
might have starved.

The heat has been considerably greater here than at Catania. The thermometer
is just now at 78. There is an old remark made on the climate of this place by
some of the ancients; which is still said to hold good* That at no season, the
sun has ever been invisible during a whole day at Syracuse. I find it mentioned
by several Sicilian authors, but shall not vouch for the truth of it. Adieu. My
next will probably be from Malta; for we shall sail tomorrow if it be possible
to procure a vessel.

Ever yours.

LETTER XIII.
Cape Pass^ro, June 3.
AS we found the mighty city of Syracuse so reduced, that it could not afford
beds and lodging to three weary travelers, we agreed to abridge our stay in
it; and accordingly hired a Maltese Sparonaro to carry us to that island: This
is a ^^all six-oar'd boat, made entirely for speed, to avoid the African
pirates, and other Barbaresque vessels, with which these seas are infested, but
so flat and so narrow, that they are not able to bear any sea, and of
consequence keep always as near the coast as possible.

On the 2d of June, by daybreak, we left the Marmoreo, or great port of
Syracuse, and although the wind was exactly contrary and pretty strong, by the
force of their oars, which they manage with great dexterity, we got on at the
rate of four miles an hour. They do not pull their oars as we do, but push them
like the Venetian Gondoliers; always fronting the prow of the boat, and seldom
or never sit down while they row; allowing the whole weight of their bodies to
be exerted every stroke of the ear. This gives a prodigious momentum, and is
certainty much more forcible than a simple exertion of the muscles of the arm.

About ten o'clock the wind became favorable, when we went indeed at an immense
rate. At twelve it blew a hurricane, and with some difficulty we got under
shore, but the wind was so exceedingly violent, that even there we had like to
have been overset, and we were obliged to run aground to save us from that
disaster. Here we were a good deal annoyed by the sand carried about by the
wind; however, the hurricane was soon over, and we again put to sea with a
favorable gale, which in a few hours carried us to Capo Passero.

In this little storm we were a good deal amused with the behavior of our
Sicilian servant, who at land is a fellow of undaunted courage, of which we
have had many proofs; but here (I don't know why) it entirely forsook him,
although there was in fact no real danger, for we never were more than 100
yards from the shore. He gave himself up to despair, and called upon all his
saints for protection: And never again recovered his confidence all the rest of
this little voyage; perpetually wishing himself back at Naples, and swearing
that no earthy temptation should ever induce him to go to sea again. The same
fellow, but a few days ago, mounted a most vicious house, and without the least
fear or concern galloped along the side of a precipice, where every moment we
expected to see him dashed to pieces; so singular and various are the different
modes of fear and of courage.

Capo Passero, anciently called Pachinus, is the remotest and most southerly
point of Sicily. It is not a peninsula, as represented in all the maps, but a
wretched barren island, of about a mile round; with a fort and a small garrison
to protect the neighboring country, often very troublesome on this part of the
coast. This little island and fort lie about a mile and a half distant from the
small creek of which we have taken possession, and are separated from the rest
of Sicily by a strait of about half a mile board.

Our pilot told us that we must not think of Malta, which is almost 100 miles
off, 'till there were more settled appearances of good weather.

As there is no habitation here of any kind, we searched about, 'till at last
we found a small cavern, where we made a very comfortable dinner. We then
sallied forth to examine the face of the country, as well as to try if we could
shoot something for our supper. We found that we had now got into a very
different world from any thing we had yet seen. The country here is exceedingly
barren, and to a considerable distance produces neither corn nor wine: But the
fields are adorned with an infinite variety of flowers and of flowering shrubs,
and the rocks are every where entirely covered with capers, which are just now
fit for gathering. If we had vinegar, we could soon have pickled hogsheads of
them.

We found here, in the greatest perfection, that beautiful shrub called the
Palmeta, resembling a small palm tree, with an elegant fine flower: But to our
great mortification, the seed is not yet ripe. We likewise found great
quantities of a blue everlasting flower, which I don't remember to have seen in
Miller, or any of our botanical books. The stem rises about a foot high, and is
crowned with a large cluster of small blue flowers, the leaves of which are of
a dry substance like the Elychrysum, or globe Amaranthus. Some of these are of
a purple color, but, most of them blue. I have gathered a pretty large
quantity for the speculation of the botanists on our return.

We found a good swimming-place, which is always one of the first things we
look out for, as this exercise constitutes one of the principal pleasures of
our expedition.

As soon as it was dark, we got on board our little boat, and rowed about a
hundred yards out to sea, where we cast anchor; our pilot assuring us that this
was absolutely necessary, as the people in this part of the country are little
better than savages; and, were we to stay at land, might very possibly come
down during the night, and rob and murder us.

He likewise told us, that the Turks had made frequent invasions upon this
point of the island which, of all others, lay most exposed to their
depredations; that lately three of their chebecks ran into a small harbor a
few miles from this, and carried off six merchantships; and that very often,
some of their light vessels were seen hovering off the coast; that the only way
to be in perfect security from these two enemies by sea and land, was to choose
a place on the coast so deep, that the banditti by land could not wade in to
us; and at the same time so shallow, as to be equally inaccessible to the
banditti by sea.

When we found ourselves thus in security on both hands, we wrapped ourselves up
in our cloaks and fell asleep: However, we had but a very uncomfortable night;
the wind rose, and the motion of our little bark was exceedingly disagreeable,
and made us heartily sick. As soon as day began to appear, we made them pull in
to shore; when we were immediately cured of our sickness; and as the weather
continues still unfavourable, we have fallen upon a variety of amusements to
pass the time.

We have been thrice in the water, which is warm and pleasant; and in the
intervals, I have written you this letter on the top of a large basket, in
which we carry our sea-store. We have likewise gathered shells, pieces of
coral, of sp^nge, and several beautiful kinds of sea-weed. The rocks here are
all of sand and gravel run together, and become as hard as granite. There are
many shells and other marine substances mixed in their composition, which
renders them objects of curiosity in the eye of a naturalist.

This morning we made a kind of ^ent of a sail, drawn over the point of a rock,
and fixed with an oar, by way of pole. Here we breakfasted most luxuriously on
excellent tea and honey of Hybla.

I was interrupted in this part of my letter, by an officer from the fort of
Capo Passero. He tells us, that we may give over all thoughts of getting
farther for these six days. What do you think is his reason? I own I was in
some pain 'till he mentioned it. This wind set in exactly as the moon entered
her second quarter, and it will certainly continue 'till she is full. There is
a rascal for you! if he be telling truth, I shall certainly study astrology. He
likewise told us, that two galliots had been seen off the coast; and desired us
to be upon our guard; but I own, the moon, together with other circumstances,
has considerably weakened his evidence with me.

We have learned from his conversation, that the fort of Capo Passero is made
use of as a place of exile for the delinquents in the army; of which number I
have not the least doubt that he is one. He told us there were two near
relations of the viceroy, that had been lately sent there for misdemeanors;
that for his part, he belonged to a very agreeable garrison; but as he loved
retirement, he chose to accompany them. However, his countenance told a very
different story; and said, in strong language, that he was a tres mauvais
sujet. Besides, he is a stupid fellow, and has tired me. I could learn nothing
from him.

It must be owned, this is an excellent place of exile for a young rake, who
wants to show away in the beau monde. It is not within many miles of any town
or village; so that the gentlemen may enjoy retirement in its utmost perfection.

We were surprised to find on this coast quantities of the true pumice-stone,
which at first we supposed to have been brought by the sea from Aetna, 'till we
likewise discovered many large pieces of lava, which makes us imagine there
must have been some eruption of fire in this part of the island; yet I see no
conical mountain, or any other indication of it.

If our officer's prognostications prove true, and we are detained here any
longer, I shall examine the country to a much greater distance. The wind
continues directly contrary; the sea is very high in the canal of Malta, and
our Sicilian servant is in a sad trepidation. But I see Glover and Fullarton
coming for their dinner; so I shall be obliged to give up the basket. -- This
sea air gives one a monstrous appetite; and, it is with grief I mention it, we
are already brought to short allowance: -- Only one cold fowl among three of
us; all three pretty sharp set, I assure you. -- Those infamous rascals to lose
our turtle! They have spied a fishing-boat, and are haling her as loud as they
can roar, but, alas! she is too far off to hear them. -- They have just fired a
gun to bring her to, and happily she obeys the signal, so there are still
hopes; otherwise we shall soon be reduced to bread and water. Our tea and sugar
too are just upon a close, which is the cruelest article of all; but we have
plenty of good bread and Hybla honey; so we are in no danger of starving.

We have likewise made an admirable and a very comfortable disposition for our
night's lodging. The Sparonaro is so very narrow, that it is impossible for us
all to lie in it; besides, we are eat up with vermin, and have nothing but the
hard boards to lie on: All these considerations, added to the cursed swinging
of the boat, and the horrid sickness it occasions, have determined us rather to
trust ourselves to the mercy of the banditti, than to lie another night at sea:
Besides, we have made the happiest discovery in the world; a great quantity of
fine, soft, dry sea-weed, lying under the shelter of a rock, and seems intended
by Providence for our bed: Over this we are going to stretch a sail, and expect
to sleep most luxuriously; but to prevent all danger from a surprise, we have
agreed to stand sentry by turns, with Fullarton's double-barrelled gun, well
primed and loaded for the reception of the enemy; at the first discharge of
which, and not before, the whole guard is to turn out, with all the remaining
part of our artillery and small arms; and as our situation is a very
advantageous one, I think we shall be able to make a stout defense.

As we are six in number, three masters and three servants, the duty, you see,
will be but trifling; and five of us will always sleep in security. Our guard,
to be sure, might have been stronger: But our Sparonaro-men have absolutely
refused to be of the party; having much more confidence in their own element;
however, they have promised, in case of an attack, immediately to come to our
assistance. I think the disposition is far from being bad one, and we are not a
little vain of our generalship.

The fishing-boat is now arrived, and they have bought some excellent little
fishes, which are already on the fire. Adieu. These fellows are roaring for
their cold fowl, and I can command the basket no longer.

Ever yours.

LETTER XIV.
Malta, June 4th.
IN spite of appearance, and our officer's wise prognostications, the wind
changed in the afternoon, and we got under sail by six o'clock: We passed the
Straits, and coasted along 'till eight, when landed to cook some macaroni we
had purchased of our sailors, and try if we could shoot something for
sea-store, as we have still a long voyage before us.

We came to the side of a sulphurous lake, the smell of which was so strong,
that we perceived it upwards of a mile distant. We found the water boiling up
with violence in many places, though the heat at the banks of the lake is very
inconsiderable. However, this, added to the pumice and lava we found near Capo
Passero, tends greatly to confirm us in the opinion, that this part of the
island, as well as about Aetna, has, in former ages, been subject to eruptions
of fire.

I think it is more than probable, that this is the celebrated Carmerina, which
Aeneas saw immediately after his passing Pachynus (or Capo Passero) which,
Virgil says, the fates had decreed should never be drained: "Hinc altas cau^es
projectaque saxa Pachyni
"Ridimus; et fatis nunquam concessa moveri
"Adparet Camarina procul."


Virgil had good reason to say so; for the level of the lake or marsh (it being
something betwixt the two) is at least as low as that of the sea, and
consequently never could be drained.

It is surrounded with a variety of fine ever-greens, and flowering shrubs, of
which the palmeta, and the arbutus or strawberry-tree, are the most beautiful.
We saw a great many wild-fowls; but, what surprised me, in so unfrequented a
place, they were so shy, that there was no getting near them: There was one
kind, in particular, that attracted our attention; it was of the size and form
of a gray plover, and flew in the same manner; but had a tail of a great
length, which seemed to be composed only of two small flexible feathers, that
made a very uncommon appearance in the air. After using all our art to shoot
one of them, we were obliged to give up the attempt.

Here we killed a small black snake, which, I think, answers the description I
have seen of the asp. We dissected out its tongue, the end of which appears
sharp like a sting, and I suppose is one, as it darted out with violence
against our sticks, when we presented them to it. Now as all animals, when
attacked, make use of those weapons that nature has armed them with for their
defense, it appeared evident to us (supposing this rule a just one) that this
animal was conscious of a power of hurting in its tongue; and we have been more
fully convinced of it from dissection. The sting appears considerably larger
than that of a be. We found a little bag at the other end of the tongue, and
probably, if we had had a microscope, should have found the tongue perforated.
This snake had no teeth; but very hard gums. I have taken care to preserve the
tongue for your inspection.

As I think it has always been supposed, that serpents hurt only with their
teeth, I thought this might be worthy of your notice. It is true, that the
darting out of the tongue is a trick of the whole serpent tribe; but this
animal seemed to do it with peculiar ferocity, and to strike it with violence
against our sticks. It was this that put us upon the examination.

I don't recollect that this singularity is mentioned in any book of natural
history, but possibly I may be mistaken; nor indeed do I remember either to
have seen or heard of any animal armed in this manner. Unless you will suppose
me to adopt the sentiments of poor Mr. S --, who, ever since his marriage,
alleges that the tongues of many females, are formed after this singular
manner; and remarks one peculiarity, that the sting seldom or never appears
'till after matrimony. -- He is very learned on this subject, and thinks it may
possibly have proceeded from their original connection with the serpent. Let
this be as it may, I sincerely hope that you and I shall never have such good
reason for adopting that opinion.

A little after nine we embarked. The night was delightful; but the wind had
died away about sunset, and we were obliged to ply our oars to get into the
canal of Malta. The coast of Sicily began to recede; and in a short time, we
found ourselves in the ocean. There was a profound silence, except the noise of
the waves breaking on the distant shore, which only served to render it more
solemn. It was a dead calm, and the moon shone bright on the waters: The waves,
from the late storm, were still high; but smooth and even, and followed one
another with a slow and equal pace. The scene had naturally sunk us into
meditation; we had remained near an hour without speaking a word, when our
sailors began their midnight hymn to the Virgin. The music was simple, solemn,
and melancholy, and in perfect harmony with the scene, and with all our
feelings. They beat exact time with their oars, and observed the harmony and
the cadence with the almost precision. We listened with infinite pleasure to
this melancholy concert, and felt the vanity of operas and oratorios. There is
often a solemnity and a pathetic in the modulation of these simple productions,
that causes a much stronger effect, than the composition of the greatest
masters, assisted by all the boasted rules of counter-point.

At last they sung us asleep, and we awoke forty miles distant from Sicily. We
were now on the main ocean, and saw no land but mount Aetna; which is the
perpetual polar-star of these seas. We had a fine breeze, and about two o'clock
we discovered the island of Malta; and in less than three hours more, we
reached the city of Valetta. The approach of the island is very fine, although
the shore is rather low and rocky. It is every where made inaccessible to an
enemy, by an infinite number of fortifications. The rock, in many places, has
been sloped into the form of a glacis, with strong parapets and intrenchments
running behind it.

The entry into the port is very narrow, and is commanded by a strong castle on
either side. We were hailed from each of these, and obliged to give a strict
account of ourselves; and on our arrival at the side of the key, we were
visited by an officer from the health-office, and obliged to give oath with
regard to the circumstances of our voyage. -- He behaved in the civilest
manner, and immediately sent us Mr. Rutter, the English consul, for whom we had
letters of recommendation.

On getting on shore, we found ourselves in a new world indeed. -- The streets
crowded with well-dressed people, who have all the appearance of health and
affluence; whereas at Syracuse, there was scarce a creature to be seen; and
even those few had the appearance of disease and wretchedness. -- Mr. Rutter
immediately conducted us to an inn, which had more the appearance of a palace.
We have had an excellent supper, and good Burgundy; and as this is the king's
birthday, we have almost got tipsy to his health. We are now going into clean,
comfortable beds, in expectation of the sweetest slumbers. Think of the luxury
of this, after being five long days without throwing off our clothes. Good
night. I would not lose a moment of it for the world. People may say what they
please, but there is no enjoyment in living in perpetual ease and affluence,
and the true luxury is only to be attained by undergoing a few hardships. But
this is no time to philosophise. So adieu.

LETTER XV.
Malta, June 5th.
OUR banker, Mr. Pous^^ach, was here before we were up, inviting us to dine
with him at his country house, from whence we are just now returned. He gave us
a noble entertainment, served on plate, with an elegant desert, and a great
variety of wines.

After dinner we went to visit the principal villas of the island; particularly
those of the grand master, and the general of the galleys, which lie con^igious
to each other. These are nothing great or magnificent; but they are admirably
contrived for a hot climate, where, of all things, shade is the most desirable.
The orange groves are indeed very fine, and the fruit they bear is superior to
any thing you have seen either in Spain or Portugal.

The aspect of the country is far from being pleasing: The whole island is a
great rock of very white free stone, and the soil that covers this rock, in
most places, is not more than five or six inches deep; yet, what is singular,
we found their crop in general was exceedingly abundant. They account for it
from the copious dews that fall during the spring and summer months; and
pretend likewise, that there is a moisture in the rock below the soil, that is
of great advantage to the corn and cotton, keeping its roots perpetually moist
and cool; without which singular quality, they say, they could have no crops at
all, the heat of the sun is so exceedingly violent.

Their barley harvest has been over some time ago; and they are just now
finishing that of the wheat. The whole island produces corn only sufficient to
support its inhabitants for five months, or little more; but the crop they most
depend upon is the cotton. They began sowing it about three weeks ago, and it
will be finished in a week more. The time of reaping it is in the month of
October, and beginning of November.

They pretend that the cotton produced from this plant, which is sown and
reaped in four months, is of a much superior quality to that of the
cotton-tree. I compared them, but I cannot say I found it so; this is indeed
the finest, but that of the cotton-tree is by much the strongest texture. The
plant rises to the height of a foot and a half, and is covered with a number of
nuts or pods full of cotton: These, when ripe, they are at great pains to cut
off, every morning before sunrise; for the heat of the sun immediately turns
the cotton yellow; which, indeed, we saw from those pods they save for seed.

They manufacture their cotton into a great variety of stuffs. Their stockings
are exceedingly fine. Some of them, they assured us, had beed sold for ten
sequins a pair. Their coverlids and blankets are esteemed all over Europe. Of
these the principal manufactures are established in the little island of Gozzo,
where the people are said to be more industrious than those of Malta, as they
are more excluded from the world, and have fewer inducements to idleness. Here
the sugar-cane is still cultivated with success though not in any considerable
quantity.

The Malt^se oranges certainly deserve the character they have, of being the
finest in the world. The season continues for upwards of seven months; from
November 'till the middle of June; during which time, those beautiful trees are
always covered with abundance of this delicious fruit. Many of them are of the
red kind, much superior, in my opinion, to the other, which are rather too
luscious. They are produced, I am told, from the common orange-bud, engrafted
on the pomegranate stock. The juice of this fruit is red as blood, and of a
fine flavor. The greatest part of their crop is sent in presents to the
different courts of Europe, and to the relations of the chevaliers. It was not
without a good deal of difficulty that we procured a few chests for our friends
at Naples.

The industry of the Maltese in cultivating their little island is
inconceivable. There is not an inch of ground lost in any part of it; and where
there was not soil enough, they have brought over ships and boats loaded with
it from Sicily, where there is plenty and to spare. The whole island is full of
enclosures of freestone, which gives the country a very uncouth and a very
barren aspect; and, in summer, reflects such a light and heat, that it is
exceedingly disagreeable and offensive to the eyes. The enclosures are very
small and irregular, according to the inclination of the ground. This, they
say, they are obliged to observe, notwithstanding the deformity it occasions;
otherwise the floods, to which they are subject, would soon carry off their
soil.

The island is covered over with country houses and villages, besides seven
cities, for so they term them; but there are only two, the Valetta and the
Citta Vecchia, that by any means deserve that appellation. Every little village
has a noble church, elegantly finished and adorned with statues of marble, rich
tapestry, and a large quantity of silver plate. They are by much the handsomest
country churches I have ever seen. -- But I am interrupted in my writing by the
beginning (I am told) of a very fine show. If it be so, I shall give you some
account of it by and by.

Eleven at night. The show is now finished and has afforded us great
entertainment. It was the departure of a Maltese squadron to assist the French
against the Boy of Tunis, who, it seems, has fallen under the displeasure of
the grand monarque, because he refused to deliver up without ransom, the
Corsican slaves that were taken before the French were in possession of that
island. The squadron consisted of three galleys; the largest with nine hundred
men, each of the others with seven hundred; three galliots, and several
scampavias, so called from their exceeding swiftness. These immense bodies were
all worked by oars, and moved with great regularity. The admiral went first,
and the rest in order, according to their dignity. The sea was crowded with
boats, and the ramparts and fortifications were filled with company. The port
resounded on all sides with the discharge of heavy artillery, which was
answered by the galleys and galliots as they left the harbor. As the echo is
here uncommonly great, it produced a very noble effect.

There were about thirty knights in each galley, making signals all the way to
their mistresses, who were weeping for their departure upon the bastions; for
these gentlemen pay almost as little regard to their vows of chastity, as the
priests and confessors do. After viewing the show from the ramparts, we took a
boat and followed the squadron for some time, and did not return till long
after sunset.

We have been admiring the wonderful strength of this place, both by nature and
art. It is certainly the happiest situation that can be imagined. The city
stands upon a peninsula, betwixt two of the finest ports in the world, which
are defended by almost impregnable fortifications. That on the south-east side
of the city is the largest. It runs about two miles into the heart of the
island, and is so very deep, and surrounded by such high grounds and
fortifications, that they assured us, the largest ships of war might ride here
in the most stormy weather, almost without a cable.

This beautiful basin is divided into five distinct harbors, all equally safe,
and each capable of containing an immense number of shipping. The mouth of the
harbor is scarcely a quarter of a mile broad, and is commanded on each side by
batteries that would tear the strongest ship to pieces before she could enter.
Besides this, it is fronted by a quadruple battery, one above the other, the
largest of which is a fleur d'eau, or on a level with the water. These are
mounted with about 80 of their heaviest artillery; so that this harbor, I
think, may really be considered as impregnable; and indeed the Turks have ever
found it so, and I believe ever will.

The harbor on the north side of the city, although they only use it for
fishing, and as a place of quarantine, would, in any other part of the world,
be considered as inestimable. It is likewise defended by very strong works; and
in the cen^re of the basin there is an island on which they have built a castle
and a lazaret.

The fortifications of Malta are indeed a most stupendous work. All the boasted
catacombs of Rome and Naples are a trifle to the immense excavations that have
been made in this little island. The ditches, of a vast size, are all cut out
of the solid rock. These extend for a great many miles; and raise our
astonishment to think that so small a state has ever been able to make them.

One side of the island is so completely fortified by nature, that there was
nothing left for art. The rock is of a great height, and absolutely
perpendicular from the sea for several miles. It is very singular, that on this
side there are still the vestiges of several ancient roads, with the tracks of
carriages worn deep into the rocks: These roads are now terminated by the
precipice, with the sea beneath; and show to a demonstration, that this island
has in former ages been of a much larger size than it is at present; but the
convulsion that occasioned its diminution is probably much beyond the reach of
any history or tradition. It has often been observed, notwithstanding the very
great distance of mount Aetna, that this island has generally been more or less
affected by its eruptions, and they think it probable, that on some of those
occasions a part of it may have been shaken into the sea.

We have now an opportunity of observing that one half of mount Aetna is
clearly discovered from Malta. They reckon the distance near 200 Italian miles.
And the people here assure us, that in the great eruptions of that mountain,
their whole island is illuminated; and from the reflection in the water, there
appears a great track of fire in the sea all the way from Malta to Sicily. The
thundering of the mountain is likewise distinctly heard. Good night. I am
fatigued with this day's expedition, and shall finish my letter tomorrow.

June 6th. As the city of Valetta is built upon a hill, none of the streets
except the key are level. They are all paved with white freestone, which not
only creates a great dust, but from its color is likewise so offensive to the
eyes, that most of the people here are remarkably weak-sighted. The principal
buildings are the palace of the grand master* the infirmary, the arsenal, the
inns or hotels of the seven Tongues, and the great church of St. John. The
palace is a noble though a plain structure, and the grand master (who studies
convenience more than magnificence) is more comfortably and Commodiously lodged
than any prince in Europe, the king of Sardinia perhaps only excepted. The
great stair is the easiest and the best I ever saw.

St. John's is a magnificent church. The pavement, in particular, is reckoned
the richest in the world. It is entirely composed of sepulchral monuments of
the finest marbles, prophyry, lapis lazuli, and a variety of other valuable
stones, admirably joined together, and at an incredible expense; representing
in a kind of Mosaic, the arms, insignia, etc. of the persons whose names they
are intended to commemorate. In the magnificence of these monuments, the heirs
of the grand masters and commanders have long vied with each other.

We went this day to see the celebration of their church service. It seems to
be more overcharged with parade and ceremony than what I have ever observed
even in any other catholic country. The number of genuflections before the
altar, the kissing of the prior's hand, the holding up of his robes by the
subaltern priests, the ceremony of throwing incense upon all the knights of the
great cross, and neglecting the poorer knights, with many other articles,
appeared to us highly ridiculous; and most essentially different indeed from
that purity and simplicity of worship that constitutes the very essence of true
christianity; and of which the great pattern they pretend to copy, set so very
noble an example.

This day (the 6th of June) is held as a thanksgiving for their deliverance
from a terrible conspiracy that was formed about twenty-one years ago, by the
Turkish slaves; at one stroke to put an end to the whole order of Malta. All
the fountains of the place were to be poisoned; and every slave had taken a
solemn oath to put his master to death.

It was discovered by a Jew, who kept a coffee-house. He understood the Turkish
language, and overheard some discourse that he thought suspicious. He went
immediately and informed the grand master. The suspected persons were instantly
seized and put to the torture, and soon confessed the whole plot. The
executions were shocking. One hundred and twenty-five were put to death by
various torments. Some were burned alive, some were broken on the wheel, and
some were torn to pieces by the four galleys rowing different ways, and each
bringing off its limb. Since that time, the slaves have been much more strictly
watched, and have less liberty than formerly. Adieu. I shall write to you again
before we leave Malta.

Yours, etc.

LETTER XVI.
Malta, June 7th.
THIS day we made an expedition through the island in coaches drawn by one mule
each; the only kind of vehicle the place affords. Our conductors could speak
nothing but Arabic, which is still the language of the common people of Malta;
so that you may believe we did not reap much benefit from their conversation.
We went first to the ancient city of Melita, which is near the center of the
island, and commands a view of the whole; and in clear weather, they pretend,
of part of Barbary, and of Sicily. The city is strongly fortified, and is
governed by an officer called the Ha^om. He received us very politely, and
showed us the old palace, which is not indeed much worth the seeing. The
cathedral is a very fine church; and although of an exceeding large size, is at
present entirely hung with crimson damask richly laced with gold.

The catacombs, not far from this city, are a great work. They are said to
extend for fifteen miles under ground; however, this you are obliged to take on
the credit of your guides, as it would ratner be risking too much to put it to
the trial. Many people, they assure us, have been lost from advancing too far
in them; the prodigious number of branches making it next to impossible to find
the way out again.

From this we went to see the Bosquetta, where the grand master has his
country-palace; by the accounts we had of it at Valetta, we expected to find a
forest stored with deer and every kind of game, as they talked much of the
great hunts that were made every year in these woods. We were not a little
surprised to find only a few scattered trees, and about half a dozen deer: But
as this is the only thing like a wood in the island, it is esteemed a very
great curiosity. The palace is as little worth seeing as the forest; though
indeed the prospect from the top of it is very fine. The furniture is three or
four hundred years old, and in the most Gothic taste that can be imagined: But
indeed the grand master seldom or never resides here.

The great source of water that supplies the city of Valetta, takes its rise
near to this place; and there is an aqueduct composed of some thousand arches,
that conveys it from thence to the city. The whole of this immense work was
finished at the private expense of one of the grand masters.

Not far from the old city there is a small church, dedicated to St. Paul; and
just by the church, a miraculous statue of the saint with a viper on his hand;
supposed to be placed on the very spot on which the house stood where he was
received after his shipwreck on this island, and where he shook the viper off
his hand into the fire without being hurt by it: At which time the Maltese
assure us the saint cursed all the venomous animals of the island, and banished
them for ever; just as St. Patrick treated those of his favorite isle. Whether
this be the cause of it or not, we shall leave to divines to determine, (though
if it had, I think St. Luke would have mentioned it in the acts of the
Apostles) but the fact is certain, that there are no venomous animals in Malta.
They assured us that vipers had been brought from Sicily, and died almost
immediately on their arrival.

Adjoining to the church there is the celebrated grotto in which the saint was
imprisoned. It is looked upon with the utmost reverence and veneration; and if
the stories they tell of it be true, it is well entitled to it all. It is
exceedingly damp, and produces (I believe by a kind of petrifaction from the
water) a whitish kind of stone, which they assure us, when reduced to powder,
is a sovereign remedy in many diseases, and saves the lives of thousands every
year. There is not a house in the island that is not provided with it: And they
tell us there are many boxes of it sent annually not only to Sicily and Italy,
but likewise to the Levant and the East Indies: And (what is considered as a
daily standing miracle) notwithstanding this perpetual consumption, it has
never been exhausted, nor even sensibly diminished; the saint always taking
care to supply them with a fresh quantity the day following.

You may be sure we did not fail to stuff our pockets with this wonderful
stone; I suspected they would have prevented us, as I did not suppose the
saint, would have worked for heretics: However, neither he nor the priests had
any objection, and we gave them a few Paul's A small silver coin.
more for their civility. I tasted some of it, and believe it is a very
harmless thing. It tastes like exceeding bad Magnesia, and I believe has pretty
much the same effects. They give about a tea-spoonful of it to children in the
smallpox and in fevers. It produces a copious sweat about an hour after, and,
they say, never fails to be of service. It is likewise esteemed a certain
remedy against the bite of all venomous animals. There is a very fine statue ot
St. Paul in the middle of this grotto, to which they ascribe great powers.

We were delighted, on our way back to the city, with the beauty of the setting
sun; much superior, I think, to what have ever observed it in Italy. The whole
of the eastern part or the heavens, for half an hour after sunset, was of a
fine deep purple, and made a beautiful appearance: This the Maltese tell us is
generally the case every evening, at this season of the year.

I forgot to say any thing of our presentation to the grand ma^^er, for which I
ask pardon both of you and him. His name is Pinto, and of a Portuguese family.
He has now been at the head of this singular little state for upwards of thirty
years. He received us with great politeness, and was highly pleased to find
that some of us had been in Portugal. He mentioned the intimate commercial
connections that had so long subsisted betwixt our nations, and expressed his
desire of being of service to us, and of rendering our stay in his island as
agreeable as possible. He is a clear-headed, sensible, little old man; which,
at so advanced a period of life, is very uncommon. Although he is considerably
upwards of ninety, he retains all the faculties of his mind in perfection. He
has no minister, but manages every thing himself; and has immediate information
of the most minute occurrences. He walks up and down stairs, and even to
church, without assistance; and has the appearance as if he would still live
for many years. His household attendance and court are all very princely; and as
grand master of Malta, he is more absolute, and possesses more power, than most
sovereign princes. His titles are Serene Highness and Eminence; and as he has
the disposal of all lucrative offices, he makes of his councils what he
pleases; besides, in all the councils that compose the jurisdiction of this
little nation, he himself presides, and has two votes. Since he was chosen
grand master, he has already given away 126 commenderies, some of them worth
upwards of 2000 l. a year; besides priories and other offices of profit. He has
the disposal of twenty-one commenderies and one priory every five years; and as
there are always a number of expectants, he is very much courted.

He is chosen by a committee of twenty-one; which committee is nominated by the
seven nations, three out of each nation. The election must be over within three
days after the death of the former grand master; and during these three days,
there is scarce a soul that sleeps at Malta: All is cabal and intrigue; and
most of the knights are masked, to prevent their particular attachments and
connections from being known: The moment the election is over, every thing
returns again to its former channel.

The land-force of Malta is equal to the number of men in the island fit to
bear arms. They have about 500 regulars belonging to the ships of war; and 150
compose the guard of the prince. The two islands of Malta and Gozzo contain
about 150,000 inhabitants. The men are exceeding robust and hardy. I have seen
them row for terror twelve hours without intermission, and without even
appearing to be fatigued.

Their sea force consists of four galleys, three galliots, four ships of sixty
guns, and a frigate of thirty-six, besides a number of the quick sailing little
vessels called Scampavias (literally, Runaways.) Their ships, galleys, and
fortifications, are not only well supplied with excellent artillery, but they
have likewise invented a kind of ordnance of their own, unknown to all the
world besides. For we found, to our no small amazement, that the rocks were not
only cut into fortifications, but likewise into artillery to defend these
fortifications; being hollowed out in many places into the form of immense
mortars. The charge is said to be about a a barrel of gunpowder, over which
they place a large piece of wood, made exactly to fit the mouth of the chamber.
On this they heap a great quantity of cannon balls, shells, or other deadly
materials; and when an enemy's ship approaches the harbor, they fire the whole
into the air; and they pretend it produces a very great effect, making a shower
for two or three hundred yards round, that would sink any vessel.

Notwithstanding the supposed bigotry of the Maltese, the spirit of toleration
is so strong, that a mosque, has lately been built for their sworn enemies the
Turks. Here the poor slaves are allowed to enjoy their religion in peace. It
happened lately that some idle boys disturbed them during their service; they
were immediately sent to prison, and severely punished. The police indeed is
much better regulated than in the neighboring countries, and assassinations
and robberies are very uncommon; the last of which crimes the grand master
punishes with the utmost severity. But he is said, perhaps in compliance with
the prejudice of his nation, to be much more relax with regard to the first.

Perhaps Malta is the only country in the world where duelling is permitted by
law. -- As their whole establishment is originally founded on the wild and
romantic principles of chivalry, they have ever found it too inconsistent with
those principles to abolish duelling; but they have laid it under such
restrictions as greatly to lessen its danger. These are curious enough. The
duellists are obliged to decide their quarrel in one particular street of the
city; and if they presume to fight any where else, they are liable to the
rigor of the law. But what is not less singular, and much more in their
favor, they are obliged under the most severe penalties to put up their sword,
when ordered so to do, by a woman, a priest, or a knight.

Under these limitations, in the midst of a great city, one would imagine it
almost impossible that a duel could ever end in blood; however, this is not the
case. A cross is always painted on the wall opposite to the spot where a knight
has been killed, in commemoration of his fall. We counted about twenty of these
crosses.

About three months ago, two knights had a dispute at a billiard table. -- One
of them, after giving a great deal of abusive language, added a blow; but to
the astonishment of all Malta (in whose annals there is not a similar instance)
after so great a provocation, he absolutely refused to fight his antagonist.
The challenge was repeated, and he had time to reflect on the consequences, but
still he refused to enter the lists. -- He was condemned to make amend
honorable in the great church of St. John for forty-five days successively;
then to be confined in a dungeon without light for five years, after which he
is to remain a prisoner in the castle for life. The unfortunate young man who
received the blow is likewise in disgrace, as he has not had an opportunity of
wiping it out in the blood of his adversary.

This has been looked upon as a very singular affair, and is still one of the
principal topics of conversation. The first part of the sentence has already
been executed, and the poor wretch is now in his dungeon. Nor is it thought,
that any abatement will be made in what remains.

If the legislature in other countries punished with equal rigor those that do
fight, as it does in this those that do not; I believe we should soon have an
end of dueling: But I should imagine the punishment for righting ought never to
be a capital one, (but rather something ignominious;) and the punishment for
not fighting should always be so, or at least some severe corporal punishment;
for ignominy will have as little effect on the person who is willing to submit
to the appellation of a coward, as the fear of death on one who makes it his
glory to despise it.

The Maltese still talk with horror of a storm that happened here on the 29th
of October, 1757, of which as it was of a very singular nature, I shall
translate you some account from a little book they have given me, written on
that subject.

About three quarters of an hour after midnight, there appeared to the
south-west of the city a great black cloud, which, as it approached, changed
its color, 'till at last it became like a flame of fire mixed with black
smoke. A dreadful noise was heard on its approach, that alarmed the whole city.
It passed over part of the port, and came first upon an English ship, which in
an instant was torn to pieces, and nothing left but the ^ulk; part of the
masts, sails, and cordage were carried along with the cloud to a considerable
distance. The small boats and felloques that f^ll in its way were all broken to
pieces, and sunk. The noise increased and became more frightful. A sentinel,
terrified at its approach, run into his box: Both he and it were lifted up and
carried into the sea, where he perished. It then traversed a considerable part
of the city, and laid in ruins almost every thing that stood in its way.
Several houses were laid level with the ground, and it did not leave one
steeple in its passage. The b^lls of some of them, together with the spi^es,
were carried to a considerable distance. The roofs of the churches were
demolished and beat down, which, if it had happened in the daytime, must have
had dreadful consequences, as all the world would immediately have run to the
churches.

It went off at the north-east point of the city; and demolishing the
light-house, is said to have mounted up into the air with a frightful noise;
and passed over the sea to Sicily, where it tore up some trees, and did other
damage, but nothing considerable; as its fury had been mostly spent upon Malta,
The number of killed and wounded amounted to near 200; and the loss of
shipping, houses, and churches, was very considerable.

Several treatises have been written to account for this singular hurricane,
but I have found nothing at all satisfactory. The sentiments of the people are
concise and positive. They declare, with one voice that it was a legion of
devils let loose to punish them for their sins. There are a thousand people in
Malta that will take their oath they saw them within the cloud, all as black as
pitch, and breathing out fire and brimstone. They add, that if there had not
been a few godly persons amongst them, their whole city would certainly have
been involved in one universal destruction.

The horse-races of Malta are of a very uncommon kind. They are performed
without either saddle, bridle, whip, or spur; and yet the horses are said to
run full speed, and to afford a great deal of diversion. They are accustomed to
the ground for some weeks before; and although it is entirely over rock and
pavement, there are very seldom any accidents. They have races of asses and
mules performed in the same manner, four times every year. The rider is only
furnished with a machine like a shoe-maker's awl, to prick on his courser if he
is lazy.

As Malta is an epitome of all Europe, and an assemblage of the younger
brothers, who are commonly the best, of its first families, it is probably one
of the best Academies for politeness in this part of the globe; besides, where
every one is entitled by law as well as custom, to demand satisfaction for the
least breach of it, people are under a necessity of being very exact and
circumspect, both with regard to their words and actions.

All the knights and commanders have much the appearance of gentlemen, and men
of the world. We met with no character in extreme. The ridicules and prejudices
of every particular nation, are by degrees softened and wore off, by the
familiar intercourse and collision with each other. It is curious to observe
the effect it produces upon the various people that compose this little medley.
The French skip, the German strut, and the Spanish stalk, are all mingled
together in such small proportions, that none of them are striking; yet every
one of these nations still retain something of their original characteristic:
It is only the exuberance of it that is wore off; and it is still easy to
distinguish the inhabitants of the south and north side of the Pyrenees, as
well as those of the east and west side of the Rhine; for though the Parisian
has, in a great measure, lost his assuming air, the Spaniard his taciturnity
and solemnity, the German his formality and his pride; yet still you see the
German, the Frenchman, and the Spaniard: It is only the caricature, that
formerly made them ridiculous, that has disappeared.

This institution, which is a strange compound of the military and
ecclesiastic, has now subsisted for near seven hundred years; and though, I
believe, one of the firstborn, has long survived every other child of
chivalry. It possesses great riches in most of the Catholic countries of
Europe; and did so in England too, before the time of Henry VIII. but that
capricious tyrant did not choose that any institution, however ancient or
respected, should remain in his dominions, that had any doubt of his supremacy
and infallibility; he therefore seized on all their possessions, at the same
time that he enriched himself by the plund^^ of the church. It was in vain for
them to plead that they were rather a military than an ecclesiastic ord^^^, and
by their valor had been of great service to Europe, in their wars against the
infidels: It was not agreeable to his system ever to hear a reason for any
thing; and no person could possibly be right, that was capable of supposing
that the king could be wrong.

Malta, as well as Sicily, was long under the tyranny of the Saracens; from
which they were both delivered about the middle of the eleventh century, by the
valor of the Normans: After which time, the fate of Malta commonly depended on
that of Sicily, 'till the emperor Charles V. about the year 1530, gave it,
together with the island of Gozzo, to the knights of St. John of Jerusalem, who
at that time had lost the island of Rhodes. In testimony of this concession,
the grand master is still obliged, every year, to send a falcon to the king of
Sicily, or his viceroy; and on every new succession, to swear allegiance, and
to receive, from the hands of the Sicilian monarch, the investiture of these
two islands.

Ever since our arrival here, the weather has been perfectly clear and serene,
without a cloud in the sky; and for some time after sunset, the heavens
exhibit a most beautiful appearance, which I don't recollect to have observed
any where else. The eastern part of the hemisphere appears of a rich deep
purple, and the western is the true yellow glow of Claud Lorrain, that you used
to admire so much. The weather, however, is not intolerably hot; thermometer
stands commonly betwixt 75 and 76. Adieu. We are now preparing for a long
voyage, and it is not easy to say from whence I shall write you next.

Ever yours.

END OF THE FIRST VOLUME.
A TOUR THROUGH SICILY AND MALTA.
Vol. II.
LETTER XVII.
Agrigentum, June 11th. Dear Beckford,
WE left the port of Malta in a sparonaro which we hired to convey us to this
city.

We coasted along the island, and went to take a view of the north-port, its
fortifications and lazaretto. All these are very great, and more like the works
of a mighty and powerful people, than of so small a state. The mortars cut out
of the rock are a tremendous invention. There are about fifty of them, near the
different creeks and landing places round the island. They are directed at the
most probable spots where boats would attempt a landing. The mouths of some of
these mortars are about six feet wide, and they are said to throw a hundred
cantars of cannon-ball or stones. A cantar is, I think, about a hundred pound
weight; so that if they do take place, they must make a dreadful havoc amongst
a debarkation of boats.

The distance of Malta from Gozzo is not above four or five miles, and the
small island of Commino lies betwixt them. The coasts of all the three are bare
and barren, but covered over with towers, redoubts, and fortifications of
various kinds.

As Gozzo is supposed to be the celebrated island of Calypso, you may believe
we expected something very fine; but we were disappointed. It must either be
greatly fallen off since the time she inhabited it, or the archbishop of
Cambray, as well as Homer, must have flattered greatly in their painting. We
looked as we went along the coast, for the grotto of the goddess, but could see
nothing that resembled it. Neither could we observe those verdant banks
eternally covered with flowers; nor those lofty trees for ever in blossom, that
lost their heads in the clouds, and afforded a shade to the sacred baths of her
and her nymphs. We saw, indeed, some nymphs; but as neither Calypso nor
Eucharis seemed to be of the number, we paid little attention to them, and I
was in no apprehension about my Telemachus: Indeed, it would have required an
imagination as strong as Don Quixote's, to have brought about the metamorphosis.

Finding our hopes frustrated, we ordered our sailors to pull out to sea, and
bid adieu to the island of Calypso, concluding, either that our intelligence
was false, or that both the island and its inhabitants were greatly changed. We
soon found ourselves once more at the mercy of the waves: Night came on, and
our rowers began their evening song to the Virgin, and beat time with their
oars. Their offering was acceptable; for we had the most delightful weather. We
rapt ourselves up in our cloaks, and slept most comfortably, having provided
mattresses at Malta. By a little after daybreak, we found we had got without
sight of all the islands, and saw only a part of mount Aetna smoking above the
waters. The wind sprung up fair, and by ten o'clock we had sight of the coast
of Sicily.

On considering the smallness of our boat, and the great breadth of this
passage, we could not help admiring the temerity of these people, who, at all
seasons of the year, venture to Sicily in these diminutive vessels; yet it is
very seldom that any accident happens; they are so perfectly acquainted with
the weather, foretelling, almost to a certainty, every storm, many hours before
it comes on. The sailors look upon this passage as one of the most stormy and
dangerous in the Mediterranean. It is called the canal of Malta, and is much
dreaded by the Levant ships; but indeed, at this season, there is no danger.

We arrived at Sicily a little before sunset, and landed opposite to Ragusa,
and not far from the ruins of the little Hybla; the third town of that name in
the island, distinguished by the epithets of the Great (near mount Aetna) the
Lesser (near Augusta) and the Little (just by Ragusa.) Here we found a fine
sandy beach, and whilst the servants were employed in dressing supper, we
amused ourselves with bathing and gathering shells, of which there is a
considerable variety. We were in expectation of finding the nautilus, for which
this island is famous; but in this we did not succeed. However, we picked up
some handsome shells, though not equal to those that are brought from the
Indies.

After supper, we again launched our bark, and went to sea. The wind was
favorable as we could wish. We had our nightly serenade as usual, and the next
day, by twelve o'clock, we reached the celebrated port of Agrigentum.

The captain of the port gave us a polite reception, and insisted on
accompanying us to the city, which stands near the top of a mountain, four
miles distant from the harbor, and about eleven hundred feet above the level
of the sea. The road on each side is bordered by a row of exceeding large
American aloes; upwards of one third of them being at present in full blow, and
making the most beautiful appearance that can be imagined. The flower-stems of
this noble plant are in general betwixt twenty and thirty feet high, (some of
them more) and are covered with flowers from top to bottom; which taper
regularly, and form a beautiful kind of pyramid, the base or pedestal of which
is the fine spreading leaves of the plant. As this is esteemed in northern
countries, one of the greatest curiosities of the vegetable tribe, we were
happy at seeing it in so great perfection; much greater, I think, than I had
ever seen it before.

With us, I think, it is vulgarly reckoned, (though I believe falsely) that
they only flower once in a hundred years. Here I was informed, that, at the
latest, they always blow the sixth year; but for the most part the fifth. As
the whole substance of the plant is carried into the stem and the flowers, the
leaves begin to decay as soon as the blow is completed, and a numerous
offspring of young plants are produced round the root of the old one; these are
slipped off, and formed into new plantations, either for hedges or for avenues
to their country-houses.

The city of Agrigentum, now called Girgenti, is irregular and ugly; though
from a few miles distance at sea, it makes a noble appearance, little inferior
to that of Genoa. -- As it lies on the slope of the mountain, the houses do not
hide one another; but every part of the city is seen.

On our arrival, we found a great falling off indeed; the houses are mean, the
streets dirty, crooked, and narrow. It still contains near twenty thousand
people; a sad reduction from its ancient grandeur, when it was said to consist
of no less than eight hundred thousand, being the next city to Syracuse for
numbers.

The Canonico Spoto, from Mr. Hamilton's letter, and from our former
acquaintance with him at Naples, gave us a kind, and a hospitable reception. He
insisted on our being his guests; and we are now in his house, comfortably
lodged, and elegantly entertained, which, after our crowded little apartment in
the sparonaro, is by no means a disagreeable change. Farewell. I shall write to
you again soon.

Ever yours.

LETTER XVIII.
Agrigentum, June 12th.
WE are just now returned from examining the antiquities of Agrigentum, the
most considerable, perhaps, of any in Sicily.

The ruins of the ancient city lie about a short mile from the modern one.
These, like the ruins of Syracuse, are mostly converted into cornfieldsd,
vineyards, and orchards; but the remains of the temples here, are much more
conspicuous than those of Syracuse. Four of these have stood pretty much in a
right line, near the south wall of the city. The first they call the temple of
Venus; almost one half of which still remains. The second is that of Concord:
It may be considered as entire, not one column having as yet fallen. It is
precisely of the same dimensions and same architecture as that of Venus, which
had probably served as the model for it. By the following inscription, found on
a large piece of marble, it appears to have been built at the expense of the
Lilibitani; probably after having been defeated by the people of Agrigentum.

CONCORDIAE AGRIGENTINORUM SACRUM, RESPUBLICA LILIBITANORUM, DEDICANTIBUS M.
ATTERIO CANDIDO PROCOS. ET L. CORNELIO MAR. CELLO. Q. P. R. P. R.

These temples are supported by thirteen large fluted Doric columns on each
side; and six at each end. All their bases, capitals, entablatures, etc. still
remain entire; and as the architecture is perfectly simple, without any thing
affected or studied, the whole strikes the eye at once, and pleases very much.
The columns are, indeed, shorter than the common Doric proportions; and they
certainly are not so elegant as some of the ancient temples near Rome, and in
other places in Italy.

The third temple is that of Hercules, altogether in ruins; but appears to have
been of a much greater size than the former two. We measured some of the broken
columns, near seven feet in diameter. It was here that the famous statue of
Hercules stood, so much celebrated by Cicero; which the people of Agrigentum
defended with such bravery, against Verres, who attempted to seize it. You will
find the whole story in his pleadings against that infamous praetor.

There was likewise in this temple a famous picture by Zeuxis. Hercules was
represented in his cradle killing the two serpents: Alcmena and Amphitrion
having just entered the apartment, were painted with every mark of terror and
astonishment. Pliny says, the painter looked upon this piece as invaluable; and
therefore could never be prevailed on to put a price upon it, but gave it as a
present to Agrigentum, to be placed in the temple of Hercules. These two great
masterpieces have been lost. We thought of them with regret, whilst we trod on
these venerable ruins.

Near to this lie the ruins of the temple of Jupiter Olympus, supposed by the
Sicilian authors to have been the largest in the heathen world. It is now
called il tempio de' giganti, or the Giants Temple, as the people cannot
conceive that such masses of rock could ever be put together by the hands of
ordinary men. The fragments of columns are indeed enormous, and give us a vast
idea of this fabric. It is said to have stood 'till the year 1100; but it is
now a perfect ruin. Our Cicerones assured us, it was exactly the same
dimensions with the church of St. Peter at Rome: But in this they are
egregiously mistaken. St. Peter's being much greater than any thing that ever
the heathen world produced.

There are the remains of many more temples, and other great works; but these,
I think, are the more conspicuous. They show you that of Vulcan, of Proserpine,
of Castor and Pollux, and a very remarkable one of Juno. This too was enriched
by one of the most famous pictures of antiquity; which is celebrated by many of
the ancient writers. Zeuxis was determined to excel every thing that had gone
before him, and to form a model of human perfection. To this end he prevailed
on all the finest women of Agrigentum, who were even ambitious of the honor,
to appear naked before him. Of these he chose five for his models, and moulding
all the perfections of these beauties into one, he composed the picture of the
goddess. This was ever looked upon as his masterpiece; but was unfortunately
burnt when the Carthagenians took Agrigentum. Many of the citizens retired into
this temple as to a place of safety; but as soon as they found the gates
attacked by the enemy, they agreed to set fire to it, and chose rather to
perish in the flames, than submit to the power of the conquerors. However,
neither the destruction of the temple, nor the loss of their lives, has been so
much regretted by posterity, as the loss of this picture.

The temple of Aesculapius (the ruins of which are still to be seen) was not
less celebrated for a statue of Apollo. It was taken from them by the
Carthagenians, at the same time that the temple of Juno was burnt. It was
carried off by the conquerors, and continued the greatest ornament of Carthage
for many years, and was at last restored by Scipio, at the final destruction of
that city. Some of the Sicilians allege, I believe without any ground, that it
was afterward carried to Rome, and still remains there, the wonder of all
ages; known to the whole world under the name of the Apollo of Belvidere; and
allowed to be the perfection of human art.

I should be very tedious, were I to give you a minute description of every
piece of antiquity. Indeed, little or nothing is to be learned from the
greatest part of them. The ancient walls of the city are mostly cut out of the
rock; the catacombs and sepulchers are all very great: One of these is worthy
of particular notice, because it is mentioned by Polybius, as being opposite to
the temple of Hercules, and to have been struck by lightning even in his time.
It remains almost entire, and answers the description he gives of it: The
inscriptions are so defaced, that we could make nothing of them.

This is the monument of Tero king of Agrigentum, one of the first of the
Sicilian tyrants. The great antiquity of it may be gathered from this, that
Tero is not only mentioned by Diodorus, Polybius, and the later of the ancient
historians; but likewise by Herodotus, and Pindar, who dedicates two of his
Olympic odes to him: So that this monument must be more than two thousand years
old. It is a kind of pyramid, probably one of the most durable forms.

All these mighty ruins of Agrigentum, and the whole mountain on which it
stands, are composed of a concretion of sea shells, run together, and cemented
by a kind of sand or gravel, and now become as hard, and perhaps more durable
than even marble itself. This stone is white before it has been exposed to the
air; but in the temples and other ruins, it is become of a dark brown. I shall
bring home some pieces of it for the inspection of the curious. I found these
shells on the very summit of the mountain, at least fourteen or fifteen hundred
feet above the level of the sea. They are of the commonest kinds, cockles,
muscles, oysters, etc.

"The things we know are neither rich nor rare;
"But wonder how the devil they got there."
POPE. By what means they have been lifted up to this vast height, and so
intimately mixed with the substance of the rock, I leave to you and your
philosophical friend to determine. This old battered globe of ours has probably
suffered many convulsions not recorded in any history. You have heard of the
vast Stratum of bones lately discovered in Istria and Ossero; part of it runs
below rocks of marble, upwards of forty feet in thickness, and they have not
yet been able to ascertain its extent: Something of the same kind has been
found in Dalmatia, in the islands of the Archipelago; and, lately, I am told,
in the rock of Gibraltar. Now, the deluge recorded in Scripture, will hardly
account for all the appearances of this sort to be met with, almost in every
country in the world. But I am interrupted by visitors; which is a lucky
circumstance, both for you and me; for I was just going to be very
philosophical, and consequently very dull. Adieu.

LETTER XIX.
Agrigentum, June 13th.
THE interruption in my last, was a deputation from the bishop, to invite us to
a great dinner tomorrow at the port; so that we shall know whether this place
still deserves the character of luxury, it always held amongst the ancients: We
have great reason to think, from the politeness and attention we have met with,
that it has never lost its ancient hospitality, for which it was likewise so
much celebrated.

Plato, when he visited Sicily, was so much struck with the luxury of
Agrigentum, both in their houses and their tables, that a saying of his is
still recorded: that they built as if they were never to die, and eat as if
they had not an hour to live. It is preserved by Aelian, and is just now before
me.

He tells a story by way of illustration, which shows a much greater conformity
of manners than one could have expected, betwixt the young nobility amongst the
ancients, and our own at this day.

He says, that after a great feast, where there was a number of young people of
the first fashion, they got all so much intoxicated, that from their reeling
and tumbling upon one another, they imagined they were at sea in a storm, and
began to think themselves in the most imminent danger; at last they agreed,
that the only way to save their lives was to lighten the ship and with one
accord began to throw the rich furniture out of the windows, to the great
edification of the mob below; and did not stop 'till they had entirely cleared
the house of it, which, from this exploit, was ever after denominated the
triremes, or the ship. He says it was one of the principal palaces of the city,
and retained this name for ever after. In Dublin, I have been told, there are
more than one triremes; and that this frolic, which they call throwing the
house out of the window, is by no means uncommon.

At the same time that Agrigentum is abused by the ancient authors for its
drunkenness, it is as much celebrated for its hospitality; and I believe, it
will be found, that this virtue, and this vice, have ever had a sort of
sneaking kindness for each other, and have generally gone hand in hand, both in
ancient and in modern times. The Swiss, the Scotch, and the Irish, who are at
present the most drunken people in Europe, are likewise, in all probability,
the most hospitable; whereas, in the very sober countries, Spain, Portugal, and
Italy, hospitality is a virtue very little known, or indeed any other virtue,
except sobriety; which has been produced, probably a good deal from the tyranny
of their government, and their dread of the inquisition; for where every person
is in fear, lest his real sentiments should appear, it would be very dangerous
to unlock his heart; but in countries where there are neither civil nor
ecclesiastical tyrants to lay an embargo on our thoughts, people are under no
apprehension lest they should be known.

However, these are not the only reasons. The moral virtues and vices may
sometimes depend on natural causes. The very elevated situation of this city,
where the air is exceedingly thin and cold, has perhaps been one reason why its
inhabitants are sonder of wine than their neighbors in the valleys.

The same may be said of the three nations I have mentioned; the greatest part
of their countries lying amongst hills and mountains, where the climate renders
strong liquors more necessary; or, at least, less pernicious, than in low
places. It is not surprising, that this practice, probably begun amongst the
mountains, where the air is so keen, has by degrees crept down into the
valleys, and has at last become almost epidemical in those countries.

Fazzello, after railing at Agrigentum for its drunkenness, adds, that there
was no town in the island so celebrated for its hospitality. He says that many
of the nobles had servants placed at the gates of the city, to invite all
strangers to their houses. It is in reference to this probably, that Empedocles
says, that even the gates of the city proclaimed a welcome to every stranger.
From our experience we are well entitled to say, that the people of Agrigentum
still retain this antiquated virtue, so little known in polite countries.
Tomorrow we shall have a better opportunity of judging whether it is still
accompanied by its sister vice.

The accounts that the old authors give of the magnificence of Agrigentum are
amazing; though indeed there are none of them that proclaim it in stronger
terms than the monuments that still remain. Diodorus says, the great vessels
for holding water were commonly of silver, and the litters and carriages for
the most part were of ivory richly adorned. He mentions a pond made at an
immense expense, full of fish and of waterfowl, that in his time was the great
resort of the inhabitants, on their festivals; but he says, that even then (in
the age of Augustus) it was going to ruin, requiring too great an expense to
keep it up. There is not now the smallest vestige of it: But there is still to
be seen a curious spring of water that throws up a kind of oil on its surface,
which is made use of by the poor people in many diseases. This is supposed to
mark out the place of the celebrated pond; which is recorded by Pliny and
Solinus to have abounded with this oil.

Diodorus, speaking of the riches of Agrigentum, mentions one of its citizens
returning victorious from the Olympic games, and entering his city, attended by
three hundred chariots, each drawn by four white horses, richly caparisoned;
and gives many other instances of their vast profusion and luxury.

Those horses, according to that author, were esteemed all over Greece, for
their beauty and swiftness; and their race is celebrated by many of the ancient
writers. "Ardous inde Agragas ostentat maxima long
"Moenia, magnanimum quondam generator equorum,"
says Virgil in the third Aeneid; and Pliny acquaints us, that those which had
been often victorious at the games were not only honored with burial rites,
but had magnificent monuments erected to eternize their memory. This Time us
confirms: He tells us, that he saw at Agrigentum several pyramids built as
sepulchral monuments to celebrated horses; he adds, that when those animals
became old and unfit for service, they were always taken care of, and spent the
remainder of their lives in ease and plenty. I could wish that our countrymen
would imitate the gratitude and humanity of the Sicilians in this article; at
least, the latter part of it. I don't know that our nation can so justly be
taxed with cruelty or ingratitude in any other article as in their treatment of
horses, the animal that of all others is the most entitled to our care. How
piteous a thing it is, on many of your great roads, to see the finest old
hunters, that were once the glory of the chase, condemned, in the decline of
life, to the tyranny of the most cruel oppressors; in whose hands they suffer
the most extreme misery, 'till they at last sink under the task that is
assigned them. I am called away to see some more antiques, but shall finish
this letter to night, as the post goes off for Italy tomorrow morning.

13th; Afternoon. We have seen a great many old walls and vaults that little or
nothing can be made of. They give them names, and pretend to tell you what they
were, but as they bear no resemblance to those things now, it would be no less
idle to trouble you with their nonsense than to believe it. We have indeed seen
one thing that has amply repaid us for the trouble we have taken. It is the
representation of a boar-hunting in alto relievo, on white marble; and is at
least equal, if not superior, to any thing of the kind I have ever met with in
Italy. It consists of four different parts; which form the the history of this
remarkable chase and its consequences.

The first is the preparation for the hunt. There are twelve hunters, with each
his lance, and a short hanger under his left arm of a very singular form. The
dogs resemble those we call lurchers. The horses are done with great fire and
spirit, and are perhaps a better proof of the excellence of the race, than even
the testimony of their authors; for the artist that formed these must certainly
have been accustomed to see very fine horses.

The second piece represents the chase. The third, the death of the king, by a
fall from his horse. And the fourth, the despair of the queen and her
attendants, on receiving the news. She is represented as falling down in a
swoon, and supported by her women, who are all in tears.

It is executed in the most masterly style, and is indeed one of the finest
remains of antiquity. It is preserved in the great church, which is noted
through all Sicily for a remarkable echo; something in the manner of our
whispering gallery at St. Paul's though more difficult to be accounted for.

If one person stands at the west gate, and another places himself on the
cornice, at the most distant point of the church, exactly behind the great
altar, they can hold a conversation in very low whispers.

For many years this singularity was little known; and several of the
confessing chairs being placed near the great altar, the wags, who were in the
secret, used to take their station at the door of the cathedral; and by this
means heard distinctly every word that passed betwixt the confessor and his
penitent; of which, you may believe, they did not fail to make their own use
when occasion offered. The most secret intrigues were discovered; and every
woman in Agrigentum changed either her gallant, or her confessor. Yet still it
was the same. At last, however, the cause was found out; the chairs were
removed, and other precautions were taken, to prevent the discovery of these
sacred mysteries, and a mutual amnesty passed amongst all the offended parties.

Agrigentum, like Syracuse, was long subject to the yoke of tyrants. Fazzello
gives some account of their cruelty, but I have no intention of repeating it:
One story, however, pleased me; it is a well known one, but as it is short, you
shall have it.

Perillo, a goldsmith, by way of paying court to Phalaris the tyrant, made him
a present of a brazen bull, of admirable workmanship; hollow within, and so
contrived that the voice of a person shut up in it, sounded exactly like the
bellowing of a real bull. The artist pointed out to the tyrant what an
admirable effect this must produce, were he only to shut up a few criminals in
it, and make a fire under them.

Phalaris, struck with so horrid an idea, and perhaps curious to try the
experiment, told the goldsmith that he himself was the only person worthy of
animating his bull: that he must have studied the note that made it roar to the
greatest advantage, and that it would be unjust to deprive him of any part of
the honor of his invention. Upon which he ordered the goldsmith to be shut up,
and made a great fire around the bull; which immediately began to roar, to the
admiration and delight of all Agrigentum. Cicero says this bull was carried to
Carthage at the taking of Agrigentum; and was restored again by Scipio, after
the destruction of that city.

Fazzello adds another story, which is still more to the honor of Phalaris.
Two friends, Melanippus and Cariton, had conspired his death. Cariton, in hopes
of saving his friend from the danger of the enterprise, determined to execute
it alone. However* in his attempt to poignard the tyrant, he was seized by the
guards, and immediately put to the torture, to make him confess his accomplice;
this he bore with the utmost fortitude, refusing to make the discovery; 'till
Melanippus, informed of the situation of his friend, ran to the tyrant,
assuring him that he alone was the guilty person; that it was entirely by his
instigation that Cariton had acted; and begged that he might be put on the rack
in the place of his friend. Phalaris, struck with such heroism, pardoned them
both.

Notwithstanding this generous action, he was in many respects a barbarous
tyrant. Fezzello gives the following account of his death, with which I shall
conclude this letter, for I am monstrously tired, and I dare say, so are you.
Zeno, the philosopher (...) Agrigentum, and being admitted into the presence of
the tyrant, advised him, for his own comfort, as well as that of his subject to
resign his power, and to lead a private life. Phalaris did not relish these
philosophical sentiments; and suspecting Zeno to be in a conspiracy with some
of his subjects, ordered him to be put to the torture in presence of the
citizens of Agrigentum.

Zeno immediately began to reproach them with cowardice and pusillanimity in
submitting tamely to the yoke of so worthless a tyrant; and in a short time
raised such a flame that they defeated the guards, and stoned Phalaris to
death. I dare say you are glad they did it so quickly. Well, I shall not write
such long letters for the future; for I assure you it is at least as
troublesome to the writer as the reader. Adieu. We shall sail tomorrow or next
morning for Trapani, from whence you may expect to hear from me. We are now
going out to examine more antique walls, but I shall not trouble you with them.

Farewell.
LETTER XX.
June 16th.
WHEN I have nothing else to do, I generally take up the pen. We are now on the
top of a high mountain, about half way betwixt Agrigentum and Palermo. Our sea
expedition by Trapani has failed, and we are determined to put no more
confidence in that element, happy beyond measure to find ourselves at a
distance from it, though in the most wretched of villages. We have traveled
all night on mules; and arrived here about ten o'clock, overcome with sleep and
fatigue. We have just had an excellent dish of tea, which never fails to cure
me of both; and I am now as fresh as when we set out. It has not had the same
effect on my companions: they have thrown themselves down on a vile straw-bed
in the corner of the hovel; and in spite of a parcel of starved chickens, that
are fluttering about and picking the straws all round them, they are already
fast asleep.

I shall seize that time to recapitulate what has happened since my last.

The day after I wrote to you, we made some little excursions round Agrigentum.
The country is delightful, producing corn, wine, and oil, in the greatest
abundance: The fields are, at the same time, covered with a variety of the
finest fruits; oranges, lemons pomegranates, almonds, pistachio-nuts, etc.
These afforded us almost as agreeable an entertainment as the consideration of
the ruins from whence they spring.

We dined with the bishop, according to agreement, and rose from table,
convinced that the ancient Agrigentini could not possibly understand the true
luxury of eating, better than their descendants, to whom they have transmitted
a very competent portion both of their social virtues and vices. I beg their
pardon for calling them vices, I wish I had a softer name for it; it looks like
ingratitude for their hospitality, for which we owe them so much.

We were just thirty at table, but, upon my word, I do not think we had less
than an hundred dishes of meat. These were dressed with the richest and most
delicate sauces; and convinced us that the old Roman proverb of "Siculus coquus
et Sicula mensa," was not more applicable in their time, than it is at present.
Nothing was wanting that could be invented to stimulate and to flatter the
palate; and to create a false appetite as well as to satisfy it. Some of the
very dishes so much relished by the Roman epicures made a part of the feast;
particularly the morene, which is so often mentioned by their authors: It is a
species of eel, found only in this part of the Mediterranean, and sent from
hence to several of the courts of Europe. It is not so fat and luscious as
other eels, so that you can eat a good deal more of it: Its flesh is as white
as snow, and is indeed a very great delicacy. But a modern refinement in luxury
has, I think, still produced a greater: By a particular kind of management they
make the livers of their fowls grow to a large size, and at the same time
acquire a high and rich flavor. It is indeed a most incomparable dish; but the
means of procuring it is so cruel, that I will not even trust it with you.
Perhaps, without any bad intention, you might mention it to some of your
friends, they to others, 'till at last it might come into the hands of those
that would be glad to try the experiment; and the whole race of poultry might
ever have reason to curse me: let it suffice to say, that it occasions a
painful and lingering death to the poor animal: that I know is enough to make
you wish never to taste of it, whatever effect it may have upon others.

The Sicilians eat of every thing, and attempted to make us do the same. The
company was remarkably merry, and did by no means belie their ancient
character, for most of them were more than half seas over, long before we rose
from table; and I was somewhat apprehensive of a second edition of the Triremes
scene, as they were beginning to reel exceedingly. By the bye, I do not doubt
but that phrase of half seas over, may have taken its origin from some such
story. They begged us to make a bowl of punch, a liquor they had often heard
of, but had never seen. The materials were immediately found, and we succeeded
so well, that they preferred it to all the wines on the table, of which they
had a great variety. We were obliged to replenish the bowl so often, that I
really expected to see most of them under the table. They called it Pontio, and
spoke loudly in its praise; declaring that Pontio (alluding to Pontius Pilate)
was a much better fellow than they had ever taken him for. However, after
dinner, one of them, a reverend canon, grew excessively sick, and while he was
throwing up, he turned to me with a rueful countenance, and shaking his head,
he groaned out, "Ah, Signor Capitano, sapeva sempre che Pontio era un grande
traditore." "I always knew that Pontius was a great traitor." Another of them
overhearing him, exclaimed, "Aspettatevi Signor Canonico." -- "Not so fast
(said he) my good Canon." "Niente al pregiudizio di Signor Pontio, vi prego*
Recordate, che Pontio v^ha fatto un canonico; ^ Pontio ha fatto sua eccellenza
uno Vescovo; Non scordatevi may di vostri amici."

Now what do you think of these reverend fathers of the church? Their merit,
you will easily perceive, does not consist in fasting and prayer. Their creed,
they say, they have a good deal modernized, and is much simpler than that of
Athanasius. One of them told me, that if we would but stay with them for some
little time, we should soon be convinced that they were the happiest fellows on
earth. "We have exploded (said he) from our system every thing that is dismal
or melancholy* and are persuaded, that of all the roads in the universe, the
road to heaven must be the pleasantest and least gloomy: If it be not so,
(added he) God have mercy upon us, for I am afraid we shall never get there."
(...) told him I could not flatter him; "That if laughing was really a sin, as
some people taught, they were certainly the greatest of all sinners," " Well
(said he) we shall at least endeavor to be happy here; and that, I am
persuaded, is the best of all preparations for happiness hereafter. Abstinence
(continued ^e) from all innocent and lawful pleasures, we reckon one of the
greatest sins, and guard against it with the utmost care: and I am pretty sure
it is a sin that none of us here will ever be damned for." He concluded by
repeating two lines, which he told me was their favorite maxim: The meaning of
which was exactly those of Mr. Pope, "For God is paid when man receives,
"To enjoy is to obey."


This is not the first time I have met with this libertine spirit amongst the
Roman Catholic clergy. There is so much nonsense and mummery in their worship,
that they are afraid lest strangers should believe they are serious; and
perhaps too often fly to the opposite extreme.

We were, however, much pleased with the bishop; he is greatly and deservedly
respected, yet his presence did no wise diminish, but rather increased, the
jollity of the company. He entered into every joke, joined in the repartee, at
which he is a great proficient, and entirely laid aside his episcopal dignity;
which, however, I am told, he knows very well how to assume when it is
necessary. He placed us next to himself, and behaved indeed, in every respect,
with the greatest ease and politeness. He is of one of the first families of
the island, and brother to the Prince of --. I had his whole pedigree pat, but
now I have lost it; no matter: He is an honest, pleasant, little fellow, and
that is of much more consequence. He is not yet forty; and so high a promotion
in so early a period of life, is reckoned very extraordinary, this being the
richest bishopric in the kingdom. He is a good scholar, and very deeply read,
both in ancient and modern learning; and his genius is in no degree inferior to
his erudition. The similarity of character and circumstances struck me so
strongly, that I could scarce help thinking I had got beside our worthy and
respectable friend, the b -- p of D -- y, which, I assure you, still added
greatly to the pleasure I had in his company. I told the bishop of this; adding
that he was brother to I -- d B -- I: he seemed much pleased, and said, he had
often heard of the family, both when lord B -- was ambassador in Spain, and his
other brother commander in the Mediterranean.

We found in this company a number of Free Masons, who were delighted beyond
measure, when they discovered that we were their brethren. They pressed us to
spend a few more days amongst them, and offered us letters to Palermo, and
every other town we should think of visiting; but the heats are increasing so
violently, that we were afraid of prolonging our expedition, lest we should be
caught by the sirocc winds, supposed to blow from the burning deserts of
Africa, and sometimes attended with dangerous consequences to those that travel
over Sicily.

But I find I have omitted several circumstances of our dinner. I should have
told you, that it was an annual feast given by the nobility of Agrigentum to
the bishop. It was served in an immense granary, half full of wheat, on the sea
shore, chosen on purpose to avoid the heat. The whole was on plate; and what
appeared singular to us, but I believe is a much better method than ours; great
part of the fruit was served up with the second course, the first dish of which
that went round was strawberries. The Sicilians were a good deal surprised to
see us eat them with cream and sugar, yet upon trial they did not at all
dislike the composition.

The desert consisted of a great variety of fruits, and still a greater of
ices; these were so disguised in the shapes of peaches, figs, oranges, nuts,
etc. that a person unaccustomed to ices might very easily have been taken in,
as an honest sea officer was lately at the house of a certain minister of your
acquaintance, not less distinguished for the elegance of his table, than the
exact formality and subordination to be observed at it. After the second course
was removed; and the ices, in the shape of various fruits and sweetmeats,
advanced by way of rear-guard; one of the servants carried the figure of a fine
large peach to the captain, who, unacquainted with deceit of any kind, never
doubted that it was a real one; and cutting it through the middle, in a moment
he had one large half of it in his mouth; at first he only looked grave, and
blew up his cheeks to give it more room; but the violence of the cold soon
getting the better of his patience, he began to tumble it about from side to
side in his mouth, his eyes rushing out of water, 'till at last able to hold no
longer, he spit it out upon his plate, exclaiming with an horrid oath, "A
painted snowball, by G --!" and wiping away his tears with his napkin, he
turned in a rage to the Italian servant that had helped him, with a "d -- n
your maccaroni eyes, you son of a b --, what did you mean by that?" The fellow,
who did not understand a word of it, could not forbear smiling, which still
convinced the captain the more that it was a trick; and he was just going to
throw the rest of the show-ball in his face, but was prevented by one of the
company; when recovering from his passion, and thinking the object unworthy of
it, he only added in a softer tone, "Very well, neighbor, I only wish I had
you on board ship for half an hour, you should have a dozen before you could
say Jack Robinson, for all your painted cheeks."

I ask pardon for this digression, but as it is a good laughable story, I know
you will excuse it. About six o'clock we took a cordial leave of our jolly
friends at Agrigentum; and embarked on board our Sparonaro at the new port. I
should have told you, that this harbor has lately been made at a very great
expense; this city having always been one of the principal ports of the island,
for the exportation of grain. The bishop and his company went into a large
barge, and sailed round the harbor, we saluted them as we went out; they
returned the compliment, and we took a second leave. The evening was fine, and
we coasted along for a good many miles; we passed several points and little
promontories, that were exceedingly beautiful and picturesque, many of them
were covered with noble large aloes in full blow. In one place, I counted
upwards of 200 of those fine majestic plants all in flower; a sight which I
imagined was hardly to be met with in the world. After sunset, alas, fain
would I conceal what happened after sunset! but life you know is chequered
with good and evil, and it would have been great presumption to receive so much
of the one, without expecting a little dash of the other too. Besides, a sea
expedition is nothing without a storm. Our journal would never have been
readable, had it not been for this. -- Well, I assure you, we had it. It was
not indeed so violent as the great one off Louisburgh, or perhaps even that
described by Virgil; the reading of which is said to have made people sea-sick;
but it was rather too much for our little bark. I was going to tell you that
after sunset the sky began to overcast, and in a short time, the whole
atmosphere appeared fiery and threatening. We attempted to get into some creek,
but could find none. The wind grew loud, and we found it was in vain to
proceed: but as the night was dark and hazy, we were dubious about the
possibility of reaching the port of Agrigentum. However, this was all we had
for it, as there were none other within many miles. Accordingly we tacked
about, and plying both oars and sail, with great care not to come amongst the
rocks and breakers, in about two hours we spied the light-house; by which we
directed our course, and got safely into port, betwixt one and two in the
morning: We lay down on our mattress, and slept sound 'till ten when finding
the falsity of our hypothesis, that there could be no bad weather in the
mediterranean at this season, we unanimously agreed to have nothing more to do
with Sparonaros, and sent immediately to engage mules to carry us over the
mountains to Palermo. The storm continued with violence the whole day, and made
us often thank heaven that we had got safely back. It was not 'till five in the
afternoon that we had mules, guides, and guards provided us; when we set off,
pretty much in the same order, and in the same equipage as we had done about
three weeks ago from Messina. Our guards attempted to fill us with the most
dreadful apprehensions of this road, showing us every mile, where such a one
was robbed, such another was murdered; and entertained us with such melancholy
ditties the greatest part of the way. Indeed, if one half of their stories be
true, it is certainly the most dangerous road in the world; but I looked upon
most of them as fictions, invented only to increase their own consequence, and
to procure a little more money. There is, indeed, some foundation for these
stories; as there are numbers of gibbets erected on the road in terrorem; and
every little baron has the power of life and death in his own domain. Our
bishop's brother, whose name I have forgot, seized lately four and twenty of
those desperate banditti, after a stout resistance, where several were killed
on both sides; and notwithstanding that some of them were under the protection
of the nobility, and in their service, they were all hanged. However, this has
by no means rooted them out. Our guard in the suspicious places went with their
pieces cocked, and kept a close look-out to either side of them; but we saw
nothing to alarm us, except the most dreadful roads in the world; in many
places worse than any thing I ever met with among the Alps.

After traveling about twenty miles, we arrived by two in the morning at the
most wretched, I don't know what to call it, there was not any one thing to be
had but a little straw for the mules. However, after a good deal of difficulty,
we at last got fire enough to boil our tea-kettle, and having brought bread
from Agrigentum, we made an excellent meal. Our tea-table was a round stone in
the field, and as the moon shone bright, we had no occasion for any other
luminary. You may believe our stay here was as short as possible; the house was
too dreadfully nasty to enter it, and the stable was full of poor wretches
sleeping on the bare ground. In short, I never saw in any country so miserable
an Inn, for so it is styled. We mounted our cavalry with all expedition, and in
a very short time got into the woods, where we were serenaded by the
nightingales as we went along, who made us a full apology and atonement for the
bad cheer we had met with. In a short time it was day, and then we had
entertainment enough from the varied scenes of the most beautiful, wild and
romantic country in the world. The fertility of many of the plains is truly
astonishing, without enclosures, without manure, and almost without culture. It
is with reason, that this island was styled "Romeni imperii horreum," the
granary of the Roman empire. Were it cultivated, it would still be the great
granary of Europe. Pliny says it yielded a hundred after one; and Diodorus, who
was a native of the island, and wrote on the spot, assures us that it produced
wheat and other grain spontaneously; and Homer advances the same fact in the
Odyssey: The soil untilled, a ready harvest yields,
With wheat and barley wave the golden fields;
Spontaneous wines from weighty clusters pour,
And Jove descends in each prolific shower.
POPE.

Many of the mountains seemed to be formed by subterraneous fire; several of
them retain their conical figure and their craters, but not so exact as those
on mount Aetna, as they are probably much older. I likewise observed many
pieces of lava on the road, and in the beds of the torrents; and a good deal of
the stone called tufa, which is certainly the production of a volcano; so that
I have no doubt, that a great part of this island, as well as the neighboring
ones of Lipari, etc. has been originally formed by subterraneous fire; we
likewise passed some quarries of a kind of talc; and also of a course
alabaster; of this they make a sort of stucco or plaster, resembling that of
Paris; but what I much regretted, we missed seeing the famous ^alt of
Agrigentum; found in the earth, about four or five miles from that city. It has
this remarkable property different from all other salt, that in the fire it
presently melts; but in the water it cracks and splits, but never dissolves. It
is celebrated by Pliny, Aristotle, and others of the ancient, as well as modern
naturalists. Fazzello, whom I have brought along with me to read on the road,
says, he has often experienced this; he adds from the authority of these
ancient authors, that they formerly had mines of this salt, so pure and solid,
that the statuaries and sculptures preferred it to marble, and made various
works of it.

The poor people of the village have found us out, and with looks full of
misery have surrounded our door. Accursed tyranny -- what despicable objects we
become in thy hands! it is not inconceivable, how any government should be able
to render poor and wretched, a country which produces almost spontaneously,
every thing that even luxury can desire? But alas; poverty and wretchedness
have ever attended the Spanish yoke, both on this, and on the other side of the
globe. -- They make it their boast, that the sun never sets on their dominions,
but forget that since they became such, they have left him nothing to see in
his course but deserted fields, barren wildernesses, oppressed peasants and
lazy, lying, ^echerous monks. Such are the fruits of their boasted conquests.
They ought rather to be ashamed that the sun should ever see them at all. The
fight of these poor people has filled me with indignation. This village is
surrounded by the finest country in the world, yet there was neither bread nor
wine to be found in it, and the poor inhabitants appear to be more than half
starved. "'Among Ceres' richest gifts with want oppressed,
"And 'midst the flowing vineyards, die of thirst."


I shall now think of concluding, as I do not recollect that I have much more
to say to you. Besides, I find myself exceeding sleepy. I sincerely wish it may
not be the same case with you, before you have read thus far. We have ordered
our mules to be ready by five o'clock, and shall again travel all night; the
heats are too great to allow of it by day; adieu. These two fellows are still
sound asleep. In a few minutes I shall be so too, for the pen is almost
dropping out of my hand. Farewell.

LETTER XXI.
Palermo, June 19th.
WE are now arrived at the great capital of Sicily, which in our opinion in
beauty and elegance is greatly superior to Naples. It is not, indeed, so large,
but the regularity, the uniformity and neatness of its streets and buildings,
render it much more pleasing; it is full of people, who have mostly an air of
affluence and gaiety. And indeed we seem to have got into a new world. -- But
stop, not so fast: -- I had forgot that you have still 50 miles to travel on a
cursed stubborn mule, over rocks and precipices; for I can see no reason, why
we should bring you at once into all the sweets of Palermo, without bearing at
least some little part in the fatigues of the journey. Come, we shall make them
as short as possible.

We left you, I think, in a little village on the top of a high mountain. We
should indeed use you very ill, were we to leave you there any longer; for I
own it is the very worst country quarter, that ever fell to my lot. However, we
got a good comfortable sleep in it, the only one thing it afforded us; and the
fleas, the bugs, and chickens, did all that lay in their power even to deprive
us of that, but we defied them. Our two leaders came to awake us before five,
apostrophying their entry with a detail of the horrid robberies and murders
that had been committed in the neighborhood; all of them, you may be sure, on
the very road that we were to go.

Our whole squadron was drawn out, and we were ranged in order of battle, by
five o'clock, when we began our march, attended by the whole village, man,
woman, and child. We soon got down amongst the woods, and endeavored to forget
the objects of misery we had left behind us. The beauty and richness of the
country increased in proportion as we advanced. The mountains, although of a
great height (that we have le^t is near 4000 feet, the mercury standing at 26
inches 2 lines) are covered to the very summit with the richest pasture. The
grass in the valleys is already burnt up, so that the flocks are all upon the
mountains. The gradual separation of heat and cold, is very visible in taking a
view of them. The valleys are brown and scorched, and so are the mountains to a
considerable height; they then begin to take a ^^^de of green, which grows
deeper and deeper, and covers the whole upper region; however, on the summit,
the grass and corn are by no means so luxuriant as about the middle. We were
amazed at the richness of the crops, far superior to any thing I had ever seen
either in England or Flanders, where the happy soil is assisted by all the arts
of cultivation; whilst here, the wretched husbandman can hardly afford to give
it a furrow; and gathers in with a heavy heart, the most luxuriant harvest. To
what purpose is it given him? Only to lie a dead weight upon his hand,
sometimes 'till it is entirely lost; exportation being prohibited to all such
as cannot pay exorbitantly for it to the sovereign. What a contrast is there
betwixt this, and the little uncouth country of Switzerland! to be sure, the
dreadful consequences of oppression can never be set in a more striking
opposition to the blessings and charms of liberty. Switzerland, the very
excrescence of Europe, where nature seems to have thrown out all her cold and
stagnating humors; full of lakes, marshes, and woods, and surrounded by
immense rocks, and everlasting mountains of ice, the barren, but sacred,
ramparts of liberty. Switzerland, enjoying every blessing, where every blessing
seems to have been denied; whilst Sicily, covered by the most luxuriant hand of
nature; where Heaven seems to have showered down its richest blessings with the
utmost prodigality; groans under the most abject poverty, and with a pale and
wan visage, starves in the midst of plenty. It is liberty alone that works this
standing miracle. Under her plastic hands the mountains sink, the lakes are
drained; and these rocks, these marshes, these woods, become so many sources of
wealth and of pleasure. But what has temperence to do with wealth?

"Here reigns Content,
"And nature's child Simplicity; long since
"Exiled from polished realms."
"'It Is Industry supplies
"The little Temperance wants; and rosy Health
"Sits smiling at the board."
You will begin to think I am in danger of turning poetical in these classic
fields; I am sure I neither suspected any of the mountains we have passed to be
Parnassus; nor did I believe any one of the nine foolish enough to inhabit
them, except Melpomene perhaps, as she is fo fond of tragical faces: However, I
shall now get you out of them as soon as possible, and bring you once more into
the gay world. I assure you, I have often wished that you could have lent me
your muse, on this expedition; my letters would then have been more worth the
reading; but you must take the will for the deed.

After traveling 'till about midnight, we arrived at another miserable
village, where we slept for some hours on straw, and continued our journey
again by daybreak. We had the pleasure of seeing the rising sun from the top
of a pretty high mountain, and were delighted with the prospect of Strombolo,
and the other Lipari islands, at a great distance from us. On our descent from
this mountain, we found ourselves on the banks of the sea, and took that road,
preferable to an inland one, although several miles nearer. We soon lighted
from our mules, and plunged into the water, which has ever made one of our
greatest pleasures in this expedition: Nobody that has not tried it, can
conceive the delight of this; after the fatigue of such a journey, and passing
three days without undressing. Your friend Fullarton, though only seventeen,
but whose mind and body now equally despise every fatigue, found himself strong
as a lion, and fit to begin such another march. We boiled our tea-kettle under
a fig tree, and eat a breakfast that might have served a company of strolling
players.

The approach to Palermo is fine. The allies are planted with fruit trees, and
large American aloes in full blow. Near the city we passed a place of
execution, where the quarters of a number of robbers were hung up upon hooks,
like so many hams; some of them appeared newly executed, and made a very
unsightly figure. On our arrival, we learned that a priest and three others had
been taken a few days ago, after an obstinate defense, in which several were
killed on both sides; the priest, rather than submit to his conquerors, plunged
his hanger into his breast, and died on the spot: The rest submitted and were
executed.

As there is but one inn in Palermo, we were obliged to agree to their own
terms (five ducats a day.) We are but indifferently lodged; however, it is the
only inn we have yet seen in Sicily, and indeed, may be said to be the only one
in the island. It is kept by a noisy troublesome French-woman, who I find will
plague us; there is no keeping her out of our rooms, and she never comes in
without telling us of such a prince and such a duke, that were so superlatively
happy at being lodged in her house: We can easily learn that they were all
desperately in love with her; and indeed she seems to take it very much amiss,
that we are not inclined to be of the same sentiments. I have already been
obliged to tell her, that we are very retired sort of people, and do not like
company; I find she does not esteem us the better for it; and this morning (as
I passed through the kitchen, without speaking to her) I overheard her exclaim,
Ah mon Dieu! comme ces Anglois sont sauvages! I believe we must take more
notice of her, otherwise we shall certainly have our rent raised; but she is as
fat as a pig, and as ugly as the devil, and lays on a quantity of paint on each
of her swelled cheeks that looks like a great plaster of red Morocco. Her
picture is hanging in the room where I am now writing, as well as that of her
husband, who, by the bye, is a ninny: They are no less vile curiosities than
the originals, He is drawn with his snuff box open in one hand, and a dish of
coffee in the other; and at the same time, fait l'amiable a Madame. I took
notice of this triple occupation, which seemed to imply something particular.
She told me that the thought was hers: That her husband was exceedingly fond of
snuff and of coffee, and wanted by this to show that he was still more occupied
with her than with either of them. I could not help applauding the ingenuity of
the conceit. Madame is painted with an immense bouquet in her breast, and an
orange in her right hand, emblematic of her sweetness and purity; and has the
prettiest little smirk on her face you can imagine. She told me that she
insisted on the painter drawing her avec le souris sur le visage, but as he had
not esprit enough to make her smile naturally, she was obliged to force one,
qui n'etoit pas tout a fait si jolie que le naturel, mais qui vaudroit toujours
mieux que de paroitre sombre; I agreed with her perfectly; and assured her it
became her very much, parceque les dames grasses sont toujours de bonne humeur.
I found, however, that she would willingly have excused me the latter part of
the compliment, which more than lost all that I had gained by the former. Il
est vrai (said she, a good deal piqued) j'ai un peu de l'embonpoint, mais pas
tant grass pourtant. I pretended to excuse myself, from not understanding all
the finesse of the language; and assured her, that de l'embonpoint was the very
phrase I meant to make use of. She accepted the apology, and we are again
reconciled; for, to give the devil his due, they are good-humoured. She made me
a curtsey, and repeated, Oui, Monsieur, pour parler comme il faut, il faut dire
de l'embonpoint On ne dit pas grass. I assured her, bowing to the ground, that
the word should for ever be razed from my vocabulary. She left me with a
gracious smile, and a curtsey much lower than the first; adding, Je scavois
bien que Monsieur etoit un homme comme il faut; at the same time tripping off
on her tip-toes, as light as a feather, to show me how much I had been
mistaken. This woman made me recollect (what I have always observed) how little
the manners of the French are to be changed by their connection with other
nations; allowing none to be in any degree worthy of imitation but their own.
Although she has now been here these twenty years, she is still as perfectly
French, as if she had never been without the gates of Paris; and looks upon
every woman in Palermo with the utmost contempt, because they have never seen
that capital, nor heard the sublime music of its opera. She is likewise
(allowing for the difference of rank) an admirable epitome of all French women,
whose universal passion has ever been the desire of admiration, and of
appearing young; and ever would be, I believe, were they to live to the age of
a thousand. Any person that will take a look at the withered death's he^ds in
their public places, covered over with a thick mask of paint, will be convinced
of this. Now, our old ^^dies, when they get to the wrong side of sixty,
generally take a jump up to the borders of fourscore, and appear no less vain
of their years, than ever they were of their youth. I know some of them, that I
am sure are not less happy, nor less contented, nor (I might almost add) l^^s
admired with their wrinkles, than ever they were with their dimples. I do not
know whether a cheerful old woman, who is willing to appear so, is more
respectable, or more estimable; or a withered witch, who fills up every wrinkle
with varnish, and at fourscore attempts to give herself the bloom of
four-and-twenty, is ridiculous and contemptible: But as dinner is on the table,
I shall leave it to you to determine. Adieu.

LETTER XXII.
Palermo, June 23d.
I SHALL have a great deal to write you about this city; we are every day more
delighted with it, and shall leave it with much regret. We have now delivered
our letters, in consequence of which we are loaded with civilities, and have
got into a very agreeable set of acquaintance. But I shall first attempt to
give you some little idea of the town, and then speak of its inhabitants. It is
by much the most regular I have seen, and is built upon that plan, which I
think all large cities ought to follow. The two great streets intersect each
other in the center of the city, where they form a handsome square, called the
Ottangolo, adorned with elegant uniform buildings. From the center of this
square, you see the whole of these noble streets, and the four great gates of
the city which terminate them; the symmetry and beauty of which produce a fine
effect. The whole of these are to be magnificently illuminated some time next
month, and must certainly be the finest sight in the world. The four gates are
each at the distance of about half a mile, (the diameter of the city being no
more than a mile:) these are elegant pieces of architecture richly adorned;
particularly the Porta Nova and Porta Felice, terminating the great street
called the Corso, that runs south-west and north-east. The lesser streets in
general run parallel to these great ones; so that from every part of the city,
in a few minutes walking, you are sure to arrive at one of the capital streets.
The Porta Felice (by much the handsomest of these gates) opens to the Marino, a
delightful walk which constitutes one of the great pleasures of the nobility of
Palermo. It is bounded on one side by the wall of the city, and on the other by
the sea, from whence, even at this scorching season there is always an
agreeable breeze. In the center of the Marino they have lately erected an
elegant kind of temple, which, during the summer month, is made use of as an
orchestra for music; and as in this season they are obliged to convert the
night into day, the concert does not begin 'till the clock strikes midnight,
which is the signal for the symphony to strike up; at that time the walk is
crowded with carriages and people on foot; and the better to favor pleasure
and intrigue, there is an order, that no person, of whatever quality, shall
presume to carry a light with him. The flambeaux are extinguished at the Porta
Felice, where the servants wait for the return of the carriages; and the
company generally continue an hour or two together in utter darkness, except
when the intruding moon, with her horns and her chastity, comes to disturb
them. The concert finishes about two in the morning, when, for the most part,
every husband goes home to his own wife. This is an admirable institution, and
never produces any scandal: No husband is such a brute as to deny his wife the
Marino; and the ladies are so cautious and circumspect on their side, that the
more to avoid giving offense, they very often put on masks.

Their other amusements consist chiefly in their Conversaziones, of which they
have a variety every night. There is one general one, supported by the
subscription of the nobility, which is open every evening at sunset, and
continues 'till midnight, when the Marino begins. It better deserves the name
of a conversation than any I have seen it Italy; for here the people really
come to converse, whereas in Italy, they only go to play at cards and eat ices.
I have observed, that seldom or never one half of the company is engaged in
play, nor do they either play long or deep. There are a number of apartments
belonging to this conversation, illuminated with wax lights, and kept
exceedingly cool and agreeable; and it is indeed altogether one of the most
sensible and comfortable institutions I have seen: Besides this, there are
generally a number of particular conversations every night, and what will a
good deal surprise you, these are always held in the apartments of the lying-in
ladies; for in this happy, climate, childbearing is divested of all its
terrors, and is only considered as a party (...) pleasure. This circumstance we
were ignorant of 'till the other morning. The duke of Verdura, who does us the
honors of the place, with great attention and politeness, came to tell us, we
had a visit to make that was indispensible. The Princess Paterno (said he) was
brought to bed last night; and it is absolutely incumbent on you to pay your
respects to her this evening. At first I thought he was in joke, but he assured
me he was serious, and that it would be looked upon as a great unpoliteness to
neglect it. Accordingly we went about sunset, and found the princess sitting
up in her bed, in an elegant undress, with a number of her friends around her.
She talked as usual, and seemed to be perfectly well. This conversation is
repeated every night during her conval scence, which generally lasts for about
eleven or twelve days. This custom is universal, and as the ladies here are
very prolific, there are for the most part three or four of these assemblies
going on in the city at the same time; possibly the Marino may not a little
contribute toward them.

The Sicilian ladies marry at thirteen or fourteen, and are sometimes
grandmothers before they are thirty. The Count Stetela presented us a few days
ago to his cousin, the Princess Partana, who he told us had a great number of
children, the eldest of which was a very fine girl of fifteen. We talked to the
princess for half an hour, not in the least doubting all the time that she was
the daughter, 'till at last the young lady came in; and even then, it was not
easy to say which appeared the handsomest or the youngest. This lady has had
twelve children, and is still in her bloom; she assured me that she never
enjoyed more perfect health than when she was in childbed; that during the
time of her pregnancy she was often indisposed, but that immediately on
delivery she was cured of all her complaints, and was capable of enjoying the
company of her friends even more than at any other time. I expressed my
surprise at this very singular happiness of their climate or constitution; but
appeared still more surprised when I told her that we lost many of our finest
women in childbed, and that even the most fortunate and easy deliveries were
attended with violent pain and anguish. She lamented the fate of our ladies,
and thanked Heaven that she was born a Sicilian.

What this singularity is owing to, let the learned determine; but it is surely
one of the capital blessings of these climates, where the curse that was laid
upon mother Eve seems to be entirely taken off: I don't know how the ladies
here have deserved this exemption, as they have at least as much both of Eve
and the serpent as ours have, and still retain their appetite, as strong as
ever, for forbidden fruit. It seems hard, that in our own country, and in
Switzerland, where the women in general are the chastest in Europe, that this
curse should fall the heaviest; it is probably owing to the climate: In cold,
but more particularly in mountainous countries, births are difficult and
dangerous; in warm and low places they are more easy; the air of the first
hardens and contracts the (...), that of the second softens and relaxes them.
In (...) places in Switzerland, and among the Alps, they lose almost one half
of their women in childbed, and those that can afford it, often go down to the
low countries some weeks before they lie in, and find their deliveries much
easier. One may easily conceive what a change it must make upon the whole
frame, to add the pressure of a column of air of two or three thousand feet
more than it is accustomed to: And if muscular motion is performed by the
pressure of the atmosphere, as some have alleged, how much must this add to
the action of every muscle! however, if this hypothesis were true, our strength
should have been diminished one third on the top of Aetna, which did not appear
to be the case; as we had passed through one third of the quantity of air of
the whole atmosphere. I have often thought that physicians pay too little
attention to these considerations; and that in skilful hands they might be
turned to great account, in the cure of many diseases; they only send their
patients to such a degree of latitude, but never think of the degree of
altitude in the atmosphere. Thus, people with the same complaints are sent to
Aix and to Marseilles, although the air in these two places must be essentially
different. Marseilles is on the level of the sea, and Aix (as I myself measured
it) is near 600 feet above it. Now I am persuaded, that in such a country as
Switzerland, or on such a mountain as Aetna, where it is easy at all times to
take off a pressure from the human body of many thousand pounds weight, that an
ingenious physician might make great discoveries; nor indeed would these
discoveries be confined to the changing of the quantity of air that presses on
the body, but would likewise be extended to the changing of the quality of the
air we breathe; which, on the side of Aetna, or any very high mountain, is more
varied than in traveling through fifty degrees of latitude. I beg pardon for
this digression; the only amends I can make, is to put it out of my power to
trouble you with any more, and thus abruptly assure you how much, etc

LETTER XXIII.
Palermo, June 26th.
OUR fondness for Palermo increases every day, and we are beginning to look
forward with regret to the time of our leaving it, which is now fast
approaching. We have made acquaintance with many sensible and agreeable people.
The Sicilians appear frank and sincere; and their politeness does not consist
in show and grimace, like some of the polite nations of the continent. The
viceroy sets the pattern of hospitality, and he is followed by the rest of the
nobles. He is an amiable, agreeable man, and I believe is as much beloved and
esteemed as a viceroy to an absolute monarch can be. He was in England in his
youth, and is still fond of many of our authors, with whom he seems to be
intimately acquainted; he speaks the language tolerably well, and encourages
the learning of it amongst his people. He may be considered with regard to
Naples as what the lord lieutenant of Ireland is with regard to England, with
this trifling difference, that, like his master, he is invested with an
absolute authority; and keeps his parliament (for he has one too) in the most
perfect subjection. The patriots here, although a very numerous body, have never
been able to gain one point, no nor a place, nor even a pension for a needy
friend. Had lord Townshend the power of the marquis Fog^iano, I suppose your
Hibernian squabbles (of which we hear so much, even at this distant corner)
would soon have an end. Notwithstanding this great authority, he is affable and
familiar, and makes his house agreeable to every body. We go very often to his
assemblies, and have dined with him several times; his table is served with
elegance and magnificence, much superior indeed to that of his Sicilian
majesty, who eats off a service of plate, at least 300 years old, very black
and rusty indeed: I heard a gentleman ask one day, whilst we were standing
round the table, if it had not been dug out of Herculaneum. That of the viceroy
is very elegant, and indeed die whole of his entertainments correspond with it;
though we have as yet seen nothing here, to be compared to the luxury of our
feast in the granary at Agrigentum.

The Sicilian cookery is a mixture of the French and Spanish; and the O^io
still preserves its rank and dignity in the center of the table, surrounded by
a numerous train of fricaffees, fricandeaus, ragouts, and pet de loups; like a
grave Spanish Don, amidst a number of little smart marquis. The other nobility
whom we have had occasion to see, are likewise very magnificent in their
entertainments; but most particularly in their deserts and ices, of which there
is a greater variety than I have seen in my other country. They are very
temperate with regard to wine; though, since we have taught them our method of
toasting ladies they are fond of, and of hob and nobbing with their friends,
ringing the two glasses together; this social practice has animated them so
much, that they have been sometimes led to drink a greater quantity than they
are accustomed to; and they often reproach us with having made them drunkards.
In their ordinary living they are very frugal and temperate; and from the
sobriety we have seen here, we are now more persuaded that the elevated
situation of Agrigentum must be one great cause of its great drunkenness.

The Sicilians have always had the character of being very amorous, and surely
not without reason. The whole nation are poets, even the peasants; and a man
stands a poor chance for a mistress, that is not capable of celebrating her
praises. I believe it is generally allowed that the pastoral poetry had its
origin in this island; and Theocritus, after whom they still copy, will ever be
looked upon as the prince of pastoral poets. And indeed in music too, as well
as poetry, the soft amorous pieces are generally styled Sicilians; these they
used to play all night under their mistresses' windows, to express the delicacy
of their passion; but serenading is not now so much in fashion, as it was
during the time of their more intimate connection with Spain, when it was faid
by one of their authors, that no person could pass for a man of gallantry that
had not got a cold; and was sure never to succeed it in making love unless he
made it in a hoarse voice. The ladies are not now so rigid, and will sometimes
condescend to hear a man, even although he should speak in a clear tone.
Neither do they any longer require the prodigious martial seats, that were then
necessary to win them. The attacking of a mad bull, or a wild boar, was
reckoned the handsomest compliment a lover could pay to his mistress; and the
putting these animals to death softened her heart much more than all the
sighing lovesick tales that could be invented. This has been humorously
ridiculed by one of their poets. He says that Cupid's little golden dart was
now changed into a massy spent, which answered a double purpose; for at the
same time that it pierced the tough bull's hide, it likewise pierced the tender
lady's heart. But these Gothic customs are now confined to Spain, and the
gentle Sicilians have reassumed their softness. To tell you the truth,
gallantry is pretty much upon the same footing here as in Italy, the
establishment of C^^cisbees is pretty general, though not quite so universal as
on the continent. However, a breach of the marriage-vow is no longer looked
upon as one of the deadly sins; and the confessor falls upon easy and pleasant
enough methods of making them atone for it. The husbands are content; and like
able generals, make up for the loss of one forttess, by the taking of another.
However, female licentiousness has by no means come to such a height as in
Italy. We have seen a great deal of domestic happiness; husbands and wives that
truly love one another, and whose mutual care and pleasure is the education of
their children. I could name a number: The Duke of Verdu^a, the Prince Partana,
the Count Buscemi, and many others who live in the most sacred union. Such
sights are very rare on the continent. But indeed the style that young people
are brought up in here, seems to lay a much more solid foundation for
matrimonial happiness, than either in France or Italy. The young ladies are not
shut up in convents 'till the day of their marriage, but for the most part live
in the house with their parents, where they receive their education, and are
every day in company with their friends and relations. From what I can observe,
I think they are allowed almost as much liberty as with us. In their great
assemblies, we often see a club of young people (of both sexes) get together in
a corner, and amuse themselves for hours, at cross purposes, or such like
games, without the mothers being under the least anxiety; indeed, we sometimes
join in these little parties, and find them extremely entertaining. In general,
they are quick and lively, and have a number of those jeux d'esprit, which I
think must ever be a proof, in all countries, of the familiar intercourse
betwixt the young people of the two sexes; for all these games are insipid, if
they are not seasoned by someting of that invisible and subtle agency, which
renders every thing more interesting in these mixed societies, than in the
lifeless ones, composed of only one part of the species. Thus, in Italy, Spain,
and Portugal, I have never seen any of these games; in France seldom, but in
Switzerland, (where the greatest liberty and familiarity are enjoyed amongst
the young people) they are numberless. -- But the conversation hour is arrived,
and our carriage is waiting.

Adieu.
LETTER XXIV.
Palermo, June 28th.
THERE are two small countries, one to the east, the other to the west of this
city, where the principal nobility have their country palaces. Both these we
have visited; there are many noble houses in each of them. That to the east is
called La Bagaria, that to the west Il Colle. We are this instant returned from
La Bagaria, and I hasten to give you an account of the ridiculous things we
have seen, though perhaps you will not thank me for it.

The palace of the Prince of Valguanera is, I think, by much the finest and
most beautiful of all the houses of the Bagaria; but it is far from being the
most extraordinary: Were I to describe it, I should only tell you of things you
have often seen and heard of in other countries, so I shall only speak of one,
which, for its singularity, certainly is not to be paralleled on the face of
the earth; it belongs to the prince of P --, a man of immense fortune, who has
devoted his whole life to the study of monsters and chimeras, greater and more
ridiculous than ever entered into the imagination of the wildest writers of
romance or knight-errantry.

The amazing crowd of statues that surround his house, appear at a distance
like a little army drawn up for its defense; but when you get amongst them, and
every one assumes his true likeness, you imagine you have got into the regions
of delusion and enchantment; for of all that immense group, there is not one
made to represent any object in nature; nor is the absurdity of the wretched
imagination that created them less astonishing than its wonderful fertility. It
would require a volume to describe the whole, and a sad volume indeed it would
make. He has put the heads of men to the bodies of every sort of animal, and
the heads of every other animal to the bodies of men. Sometimes he makes a
compound of five or six animals that have no sort of resemblance in nature. He
puts the head of a lion to the neck of a goose, the body of a lizard, the legs
of a goat, the tail of a fox. On the back of this monster, he puts another if
possible still more hideous, with five or six heads, and a bush of horns, that
beats the beast in the Revelations all to nothing. There is no kind of horn in
the world that he has not collected; and his pleasure is, to see them all
flourishing upon the same head. This is a strange species of madness; and it is
truly unaccountable that he has not been shut up many years ago; but he is
perfectly innocent, and troubles nobody by the indulgence of his phrenzy; on
the contrary, he gives bread to a number of statuaries and other workmen, whom
he rewards in proportion as they can bring their imaginations to coincide with
his own; or, in other words, according to the hideousness of the monsters they
produce. It would be idle and tiresome to be particular in an account of these
absurdities. The statues that adorn, or rather deform the great avenue, and
surround the court of the palace, amount already to 600, notwithstanding which,
it may be truly said, that he has not broke the second commandment; for of all
that number, there is not the likeness of any thing in heaven above, in the
earth beneath, or in the waters under the earth. The old ornaments which were
put up by his father, who was a sensible man, appear to have been in a good
taste. They have all been knocked to pieces, and laid together in a heap, to
make room for this new creation.

The inside of this enchanted castle corresponds exactly with the out; it is in
every respect as whimsical and fantastical, and you cannot turn yourself to any
side, where you are not stated in the face by some hideous figure or other.
Some of the apartments are spacious and magnificent, with high arched roofs;
which instead of plaster or stucco, are composed entirely of large mirrors,
nicely joined together. The effect that these produce (as each of them make a
small angle with the other) is exactly that of a multiplying glass; so that
when three or four people are walking below, there is always the appearance of
three or four hundred walking above. The whole of the doors are likewise
covered over with small pieces of mirror, cut into the most ridiculous shapes,
and intermixed with a great variety of crystal and glass of different colors.
All the chimney-pieces, windows, and side-boards are crowded with pyramids and
pillars of tea-pots, caudle-cups, bowls, cups, saucers, etc. strongly cemented
together; some of these columns are not without their beauty: one of them has a
large china chamber pot for its base, and a circle of pretty little flower-pots
for its capital: the shaft of the column, upwards of four feet long, is
composed entirely of tea-pots of different sizes, diminishing gradually from
the base to the capital. The profusion of china that has been employed in
forming these columns is incredible; I dare say there is not less than forty
pillars and pyramids formed in this strange fantastic manner.

Most of the rooms are paved with fine marble tables of different colors, that
look like so many tomb-stones. Some of these are richly wrought with lapis
lazuli, porphyry, and other valuable stones; their fine polish is now gone, and
they only appear like common marble; the place of these beautiful tables he has
supplied by a new set of his own invention, some of which are not without their
merit. These are made of the finest tortoise-shell mixed with mother of pearl,
ivory, and a variety of metals; and are mounted on fine stands of solid brass.

The windows of this enchanted castle are composed of a variety of glass of
every different color, mixed without any sort of order or regularity. Blue,
red, green, yellow, purple, violet. So that at each window, you may have the
heavens and earth of whatever color you choose, only by looking through the
pane that pleases you.

The house-clock is cased in the body of a statue; the eyes of the figure move
with the pendulum, turning up their white and black alternately, and make a
hideous appearance.

His bedchamber and dressing room are like two apartments in Noah's ark; there
is scarce a beast, however vile, that he has not placed there; toads, frogs,
serpents, lizards, scorpions, all ^ut out in marble, of their respective
colors. There are a good many busts too, that are not less singularly
imagined. Some of these make a very handsome profile on one side; turn to the
other, and you have a skeleton; here you see a nurse with a child in her arms;
its back is exactly that of an infant; its face is that of a wrinkled old woman
of ninety.

For some minutes one can laugh at these follies, but indignation and contempt
soon get the better of your mirth, and the laugh is turned into a sneer. I own
I was soon tired of them; though some things are so strangely fancied, that it
may well excuse a little mirth, even from the most rigid cynic.

The family statues are charming; they have been done from some old pictures,
and make a most venerable appearance; he has dressed them out from head to
foot, in new and elegant suits of marble; and indeed the effect it produces is
more ridiculous than any thing you can conceive. Their shoes are all of black
marble, their stockings generally of red; their clothes are of different
colors, blue, green, and variegated with a rich lace of giall antique. The
periwigs of the men and head-dresses of the ladies are of fine white; so are
their shirts, with long flowing ruffles of alabaster. The walls of the house
are covered with some fine basso relievos of white marble, in a good taste;
these he could not well take out, or alter, so he has only added immense frames
to them. Each frame is composed of four large marble tables.

The author and owner of this singular collection is a poor miserable lean
figure, shivering at a breeze, and seems to be afraid of every body he speaks
to; but (what surprised me) I have heard him talk speciously enough on several
occasions. He is one of the richest subjects in the island, and it is thought
he has not laid out less than 20,000 pounds in the creation of this world of
monsters and chimeras. He certainly might have fallen upon some way to prove
himself a fool at a cheaper rate. However it gives bread to a number of poor
people, to whom he is an excellent master. His house at Palermo is a good deal
in the same style: His carriages are covered with plates of brass, so that I
really believe some of them are musket proof.

The government have had serious thoughts of demolishing the regiment of
monsters he has placed round his house, but as he is humane and inoffensive,
and as this would certainly break his heart, they have as yet forborne.
However, the seeing of them by women with child is said to have been already
attended with very unfortunate circumstances; several living monsters having
been brought forth in the neighborhood. The ladies complain that they dare no
longer take an airing in the Bagaria; that some hideous form always haunts
their imagination for some time after: Their husbands too, it is said, are as
little satisfied with the great variety of horns. Adieu. I shall write you
again by next post, as matter multiplies fast upon me in this metropolis.

Ever yours.

LETTER XXV.
Palermo, June 30th.
THE account the people here give of the sirocc, or south-east wind, is truly
wonderful; today, at the viceroy's we were complaining of the violence of the
heat, the thermometer being at 79. They assured us, that if we staid till the
end of next month, we should probably look on this at pleasant cool weather;
adding, that if we had once experienced the sirocc, all other weather will
appear temperate. I asked to what degree the thermometer commonly rose during
this wind; but found to my surprise, that there was no such instrument in use
amongst them: However, the violence of it, they assure us, is incredible; and
that those who had remained many years in Spain and Malta, had never felt any
heat in those countries to compare to it. How it happens to be more violent in
Palermo than in any other part of Sicily, is a mystery that still remains to be
unfolded. Several treatises have been written on this subject, but none that
give any tolerable degree of satisfaction. As we shall stay for some time
longer, it is possible we may have an opportunity of giving you some account of
it.

They have begun some weeks ago to make preparations for the great feast of St.
Rosolia; and our friends here say they are determined that we shall not leave
them 'till after it is over; but this I am afraid will not be in our power. The
warm season advances, and the time we appointed for our return to Naples is
already elapsed; but indeed, return when we will, we shall make but a bad
exchange; and were it not for those of our own country whom we have left behind
us, we certainly should have determined on a much longer stay. But although the
society here is superior to that of Naples, yet, call it prejudice, or call it
what you will, there is a je ne scai quoi, a certain confidence in the
character, the worth, and friendship of our own people, that I have seldom felt
any where on the continent, except in Switzerland. This sensation, which
constitutes the charm of society, and can alone render it supportable for any
time, is only inspired by something analogous, and sympathetic, in our feelings
and sentiments; like two instruments that are in unison, and vibrate to each
other's touch: For society is a concert, and if the instruments are not in
tune, there never can be harmony; and (to carry on the metaphor) this harmony
too must sometimes be heightened and supported by the introduction of a
discord; but where discords predominate, which is often the case between an
English and an Italian mind, the music must be wretched indeed. Had we but a
little mixture of our own society, how gladly should we spend the winter in
Sicily; but we often think with regret on Mr. Hamilton's and Mr. Walter's
families; and wish again to be on the continent. Indeed, even the pleasures we
enjoy here, we owe principally to Mr. Hamilton: His recommendations we have
ever found to be the best passport and introduction; and the zeal and
cordiality with which these are always received, proceeds evidently not from
motives of deference and respect to the minister, but of love and affection to
the man.

This morning we went to see a celebrated convent of Capuchins, about a mile
without the city; it contains nothing very remarkable but the burial-place,
which indeed is a great curiosity. This is a vast subterraneous apartment,
divided into large commodious galleries, the walls on each side of which are
hollowed into a variety of niches, as if intended for a great collection of
statues; these niches, instead of statues, are all filled with dead bodies, set
upright upon their legs, and fixed by the back to the inside of the nich: Their
number is about three hundred; they are all dressed in the clothes they usually
wore, and form a most respectable and venerable assembly. The skin and muscles,
by a certain preparation, become as dry and hard as a piece of stock fish; and
although many of them have been here upwards of two hundred and fifty years,
yet none are reduced to skeletons; the muscles, indeed, in some appear to be a
good deal more shrunk than in others; probably because these persons had been
more extenuated at the time of their death.

Here the people of Palermo pay daily visits to their deceased friends, and
recall with pleasure and regret the scenes of their past life: Here they
familiarize themselves with their future state, and choose the company they
would wish to keep in the other world. It is a common thing to make choice of
their nich, and to try if their body fits it, that no alterations may be
necessary after they are dead; and sometimes, by way of a voluntary penance,
they accustom themselves to stand for hours in these niches.

The bodies of the princes and first nobility are lodged in handsome chests or
trunks, some of them richly adorned: These are not in the shape of coffins, but
all of one width, and about a foot and a half, or two feet deep. The keys are
kept by the nearest relations of the family, who sometimes come and drop a tear
over their departed friends.

I am not sure if this is not a better method of disposing of the dead than
ours. These visits must prove admirable lessons of humility; and I assure you,
they are not such objects of horror as you would imagine: They are said, even
for ages after death, to retain a strong likeness to what they were when alive;
so that, as soon as you have conquered the first feelings excited by these
venerable figures, you only consider this as a vast gallery of original
portraits, drawn after the life, by the justest and most unprejudiced hand. It
must be owned that the colors are rather faded; and the pencil does not appear
to have been the most flattering in the world; but no matter, it is the pencil
of truth, and not of a mercenary, who only wants to please. We were alleging
too, that it might be made of very considerable utility to society; and that
these dumb orators could give the most pathetic lectures upon pride and vanity.
Whenever a fellow began to strut, like Mr. B. or to affect the haughty
supercilious air, he should be sent to converse with his friends in the
gallery; and if their arguments did not bring him to a proper way of thinking,
I would give him up as incorrigible.

At Bologna they showed us the skeleton of a celebrated beauty, who died at a
period of life when she was still the object of universal admiration. By way of
making atonement for her own vanity, she bequeathed herself as a monument to
curb the vanity of others. Recollecting on her deathbed the great adulation
that had been paid to her charms, and the fatal change they were soon to
undergo, she ordered that her body should be dissected, and her bones hung up
for the inspection of all young maidens who are inclined to be vain of their
beauty. However, if she had been preserved in this moral gallery, the lesson
would have been stronger; for those very features that had raised her vanity
would still have repainted, only divested of all their power, and disarmed of
every charm.

Some of the Capuchins sleep in these galleries every night, and pretend to
have many wonderful visions and revelations; but the truth is, that very few
people believe them.

No woman is ever admitted into this convent either dead or alive; and this
interdiction is written in large characters over the gate. The poor indolent
Capuchins, the frailest of all flesh, have great need of such precautions: They
have no occupation from without, and they have no resources within themselves,
so that they must be an easy prey to every temptation: Bocaccio, and all the
books of that kind, are filled with stories of their frailty. Yesterday, dining
at the Prince of Sperlinga's, and talking on this subject, the Abbe T -- gave
us an anecdote of a friend of his, who was formerly a brother of this convent.
He is known by the name of Fra Pasqual, and has passed through many singular
scenes of life, which it would be too long to recount. His last migration, or,
if you will, transmigration, was from one of the banditti of this kingdom, in
which capacity he had been enrolled for some time; but, tired of the danger and
fatigue to which he was perpetually exposed, he at last determined to exchange
the character of the hero, for that of the saint, and try if it was not both
safer and surer, to rely on the weakness of others, than on our own strength.

Fra Pasqual pretended a strong compunction for the transgressions of his past
life, and made a promise to the Virgin, that the remainder of it should be
spent in mortification and penance, to atone for them. To this end, Pasqual
took the vows of poverty and of chastity, and entered into all the rigours of
the monastic life. For some weeks he behaved in a most exemplary manner; he
went barefooted, wore a large rosary, and a thicker cord of discipline than any
monk in the convent; and his whole deportment gave testimony of the most
unfeigned repentance; however, the devil was still at work in the heart of
Pasqual, and all these external mortifications only made him work the harder;
in short, he found it impossible to drive him out: Pasqual was sensible of
this; and afraid lest the enemy should at last get the better of him, he
thought it advisable to leave at Palermo the character of sanctity he had
acquired, and begin somewhere else upon a new score. He embarked for Naples,
where he was soon admitted into a Capuchin convent.

As Pasqual knew from experience that the dull uniformity of the monastic life
required some little amusements to render it supportable, the first thing he
set about was to find a mistress. He made love to a lady of easy virtue, who
soon admitted his addresses, but at the same time informed him, that he had a
formidable rival, who was jealous as a tiger, and would not fail to put them
both to death, should he discover the intrigue. This was no other than a
lifeguard-man, a fellow of six feet two inches, with a vast spada, like that of
Goliath, and a monstrous pair of curled whiskers, that would have cast a damp
on the heart of any man but Fra Pasqual; but the monastic life had not yet
enervated him; he was accustomed to danger, and loved a few difficulties:
however, as in his present character he could not be on a footing with his
rival, he thought it best only to make use of prudence and stratagem to
supplant him: These are the ecclesiastical arms, and they have generally been
found too hard for the military.

The lady promised him an interview as soon as the court should go to Portici,
where the lifeguard-man's duty obliged him to attend the king. Pasqual waited
with impatience for some time; at last the wished-for night arrived; the king
set off, after the opera, with all his guards. Pasqual flew like lightning to
the arms of his mistress; the preliminaries were soon settled; and the happy
lovers had just fallen asleep, when they were suddenly alarmed by a rap and a
well known voice at the door. The lady started up in an agony of despair,
assuring Pasqual that they were both undone; that this was her lover; and if
some expedient was not fallen upon, in the first transports of his fury, he
would certainly put them both to death. There was no time for reflection; the
lifeguard-man demanded entrance in the most peremptory manner, and the lady was
obliged to instant compliance. Pasqual had just time to gather his rags
together, and cram himself in below the bed; at that instant the door opened,
and the giant came in, rattling his arms and storming at his mistress, for
having made him wait so long; however, she soon pacified him. He then ordered
her to strike a light, that he might see to undress: This struck Pasqual to the
soul, and he gave himself up for lost; however, the lady's address saved him,
when he least expected it. In bringing the tinder, she took care to let fall
some water into the box; and all the beating she and her lover could beat, they
could not produce one spark. Every stroke of the flint sounded in Pasqual's
ears like his death-knell; but when he heard the lifeguard-man swearing at the
tinder for not kindling, he began to conceive some hopes, and blessed the
fertile invention of woman. The lady told him he might easily get a light at
the guard, which was at no great distance. Pasqual's heart leaped with joy; but
when the soldier answered that he was absent without leave, and durst not be
seen, it again began to flag; but on his ordering her to go, it died within
him, and he now found himself in greater danger than ever. The lady herself was
disconcerted; but quickly recovering, she told him, it would be too long before
she could get dressed; but advised him to go to the corner of a neighboring
street, where there was a lamp burning before the Virgin Mary, who could have
no objection to his lighting a candle at it. Pasqual revived; but the soldier
declared he was too much fatigued with his walk, and would rather undress in
the dark; he at the same time began to grope below the bed for a bottle of
liqueurs, which he knew stood there. Pasqual shook like a quaker, however,
still he escaped. The lady observing what he was about, made a spring, and got
him the bottle, at the very instant he was within an inch of seizing Pasqual's
head. The lady then went to bed, and told her lover, as it was a cold night,
she would warm his place for him. Pasqual admired her address, and began to
conceive some hopes of escaping.

His situation was the most irksome in the world; the bed was so low, that he
had no room to move; and when the great heavy lifeguard-man entered it, he
found himself squeezed down to the ground. He lay trembling and stifling his
breath for some time, but found it absolutely impossible to support his
situation 'till morning; and indeed, if it had, his clothes, which were
scattered about, must infallibly discover him: He therefore began to think of
making his escape; but he could not move without alarming his rival, who was
now lying above him. At first he thought of rushing suddenly out, and throwing
himself into the street; but this he disdained, and, on second thoughts,
determined to seize the lifeguard-man's sword, and either put him to death, or
make an honorable capitulation both for himself and the lady. In the midst of
these reflections, his rival began to snore, and Pasqual declares that no music
was ever so grateful to his soul. He tried to stir a little, and finding that
did not awake the enemy, he by degrees worked himself out of his prison. He
immediately laid hold of the great spada; when all his fears forsook him, and
he felt as bold as a lion. He now relinquished the dastardly scheme of
escaping, and only thought how he could best retaliate on his rival, for all
that he had made him suffer.

As Pasqual was stark naked, it was no more trouble to him to put on the
soldier's clothes than his own; and as both his cloak and his cappouch together
were not worth a sixpence, he thought it most eligible to equip himself a la
militaire, and to leave his sacerdotal robes to the soldier. In a short time he
was dressed cap-a-pie. His greasy cowl, his cloak, his sandals, his rosary, and
his rope of discipline, he gathered together, and placed on a chair before the
bed; and girded himself with a great buff belt, instead of the cordon of St.
Francis, and grasping his trusty Toledo instead of the crucifix, he sallied
forth into the street. He pondered for some time what scheme to fall upon; and
at first thought of returning in the character of another life-guard-man,
pretending to have been sent by the officer with a guard in quest of his
companion, who not being found in his quarters, was supposed to have deserted:
And thus, after having made him pay heartily for all that he had suffered under
the bed, to leave him to the enjoyment of his panic, and the elegant suit of
clothes he had provided him. However, he was not satisfied with this revenge,
and determined on one still more solid. He went to the guard, and told the
officer that he had met a Capuchin friar, with all the ensigns of his sanctity
about him, sculking through the streets, in the dead of night, when they
pretend to be employed in prayer for the sins of mankind. That prompted by
curiosity to follow him, the holy friar as he expected went strait to the house
of a celebrated courtezan; that he saw him admitted, and listened at the window
'till he heard them go to bed together: That if he did not find this
information to be true, he should resign himself his prisoner, and submit to
whatever punishment he should think proper.

The officer and his guard delighted to have much a hold of a Capuchin (who
pretended to be the very models of sanctity, and who revile in a particular
manner the licentious life of the military) turned out with the utmost
alacrity, and, under the conduct of Pasqual, surrounded the lady's house.
Pasqual began thundering at the door; and demanded entrance for the officer and
his guard. The unhappy soldier waking with the noise, and not doubting that it
was a detachment sent to seize him, gave himself up to despair, and instantly
took shelter in the very place that Pasqual had so lately occupied; at the same
time laying hold of all the things he found on the chair, never doubting that
they were his own clothes. As the lady was somewhat dilatory in opening the
door, Pasqual pretended to put his foot to it, when up it flew, and entering
with the officer and his guard, demanded the body of a Capuchin friar, who they
were informed, lodged with her that night. The lady had heard Pasqual go out,
and having no suspicion that he would inform against himself, she protested her
innocence in the most solemn manner, taking all the saints to witness that she
knew no such person: But Pasqual suspecting the retreat of the lover, began
groping below the bed, and soon pulled out his own greasy cowl and cloak; "Here
said he to the officer) here are proofs enough: I Will answer for it, Signor
Padre himself is at no great distance. And putting his nose below the bed; Fogh
(says he) I smell him; he stinks like a fox. The surest way of finding a
Capuchin, is by the nose; you may wind him a mile off. Then lowering their
lanthorn, they beheld the unfortunate lover squeezed in betwixt the bed and the
ground, and almost stifled. Ecco (...) (said Pasqual) here he is, with all the
ensigns of his holiness; and pulling them out one by one, the crucifix, the
rosary, and me cord of discipline. You may see (said he) that the reverend
father came here to do penance; and taking up the cord, Suppose now we should
assist him in this meritorious work. Au^i^^^, Signor Padre, andiam^. We will
save you the trouble of inflicting it yourself; and whether you came here to
sin, or to repent, by your own maxims, you know, a little sound discipline is
healthful to the soul. The guard were lying round the bed in convulsions of
laughter; and began breaking the most galling and most insolent jokes upon the
supposed padre. The lifeguard-man thought himself enchanted. He at last
ventured to speak, and declared they were all in a mistake; that he was no
Capuchin: Upon which the laugh redoubled, and the coarsest jokes were repeated.
The lady, in the mean time, with the best dissembled marks of fear and
astonishment, ran about the room, exclaiming, Oime! siamo perduti -- Siamo
incantati -- Siamo insorcelati. Pasqual delighted to see that his plan had
taken its full effect, thought it now time to make his retreat, before the
unfortunate lover could have an opportunity of examining his clothes, and
perhaps detecting him: He therefore pretended regimental business, and
regretting much that he was obliged to join his corpse, took leave of the
officer and his guard; at the same time recommending by all means, to treat the
holy father with all that reverence and respect that was due to so sacred a
person.

The lifeguard-man, when he got out from below the bed, began to look about for
his clothes; but observing nothing but the greasy weeds of a Capuchin friar, he
was now perfectly convinced, that Heaven had delivered him over, for his
offenses, to the power of some demon (for of all mortals, the Neapolitan
soldiers are the most superstitious.) The lady too, acted her part so well,
that he had no longer any doubt of it. Thus it is (said he in a penitential
voice) to offend heaven! I own my sin. I knew it was Friday, and yet, O, flesh,
flesh! Had it been any other day, I still should have remained what I was. O
St. Gennaro! I passed thee A celebrated statue of St. Januarius, betwixt
Portici and Naples.
too without paying thee due respect: Thy all-seeing eye has found me out.
Gentlemen, do with me what you please; I am not what I seem to be." "No, no,
(said the officer) we are sensible of that. But, come, Signor Padre, on with
your garments, and march; we have no time to trifle. Here, Corporal, (giving
him the cordon) tie his hands, and let him feel the weight of St. Francis. The
saint owes him that, for having so impudently denied him for his master. The
poor soldier was perfectly passive; they arrayed him in the sandals, the cowl,
and the cloak of Fra Pasqual, and put the great rosary about his neck; and a
most woeful figure he made. The officer made him look in the glass, to try if
he could recollect himself, and asked if he was a Capuchin now or not. He was
shocked at his own appearance; but bore every thing with meekness and
resignation. They then conducted him to the guard, belabouring him all the way
with the cord of St. Francis, and asking him every stroke, if he knew his
master now?

In the mean time, Pasqual was snug in his convent, enjoying the sweets of his
adventure. He had a spare cloak and cowl, and was soon equipped again like one
of the holy fathers; he then took the clothes and accoutrements of the
lifeguard-man, and laid them in a heap, near the gate of another convent of
Capuchins, but at a great distance from his own, reserving only to himself a
trifle of money which he found in the breeches pocket, just to indemnify him
for the loss of his cloak and his cowl; and even this, he says, he should have
held sacred, but he knew whoever should find the clothes, would make lawful
prize of it.

The poor soldier remained next day a spectacle of ridicule to all the world;
at last his companions heard of his strange metamorphosis, and came in troops
to see him: Their jokes were perhaps still more galling than th^se of the
guard, but as he thought himself under the finger of God, or at least of St.
Januarius, he bore all with meekness and patience; at last his clothes were
found, and he was set at liberty; but he believes to this day that the whole
was the work of the devil, sent to chastise him for his sins; and has never
since seen his mistress on a Friday, nor passed the statue of St. Januarius
without muttering a prayer. Fra Pasqual has told the story to several of his
most intimate friends, whom he can depend on, amongst whom is the Abbe T-t-i,
who has often had it from his own mouth.

I beg pardon for this long story; had I suspected that it would have run out
to half this length, I assure you, I should not have troubled you with it.
Perhaps, however, you will think this apology precisely the most unnecessary,
and most impertinent part of it all. This is often the fate of apologies,
particularly for long letters; First, because it always makes them longer;
Secondly, Hey-day! where are we going now? To return then to our subject. We
had no sooner left the Capuchin convent, than our carriage, broke down, long
before we reached the city: And as walking (at Palermo as well as Naples) is of
all things the most disgraceful, we risked by this unfortunate accident to have
our characters blasted for ever. However, Philip, our Sicilian servant, took
care to make such a noise about it, that our dignity did not much suffer. He
kept a little distance before us, pesting and blasting all the way at their
cursed crazy carriages; and swearing that there never was any thing in the
world so infamous: That in a city like Palermo, the capital of all Sicily,
Signori of our rank and dignity should be obliged to walk on walk; that it must
be an eternal reflection against the place, and bawled out to every person he
met, if there was no coaches to be had; no carriages of any kind, either for
love or money. In short, we had not got half through the street, before we had
several offers from gentlemen of our acquaintance, who lamented exceedingly the
indignity we had suffered, and wondered much, that we did not rather sond
forward a servant for another coach, and wait (in the heat of the sun) 'till it
arrived.

This is not the only time that Philip's wits have been of service to us on
such occasions. A few nights ago, we had a dispute with out coachman; turned
him off, and had not provided another. We were unfortunately engaged to go to
the great conversation. What was to be done? No such thing as walking. Should
we be caught in the fact, we are disgraced for ever. It would be worse than to
be caught in that of adultery. No alternative, however. There was not a coach
to be had, and our old coachman would not serve us for one night only. Philip
made sad wry faces, and swore the coachman ought to be crucified; but when he
saw us bent on walking, he was still more distressed; and I really believe, if
we had been discovered, that he would not have served us any longer. He
therefore set his wits to work, how he should preserve both his master's honor
and his own place. He at first hesitated, before he would take up the flambeau;
but he would by no means be prevailed on to light it. What, (said Philip) do
you think I have no more regard for you, than to expose you to the eyes of the
whole world? No, no, Gentlemen; if you will bring yourselves to disgrace, you
shall at least make me the agent of showing it: But remember, if you are
observed walking, no mortal will believe you keep a coach; and do you expect
after that to be received into company?" "Well, well, Philip, do as you please,
but we must go to the conversation. Philip shrugged up his shoulders. Diabolo,
che faremo! Andiamo dunque Signori, andiamo. So saying, he led the way, and we
followed.

Philip had studied the geography of the town; he conducted us through lanes
only known to himself, and carefully avoided the great street; 'till at last we
arrived at a little entry, which leads to the conversation-rooms; here the
carriages usually stop. We slipped up the entry in the dark; when Philip,
darting into a shop, lighted his flambeau in an instant, and came rushing
before us, bawling out, "Piazza per gli Signori forrestieri;" when all the
world immediately made way for us. After we had got into the rooms, he called
so loud after us, asking at what time he should order the coach to return;
that, overcome partly by risibility, and partly by a consciousness of the
deceit, not one of us had power to answer him. Philip, however, followed us,
and repeated the question so often, that we were obliged to give him a reply,
"a mezzo notte." At midnight he came to tell us that the coach was ready. We
were curious to see how he would behave on this occasion; for it was not half
so difficult to get in unobserved, as to get out: However, Philip's genius was
equal to both. As soon as we got into the entry, he ran to the door, bawling
out Antonio as hard as he could roar. No Antonio answered; and unfortunately,
there was a number of gentlemen and ladies going away at the same time. They
begged of us, as strangers, to st^p first into our carriage, and absolutely
refused to go out before us. Philip was sadly puzzled. He first ran up the
street, then he ran down, and came back all out of breath, cursing Antonio.
That rascal (said he) is never in the way, and you must turn him off. He
pretends that he could not get up his coach to the door, for the great crowd of
carriages; and is waiting about fifty yards below. Vostri Eccellenzi had better
step down (said Philip) otherwise you will be obliged to wait here at least
half an hour. We took leave of the company, and set off* Philip ran like a
lamp-lighter, 'till he had almost passed the carriages, when dashing his
flambeau on the ground, as if by accident, he extinguished it, and getting into
a narrow lane, he waited 'till we came up; when he whispered us to follow him,
and conducted us back, by the same labyrinth we had come; and thus saved us
from eternal infamy. However, he assures us, he will not venture it again for
his place.

Now, what do you think of a nation where such prejudices as these prevail? It
is pretty much the case all over Italy. An Italian nobleman is ashamed of
nothing so much as making use of his legs. They think their dignity augments by
the repose of their members; and that no man can be truly respectable, that
does not loll away one half of his time on a sofa, or in a carriage. In short,
a man is obliged to be indolent and effeminate, not to be despised and
ridiculous. What can we expect of such a people? Can they be capable of any
thing great or manly, who seem almost ashamed to appear men! I own, it
surpasses my comprehension; and I bless my stars every time that I think of
honest John Bull, even with all his faults. Will you believe me, that of all
that I have known in Italy, there are scarce half a dozen that have had
fortitude enough to subdue this most contemptible of all human prejudices? The
Prince of Campo Franco too in this place, is above it. He is a noble fellow,
and both in his person and character, greatly resembles our late worthy friend,
General Craufurd. He is a major general too, and always dresses in his uniform,
which still increases the resemblance. Every time I see him, he says or does
something that recals strongly to my mind the idea of our noble general. He
laughs at the follies of his country, and holds these wretched prejudices in
that contempt they deserve. What would the old hardy Romans think (said he,
talking on this subject) were they permitted to take a view of the occupations
of their progeny? I should like to see a Brutus or a Cassius amongst us for a
little; how the clumsy vulgar fellows would be hooted. I dare say they would
soon be glad to return to the shades again.

Adieu; for some nights past we have been observing the course of a comet; and
as we were the first people here that took notice of it, I assure you, we are
looked upon as very profound astronomers. I shall say more of it next letter.
We have now got out of our abominable inn, and have taken a final leave of our
French landlady. The Count Bushem^, a very amiable young man, has been kind
enough to provide us a lodging on the seashore; one of the coolest and most
agreeable in Palermo.

Ever-yours, etc.

LETTER XXVI.
Palermo, July 2d^
OUR comet is now gone; we first observed it on the 24th. It had no tail, but
was surrounded with a faintish ill defined light, that made it look like a
bright star shining through a thin cloud. This small probability, is owing to
an atmosphere, around the body of the comet, that causes a refraction of the
rays, and prevents them from reaching us with that distinctness we observe in
bodies that have no atmosphere. We were still the more persuaded of this two
nights ago, when we had the good fortune to catch the comet just passing close
by a small fixed star, whose light was not only considerably dimmed, but we
thought we observed a sensible change of place in the star, as soon as its rays
felt into the atmosphere of the comet; owing no doubt to the refraction in
passing through that atmosphere. We attempted to trace the line of the comet's
course, but as we could find no globe, it was not possible to do it with any
degree of precision. Its direction was almost due north, and its velocity
altogether amazing. We did not observe it so minutely the two or three first
nights of its appearance, but on the 30th it was at our zenith here, (latitude
3 10; longitude from Land. 13) about five minutes after midnight, and last
night, the first of July, it passed four degrees to the east of the polar star,
nearly at 40 minutes after eight. So that, in less than 24 hours, it has
described a great arch in the heavens; upwards of 50 degrees; which gives an
idea of the most amazing velocity. Supposing it at the distance of the sun, at
this rate of traveling, it would go round the earth's orbit in less than a
week. Which makes, I think, considerably more than sixty millions of miles in a
day; a motion that vastly surpasses all human comprehension. And as this motion
continues to be greatly accelerated, what must it be, when the comet approaches
still nearer to the body of the sun! Last night a change of place was
observable in the space of a few minutes, particularly when it passed near any
of the fixed stars. We attempted to find if it had any observable parallax, but
the vast rapidity of its motion always prevented us; for whatever fixed stars
it was in the horizon, it had got so far to the north of them, long before it
reached the meridian, that the parallax, if there was any, entirely escaped us.

I shall long much to see the observations that have been made with you, and in
other distant countries, on this comet; as from these, we shall probably be
enabled to form some judgment of its distance from the earth; which, although
we could observe no parallax, I am apt to believe was not very great, as its
motion was so very perceptible. We could procure no instruments to measure its
apparent distance from any of the fixed stars, so that the only two
observations any thing can be made of, are, the time of its passing the polar
star last night, its distance from it, and the time of its arrival at our
zenith on the 30th; this we found by applying the eye to a straight rod, hung
perpendicularly from a small thread. The comet was not in the exact point of
the zenith, but to the best of our observation, about six or seven minutes to
the north of it. Last night it was visible almost immediately after sunset;
long before any of the fixed stars appeared. It is now immersed in the rays of
the sun, and has certainly got very near his body. If it returns again to the
regions of space, it will probably be visible in a few days, but I own I should
much doubt of any such return, if it is rearlly by the attractive force of the
sun, that it is at present carried with such amazing celerity toward him. This
is the third comet of this kind, whose return I have had an opportunity of
watching; but never was fortunate enough to find any of them after they had
passed the sun; though those that do really return, appear at that time much
more luminous than before they approached him.

The astronomy of comets, from what I can remember of it, appears to be clogged
with very great difficulties, and even some seeming absurdities. It is
difficult to conceive, that these immense bodies, after being drawn to the sun
with the velocity of a million of miles in an hour; when they have at last come
almost to touch him, should then fly off from his body, with the same velocity
they approach it; and that too, by the power of this very motion that this
attraction has occasioned. The demonstration of this I remember is very curious
and ingenious; but I wish it may be entirely free from sophistry. No doubt, in
bodies moving in curves round a fixed center, as the centripetal motion
increases, the centrifugal one increases likewise; but how this motion, which
is only generated by the former, should at last get the better of the power
that produces it; and that too, at the very time this power has acquired its
utmost force and energy; seems somewhat difficult to conceive. It is the only
instance I know, wherein the effect increasing regularly with the cause; at
last, whilst the cause is still acting with full vigor; the effect entirely
gets the better of the cause, and leaves it in the lurch. For, the body
attracted, is at last carried away with infinite velocity from the attracting
body. By what power is it carried away? Why, say our philosophers, by the very
power of this attraction, which has now produced a new power superior to
itself, to wit, the centrifugal force. However, perhaps, all this may be
reconcilable to reason; far be it from me to presume attacking so glorious a
system as that of attraction. The law that the heavenly bodies are said to
observe, in describing equal areas in equal times, is supposed to be
demonstrated, and by this it would appear, that the centripetal and centrifugal
forces alternately get the mastery of one another.

However, I cannot help thinking it somewhat hard to conceive, that gravity
should always get the better of the centrifugal force, at the very time that
its action is the smallest, when the comet is at its greatest distance from the
sun; and that the centrifugal force should get the better of gravity, at the
very time that its action is the greatest, when the comet is at its nearest
point to the sun.

To a common observer it would rather appear, that the sun, like an electric
body, after it had once charged the objects that it attracted with its own
effluvia or atmosphere, by degrees loses its attraction, and at last even
repels them; and, that the attracting power, like what we likewise observe in
electricity, does not return again 'till the effluvia imbibed from the
attracting body is dispelled or dissipated; when it is again attracted, and so
on alternately. For it appears (at least to an unphilosophical observer)
somewhat repugnant to reason, to say that a body flying off from another body
some thousands of miles in a minute, should all the time be violently attracted
by that body, and that it is even by virtue of this very attraction that it is
flying off from it. He would probably ask, What more could it do, pray, were it
really to be repelled?

Had the system of electricity, and of repulsion as well as attraction, been
known and established in the last age, I have little doubt that the profound
genius of Newton would have called it to his aid; and perhaps accounted in a
more satisfactory manner, for many of the great phenomenon of the heavens. To
the best of my remembrance, we know of no body that possesses, in any
considerable degree, the power of attraction, that in certain circumstances
does not likewise possess the power of repulsion. The magnet, the tourmalin,
amber, glass, and every electrical substance. Now from analogy, as we find the
sun so powerfully endowed with attraction, why may we not likewise suppose him
to be possessed of repulsion? Indeed, this very power seems to be confessed by
the Newtonians to reside in the sun in a most wonderful degree; for they assure
us he repels the rays of light with such amazing force, that they fly upwards
of 80 milions of miles in seven minutes. Now why should we confine this
repulsion to the rays of light only? As they are material, may not other matter
brought near his body, be affected in the same manner? Indeed one would
imagine, that their motion alone would create the most violent repulsion; and
that the force, with which they are perpetually flowing from the sun, would
most effectually prevent every other body from approaching him; for this we
find is the constant effect of a rapid stream of any other matter. -- But let
us examine a little more his effects on comets. The tails of these bodies, are
probably their atomspheres rendered highly electrical, either from the violence
of their motion, or from their proximity to the sun. -- Of all the bodies we
know, there is none in so constant and so violent an electrical state, as the
higher regions of our own atomsphere. Of this I have long been convinced; for,
send up a kite with a small wire about its string, only to the height of 12 or
1300 feet, and at all times it will produce fire, as I have found by frequent
experience; sometimes when the air was perfectly clear, without a cloud in the
hemisphere; at other times, when it was thick and hazy, and totally unfit for
electrical operations below. Now, as this is the case at so small a height, and
as we find the effect still grows stronger, in proportion as the kite advances
(for I have sometimes observed, that a little blast of wind, suddenly raising
the kite about an hundred feet, has more than doubled the effect) what must it
be in very great elevations? -- Indeed we may often judge of it from the
violence with which the clouds are agitated, from the meteors formed above the
region of the clouds, and particularly from the aurora borealis, which has been
observed to have much the same color and appearance as the matter that forms
the tails of comets.

Now what must be the effect of so vast a body as our atomsphere, made strongly
electrical, when it happens to approach any other body? It must always be
either violently attracted or repelled, according to the positive or negative
quality (in the language of the electricians) of the body that it approaches.

It has ever been observed that the tails of comets (just as we should expect,
from a very light fluid body, attached to a solid heavy one) are drawn after
the comets, as long as they are at a distance from the sun; but as soon as the
comets get near his body, the tail veers about to that side of the comet that
is in the opposite direction from the sun, and no longer follows the comet, but
continues its motion sideways, opposing its whole length to the medium through
which it passes, rather than allow it in any degree to approach the sun.
Indeed, its tendency to follow the body of the comet is still observable, were
it not prevented by some force superior to that tendency; for the tail is
always observed to bend a little to that side from whence the comet is flying.
This perhaps is some proof too, that it does not move in an absolute vacuum.

When the comet reaches its perihelion, the tail is generally very much
lengthened, perhaps by the rarefaction from the heat; perhaps by the increase
of the sun's repulsion, or that of his atomsphere. It still continues
projected, exactly in the opposite direction from the sun; and when the comet
moves off again to the regions of space, the tail, instead of following it, as
it did on its approach, is projected a vast way before it, and still keeps the
body of the comet exactly opposed betwixt it and the sun; 'till by degrees, as
the distance increases, the length of the tail is diminished; the repulsion
probably becoming weaker and weaker.

It has likewise been observed, that the length of these tails are commonly in
proportion to the proximity of the comet to the sun. That of 1680 threw out a
train that would almost have reached from the sun to the earth. If this had
been attracted by the sun, would it not have fallen upon his body? When the
comet at that time was not one-fourth of his diameter distant from him; but
instead of this, it was darted away to the opposite side of the heavens, even
with a greater velocity than that of the comet itself. -- Now what can this be
owing to, if not to a repulsive power in the sun, or his atmosphere?

And, indeed, it would at first appear but little less absurd to say, that the
tail of the comet is all this time violently attracted by the sun, although it
be driven away in an opposite direction from him, as to say the same of the
comet itself. It is true, this repulsion seems to begin much sooner to affect
the tail, than the body of the comet; which is supposed always to pass the sun
before it begins to fly away from him, which is by no means the case with the
tail. The repulsive force, therefore (if there is any such) is in a much less
proportion than the attractive one, and probably just only enough to
counterbalance the latter, when these bodies are in their perihelions, and to
turn them so much aside, as to prevent their falling into the body of the sun.
The projectile force they have acquired will then carry them out to the
heavens, and repulsion probably diminishing as they recede from the sun's
atmosphere, his attraction will again take place, and retard their motion
regularly, 'till they arrive at their aphelia, when they once more begin to
return to him.

I don't know how you will like all this: -- Our comet has led me a dance I
very little thought of; and I believe I should have done better to send it at
once into the sun, and had done with it: And that, indeed, I am apt to believe,
will be its fate. For as this comet has no tail, there is, of consequence, no
apparent repulsion. If it was repelled, its atmosphere, like the others, would
be driven away in the opposite direction from the sun; I therefore do not see
any possible method it has of escaping.

These comets are certainly bodies of a very different nature from those with
tails, to which indeed they appear even to bear a much less resemblance than
they do to planets: And it is no small proof of the little progress we have
made in the knowledge of the universe, that they have not as yet been
distinguished by a different name.

This is the third kind of body that has been discovered in our system, that
all appear essentially different from each other, that are probably regulated
by different laws, and intended for very different purposes. How much will
posterity be astonished at our ignorance, and wonder that this system, should
have existed for so many thousand years, before we were in the least acquainted
with one half of it, or had even invented names to distinguish its different
members!

I have do doubt, that in future ages, the number of the comets, the form of
their orbits, and time of their revolutions, will be as clearly demonstrated as
that of the planets. It is our countryman, Dr. Halley, who has begun this great
work, which may be considered just now as in its earliest infancy. These bodies
too, with thick atmospheres, but without tails, will likewise have their proper
places ascertained, and will no longer be confounded with bodies to which they
bear no resemblance or connection.

Comets with tails have seldom been visible, but on their recess from the sun.
It is he that kindles them up, and gives them that alarming appearance in the
heavens. On the contrary, those without tails have seldom, perhaps never, been
observed, but on their approach to him. I don't recollect any whose return has
been tolerably well ascertained. I remember, indeed, a few years ago, a small
one, that was said to have been discovered by a telescope, after it had passed
the sun, but never more became visible to the naked eye. This assertion is
easily made, and nobody can contradict it; but it does not at all appear
probable, that it should have been so much less luminous after it had passed
the sun, than before it approached him; and I will own to you, when I have
heard that the return of these comets had escaped the eyes of the most acute
astronomers, I have been tempted to think, that they did not return at all, but
were absorbed in the body of the sun, which their violent motion toward him
seemed to indicate. Indeed, I have often wished that this discovery might be
made, as it would in some measure account for what has as yet been looked upon
as unaccountable: That the sun, notwithstanding his daily waste, from
enlightening the universe, never appears diminished either in size or light.
Surely this waste must be immense, and were there not in nature some hidden
provison for supplying it, in the space of six thousand years, supposing the
world to be no older, the planets must have got to a much greater distance from
his body, by the vast diminution of his attraction; they must likewise have
moved much flower, and consequently the length of our year must have been
greatly increased. Nothing of all this seems to be the case: The diameter of
the sun is the same that ever it was: He neither appears diminished, nor our
distance from him increased: His light, heat, and attraction seem to be the
same as ever; and the motion of the planets round him is performed in the same
time; of consequence, his quantity of matter still continues the same. How then
is this vast waste supplied? May there not be millions of bodies attracted by
him, from the boundless regions of space, that are never perceived by us?
Comets, on their road to him, have several times been accidentally discovered
by telescopes, that were never seen by the naked eye. Indeed the number of
black spots on the sun seem to indicate that there is always a quantity of
matter there, only in a preparation to give light, but not yet refined and pure
enough to throw off rays like the rest of his body. For I think we can hardly
conceive, that any matter can remain long on the body of the sun without
becoming luminous; and so we find these spots often disappear, that is to say,
the matter of which they are composed is then perfectly melted, and has
acquired the same degree of heat and light as the rest of his body. Even in our
glass-houses, and other very hot furnaces, most sorts of matter very soon
acquire the same color and appearance as the matter in fusion, and emit rays
of light like it. But how much more must this be the case at the surface of the
sun! when Newton computes, that even at many thousand miles distance from it, a
body would acquire a degree of heat two thousand times greater than that of red
hot iron. It has generally been understood, that he said the great comet really
did acquire this degree of heat; but this is certainly a mistake: Sir Isaac's
expression, to the best of my remembrance, is, that it might have acquired it.
And if we consider the very great size of that body, and the short time of its
perihelion, the thing will appear impossible: Nor indeed do I think we can
conceive, that a body only as large as our earth, and the spots on the sun are
often much larger, could be reduced to fusion, even on his surface, but after a
very considerable space of time.

Now as it seems to be universally supposed, that the rays of light are really
particles of matter, proceeding from the body of the sun, I think it is
absolutely necessary that we should fall upon some such method of sending him
back a supply of those rays, otherwise, let his stock be ever so great, it must
at last be exhausted.

I wish astronomers would observe whether the spots on the sun are not
increased after the appearing of these comets; and whether these spots do not
disappear again by degrees, like a body that is gradually melted down in a
furnace. But there is another consideration too, which naturally occurs: Pray
what becomes of all this vast quantity of matter after it is reduced to light?
Is it ever collected again into solid bodies; or is it for ever lost and
dissipated, after it has made its journey from the sun to the object it
illuminates? It is somewhat strange, that of all that immense quantity of
matter poured down on us during the day, that pervades and fills the whole
universe; the moment we are deprived of the luminous body, the whole of it, in
an instant, seems to be annihilated: In short, there are a number of
difficulties attending the common received doctrine of light; nor do I think
there is any point in natural philosophy the solution of which is less
satisfactory. If we suppose every ray to be a stream of particles of matter;
darting from the luminous body, how can we conceive that these streams may be
intersected and pierced by other streams of the same matter ten thousand
different ways, without causing the least confusion either to the one or the
other? For in a clear night we see distinctly any particular star that we look
at, although the rays coming from that star to our eye is pierced for millions
of miles before it reaches us by millions of streams of the same rays, from
every other sun and star in the universe. Now suppose, in any other matter that
we know of, and one would imagine there ought at least to be some sort of
analogy; suppose, I say, we should only attempt to make two streams pass one
another; water, for instance, or air, one of the purest and the most fluid
substances we are acquainted with, we find it totally impossible. The two
streams will mutually interrupt and incommode one another, and the strongest
will ever carry off the weakest into its own direction; but if a stream of
light is hit by ten thousand other streams, moving at the rate of ten millions
of miles in a minute, it is not even bent by the impression, nor in the
smallest degree diverted from its course; but reaches us with the same
precision and regularity, as if nothing had interfered with it. Besides, on the
supposition that light is real particles of matter moving from the sun to the
earth, in the space of seven minutes, how comes it to pass, that with all this
wonderful velocity, there seems to be no momentum! for it communicates motion
to no body that obstructs its passage, and no body whatever is removed by the
percussion. Supposing we had never heard of this discovery, and were at once to
be told of a current of matter flying at the rate of ten millions of miles in a
minute, and so large as to cover one half of our globe, would we not imagine
that the earth must instantly be torn to pieces by it, or carried off with the
most incredible velocity! it will be objected, that the extreme minuteness of
the particles of light prevents it from having any such effect; but as these
particles are in such quantity, and so close to each other as to cover the
surface of every body that is opposed to them, and entirely to fill up that
vast space betwixt the earth and the sun, this objection I should think in a
great measure falls to the ground. The particles of air and of water are
likewise extremely minute, and a small quantity of these will produce little or
no effect, but increase their number, and only give them the millionth part of
the velocity that is ascribed to a ray of light, and no force whatever could be
able to withstand them.

Adieu. I have unwarily run myself into the very deeps of philosophy; and find
it rather difficult to struggle out again. I ask your pardon, and promise, if
possible, for the future, to steer quite clear of them. I am sure, whatever
this comet may be to the universe, it has been an ignis fatuus to me; for it
has led me strangely out of my road, and bewildered me amongst rock and
quicksands, where I was like to stick fifty times.

I have forgot whether or not you are a rigid Newtonian; if you are, I believe
I had better recant in time, for fear of accidents. I know this is a very
tender point; and I have seen many of those gentlemen, who are good christians
too, that can bear with much more temper to hear the divinity of our Savior
called in question, than that of Sir Isaac; and look on a Cartesian or a
Ptolomean, as a worse species of infidel than an atheist.

I remember when I was at college, to have seen a heretic to their doctrine of
gravity, very suddenly converted by being tossed in a blanket; and another, who
denied the law of centripetal and centrifugal forces, soon brought to assent,
from having the demonstration made upon his shoulders, by a stone whirled at
the end of a string.

These are powerful arguments, and it is difficult to withstand them. I cry you
mercy. I am without reach of you at present, and you are heartily welcome to
wreak your vengeance on my letter.

LETTER XXVII.
Palermo, July 6th.
MANY of the churches here are extremely rich and magnificent. The cathedral
(or, as they call it, Madre Chiesa) is a venerable Gothic building, and of a
large size; it is supported within by eighty columns of Oriental granite, and
divided into a great number of chapels, some of which are extremely rich,
particularly that of St. Rosolia, the patroness of Palermo, who is held in
greater veneration here, than all the persons of the Trinity; and, which is
still much more than even the Virgin Mary herself. The relics of the saint are
preserved in a large box of silver, curiously wrought, and enriched with
precious stones. They perform many miracles, and are looked upon as the
greatest treasure of the city. They are esteemed the most effectual remedy
against the plague, and have often preserved them from that fatal distemper.
The saint gained so much credit, in saving them from the last plague of
Messina, although it was at two hundred miles distance, that they have, out of
gratitude, erected a noble monument to her. -- St. Agatha did as much for
Catania, but that city has not been so generous to her. The other riches of
this church consist principally in some bones of St. Peter, and a whole arm of
St. John the Baptist. There is likewise a jaw bone of prodigious efficacy; and
some other bones of left note. It contains some things of smaller consequence,
which, however, are not altogether without their merit. The monuments of their
Norman kings, several of whom lie buried here, are of the finest porphyry, some
of them near seven hundred years old, and yet of very tolerable workmanship.
Opposite to these, there is a tabernacle of lapis lazuli. It is about fifteen
feet high, and finely ornamented. Some of the presents made to St. Rosolia, are
by no means contemptible. A cross of very large brilliants, from the king of
Spain, is, I think, the most considerable.

The Sachristie too is very rich: there are some robes embroidered with
Oriental pearl, that are near four hundred years old, and yet look as fresh as
if done yesterday.

The Jesuits church is equal in magnificence to any thing I have seen in Italy.
The genius of those fathers appears strong in all their works; one is never at
a loss to find then out. They have been grossly calumniated; for they certainly
had less hypocrisy than any other order of monks.

The Chiesa del Pallazzo is entirely encrusted over with ancient mosaic; and
the vaulted roof too is all of the same. But it is endless to talk of churches.
Here are upwards of three hundred. That of Monreale, about five miles distant
from this city, is the next in dignity in the island, after the cathedral of
Palermo. It is nearly of the same size, and the whole is encrusted with mosaic,
at an incredible expense. Here are likewise several porphyry and marble
monuments of the first kings of Sicily. This cathedral was built by King
William the Good, whose memory is still held in great veneration amongst the
Sicilians.

The archbishop of Monreale, is already looked upon as a saint, and indeed he
deserves beatification better, I believe, than most of those in the calendar.
His income is very great, of which he reserves to himself as much as procures
him clothes, and the simplest kind of food; all the rest he devotes to
charitable, pious, and public uses. He even seems to carry this too far, and
denies himself the common gratifications of life; such as sleeping on a bed; a
piece of luxury he is said never to indulge himself in, but lies every night on
straw. He is, as you may believe, adored by the people, who crowd in his way as
he passes, to receive his benediction; which they allege is even of more
sovereign efficacy than that of the pope. And indeed so it is, for he never
sees an object in distress, but he is sure to relieve him; not trusting alone
to the spiritual efficacy of the blessing, but always accompanying it with
something solid and temporal; and perhaps this accompaniment is not esteemed
the worst part of it. The town and country round Monreale are greatly indebted
to his liberality; and in every corner exhibit marks of his munificence. He has
just now made a present to the cathedral of a magnificent altar; only about one
half of which is finished. It is of massive silver, exquisitely wrought,
representing in high relief, some of the principal stories in the Bible, and, I
think, will be one of the finest in the world. But what is of much greater
utility, he has at his own expense made a noble walk the whole way from this
city to Monreale, which was formerly of very difficult access, as it stands
near the top of a pretty high mountain. The walk is cut with a great deal of
judgment on the side of this mountain, and winds by easy zig-zags to the top of
it. It is adorned with several elegant fountains of water, and is bordered on
each side with a variety of flowering shrubs. The valley at the foot of the
mountain is rich and beautiful. It appears one continued orange garden for many
miles, and exhibits an elegant piece of scenery; perfuming the air at the same
time with the most delicious odours. We were so pleased with this little
expedition, that notwithstanding the heat of the season, we could not keep in
our carriage, but walked almost the whole of it.

The city of Palermo for these ten days past has been wholly occupied in
preparing for the great feast of St. Rosolia. And if the show is in any degree
adequate to the expense and trouble it costs them, it must indeed be a very
noble one. They are erecting an incredible number of arches and pyramids for
the illuminations. They are of wood; painted, and adorned with artificial
flowers. These, they tell us, are to be entirely covered over with small lamps;
so that when seen at a little distance, they appear like so many pyramids and
arches of flame. The whole Marino, and the two great streets that divide the
city, are to be illuminated in this magnificent manner. The number of pyramids
and arches prepared for these illuminations, we are told, exceeds two thousand.
They are erected on each side of the street, betwixt the foot-path and the
(...), and run in two right lines exactly parallel from end to end. Each of
these lines is a mile in length, which makes four miles for the whole. The four
gates are the vistas to these four streets, and are to be highly decorated and
illuminated. From the square in the center of the city, the whole of this vast
illumination can be seen at once; and they assure us the grandeur of it exceeds
all belief. The whole of the Marino is to be dressed out in the same manner;
and for these three weeks past, they have been employed in erecting two great
theaters for fireworks. One of these fronts the viceroy's palace, and is almost
equal to it in size. The other is laid on piles driven in the sea, exactly
opposite to the great orchestra in the center of the Marino. Besides these,
they are building an enormous engine, which they call St. Rosolia's triumphal
car. From the size of it, one would imagine it were for ever to remain in the
spot where it is erected; but they assure us, it is to be drawn in triumph
through the city. It is indeed mounted upon wheels, but it does not appear that
any force whatever can be able to turn them.

I own my curiosity increases every day to see this singular exhibition. The
car is already higher than most houses in Palermo, and they are still adding to
its height. But the part of the show they value themselves the most on, is the
illumination of the great church; this they affirm is superior to any thing in
the world; the illumination of St. Peter's itself not excepted. The
preparations for it, are indeed amazing. These were begun about a month ago,
and will not be finished 'till toward the last days of the feast. The whole of
the cathedral, both roof and walls, is entirely covered over with mirror,
intermixed with gold and silver paper, and an infinite variety of artificial
flowers. All these are arranged and disposed, in my opinion, with great taste
and elegance; none of them predominate, but they are intermingled every where
in a just proportion.

Every altar, chapel, and column are finished in the same manner, which takes
off from the littleness of the particular ornaments, and gives an air of
grandeur and uniformity to the whole. The roof is hung with innumerable lustres
filled with wax candles, and I am persuaded, when the whole is lighted up, it
must be equal to any palace either in the Fairy Tales or the Arabian Nights
Entertainment. Indeed it seems pretty much in the same style too, for all is
gold, silver, and precious stones. The saints are dressed out in all their
glory, and die fairy queen herself was never finer than is St. Rosolia. The
people are lying yonder in crowds before her, praying with all their might. I
dare say, for one petition offered to God Almighty, she has at least an hundred.

We were just now remarking, with how little respect they pass the chapels
dedicated to God; they hardly deign to give a little inclination of the head;
but when they come near those of their favorite saints, they bow down to the
very ground: Ignorance and superstition have ever been inseparable: I believe
in their hearts they think he has already reigned long enough; and would be
glad to have a change in the government: And every one of them (like the poor
Welchman who thought he should be succeeded by Sir Watkin Williams) is fully
persuaded, that his own favorite saint is the true heir apparent. Indeed they
already give them the precedence on most occasions; not in processions and
affairs of etiquette; there they think it would not be decent; but, in their
more private affairs, they generally pay the compliment to the saint: Yet in
their inscriptions on churches and chapels, (which one would think are public
enough) when they are dedicated to God and any particular saint, they have
often ventured to put the name of the saint first. Sancto Januario, et Deo Opt.
Max. taking every opportunity of raising their dignity, though at the expense
of that of God himself.

LETTER XXVIII.
Palermo, July 7th.
I HAVE been enquiring who this fame St. Rosolia may be, who has become so very
capital a personage in this part of the world; but, notwithstanding their
adoring her with such fervency, I have found none that can give any tolerable
account of her saintship. They refer you to the most fabulous legends, that
even differ widely in their accounts of her. And, after all the offerings they
have made, the churches they have built, and monuments they have raised to her
memory, I think it is far from being improbable, that there really never did
exist such a person. I went through all the booksellers shops, but could find
nothing relative to her, except an epic poem, of which she is the heroine. It
is in the Sicilian language; and is indeed one of the greatest curiosities I
have met with. The poet sets her at once above all other saints except the
Virgin, and it seems to be with the greatest reluctance, that he can prevail
upon himself to yield the pas even to her. I find, from this curious
composition, and the notes upon it, that St. Rosolia was niece to King William
the Good. That she began very early to display symptoms of her sanctity. That
at fifteen she deserted the world and disclaimed all human society. She retired
to the mountains on the west of this city* and was never heard of for about
five hundred years. She disappeared in the year 1159. The people thought she
had been taken up to heaven; 'till in the year 1624, during the time of a
dreadful plague, a holy man had a vision, that the saint's bones were lying in
a ca^e near the top of the Monte Pelegrino. That if they were taken up with due
reverence, and carried in procession thrice round the walls of the city, they
should immediately be delivered from the plague. At first little attention was
paid to the holy man, and he was looked upon as little better than a dreamer;
however, he persisted in his story, grew noisy, and got adherents. The
magistrates, to pacify them, sent to the Monte Pelegrino; when lo the mighty
discovery was made! the sacred bones were found, the city was freed from the
plague, and St. Rosolia became the greatest saint in the calendar. Churches
were reared, altars were dedicated, and ministers appointed to this new
divinity, whose dignity and consequence have ever since been supported at an
incredible expense. Now I think it is more than probable that these bones, that
are now so much reverenced, and about which this great city is at present in
such a bustle, belong to some poor wretch that perhaps was murdered, or died
for want in the mountains. The holy man probably could have given a very good
account of them.

It is really astonishing to think, what animals superstition makes of mankind.
I dare say, the bones of St. Rosolia are just as little entitled to the honors
they receive, as those of poor St. Viar, which were found somewhere in Spain
under a broken tombstone, where these were the only legible letters. The story
I think, is told by Dr. Middleton. The priests found that the bones had an
excellent knack at working miracles, and were of opinion that this, together
with the S. Viar on the stone, was proof sufficient of his sanctity. He
continued long in high estimation, and they drew no inconsiderable revenue from
his abilities; 'till unfortunately they petitioned the pope to grant him some
immunities. The pope (Leo the tenth, I think,) not entirely satisfied with
regard to his saintship, desired to be informed of his pretensions. A list of
his miracles was sent over, accompanied by the stone with S. Viar upon it. The
first part of the proof was sustained; but the antiquaries discovered the
fragment to be part of the tombstone of a (Roman) praefectus viarum, or
overseer of the high road; to whose bones they had been so much indebted: and
poor St. Vair, though probably an honester man than most of them, was ordered
to ^e struck out of the calendar.

The people of fashion here hold the superstition of the vulgar in great
contempt; and perhaps that very superstition is one principal cause of their
infidelity. Indeed I have ever found, that deism is most prevalent in those
countries where the people are the wildest and most bigoted. A refined and
cultivated understanding, shocked at their folly, thinks it cannot possibly
recede too far from it, and is often tempted to fly to the very opposite
extreme. When reason is much offended by any particular dogma of faith or act
of worship, she is but too apt, in the midst of her disgust, to reject the
whole. The great misfortune is, that, in these countries, the most violent
champions for religion are commonly the most weak and ignorant; and certainly,
one weak advocate in any cause, but more particularly in a mysterious one, that
requires to be handled with delicacy and address, is capable of hurting it
more, than fifty of its warmest opponents. Silly books, that have been written
by weak well-meaning men, in defense of religion, I am confident have made more
infidels than all the works of Bo^^^gbr^k^, S^a^^esbury, or even Voltaire
himself: They only want to make people believe that there are some ludicrous
things to be said against it; but these grave plodding blockheads do all they
can to persuade us that there is little to be said for it. The universal error
of these gentry, is that they ever attempt to explain, and reconcile to sense
and reason those very mysteries that the first principles of our religion teach
us are incomprehensible; and of consequence neither objects of sense nor
reason. I once heard an ignorant priest declare, that he did not find the least
difficulty, in conceiving the mystery of the Trinity, or that of incarnation;
and that he would undertake to make them plain to the meanest capacities. A
gentlemen present told him, he had no doubt he could, to all such capacities as
his own. The priest took it as a compliment, and made him a bow. Now, don't you
think, that a few such teachers as this, must hurt religion more by their zeal,
than all its opponents can by their wit? Had these heroes still kept behind the
bulwarks of faith and of mystery, their adversaries never could have touched
them; but they have been foolish enough to abandon these strong holds; and
dared them forth to combat on the plain fields of reason and of sense. A sad
piece of generalship indeed: Such defenders must ever ruin the best cause.

But although the people of education here despise the wild superstition of the
vulgar, yet they regularly go to mass, and attend die ordinances with great
respect and decency; and they are much pleased with us for our conformity to
their customs, and for not appearing openly to despise their rites and
ceremonies. I own, this attention of theirs, not to offend weak minds, tends
much to give us a favorable opinion both of their hearts and understandings.
They don't make any boast of their infidelity; neither do they pester you with
it as in France, where it is perpetually buzzed in your ears; and where,
although they pretend to believe less, they do in fact believe more than any
nation on the continent.

I know of nothing that gives one a worse opinion of a man, than to see him
make a show and parade of his contempt for things held sacred: It is an open
insult to the judgment of the public. A countrym^n of ours, about two years
ago, offended egregiously in this article, and the people still speak of him
both with contempt and detestation. It happened one day, in the great church,
during the elevation of the host, when every body else were on their knees,
that he still kept standing, without any appearance of respect to the ceremony.
A young nobleman that was near him expressed his surprise at this. It is
strange, Sir, (said he) that you, who have had the education of a gentleman,
and ought to have the sentiments of one, should choose thus to give so very
public offense. Why, Sir, (said the Englishman) I don't believe in
transubstantiation." -- "Neither do I Sir, (replied the other) and yet you see
I kneel.

Adieu. I am called away to see the preparations for the feast. In my next I
shall probably give you some account of it.

P. S. I have been watching with great care the return of our comet, but as yet
I have discovered nothing of it: I observe too, with a very indifferent glass,
several large round spots on the sun's disk, and am far from being certain that
it is not one of them: But I shall not alarm you any more with this subject.

LETTER XXIX.
Palermo, July l0th.
ON sunday, the 8th, we had the long expected sirocc wind, which, although our
expectations, had been raised pretty high, yet I own it greatly exceeded them.
Ever since we came to our new lodging, the thermometer has stood betwixt 72 and
74; at our old one, it was often at 79 and 80; so great is the difference
betwixt the heart of the city and the seashore. At present, our windows not
only front to the north, but the sea is immediately under them, from whence we
are constantly refreshed by a delightful cooling breeze. Friday and Saturday
were uncommonly cool, the mercury never being higher than 72; and although the
sirocc is said to have set in early on Sunday morning, the air in our
apartments, which are very large, with high cielings, was not in the least
affected by it at eight o'clock, when I rose. I opened the door without having
any suspicion of such a change; and indeed I never was more astonished in my
life. The first blast of it on my face felt like the burning steam from the
mouth of an oven. I drew back my head and shut the door, calling out to
Fullarton, that the whole atmosphere was in a flame. However, we ventured to
open another door that leads leads to a cool platform where we usually walk;
this was not exposed to the wind; and here I found the heat much more
supportable than I could have expected from from the first specimen I had of it
at the other door. It felt somewhat like the subterraneous sweating stoves at
Naples; but still much hotter. In a few minutes we found every fiber greatly
relaxed, and the pores opened to such a degree, that we expected soon to be
thrown into a profuse sweat. I went to examine the thermometer, and found the
air in the room as yet so little affected, that it stood only at 73. The
preceding night it was at 72. I took it out to the open air, when it
immediately rose to 110, and soon after to 112; and I am confident, that in our
old lodgings, or any where within the city, it must have risen several degrees
higher. The air was thick and heavy, but the barometer was little affected; it
had fallen only about a line. The sun did not once appear the whole day,
otherwise I am persuaded the heat must have been insupportable; on that side of
our platform which is exposed to the wind, it was with difficulty we could bear
it for a few minutes. Here I exposed a little pomatum which was melted down, as
if I had laid it before the fire. I attempted to take a walk in the street, to
see if any creature was stirring, but I found it too much for me, and was glad
to get up stairs again.

This extraordinary heat continued till 3 o'clock in the afternoon, when the
wind changed at once, almost to the opposite point of the compass, and all the
rest of the day it blew strong from the sea. It is impossible to conceive the
different feeling of the air. Indeed, the sudden change from heat to cold is
almost as inconceivable as that from cold to heat. The current of this hot air
had been flying for many hours from south to north; and I had no doubt, that
the atmosphere, many for miles round, was entirely composed of it; however, the
wind no sooner changed to the North, than it felt extremely cold, and we were
soon obliged to put on our clothes, for 'till then we had been almost naked. In
a short time the thermometer sunk to 82, a degree of heat that in England would
be thought almost insupportable, and yet all that night we were obliged, merely
from the cold, to keep up the glasses of our coach; so much were the pores
opened and the fibers relaxed by these few hours of the sirocc. Indeed, I had
exposed myself a good deal to the open air, as I was determined to feel what
effect it would produce on the human body. At first I thought it must have been
impossible to bear it; but I soon discovered my mistake, and found, that where
I was sheltered from the wind, I could walk about without any great
inconveniency; neither did it produce that copious sweat expected; it
occasioned indeed a violent perspiration, which was only attended with a slight
moisture on the skin; but I suppose, if I had put on my clothes, or taken the
least exercise, it soon would have brought it on.

I own to you my curiosity with regard to the sirocc is now thoroughly
satisfied; nor do I at all wish for another visit of it during our stay in
Sicily. Many of our acquaintance who had been promising us this regalo, as they
call it, came crowding about us as soon as it was over, to know what we thought
of it. They own it has been pretty violent for the time it lasted; but assure
us they have felt it more so, and likewise of a much longer duration; however,
it seldom lasts more than thirty-six or forty hours, so that the walls of the
houses have not time to be heated throughout, otherwise they think there could
be no such thing as living: However, from what I felt of it, I believe they are
mistaken. Indeed, had I been satisfied with the first blast (which is generally
the case with them) and never more ventured out in it, I certainly should have
been of their opinion. They laughed at us for exposing ourselves so long to it;
and were surprised that our curiosity should lead us to make experiments at the
expense of our persons. They assure us, that during the time it lasts, there is
not a mortal to be seen without doors, but those whom necessity obliges. All
their doors and windows are shut close, to prevent the external air from
entering; and where there are no window-shutters, they hang up wet blankets on
the inside of the window. The servants are constantly employed in sprinkling
water through their apartments, to preserve the air in as temperate a state as
possible; and this is no difficult matter here, as I am told there is not a
house in the city that has not a fountain within it. By these means the people
of fashion suffer very little from the sirocc, except the strict confinement to
which it obliges them.

It is somewhat singular, that notwithstanding the scorching heat of this wind
it has never been known to produce any epidemical distempers, nor indeed bad
consequences of any kind to the health of the people. It is true, they feel
extremely weak and relaxed during the time it blows, but a few hours of the
Tramontane, or North wind, which generally succeeds it, soon braces them up,
and sets them to rights again. Now, in Naples, and in many other places in
Italy, where its violence is not to be compared to this, it is often attended
with putrid disorders, and seldom fails to produce a general dejection of
spirits. It is true, indeed, that there the sirocc lasts for many days, nay,
even for weeks; so that, as its effects are different, it probably proceeds
likewise from a different cause.

I have not been able to procure any good account of this very singular object
in the climate of Palermo. The caufes they assign for it are various, though
none of them, I think, altogether satisfactory.

I have seen an old fellow here, who has written upon it. He says it is the
same wind that is so dreadful in the sandy deserts of Africa, where it
sometimes proves mortal in the space of half an hour. He alleges that it is
cooled by its passage over the sea, which entirely disarms it of these
tremendous effects, before it reaches Sicily. But if this were true, we should
expect to find it most violent on that side of the island that lies nearest to
Africa, which is not the case: Though indeed it is possible, that its heat may
be again increased by its passage across the island; for it has ever been found
much more violent at Palermo, which is near the most northern point, than any
where else in Sicily. Indeed, I begin to be more reconciled to this reason,
when I consider that this city is almost surrounded by high mountains, the
ravines and valleys betwixt which are parched up and burning hot at this
season. These likewise contain innumerable springs of warm water, the steams of
which must tend greatly to increase the heat, and perhaps likewise to soften
the air, and disarm it of its noxious qualities. It is a practice too, at this
season, to burn heath and brushwood on the mountains, which must still add to
the heat of the air.

Some gentlemen who were in the country told me, that they walked out
immediately after the sirocc, and found the grass and plants that had been
green the day before, were become quite brown, and crackled under their feet as
if dried in an oven.

I shall add for your amusement, a journal of the weather since we came to
Palermo. The barometer has continued constantly within a line or two of the
same point, 29; and the sky has been always clear, except the day of the sirocc
and the 26th of June, when we had a pretty smart shower of rain for two hours;
so that I think I have nothing farther to do, but to mark the heights of the
thermometer.

Thermometer. June 17 -- 73 18 -- 74 19 -- 75 20 -- 76 21 -- 75 22 -- 77 23 --
76 24 -- 77 25 -- 77 26 -- 77 27 -- 77 28 -- 77 29 -- 77
June 30 -- 78 July 1 -- 79 2 -- 80 3 -- 80 4 At our new lodgings on the
seaside, fronting the North, 74 5 -- 73 6 -- 72 7 -- 72 8 The sirocc wind, 112
In the afternoon, 82 9 -- 79 10 -- 78
The more I consider the extreme violence of this heat, the more I am surprised
that we were able to bear it with so little inconvenience. We did not even feel
that depression of spirits that commonly attends very great heats with us. The
thermometer rose 40 degrees, or very near it; and it happens singularly enough,
that before the sirocc began, it stood just about 40 degrees above the point of
congelation; so that in the morning of the 8th of July, the heat increased as
much, almost instantaneously, as it generally does during the whole time that
the sun moves from tropic to tropic; for the difference of 72 and 112 is the
same as between the freezing point and 72; or between a cold day in winter, and
a warm one in summer.

Yesterday we had a great entertainment in the palace of the Prince Partana,
from the balcony of which the viceroy reviewed a regiment of Swiss, the best I
have yet seen in the Neapolitan service. They are really a fine body of men,
and, notwithstanding the violence of the heat, went through their motions with
great spirit. They had two field pieces on each flank, which were extremely
well served; and the evolutions were performed with more precision and
steadiness than one generally meets with, except in England or Germany. The
grenadiers were furnished with false grenades, which produced every effect of
real ones, except that of doing mischief. The throwing of these was the part of
the entertainment that seemed to please the most; and the grenadiers took care
to direct them so, that their effect should not be lost. When a number of them
fell together amongst a thick crowd of the mobility, which was commonly the
case, it afforded an entertaining scene enough, for they defended themselves
with their hats, and threw them very dexterously upon their neighbors.
However, we saw no damage done, except the singeing of a few wigs and caps; for
the ladies were there in as great numbers as the gentlemen.

The company at the Prince Partana's was brilliant, and the entertainment
noble. It consisted principally of ices, creams, chocolate, sweetmeats, and
fruits, of which there was a great variety. Not one half of the company played
at cards; the rest amused themselves in conversation and walking on the
terrace. We found the young prince and princess who are very amiable, with
several of their companions playing at cross-purposes, and other games of that
kind. We were joyfully admitted of this cheerful little circle, where we amused
ourselves very well for several hours. I only mention this, to show you the
different system of behavior here and in Italy, where no such familiar
intercourse is allowed amongst young people before marriage. The young ladies
here are easy, affable, and unaffected; and, not (as on the continent)
perpetually stuck up by the sides of their mothers, who bring them into
company, not for their amusement, but rather to offer them for sale; and seem
mightily afraid lest every one should steal them, or that they themselves
should make an elopement; which indeed I should think there was some danger of,
considering the restraint under which they are kept: For surely there is no
such strong incitement to vice, as the making a punishment of virtue.

Here the mothers show a proper confidence in their daughters, and allow their
real characters to form and to ripen. In the other case they have either no
character at all, or an affected one, which they take care to throw off the
moment they have got a husband; when they think it impossible to recede too far
from those rigorous maxims of decorum and circumspection, the practice of which
they had ever found so extremely disagreeable.

Were they allowed first to show what they really are, I am persuaded they
would not be half so bad; but their parents, by the manner they treat them,
show that they have no confidence in their principles; and seem to have adopted
the ungenerous maxim of our countryman, "That every woman is at heart a rake."

Now in countries where this maxim becomes of general belief, there is no
doubt, that it likewise becomes true; for the women having no longer any
character to support, they will even avoid the pretenses to virtue, well
knowing that those pretenses are only looked upon as hypocrisy and affectation.
I dare say, you will agree with me, that the better method to make them
virtuous, is first to make them believe that we think them so; for where virtue
is really esteemed, there are none that would willingly relinquish the
character; but where it requires a guard, (as parson Adams says) it certainly
is not worth the sentinel.

Some of the families here put me in mind of our domestic system. The prince of
Resuttana, his wife and daughter, are always together; but it is because they
choose to be so, and there appears the strongest affection, without the least
diffidence on the one side, or restraint on the other. The young princess Donna
Rosolia is one of the most amiable young ladies I have seen; she was of our
little party last night, and indeed made one of its greatest ornaments. It
would appear vain and partial after this to say that in countenance, sentiment,
and behavior, she seems altogether English; but it is true: And this perhaps
may have contributed to advance her still higher in our esteem; for in spite of
all our philosophy these unphilosophical prejudices will still exist, and no
man, I believe, has entirely divested himself of them. We had lately a noble
entertainment at her father's country house, and had reason to be much pleased
with the unaffected hospitality and easy politeness of the whole family. This
palace is reckoned the most magnificent in the neighborhood of Palermo. It
lies about six or seven miles to the west of the city, in the country called Il
Colle; in the opposite direction from the Bagaria, which I have already
mentioned. The viceroy and his family, with the greatest part of the nobility,
were of this party, which lasted till about two in the morning. At midnight a
curious set of fireworks were played off, from the leads of the palace, which
had a ^ine effect from the garden below.

Farewell. I had no time to write yesterday, and though we did not break up
till near three this morning, I have got up at eight, I was so eager to give
you some account of the sirocc wind.

We are now going to be very busy: The feast of St. Rosolia begins tomorrow;
and all the world are on the very tip-toe of expectation: Perhaps they may be
disappointed. I often wish that you were with us, particularly when we are
happy: Though you know it is by no means feasts and shows that makes us so.
However, as this is perhaps the most remarkable one in Europe; that you may
enjoy as much of it as possible, I shall sit down every night, and give you a
short account of the transactions of the day. We are now going to breakfast;
after which we are engaged to play at Ballo^, an exercise I suppose you are
well acquainted with; but as the day promises to be extremely hot, I believe I
shall desert the party and go a swimming. But I see F. and G. have already
attacked the figs and peaches, so I must appear for my interest -- Farewell.

LETTER XXX.
Palermo, July 12th.
ABOUT five in the afternoon, the festival began by the triumph of St. Rosolia,
who was drawn with great pomp through the center of the city, from the Marino
to the Porto Nuovo. The triumphal car was preceeded by a troop of horse, with
trumpets and kettle-drums; and all the city officers in their gala uniforms. It
is indeed a most enormous machine: It measures seventy feet long, thirty wide,
and upwards (...) eighty high; and, as it passed along, over-topped the
loftiest houses of Palermo. The form of its under-part is like that of the
Roman galleys, but it swells as it advances in height; and the front assumes an
oval shape like an amphitheatre, with seats placed in the theatrical manner.
This is the great orchestra, which was filled with a numerous band of musicians
placed in rows, one above the other: Over this orchestra and a little behind
it, there is a large dome supported by six Corinthian columns, and adorned with
a number of figures of saints and angels; and on the summit of the dome there
is a gigantic silver statue of St. Rosolia. The whole machine is dressed out
with orange trees, flower-pots, and trees of artificial coral. The car stopped
every fifty or sixty yards, when the orchestra performed a piece of music, with
songs in honor of the saint. It appeared a moving castle, and completely filled
the great street from side to side. This indeed was its greatest disadvantage,
for the space it had to move in was in no wise proportioned to its size, and
the houses seemed to dwindle away to nothing as it passed along. This vast
fabric was drawn by fifty-six huge mules, in two rows, curiously caparisoned,
and mounted by twenty-eight postillions, dressed in gold and silver stuffs,
with great plumes of ostrich feathers in their hats. Every window and balcony,
on both sides of the street, were full of well-dressed people, and the car was
followed by many thousands of the lower sort. The triumph was finished in about
three hours; and was succeeded by the beautiful illumination of the Marino.

I believe I have already mentioned, that there is a range of arches and
pyramids extending from end to end of this noble walk: These are painted and
adorned with artificial flowers, and are entirely covered with lamps, placed so
very thick, that at a little distance the whole appears so many pyramids and
arches of flame. The whole chain of this illumination was about a mile in
length, and indeed you can hardly conceive any thing more splendid. There was
no break or imperfection any where; the night being so still that not a single
lamp was extinguished.

Opposite to the center of this great line of light, there was a magnificent
pavilion erected for the viceroy and his company, which consisted of the whole
nobility of Palermo: And on the front of this, at some little distance in the
sea, stood the great fireworks, representing the front of a palace, adorned
with columns, arches, trophies, and every ornament of architecture. All the
chebecks, galleys, galliots and other shipping, were ranged around this palace,
and formed a kind of amphitheatre in the sea, enclosing in it the center. These
began the show by a discharge of the whole of their artillery, the sound of
which re-echoed from the mountains, produced a very noble effect; they then
played off a variety of water rockets, and bombs of a curious construction,
that often burst below water. This continued for half an hour, when, in an
instant, the whole of the palace was beautifully illuminated. This was the
signal for the shipping to cease, and appeared indeed like a piece of
enchantment, as it was done altogether instantaneously, and without the
appearance of any agent. At the same time the fountains that were represented
in the court before the palace, began to spout up fire, and made a
representation of some of the great jet d'eaus of Versailles and Marly. As soon
as these were extinguished, the court assumed the form of a great parterre;
adorned with a variety of palm trees of fire, interspersed with orange trees,
flower-pots, vases, and other ornaments. On the extinguishing of these the
illumination of the palace was likewise extinguished; and the front broke out
into the appearance of a variety of suns, stars, and wheels of fire, which in a
short time reduced it to a perfect ruin. And when all appeared finished, there
burst from the center of the pile, a vast explosion of two thousand rockets,
bombs, serpents, squibs, and devils, which seemed to fill the whole atmosphere;
the fall of these made terrible havoc amongst the clothes of the poor people
who were not under cover, but afforded admirable entertainment to the nobility
who were. During this exhibition we had a handsome entertainment of coffee,
ices and sweatmeats, with a variety of excellent wines, in the great pavilion
in the center of the Marino; this was at the expense of the Duke of Castellano,
the praetor (or mayor) of the city. The principal nobility give these
entertainments by turns every night during the festival, and vie with each
other in their magnificence.

As soon as the fireworks were finished, the viceroy went out to sea in a
galley richly illuminated. We chose to stay on shore, to see the appearance it
made at a distance. It was rowed by seventy-two oars, and indeed made one of
most beautiful objects you can imagine; flying with vast velocity over the
waters, as smooth and as clear as glass, which shone round it like a flame, and
reflected its splendor on all sides. The oars beat time to the French-horns,
clarionets, and trumpets, of which there was a numerous band on the prow.

The day's entertainment was concluded by the Corso, which began exactly at
midnight, and lasted 'till two in the morning.

The great street was illuminated in the same magnificent manner as the Marino.
The arches and pyramids were erected at little distances from each other, on
both sides of the street, betwixt the foot-path and the space for carriages;
and when seen from either of the gates, appeared to be two continued lines of
the brightest flame. Indeed, these illuminations are so very different, and so
much superior, to any I have ever seen, that I find it difficult to give any
tolerable idea of them. Two lines of coaches occupied the space betwixt these
two lines of illumination. They were in the greatest gala; and as they open
from the middle, and let down on each side, the beauty of the ladies, the
richness of their dress, and brilliance of their jewels, were displayed in the
most advantageous manner.

This beautiful train moved slowly round and round for the space of two hours;
and every member of it seemed animated with a desire to please. The company
appeared all joy and exultation: Scarce two coaches passed without some mutual
acknowledgement of affection or respect; and the pleasure that sparkled from
every eye seemed to be reflected and communicated by a kind of sympathy through
the whole.

In such an assembly, it was impossible for the heart not to dilate and expand
itself; I own mine was often so full, that I could hardly find utterance; and I
have seen a tragedy with less emotion than I did this scene of joy. I always
thought these affections had been strangers to pomp and parade; but here the
universal joy seemed really to spring from the heart; it brightened up every
countenance, and spoke affection and friendship from every face. No stately
air, no supercilious look; all appeared friends and equals. And sure I am, that
the beauty of the ladies was not half so much heightened either by their dress
or their jewels, as by that air of complacency and good humor with which it
was animated.

We were distributed in different coaches amongst the nobility, which gave us a
better opportunity of making these observations. I will own to you, that I have
never beheld a more delightful sight; and if superstition often produces such
effects, I sincerely wish we had a little more of it amongst us. I could have
thrown myself down before St. Rosolia, and blessed her for making so many
people happy.

We retired about two o'clock, but the variety of glittering scenes and gaudy
objects still vibrated before my eyes, and prevented me from sleeping; however,
I am almost as much refreshed as if I had; but I really believe four more such
days will be too much for any of us. Indeed, I am sure that it is impossible to
keep it up, and it must necessarily flag. I think, from what I can observe,
they have already exhausted almost one half of their preparations; how they are
to support the other four days, I own, I do not comprehend; however, we shall
see.

I thought to have given you an account of every thing at night, after it was
over, but I find it impossible; the spirits are too much dissipated, and
exhausted, and the imagination is too full of objects to be able to separate
them with any degree of regularity. I shall write you therefore regularly the
morning following, when this fever of the fancy has had time to cool, and when
things appear as they really are. Adieu then 'till tomorrow. Here is a fine
shower, which will cool the air, and save the trouble of watering the Marino
and the great street, which is done regularly every morning when there is no
rain. The thermometer is at 73.

13th. I thought there would be a falling off. Yesterday's entertainments were
not so splendid as those of the day before. They began by the horse-races.
There were three races, and six horses started each race. These were mounted by
boys of about twelve years old, without either saddle or bridle, but only a
small piece of cord, by way of bit, in the horse's mouth, which it seems is
sufficient to stop them. The great street was the course; and to this end it
was covered with earth to the depth of five or six inches. The firing of a
cannon at the Porto Felice was the signal for starting; and the horses seemed
to understand this, for they all set off at once, full speed, and continued at
their utmost stretch to the Porto Nuovo, which was the winning post. It is
exactly a mile, and they performed it in a minute and thirty-five seconds,
which, considering the size of the horses, (scarce fourteen hands) we thought
was very great. These are generally Barbs, or a mixed breed, betwixt a Sicilian
and Barb. The boys were gaudily dressed, and made a pretty appearance. We were
surprised to see how well they stuck on; but indeed, I observed they had
generally laid fast hold of the mane.

The moment before starting, the street appeared full of people; nor did we
conceive how the race could possibly be performed. Our surprise was increased
when we saw the horses run full speed at the very thickest of this crowd, which
did not begin to open, 'till they were almost close upon it. The people then
opened, and fell back on each side, by a regular uniform motion, from one end
of the street to the other. This singular maneuver seemed to be performed
without any bustle or confusion, and the moment the horses were past, they
closed again behind them. However, it destroys great part of the pleasure of
the race; for you cannot help being under apprehensions for such a number of
people, whom you every moment see in imminent danger of being trod to death;
for this must inevitably be their fate, were they only a second or two later in
retiring. These accidents, they allow, have often happened; however, yesterday
every body escaped.

The victor was conducted along the street in triumph, with his prize displayed
before him. This was a piece of white silk embroidered and worked with gold.

These races I think are much superior to the common style of races in Italy,
which are performed by horses alone without riders; but they are by no means to
be compared to those in England.

The great street was illuminated in the same manner as on the preceding night;
and the grand conversation of the nobles was held at the archbishop's palace,
which was richly fitted up for the occasion.

The gardens were finely illuminated; and put me in mind of our Vauxhall. There
were two orchestras (one at each end) and two very good bands of music. The
entertainment was splendid, and the archbishop showed attention and politeness
to every person of the company.

About ten o'clock the great triumphal car marched back again in procession to
the Marino. It was richly illuminated with large wax tapers, and made a most
formidable figure. Don Quixote would have been very excusable in taking it for
an enchanted castle, moving through the air. We did not leave the archbishop's
'till midnight, when the Corso began, which was precisely the same in every
respect as the night before, and afforded us a delightful scene.

14th. Last night the two great streets and the four gates of the city that
terminate them, were illuminated in the most splendid manner. These streets
cross each other in the center of the city, where they form a beautiful square,
called La Piazza Ottangolare, from the eight angles they form. This square was
richly ornamented with tapestry, statues, and artificial flowers; and as the
buildings which form its four sides are uniform, and of a beautiful
architecture, and at the same time highly illuminated, it made a fine
appearance.

There are four orchestras erected in it; and the four bands of music are
greater than I had any conception this city could have produced.

From the center of this square you have a view of the whole city of Palermo
thus dressed out in its glory; and indeed, the effect it produces surpasses
belief. The four gates that form the vistas to this splendid scene are highly
decorated, and lighted up in an elegant taste; the illuminations representing a
variety of trophies, the arms of Spain, those of Naples, Sicily, and the city
of Palermo, with their guardian geniuses, etc.

The conversation of the nobles was held in the viceroy's palace; and the
entertainment was still more magnificent than any of the former. The great
fireworks opposite to the front of the palace began at ten o'clock, and ended
at midnight; after which we went to the Corso, which lasted, as usual, 'till
two in the morning. This part of the entertainment still pleases us most; it is
indeed the only part of it that reaches the heart; and where this is not the
case, a puppet-show is just as good as a coronation. We have now got acquainted
almost with every countenance; and from that air of goodness and benignity that
animates them, and which seems to be mutually reflected from one to the other,
we are inclined to form the most favorable opinion of the people.

Our fireworks last night were greater than those of the Marino, but their
effect did not please me so much; the want of the sea and the shipping were two
capital wants. They likewise represented the front of a palace, but of a
greater extent. It was illuminated too as the former, and the whole conducted
pretty much in the same manner. We saw it to the greatest advantage from the
balconies of the state apartments, in the viceroy's palace, where we had an
elegant concert; but to the no small disappointment of the company, Gabrieli,
the finest singer, but the most capricious mortal upon earth, did not choose to
perform.

15th. Three races, six horses each, as formerly. They called it very good
sport. I cannot say that I admired it. A poor creature was rode down, and I
believe killed; and one of the boys had likewise a fall.

The great assembly of the nobility was held at the Judice Monarchia's an
officer of high trust and dignity. Here we had an entertainment in the same
style as the others, and a good concert. At eleven o'clock the viceroy,
attended by the whole company, went on foot to visit the square and the great
church. We made a prodigious train; for though the city was all a lamp of
light, the servants of the viceroy and nobility attended with wax flambeaux, to
show us the way. As soon as the viceroy entered the square, the four orchestras
struck up a symphony, and continued playing 'till he left it.

The crowd around the church was very great, and without presence of the
viceroy, it would have been impossible for us to get in; but his attendants
soon cleared the passages; and at once entering the great gate, we beheld the
most splendid scene in the world. The whole church appeared a flame of light;
which, reflected from ten thousand bright and shining surfaces of different
colors and of different angles, produced an effect, which, I think, exceeds
all the descriptions of enchantment I have ever read. Indeed, I did not think
that human art could have devised any thing so splendid. I believe I have
already mentioned that the whole church, walls, roof, pillars, and pilasters
were entirely covered over with mirror, interspersed with gold and silver
paper, artificial flowers, etc. done up with great taste and elegance, so that
not one inch either of stone or plaster was to be seen. Now, form an idea, if
you can, of our great cathedrals dressed out in this manner, and illuminated
with twenty thousand wax-tapers, and you will have some faint notion of this
splendid scene. I own it did greatly exceed my expectations, although, from the
descriptions we had of it, they were raised very high. When we recovered from
our first surprise, which had produced, unknown to ourselves, many exclamations
of astonishment, I observed that all the eyes of the nobility were fixed upon
us; and that they enjoyed exceedingly the amazement into which we were thrown.
Indeed this scene, in my opinion, greatly exceeds all the rest of the show.

I have often heard the illumination of St. Peter's spoken of as a wonderful
fine thing: So indeed it is; but it is certainly no more to be compared to
this, than the planet Venus is to the sun. The effects indeed are of a
different kind, and cannot well be compared together.

This scene was too glaring to bear any considerable time; and the heat
occasioned by the immense number of lights, soon became intolerable. I
attempted to reckon the number of lustres, and counted upwards of five hundred;
but my head became giddy, and I was obliged to give it up. They assure us that
the number of wax-tapers is not less than twenty thousand. There are
eight-and-twenty altars, fourteen on each side; these are dressed out with the
utmost magnificence; and the great altar is still the most splendid of all.

When you think of the gaudy materials that compose the lining of this church,
it will be difficult to annex an idea of grandeur and majesty to it: At least,
so it struck me, when I was first told of it; yet, I assure you, the elegant
simplicity and unity of the design prevents this effect, and gives an air of
dignity to the whole.

It is on this part of the show the people of Palermo value themselves most;
they talk of all the rest as trifling in comparison of this; and indeed, I
think it is probable, that there is nothing of the kind in the world that is
equal to it. It is strange they should choose to be at so great an expense and
trouble, for a show of a few hours only; for they have already begun this
morning, to strip the church of its gaudy dress, and I am told it will not be
finished for many weeks.

From the church we went immediately to the Corso, which concluded, as usual,
the entertainments of the day.

16th. Last night we had the full illumination of all the streets. The assembly
was held at the praetor's where there was an elegant entertainment and a
concert. Pacherotti, the first man of the opera, distinguished himself very
much. I think he is one of the most agreeable singers I ever heard; and am
persuaded, that in a few years, he will be very celebrated. Campanucci, the
second soprano, is, I think, preferable to most that I have heard in Italy; and
you will the more easily believe this, when I inform you, that he is engaged
for next winter, to be the first singer in the great opera at Rome. Is it not
strange, that the capital of all Italy; and, for the fine arts, (as it formerly
was for arms) the capital of the world, should condescend to choose its first
opera performer from amongst the subalterns of a remote Sicilian stage?

You will believe, that with two such sopranos as these, and Gabrieli for the
first woman, the opera here will not be a despicable one. It is to begin in a
few days notwithstanding the extreme heat of the season; so fond are the people
here of these entertainments.

Their opera dancers are those you had last year at London; they are just
arrived, and the people are by no means pleased with them. We saw them this
morning at the rehearsal; and, to their great surprise, addressed them in
English. You cannot imagine how happy they were to see us. Poor souls! I was
delighted to hear with what warmth of gratitude and affection they spoke of
England. There is a mother and two daughters; the youngest pretty, but the
eldest, the first dancer, appears a sensible, modest, well-behaved girl; more
so than is common with these sort of people. Speaking of England, she said,
with a degree of warmth, that her good treatment in general could hardly
inspire, that in her life she never left any country with so sore a heart; and
had she only enjoyed her health, all the world should never have torn her away
from it. She seemed affected when she said this. I acknowledge the honor she
did the English nation; but alleged that the sentiments, and the manner in
which they were uttered could scarcely proceed from a general love of the
country. She answered me with a smile, but at the same time I could observe the
tear in her eye. At that instant we were interrupted; however, I shall
endeavor, if possible, to learn her story; for I am persuaded there is one:
Perhaps you may know it, as I dare say it is no secret in London.

But I have got quite away from my subject, and had forgot that I sat down to
give you an account of the feast. Indeed I will own, it is a kind of subject I
by no means like to write upon; I almost repent that I had undertaken it, and
am heartily glad it is now over. It does very well to see shows; but their
description is of all things on earth the most insipid: For words and writing
convey ideas only by a slow and regular kind of progress; and while we gain
one, we generally lose another, so that the fancy seldom embraces the whole;
but when a thousand objects strike you at once, the imagination is filled and
satisfied.

The great procession that closes the festival began at ten o'clock. It only
differed from other processions in this, that besides all the priests, friars,
and religious orders of the city, there were placed an equal distances from
each other ten losty machines made of wood and pasteboard, ornamented in an
elegant manner, representing temples, tabernacles, an^ a variety of beautiful
pieces of architecture. These are furnished by the different convents and
religious fraternities, who vie with each other in the richness and elegance of
the work. Some of them are not less than sixty feet high. They are filled with
figures of saints and of angels, made of wax, so natural and so admirably well
painted, that many of them seemed really to be alive. All these figures are
prepared by the nuns, and by them dressed out in rich robes of gold and silver
tissue.

We were a good deal amused this morning to see them returning home in coaches
to their respective nunneries. At first we took them for ladies in their gala
dress, going out to visit the churches, which we were told was the custom, and
began to pull off our hats as they went past. Indeed, we were led into this
blunder by some of our friends, who carried us out on purpose; and as they saw
the coaches approach, told us, This is the Princess of such a thing; there is
the Duchess of such another thing; and, in short, we had made half a dozen of
our best bows, (to the no small entertainment of these wags) before we
discovered the trick. They now insist upon it, that we are good Catholics, for
all this morning we had been bowing to saints and angels.

A great silver box, containing the bones of St. Rosolia, closed the
procession. It was carried by thirty-six of the most respectable burgesses of
the city, who look upon this as the greatest honor. The archbishop walked
behind it, giving his benediction to the people as he passed.

No sooner had the procession finished the tour of the great square before the
praetor's palace, than the fountain in the center, one of the largest and
finest in Europe, was converted into a fountain of fire; throwing it up on all
sides, and making a beautiful appearance. It only lasted for a few minutes, and
was extinguished by a vast explosion, which concluded the whole. As this was
altogether unexpected, it produced a fine effect, and surprised the spectators
more than any of the great fireworks had done.

There was a mutual and friendly congratulation ran through the whole assembly,
which soon after parted; and this morning every thing has once more reassumed
its natural form and order; and I assure you, we were not more happy at the
opening of the festival, than we are now at its conclusion. Every body was
fatigued and exhausted by the perpetual feasting, watching, and dissipation of
these five days. However, upon the whole, we have been much delighted with it,
and may with truth pronounce, that the entertainments of the feast of St.
Rosolia are much beyond those of the holy week at Rome; of the Ascension, at
Venice; or, indeed, any other festival we have ever been witness of.

I believe I did not tell you, that about ten or twelve days ago, as the time
we had appointed for our return to Naples was elapsed, we had hired a small
vessel, and provided every thing for our departure: We had even taken leave of
the viceroy, and received our passports. Our baggage and sea-store was already
on board, when we were set upon by our friends, and solicited with so much
earnestness and cordiality, to give them another fortnight, that we found it
impossible to refuse it; and in consequence discharged our vessel, and sent for
our trunks. I should not have mentioned this, were it not to show you how much
more attention is paid to strangers here than in most places on the continent.

We reckon ourselves much indebted to them for having obliged us to prolong our
stay; as, independent of the amusements of the festival, we have met with so
much hospitality and urbanity, that there it is now with the most sincere
regret we find ourselves obliged to leave them. Indeed, had we brought our
clothes and books from Naples, it is hard to say how long we might have stayed.

We have sent to engage a vessel, but probably shall not sail for five or six
days. Adieu.

LETTER XXXI.
Palermo, July 19th.
WE have now had time to enquire a little into some of the antiquities of this
island, and have found several people, particularly the prince of Torremuzzo,
who have made this the great object of their study. However, I find we must
wade through oceans of fiction, before we can arrive at any thing certain or
satisfactory.

Most of the Sicilian authors agree in deriving their origin from Ham, or, as
they call him, Cham, the son of Noah, who, they pretend, is the same with
Saturn. They tell you that he built a great city, which from him was named
Camesena. There have been violent disputes about the situation of this city:
Beroso supposes it to have stood, where Camari^a was afterward founded* and
that this was only a corruption of its primitive name. But Guarneri, Carrera,
and others, combat this opinion, and affirm, that Camesena stood near the foot
of Aetna, betwixt Aci and Catania, almost opposite to the three rocks that
still bear the name of the Cyclops. Indeed Carrera mentions an inscription that
he had seen in a ruin near Aci, supposed to have been the sepulcher of Acis,
which he thinks puts his matter out of doubt. These are his words: Haec est
inscriptio vetustae cujusdam tabellae repertae in pyramide sepulchri Acis, ex
fragmentis vetustissimae Chamesenae, urbis hodie Acis, conditae a Cham,
gigantum principe, etiam noncupato Saturno, Chameseno, in promontorio Xiphonio,
ubi adhuc hodie visuntur solo aequata antiqua vestigia, et ruinae dictae urbis
et arcis in insula prope Scopulos Cyclopum, et retinet adhuc sincopatum nomen
La Gazzena.

This same Cham they tell you was a very great scoundrel, and that esenus which
signified infamous, was added to his name, only to denote his character.
Fazzello says, he married his own sister, who was called Rhea; that Ceres was
the fruit of his marriage; that she did not inherit the vices of her father,
but reigned over Sicily with great wisdom and moderation. That she taught her
subjects the method of making bread and wine, the materials for which their
island produced spontaneously in great abundance. That her daughter Proserpine
was of equal beauty and virtue with herself: Orius king of Epirus had demanded
her in marriage, and on a refusal, carried off by force; which gave occasion to
the wild imagination of Greece to invent the fable of the rape of Proserpine by
Pluto, king of hell, this Orius being of a morose and gloomy disposition.

Ceres has ever been the favorite deity of the Sicilians. She chose her seat
of empire in the center of the island, on the top of a high hill called Enna,
where she founded the city of that name. It is still a considerable place, and
is now called Castragiovanni; but little or nothing remain of the ruins of Enna.

Cicero gives a particular account of this place. He says, from its situation
in the center of the island, it was called Umbilicus Siciliae, and describes it
as one of the most beautiful and fertile spots in the world, The temple of
Ceres, at Enna was renowned all over the heathen world, and pilgrimages were
made to it, as they are at present to Loretto. Fazzello says, it was held in
such veneration, that when the city was surprised and pillaged by the slaves
and barbarians, they did not presume to touch this sacred temple, although it
contained more riches than all the city besides.

There have been violent disputes amongst the Sicilian authors, whether
Proserpine was carried off near the city of Enna, or that of Aetna, which stood
at the foot of that mountain, but it is of mighty little consequence, and more
respect, I think, is to be paid to the sentiments of Cicero, who gives it in
favor of Enna, than the whole of them. Diodorus too is of the same opinion,
and his description of this place is almost in the very words as those of
Cicero. They both paint it as a perfect paradise; abounding in beautiful
groves, clear springs and rivulets, and like Aetna, covered with a variety of
flowers at all seasons of the year. To these authorities, if you please, you
may add that of Milton, who compares it to paradise itself. -- Nor that fair
field
Of Enna, where Proserpine gathering flowers,
Herself a fairer flower, by gloomy Dis
Was gathered.


If you want to have a fuller account of this place you will find it in
Cicero's pleadings against Verres, and in the fifth book of Diodorus. I have
conversed with several gentlemen who have been there; they assure me that it
still answers in a great measure to the description of these authors. Medals I
am told, are still found, with an elegant figure of Ceres, and an ear of wheat
for the reverse; but I have not been able to procure any of them.

There was another temple in Sicily not less celebrated than this one of Ceres.
It was dedicated to Venus Erecina, and, like the other too, was built on the
summit of a high mountain. The ancient name of this mountain was Eryx, or as
the Sicilians call it Erice, but it is now called St. Juliano. Both mountain
and temple are often mentioned by the Greek and Latin historians, and happily
the Sicilian ones have no dispute about its situation or origin, which they
make to be almost as ancient as that of Ceres. Diodorus says that Dedalus,
after his flight from Crete, was hospitably received here, and by his wonderful
skill in architecture added greatly to the beauty of this temple. He enriched
it with many fine pieces of sculpture, but particularly with the figure of a
ram of such exquisite workmanship that it appeared to be alive. This, I think,
is likewise mentioned by Cicero.

Aeneas too in his voyage from Troy to Italy, landed in this part of the
island, and according to Diodoras and Thucydides, made rich presents to this
temple; but Virgil is not satisfied with this; he must raise the piety of his
hero still higher, and, in opposition to all the historians, makes Aeneas the
founder of the temple. Tum vicina astris Erycino in vertice sede.
Fundatur Veneri Idaliae, tumuloque sacerdos
Et lucus late sacer additur Anchisae^.

Its fame and glory continued to increase for many ages; and it was still held
in greater veneration by the Romans, than it had been by the Greeks. Fazzello
says, and quotes the authority of Strabo, that seventeen cities of Sicily were
laid under tribute, to raise a sufficient revenue to support the dignity, and
enormous expenses of this temple. Two hundred soldiers were appointed for its
guard, and the number of its priests, priestesses, and ministers male and
female, were incredible.

At certain seasons of the year, great numbers of pigeons, which were supposed
to be the attendants of Venus, used to pass betwixt Africa and Italy; and
resting for some days on mount Eryx, and round this temple, it was then
imagined by the people that the goddess herself was there in person; and on
these occasions, he says, they worshipped her with all their might. Festivals
were instituted in honor of the deity, and the most modest woman was looked
upon as a prude, that refused to comply with the rites. However, there wore not
many complaints of this kind; and it has been alleged, that the ladies of Eryx
were sometimes seen looking out for the pigeons long before they arrived; and
that they used to scatter peace about the temple to make them stay as long as
possible.

Venus was succeeded in her possessions of Eryx by St. Juliano, who now gives
his name both to the city and mountain; and indeed he has a very good title,
for when the place was closely besieged, the Sicilians tell you, he appeared on
the walls armed cap-a-pie, and frightened the enemy to such a degree, that they
instantly took to their heels, and left him ever since in quiet possession of
it. It would have been long before Venus and her pigeons could have done as
much for them.

Many medals are found in the neighborhood, but there is not the least vestige
of this celebrated temple. Some marbles with inscriptions and engravings that
have been found deep below ground are almost the only remaining monuments of
its existence. Suetonius says, that it had even fallen to ruins before the time
of Tiberius; but as Venus was the favorite divinity of that emperor, he had
ordered it to be magnificently repaired; however, it is somewhat difficult to
reconcile this with Strabo's account; who tells u^, that even before his time
it had been totally abandoned; and indeed this seems most probable, as every
vestige of it has now disappeared, which is not commonly the case with the
great works of the age of Tiberius.

Aeneas landed at the port of Drepanum, at the foot of this mountain. Here he
lost his father Anchises; in honor of whom, on his return from Carthage about
a year after, he celebrated the games that make so great a figure in the
Aeneid, which Virgil introduces with a good deal of address as a compliment to
the piety of Augustus, who had instituted games of the same kind in honor of
Julius Caesar, his father by adoption.

It is singular, that Virgil's account of this part of Sicily should be so very
different from that of Homer, when there was so short a space, only a few
months, between the times that their two heroes visited it. Indeed, Virgil
seems to have followed the historians, in his conduct of this part of his poem,
more than the sentiments of Homer; who makes this very country where Aeneas was
so hospitably received, the habitation of Polyphemus and the Cyclops, where
Ulysses lost so many of his companions, and himself made so very narrow an
escape. The island of Licosia where he moored his fleet, lay very near the port
of Drepanum, and Homer describes the adventure of Polyphemus to have happened
on the shore of Sicily, opposite to that island. Virgil has taken the liberty
to change the scene of action, as he was better acquainted both with the
geography and history of the country than Homer; and perhaps with a good deal
of propriety places it at the foot of mount Aetna. I am afraid there is not so
much propriety in changing the action itself, and contradicting the account
that Homer gives of it. For Ulysses says that Polyphemus devoured four of his
companions; but that he, by his address, saved all the rest, and was himself
the last that escaped out of the cave. Now Virgil makes Ulysses to have told a
lie, for he affirms that he left Achemenides behind him; and Achemenides too
gives a different account of this affair from Ulysses: He assures Aeneas, that
Polyphemus devoured only two of his companions; after which they put out his
eye, (acuto telo) with a sharp weapon; which rather gives the idea of a spear
or javelin, than that of a great beam of wood made red hot in the fire, as
Homer describes it. But there are many such passages. Don't you think they seem
either to indicate a negligence in Virgil, or a want of deference for his
master? Neither of which, I believe, he has ever been accused of.

The Sicilian authors are by no means pleased with Virgil for making Aeneas the
founder of this temple of Venus Erecina. They will only allow that the colony
which he was obliged to leave there, after the burning of his ships, did, in
honor of his mother Venus, build the city of Eryx around her temple: But they
all insist upon it, that the temple was built by Eryx, or as they call him
Erice, another son of Venus, but much older than Aeneas; the same that was
found to be so equal a match for Hercules, but was at last killed by him at a
boxing match near the foot of this mountain. The spot where this is supposed to
have happened, still retains the name of (il campodi Hercole) the fields of
Hercules. Through the whole fifth book of the Aeneid, this Eryx is styled the
brother of Aeneas; and, in his account of the games, Virgil introduces those
very gauntlets with which he fought with Hercules, (in hoc ipso littore) in
this very field. The sight of which, from their enormous size, astonishes the
whole host, and frightens the champion Dares so much that he refuses to fight.

Adieu. The opera begins in two days; after which, I think, we shall soon take
leave of Sicily.

Ever yours.

LETTER XXXII.
Palermo, July 21st.
YESTERDAY we walked up to the Monte Pelegrino to pay our respects to St.
Rosolia, and thank her for the variety of entertainment she afforded us. It is
one of the most fatiguing expeditions I ever made in my life. The mountain is
extremely high, and so uncommonly steep, that the road up to it is very
properly termed la Scala, or the Stair: Before the discovery of St. Rosolia, it
was looked upon as almost inaccessible, but they have now at a vast expense cut
out a road, over precipices that were almost perpendicular. We found the saint
lying in her grotto, in the very same attitude in which she is said to have
been discovered; her head reclining gently upon her hand, and a crucifix before
her. This is a statue of the finest white marble, and of most exquisite
workmanship. It is placed in the inner part of the cavern, on the very same
spot where St. Rosolia expired. It is the figure of a lovely young girl of
about fifteen, in an act of devotion. The artist has found means to throw
something that is extremely touching, into the countenance and air of this
beautiful statue. I never in my life saw one that affected me so much, and am
not surprised that it should have captivated the hearts of the people. It is
covered with a robe of beaten gold, and is adorned with some valuable jewels.
The cave is of a considerable extent, and extremely damp, so that the poor
little saint must have had very cold uncomfortable quarters. They have built a
church around it; and appointed priests to watch over these precious relics,
and receive the offerings of pilgrims that visit them.

An inscription graved by the hand of St. Rosolia herself, was found in a cave
in mount Quesquina, at a considerable distance from this mountain. It is said
that she was disturbed in her retreat there, and had wandered from thence to
mount Pelegrino, as a more retired and inaccessible place. I shall copy it
exactly, as it is preserved in the poor little saint's own Latin.

EGO ROSOLIA SINIBALDI QUISQUINE ET ROSARUM DOMINI FILIA AMORE DEI MEI JESU
CHRISTI IN HOC ANTRO HABITARI DECREVI. After St. Rosolia was scared from the
cave where this inscription was found, she was never more heard of, 'till her
bones were found about five hundred years after, in this spot.

The prospect from the top of mount Pelegrino is beautiful and extensive. Most
of the Lipari islands are discovered in a very clear day, and likewise a large
portion of mount Aetna, although at the distance of almost the whole length of
Sicily. The Bagaria too, and the Colle, covered over with a number of fine
country houses and gardens, make a beautiful appearance. The city of Palermo
stands within less than two miles of the foot of the mountain, and is seen to
great advantage. Many people went to this mountain during the time of the great
illumination, from whence they pretend it has a fine effect; but this
unfortunately we neglected.

Near the middle of the mountain, and not far from its summit, there still
appears some remains of a celebrated castle, the origin of which the Sicilian
authors carry back to the most remote antiquity. Massa says, it is supposed to
have been built in the reign of Saturn immediately after the flood; for in the
time of the earliest Carthaginian wars, it was already much respected on
account of its venerable antiquity. It was then a place of strength, and is
often mentioned by the Greek historians. Diodorus says, in his twenty-third
book, that Hamilcar kept possession of it for three years, against all the
power of the Romans; who, with an army of forty thousand men, attempted in vain
to dislodge him.

The situation of Palermo is seen, I think, to more advantage from the Monte
Pelegrino than from any where else. This beautiful city stands near the
extremity of a kind of natural amphitheatre, formed by high and rocky
mountains; but the country that lies betwixt the city and these mountains is
one of the richest and most beautiful spots in the world. The whole appears a
magnificent garden, filled with fruit trees of every species, and watered by
clear fountains and rivulets, that form a variety of windings through this
delightful plain. From the singularity of this situation, as well as from the
richness of the soil, Palermo has had many flattering epithets bestowed upon
it; particularly by the poets, who have denominated it Con^a d' Oro, The Golden
Shell, which is at once expressive both of its situation and richness. It has
likewise been styled Aurea Valle, Hortus Siciliae, etc. and to include all
these together, the lasting term of Felix has been added to its name, by which
you will find it distinguished even in the maps.

Many of the etymologists allege, that it is from the richness of this valley
that it had its original name of Panormus, which, in the old Greek language,
they pretend, signified All a garden: But others say there is no occasion for
straining significations, and assert, with more appearance of plausibility,
that it was called Pan-ormus, from the size and convenience of its harbors;
one of which is recorded anciently to have extended into the very center of the
city. And this is the account Diodorus gives of it; it was called Panormus,
says he, because its harbor even penetrated to the very innermost parts of the
city. Panormus in the Greek language signifying All a port: And Procopius, in
his history of the wars of the Goths, assures us, that in the time of
Belisarius, the port was deep enough for that general to run his ships up to
the very walls of the city, and give the assault from them. It is not now so
well entitled to this name as it was formerly. These harbors have been almost
entirely destroyed and filled up; most probably I think by the violent torrents
from the mountains that surround it; which are recorded sometimes to have laid
waste great part of the city. Fazzello speaks of an inundation of which he was
an eyewitness, that came down from the mountains with such fury, that they
thought the city would have been entirely swept away. He says, it burst down
the wall near to the royal palace, and bore away every thing that opposed its
passage; churches, convents, houses, to the number of two thousand, and drowned
upwards of three thousand people. Now the fragments and ruins carried to the
sea by such a torrent alone would be sufficient to fill up a little harbor, so
that we are not to be surprised, that these capacious ports, for which it had
been so much celebrated, no longer exist.

Next to Chameseno, Palermo is generally supposed to be the most ancient city
in the island. Indeed, there still remain some monuments that carry back its
origin to the times of the most remote antiquity. A bishop of Lucera has wrote
on this subject. He is clearly of opinion, that Palermo was founded in the days
of the first patriarchs. You will laugh at this; so did I; but the bishop does
not go to work upon conjecture only; he supports his opinion with such proofs,
as I own to you, staggered me a good deal. A Chaldean inscription was
discovered about six hundred years ago, on a block of white marble; it was in
the reign of William II. who ordered it to be translated into Latin and
Italian. The bishop says, there are many fragments in Palermo with broken
inscriptions in this language; and seems to think it beyond a doubt, that the
city was founded by the Chaldeans, in the very early ages of the world. This is
the literal translation: -- During the time that Isaac, the son of Abraham,
reigned in the valley of Damascus, and Esau, the son of Isaac, in Idumea, a
great multitude of Hebrews, accompanied by many of the people of Damascus, and
many Phoenicians, coming into this triangular island, took up their habitation
in this most beautiful place, to which they gave the name of Panormus.

The bishop translates another Chaldean inscription, which is indeed a great
curiosity. It is still preserved, though not with that care that so valuable a
monument of antiquity deserves. It is placed over one of the old gates of the
city, and when that gate falls to ruin, it will probably be for ever lost. The
translation is in Latin, but I shall give it you in English: -- There is no
other God but one God. There is no other power but this same God. There is no
other conqueror but this God whom we adore. The commander of this tower is
Saphu, the son of Eliphar, son of Esau, brother of Jacob, son of Isaac, son of
Abraham. The name of the tower is Baych, and the name of the neighboring tower
is Pharat.

These two inscriptions seem to reflect a mutual light upon each other.
Fazzello has preserved them both, and remarks upon this last, that it appears
evidently from it, that the tower of Baych wat built antecedent to the time of
Saphu, (or, as we translate it, Zephu) who is only mentioned as commander of
the tower, but not as its founder.

Part of the ruins of this tower still remain, and many more Chaldean
inscriptions have been found amongst them, but so broken and mangled, that
little could be made of them. Fazzello is in great indignation at some masons
he found demolishing these precious relics, and complains bitterly of it to the
sen^^e, whom he with justice upbraids for their negligence and indifference.

Conversing on this subject the other night with a gentleman who is well versed
in the antiquities of this place, I took the liberty of objecting to the Greek
etymology, Pan-ormus, it appearing extremely absurd to give a Greek name to the
city long before the existence of the Greek nation: I added, that I was a good
deal surprised Fazzello had not attempted to account for this seeming
absurdity. He allowed the apparent validity of the objection, and blamed
Fazzello for his negligence; but assured me, that Pan-ormus, or something very
nearly of the same sound, signified in the Chaldean language, and likewise in
the Hebrew, a paradise, or delicious garden; and that the Greeks probably
finding it so applicable, never thought of changing its name. This I was in no
capacity to contradict. He added too, that Panormus was likewise an Arabic
word, and signified This water; which probably was the reason that the Saracens
did not change its name, as they have done that of almost every thing else; as
this is as applicable and as expressive of the situation of Palermo, as any of
the other etymologies; it being surrounded on all sides with beautiful
fountains of the purest water, the natural consequence of the vicinity of the
mountains.

Pray show this letter to our friend Mr. Crofts, and desire his sentiments on
these etymologies and antiquities. Tell him I have not forgot his commission,
and shall procure him all the oldest and most unintelligible books in Palermo;
but I must beg, for the repose and tranquillity of mankind, that he will not
republish them. On these conditions, I send him a most valuable fragment; It is
part of a Chaldean inscription that has been exactly copied from a block of
white marble found in the ruins of the tower Baych. I own I should like much to
see it translated: The people here have as yet made nothing of it: And we were
in no capacity to assist them.

(...)

(...)

On consulting the Bible, I find, that in our translation, this son of (...) is
called Eliphaz, and Eliphaz's son, who was captain of this tower, Zepho. The
variation of the names you see is but trifling. It is not improbable that the
other tower, Pharat, by a small variation of the same kind, has been named from
their cousin, Pharez, the son of Judah, who got the start of his brother Zarah.
You will find the story at the end of the thirty-eighth chapter of Genesis. The
thirty-seventh chapter will give you some account of Eliphar and Saphu: But I
can find no etymology for the name of the tower Baych. I dare say Mr. Crofts
can tell you what it means. Pharez signifies a breach; a very inauspicious name
one would think for a tower. Adieu. The weather has become exceeding hot. The
thermometer is at 80.

Ever yours.

LETTER XXXIII.
Palermo, July 24th.
IN the course of our acquaintance with some gentlemen of sense and observation
in this place, we have learned many things concerning the island, that perhaps
may be worthy of your attention; and as this day is so hot that I cannot go
out, I shall endeavor to recollect some of them, both for your amusement and
my own. The thermometer is up at 81. So you may judge of the situation of our
northern constitutions.

There is one thing, however, that I have always observed in these southern
climates ^ that although the degree of heat is much greater than with us, yet
it is not commonly attended with that weight and oppression of spirits that
generally accompany our sultry days in summer. I am sure, that in such a day as
this, in England, we should be panting for breath; and no mortal would think
either of reading or writing. That is not the case here; I never was in better
spirits in my life: Indeed I believe the quantities of ice we eat may
contribute a good deal toward it; for I find, that in a very violent heat,
there is no such cordial to the spirits as ice, or a draught of ice-water: It
is not only from the cold it communicates but, like the cold bath, from the
suddenness of that communication, it braces the stomach, and gives a new tone
to the fibers. It it strange that this piece of luxury (in my opinion the
greatest of all, and perhaps the only healthy one) should still be so much
neglected with us.

I knew an English lady at Nice, who in a short time was cured of a threatening
consumption, only by a free indulgence in the use of ices; and I am persuaded,
that in skilful hands, few remedies would be more effectual in many of our
stomach and inflammatory complaints, as hardly any thing has a stronger or more
immediate effect upon the whole frame; and surely our administering of warm
drinks and potions in these complaints tend often to nourish the disease. It is
the common practice here, in inflammatory fevers, to give quantities of
ice-water to drink; nay, so far have they carried it, that Dr. Sanghes, a
celebrated Sicilian physician, covered over the breast and belly of his
patients with snow or ice; and they assure us, in many cases, with great
success. -- But, indeed, I ought in justice to add, that this physician's
practice has not been generally adopted.

Perhaps it is from the present benefit I find from ice, that I have said so
much in favor of it; for I am fully persuaded, that if I had not a quantity of
it standing here below the table, I should very soon be obliged to give up
writing, and go to bed; but whenever I begin to flag, another glass is sure to
set me to rights again.

I was going to give you some account of the fisheries of this island.

The catching of the tunny-fish constitutes one of the principal Sicilian
amusements during the summer months; and the caring and sending them to foreign
markets makes one of the greatest branches of their commerce. We were invited
yesterday by the Prince Sperlinga to a party of tunny-fishing; but the violence
of the heat prevented it.

These fish do not make their appearance in the Sicilian seas 'till toward the
latter end of May; at which time the Tonnaros, as they call them, are prepared
for their reception. This is a kind of aquatic castle, formed, at a great
expense, of strong nets, fastened to the bottom of the sea by anchors and heavy
leaden weights.

These tonnaros are erected in the passages amongst the rocks and islands that
are most frequented by the tunny-fish. They take care to shut up with nets the
entry into these passages, all but one little opening, which is called the
outward gate of the tonnaro. This leads into the first apartment, or, as they
call it, the hall. As soon as the fish have got into the hall, the fishermen,
who stand century in their boats during the season, shut the outer door, which
is no more than letting down a small piece of net, which effectually prevents
the tunny from returning by the way they came. They then open the inner door of
the hall, which leads to the second apartment, which they call the
antichamber, and, by making a noise on the surface of the water, they soon
drive the tunny-fish into it. As soon as the whole have got into the
antichamber, the inner door of the hall is again shut, and the outer door is
opened for the reception of more company.

Some tonnaros have a great number of apartments, with different names to them
all; the saloon, the parlour, the dining room, etc. but the last apartment is
always styled ^a Camera della Morte, The chamber of Death: This is composed of
stronger nets and heavier anchors than the others.

As soon as they have collected a sufficient number of tunny-fish, they are
driven from all the other apartments into the chamber of death; where the
slaughter begins. The fishermen, and often the gentlemen too, armed with a kind
of spear or harpoon, attack the poor defenseless animals on all sides; which
now giving themselves up to despair, dash about with great force and agility,
throwing the water over all the boats; and tearing the nets to pieces, they
often knock out their brains against the rocks or anchors. and sometimes even
against the boats of their enemies.

You see there is nothing very generous or manly in this sport. The taking of
the Pesce Spada, or sword-fish, is a much more noble diversion: No art is made
use of to ensnare him; but with a small harpoon, fixed to a long line, they
attack him in the open seas, and will often strike him at a very considerable
distance. It is exactly the whale-fishing in miniature. The Sicilian fishermen
(who are abundantly superstitious) have a Greek sentence which they make use of
as a charm to bring him near their boats. This is the only bait they use, and
they pretend that it is of wonderful efficacy, and absolutely obliges him to
follow them; but if unfortunately he should overhear them speak a word of
Italian, he plunges under water immediately, and will appear no more.

As these fish are commonly of a great size and strength, they will sometimes
run for hours after they are struck, and afford excellent sport. I have seen
them with a sword four or five feet long, which gives them a formidable
appearance in the water, particularly after they are wounded. The flesh of
these animals is excellent; it is more like beef than fish, and the common way
of dressing it is in steaks.

The fishing of the Pesce Spada is most considerable in the sea of Messina,
where they have likewise great quantities of eels, particularly the Morena, so
much esteemed amongst the Romans, which I think is indeed the finest fish I
ever eat.

But it is not only their large fish that they strike with harpoons; they have
the same method of taking mullet, dories, a kind of mackarel, and many other
species; but this is always performed in the night. As soon as it is dark, two
men get into a small boat; one of them holds a lighted torch over the surface
of the water, the other stands with his harpoon ready poised in his hand. The
light of the torch soon brings the fish to the surface, when the harpooner
immediately strikes them. I have seen great quantities killed in this manner,
both here and at Naples. A large fleet of boats employed in this kind of
fishing make a beautiful appearance on the water, in a fine summer night.

The coral fishery is chiefly practiced at Trapani: They have invented a
machine there, which answers the purpose much beyond their expectations. This
is only a great cross of wood, to the center of which is fixed a heavy hard
stone, capable of carrying the cross to the bottom. Pieces of small net are
tied to each limb of the cross, which is poised horizontally by a rope, and let
down into the water. As soon as they feel it touch the bottom, the rope is made
fast to the boat. They then row about, all over the coral beds: The consequence
of which is, the great stone breaks off the coral from the rocks, and it is
immediately entangled in the nets. Since this invention the coral fishery has
turned out to considerable account.

The people of Trapani are esteemed the most ingenious of the island; they are
the authors of many useful and ornamental inventions. An artist there, has
lately discovered a method of making Cameios, which are a perfect imitation of
the ancient ones engraved on the onyx. They are done on a kind of hard shell
from pastes of the best antiques, and so admirably executed, that it is often
difficult to distinguish the ancient from the modern. These set in gold, are
generally worn as bracelets, and are at present in high estimation amongst the
ladies of quality here. Mrs. Hamilton Now Lady Hamilton.
procured a pair of them last year, and carried them to Naples, where they have
been much admired. Commissions were immediately sent over, and the man has now
more business than he can manage; however, we have been fortunate enough to
procure a few pairs of them for our friends. I have seen Cameios that have cost
two hundred guineas that could scarce be distinguished from one of these.

The difficulties under which the poor Sicilians labor, from the extreme
oppression of their government, obliges them sometimes to invent branches of
commerce that nature seems to have denied them, as they are not allowed to
enjoy those she has bestowed. The sugar-cane was very much cultivated in this
island, but the duties imposed were so enormous, that it has been almost
abandoned. But their crops of wheat alone, were they under a free government,
would soon be sufficient to render this little nation one of the richest and
most flourishing in the world; for even in the wretched state of cultivation it
is in at present, one good crop, I am told, is sufficient to maintain the
island for seven years. You will be a good deal surprised, after this, to hear
that the exportation of this commodity has been prohibited for these several
years past; at least to all such as are not able to pay most exorbitantly for
that privilege. The consequence is, that corn has become a drug. The common
price of the salma, which is two loads, was about thirty-one shillings; at
present it is reduced to five shillings and six pence, and there is a
probability that it will still fall lower.

This crop, which has been very abundant, I am told, in many places they have
hardly been at the pains to gather in, as there is little probability of this
cruel prohibition being removed. The farmers are already ruined, and the ruin
of their masters must inevitably follow. This is the method the ministry of
Naples, or rather that of Spain, has taken to humble the pride of the Sicilian
barons, whose power they pretend is still very extensive, and their
jurisdiction absolute; most of them possessing a right of life and death in
their own domain. However, there is a probability that they will soon be
obliged to relinquish their privileges. The complaint is universal, and if the
ministry persevere in these rigorous measures, there must be either a revolt,
or they must soon be reduced to a state of poverty as well as of servitude. I
believe indeed most of them would readily embrace any plausible scheme, to
shake off their yoke; as in general they appear to be people of great
sensibility, with high notions of honor and liberty.

Talking of the natural riches of their island; Yes, say they, if these were
displayed, you would have reason indeed to speak of them. Take a look at these
mountains, they contain rich veins of every metal, and many Roman mines still
remain; but to what end should we explore them? It is not we that should reap
the profit. Nay, a discovery of any thing very rich might possibly prove the
ruin of its possessor. No, in our present situation the hidden treasures of the
island must ever remain a profound secret. Were we happy enough to enjoy the
blessings of your constitution, you might call us rich indeed. Many hidden
doors of opulence would then be opened, which now are not even thought of, and
we should soon reassume our ancient name and consequence; but at present we
are nothing.

This is the language that some of the first people amongst them hold with us.
However, they still boast that they retain more of the feudal government than
any nation in Europe. The shadow indeed remains, but the substance is gone long
ago. It has long been the object of the Bourbon ministry to reduce the power of
the barons in every kingdom. Richlieu began the system in France, and it has
ever since been prosecuted by his successors; its influence has now spread over
the whole of their possessions in Europe; of which as this is the most remote,
it has likewise been the longest in reaching it.

The foundation of the feudal system was first laid here by the count Rugeiro,
about the middle of the eleventh century, immediately after he had driven the
Saracens out of the island. He divided Sicily into three parts; the first, by
consent of his army, was given to the church; the second he bestowed upon his
officers, and the third he reserved for himself.

Of these three branches, or as they call them Braccios, (arms) he composed his
parliament, the form of which remains the same to this day. The Braccio
Militare is composed of all the barons of the kingdom, to the number of two
hundred and fifty-one, who are still obliged to military serv^^^: Their chief
is the prince Butero, who is heredi^^^^ president of the parliament; for in
conformity to the genius of the feudal government some of the great officers
are still hereditary. The three archbishops, all the bishops, abbes, priors,
and dignified clergy, amounting to near seventy, form the Braccio
Ecclesiastico: The archbishop of Palermo is their chief. The Braccio Demaniale
is formed by election, like our house of commons: There are forty-three royal
cities, styled Demaniale, that have a right to elect members. Every householder
had a vote in this election. Their chief is the member for Palermo; who is
likewise praetor (or mayor of the city.) He is an officer of the highest rank,
and his power is very extensive; inferior only to that of the viceroy; in whose
absence, the greatest part of the authority devolves upon him. He has a company
of grenadiers for his body guard; and receives the title of excellency.

The praetor, together with six senators, who are styled patricians, have the
management of the civil government of the city. He is appointed every year, by
the king, or by the viceroy, which is the same thing; for I don't find that the
people any longer exercise even the form of giving their votes: So that the
very shadow of liberty has now disappeared as well as the substance. -- You may
judge of the situation of liberty in a kingdom, where all courts civil and
criminal are appointed by regal authority, and where all offices are conferred
only by the will of the sovereign, and depend entirely upon his caprice.

I own I feel most sincerely for the Sicilians, who, I think, are possessed of
many admirable qualities. But the spirit of every nation must infallibly sink,
under an oppressive and tyrannical government. -- Their spirit however has in a
great measure kept them free from one branch of tyranny, the most dreadful of
all, that of the inquisition. The kings of Spain wanted to establish it in its
full force; but the barons, accustomed to exercise despotic government
themselves, could not bear the thoughts of becoming slaves to a set of ignorant
Spanish priests: And, I believe, they took the only way that was left to avoid
it. Every inquisitor that pretended to more zeal than they thought became him,
was immediately assassinated; particularly if he presumed to interfere with the
conduct or sentiments of the nobility. This soon took off the edge of their
zeal, and reduced the holy office to a becoming moderation. However, they are
extremely circumspect in their conversation about religious matters; and
generally advise strangers to be on their guard, as the power of the
inquisition, although considerably reduced, is by no means annihilated.

The laws of Sicily are scattered in a great number of volumes; these the king
of Sardinia intended to abridge, and collect into one code, but unfortunately
he was not long enough in possession of the island, to accomplish this useful
work. -- But where there is an authority above all laws, laws can be but of
little service.

The power of the viceroy is very absolute; he has not only the command of all
the military force in the kingdom, but likewise presides with unbounded
authority in all civil tribunals; and as he is also invested with the legantine
power, his sway is equally great in religious matters.

He has the right of nominating to all the great offices in the kingdom; and
confirming of all dignities, both civil and ecclesiastical.

In visiting the prisons, a ceremony which be performs with great pomp twice a
year, he has the power of liberating whatever prisoners he pleases; of reducing
or altering their sentences, their comes and accusations having first been read
over to him. Indeed, that there may be some appearance of a regard to law and
justice, his counselor always attends him on these occasions, to mark out the
limits of the law. -- This is an officer of very high rank, appointed to assist
the viceroy in his decisions, where the case may appear intricate or dubious;
and always is, or ought to be, one of the ablest lawyers in the island. For the
most part, this office has been given to strangers, who are supposed to have no
kindred or particular connection here, that in giving their judgment they may
be free from all prejudice and partiality. He has free admittance into all
courts and tribunals, that he may be the better enabled to give the viceroy an
account of their proceedings.

The whole military force of Sicily, amounts at present, from what I can learn,
to 9500 men, about 1200 of which are cavalry. Many of their cities and
fortresses would require a very numerous garrison to defend them: Particularly
Messina, Syracuse, and Palermo: But indeed the state of their fortifications,
as well as that of their artillery, is such, that (even if they were inclined)
they could make but a small defense.

If this island were in the hands of a naval power, I think it is evident, that
it must command the whole Levant trade: There are several little ports at each
end of it, besides the great ones of Trapani, Syracuse, and Messina, which lie
pretty near the three angles of the triangle. Whatever ships had passed either
of these, the others could be apprised of in the space of half an hour, by
means of signal towers, which the Sicilians have erected all around their
island to warn them against sudden invasions from the Barbary side. These
towers are built on every little promontory, within sight of each other. Fires
are always kept ready for lighting, and a person is appointed to watch at each
of them, so that the whole island can be alarmed, they assure us, in the space
of an hour.

By the bye, we have been witness here of a practice, that appears to be a very
iniquitous one, and in the end, I should think, must prove the destruction of
our Mediterranean trade. Several ships have put in at this port with English
colors, but to our surprise, not one Englishman on board. These, I find, they
call Bandiere men: Perhaps it is a known practice, although, I own, I was an
utter stranger to it. They are very numerous in these seas, and carry on a
considerable trade through the whole of the Mediterranean, to the great
detriment of our own ships. Most of them belong to Genoa and Sicily, though
they pass under the name of Minorquins. They purchase Mediterranean passports,
I am told, from some of the govenors of our garrisons, which entitles them,
during the term specified in these passports, to trade under English colors. I
am assured that the number of these Bandiere men amounts to some hundreds. They
have often one or two English sailors on board; or at least some person that
speaks the language, to answer when they are challenged. Pray can you tell me
if this practice is known in England?

Adieu. The heat has become intolerable, and I am able to write no more;
however, I should not have given it up yet, but my ice is all melted, and I
have not the conscience to send out a servant for more: I dare say, you are
very glad of it, and wish it had been melted long ago. If this continues, I
believe we ourselves shall be melted. The thermometer is above eighty-two, and
the heat still seems to increase. The sea has even become too hot for bathing;
and it does not at all refresh us now as it did formerly.

Farewell.
LETTER XXXIV.
Palermo, July 26th.
WE have now got every thing ready for our departure, and if the wind continues
favorable, this is probably the last letter I shall write you from Sicily.
However, I had still a great deal more to say, both of the Sicilians and their
island, and shall leave them, I assure you with a good deal of regret.

Two chebecks sailed this morning for Naples. We had the offer of a passage;
but had already engaged a little vessel for ourselves. A young nobleman, the
marquis of --, was shipped off in one of them, with orders never more to set
his foot in Palermo. Indeed we are much surprised that his sentence is so mild,
as he has been guilty of a crime which in catholic countries is generally
punished with the greatest rigor; no less than the debauching a nun. He met
with the young lady at a bathing-place, about thirty miles from this, where she
had been sent from her convent for the recovery of her health; her mother was
along with her, but as the two young people were first cousins, and had lived
together like brother and sister, the old lady thought there could be no risk
in allowing them their wonted familiarity.

The nun soon recovered her health, grew fat, and returned to her convent. This
is about six or seven months ago; and it is only a few days since the fatal
discovery was made; but alas, it would conceal no longer. He is banished Sicily
for life; and his estate, or the greatest part of it, is confiscated. He may
think himself happy they have treated him with so much lenity: Had his jury
been composed of priests and confessors, he must have died, without benefit of
clergy; for this is the first mortal sin, for which there is neither atonement
nor absolution; to lie with a nun, and yet not be in orders.

The punishment of the poor unfortunate girl is not yet determined: However, I
am told, it will be a terrible one: Probably confinement in a dungeon for seven
or eight years, without any company but a skull and a crucifix; and to live all
that time upon bread and water. I saw a nun, at Portallegre in Portugal, that
had suffered this very punishment for the same crime.

This story has been kept a profound secret, and if we had not been on a very
intimate footing with some people here, we never should have heard of it.

The Sicilians still retain some of the Spanish customs, though nothing of
their gravity or taciturnity: The younger sons of the nobility are styled Don
by their christened names, and the daughters Donna; like our appellation of
lord and lady to the sons and daughters of dukes. The eldest son has commonly
the title of count or marquis, but they are not all counts as in France and
Germany, where I have seen six counts in one house, and very nea^ twice the
number of barons in another.

One of the most common titles here, as well as at Naples, is that of Prince;
and although these were only created by Philip II. of Spain, they take rank of
all the other nobility, some of whom, particularly the counts, carry their
origin as far back as the time of the Normans, and look with great contempt on
these upstart Princes. The dukes and marquisses are not so old: The first were
created by Charles V. and the second, though an inferior title, by king
Alphonso, in the fifteenth century. So that the dignity of the Sicilian titles
may be said to be in the inverse ratio of their antiquities.

The luxury of the people here, like that of the Neapolitans, consists chiefly
in their equipages and horses; but by a wise law of the king of Sardinia, which
I am surprised should still remain in force, the viceroy alone is allowed to
drive in the city with six horses; the praetor, the archbishop and president of
the parliament with four; all the rest of the nobility are restricted to two.
But this is only within the gates of Palermo; and when they go to the country,
there is none of them that drive with less than four: Besides, every family of
distinction has at least two or three carriages in daily use^ for no man of
fashion is so unpolite as to refu^^ his wi^e a chariot of her own, of which she
has the entire command; (without this the Marino could never subsist;) and the
upper servants of the first families would be just as much ashamed to be seen
on foot as their masters. We took the liberty to ridicule the folly of this
practice: They allow of its absurdity, and wish to break through it; but who is
to lead the way? We even prevailed with some of the young nobility, which I
assure you was no small condescension, to walk the streets with us during the
illuminations; but even this condescension showed the folly of the prejudice in
a stronger light than if they had refused us; for they would not be prevailed
on to stir out, 'till they had sent their servants about ten yards before them,
with large wax flambeaux, although the whole city was in a flame of light. You
may believe we did not spare them upon this occasion; but it was all to no
purpose. However, it is possible that we may overlook many customs of our own,
that are not less ridiculous; for ridicule for the most part is relative, and
depends only on time and place. Perhaps you may remember the Prince of
Anamaboo; I should like to hear the account he would give of the English nation
in his own country; for some of our customs struck him in a still more
ridiculous light. Walking out in St. James's Park, in the afternoon, he
observed one of his acquaintance driving in a phaeton with four horses. The
Prince burst into a violent fit of laughing: When they asked him what was the
matter? "Vat the devil (said the Prince in his bad English) has that fellow eat
so much dinner that now it takes four horses to carry him? I rode out with him
this morning, and he was then so light, than van little horse ran away with
him. He must either be a great fool or a great glutton. Another time they
insisted on the Prince going to the play. He went; but he soon tired of it, and
returned to his Companions. Well, Prince, (said they) what did you see? "Vat
did I see," (replied he with the utmost contempt) I did see some men playing de
(...), and some men playing de fool.

I only infer from this, that it is with some degree of caution we should
ridicule the customs of other nations: A Sicilian, perhaps, would laugh with as
much justice at many of our customs; that, for instance, of obliging people to
drink when they have no inclination to it; that in the north of eating Soland
geese before dinner, to give them an appetite; that of physicians and lawyers
wearing enormous wigs, and many others that will naturally occur to you, none
of which appear in the least ridiculous to the people that practice them; who
would no doubt defend them as strenuously as the Sicilians do the necessity of
carrying flambeaux before them during the great illumination. Indeed, they have
just now given us an admirable specimen of some of our ridicules, in one of
their opera-dances, with which we have been a good deal entertained.

I believe I told you that the dancers are lately come from England: They have
brought upon the stage many of the capital London characters: The bucks, the
maccaronies, the prigs, the cits, and some others still more respectable: These
are well supported, and afford a good deal of laughing. But I am interrupted,
otherwise I should have given you a more particular account of them. Adieu. The
heat is intolerable; and there is no possibility of walking out. We complain
without reason of our own climate; and king Charles's observation I am
persuaded was just; "That there is hardly any climate, where, throughout the
year, we can have so much exercise in the open air."

LETTER XXXV.
Palermo, July 27th.
THE Sicilians are animated in conversation, and their action for the most part
is so just and so expressive of their sentiments, that without hearing what is
said, one may comprehend the subject of their discourse. We used to think the
French and Neapolitans great adepts in this art; but they are much outdone by
the Sicilians, both in the variety and justness of their gesticulation.

The origin of this custom they carry so far back as the time of the earliest
tyrants of Syracuse, who, to prevent conspiracies, had forbid their subjects,
under the most severe penalties, to be seen in parties talking together. This
obliged them to invent a method of communicating their sentiments by dumb show,
which they pretend has been transmitted from generation to generation ever
since.

I think it is not at all improbable that this custom too may have given the
first idea of comedy; as we find, that some short time after, Epicarmus, a
native of that city, was the author of this invention.

The Sicilians 'till lately retained a great many foolish and superstitious
customs; but particularly in their marriage and funeral ceremonies; it would be
tedious to give you an account of all these; some of them are still practiced
in the wild and mountainous parts of the island. As soon as the marriage
ceremony is performed, two of the attendants are ready to cram a spoonful of
honey into the mouths of the bride and bridegroom; pronouncing it emblematical
of their love and union, which they hope will ever continue as sweet to their
souls, as that honey is to their palates. They then begin to throw handfuls of
wheat upon them, which is continued all the way to the house of the bridegroom.
This is probably the remains of some ancient rite to Ceres, their favorite
divinity, and they think i cannot fail of procuring them a numerous progeny:
However, the Sicilian women have no occasion for any charm to promote this, as,
in general, they are abundantly prolific even without it: Fazzello gives an
account of women having frequently upwards of forty children; and Carrera
mentions one who had forty-seven.

The young couple are not allowed to taste of the marriage feast; this they
pretend is to teach them patience and temperance; but when dinner is finished,
a great bone is presented to the bridegroom by the bride's father, or one of
her nearest relations, who pronounces these words: Rodi tu quest' osso, etc.
Pick you this bone, for you have now taken in hand to pick one, which you will
find much harder and of more difficult digestion. Perhaps this may have given
rise to the common saying, when one has undertaken any thing arduous or
difficult, that He has got a bone to pick.

The Sicilians, like most other nations in Europe, carefully avoid marrying in
the month of May, and look upon such marriages as extremely inauspicious. This
piece of superstition is as old, perhaps older than the time of the Romans, by
whose authors it is frequently mentioned; and by whom it has been transmitted
to almost every nation in Europe, It is somewhat unaccountable, that so
ridiculous an idea, which can have no foundation in nature, should have stood
its ground for so many ages. There are indeed other customs still more trivial,
that are not less universal. That of making April fools on the first day of
that month; the ceremony of the cake on Twelfth-night; and some others that
will occur to you, of which, no more than this, I have ever been able to learn
the origins.

The marriages of the Sicilian nobility are celeba^ted with great magnificence;
and the number of elegant carriages produced on these occasions is astonishing.
I wanted to discover when this great luxury in carriages had taken its rise;
and have found an account of the marriage of the daughter of one of their
viceroys to the duke of Bivona, in the year 1551. It is described by one
Elenco, who was a spectator of the ceremony. He says the ladies as well as
gentlemen were all mounted on fine horses, sumptuously caparisoned, and
preceded by pages: That there were only three carriages in the city, which were
used by invalids who were not able to ride on horseback. These he calls
Carette, which word now signifies a little cart.

The Sicilian ladies marry very young, and frequently live to see the fifth or
sixth generation. You will expect, no doubt, that I shall say something of
their beauty. In general, they are sprightly and agreeable; and in most parts
of Italy they would be esteemed handsome. A Neapolitan or a Roman would surely
pronounce them so. But a Piedmontese would declare them very ordinary; so
indeed would most Englishmen. Nothing so vague as our ideas of female beauty:
They change in every climate; and the criterion is no where to be found. "Ask
where is the North? -- At York, it is on the Tweed,
"In Scotland at the Orcades, and there,
"At Nova Zembla, or the Lord knows where."


No two nations, perhaps no two men, have affixed precisely the same
characteristics; and every one exalts his idea of it, according to the beauty
of the women he is accustomed to see; so that even the same person may
sometimes appear beautiful, sometimes ugly just in proportion as we have seen
others that are more or less so. I remember, after making the tour of Savoy and
the Lower Valais, every woman we met in Switzerland appeared an angel. The same
thing happens in traveling through some parts of Germany; and you will easily
recollect the surprising difference betwixt a beauty at Milan and one at Turin,
although these places lie adjacent to each other. It is pity a that the Juno of
Zeuxis has been lost, if it were no more than to have shown us the notion the
ancients had of a perfect beauty. Indeed, the Venus of Medicis has been
considered as a model of perfection, but it is surely absurd; for who ever
heard of a perfect beauty of five feet high! the very idea is ridiculous; and
whatever figure her goddessship might make amongst the ancient divinities, in
the pantheon at Rome, I am afraid she would cut but a sorry one amongst the
modern ones, in that of London. In short, I believe we may safely conclude,
that beauty is a relative quality, and the to kalon is no longer the same, no
more in a physical than a moral sense, in any two places on the globe.

The ladies here have remarkable fine hair, and they understand how to dress
and adorn it to the greatest advantage. It is now only used as an
embellishment; but in former times we are told, that, like that of Sampson, it
was found to be the strength and protection of their country. There is a
paradox for you, that all the wise men of the East could hardly solve. Their
historians relate, (in whose reign I believe is rather dubious) that this city
had suffered a long siege from the Saracens and was greatly reduced by famine;
but, what distressed them still more, there were no materials to be found for
making bowstrings, and they were on the point of surrendering. In this dilemma,
a patriotic dame stepped forth, and proposed to the women, that the whole of
them should cut off their hair, and twist it into bow-strings: This was
immediately complied with. The heroism of the women, you know, must ever excite
that of the men. The besieged, animated by this gallant sacrifice of the fair,
renewed their defense with such vigor, that the assailants were beat off; and
a reinforcement soon after arriving, the city was saved. The ladies still value
themselves on this story, which you may believe has not been forgotten by their
bards. The hair of our ladies (says one of their quaint poets) is still
employed in the same office; but now it discharges no other shafts but those of
Cupid; and the only cords it forms are the cords of love.

The Sicilians are much fonder of study than their neighbors on the continent;
and their education is much more attended to. We were a good deal surprised to
find, that instead of that frivolity and nothingness, which so often constitute
the conversation of the Italian nobility, here their delight was to talk on
subjects of literature, of history, of politics, but chiefly of poetry; for the
other branches of knowledge and science are only general: This is the only one
that may be said to be universal. Every person, in some period of his life is
sure to be inspired; and a lover is never believed so long as he can speak of
his passion in prose; and, contrary to our way of reasoning, is only reckoned
true in proportion as he is poetical. Thus, inspiration, you see, has here
become the test of truth.

We were astonished on our first arrival at Palermo, to hear ourselves
addressed in English by some of the young nobility; but still more so, to find
them intimately acquainted with many of our celebrated poe^ and philosophers.
Milton, Shakespeare, Dryden, Pope, Bacon, Bolingbroke, we found in several
libraries, not in the translation, but generally in the best editions of the
original.

Our language, indeed, has become so much in vogue, that it is now looked upon
as no immaterial part of a polite education: The viceroy, the Marquis Fogliano,
a man of great merit and humanity, has made some of our authors his favorite
study, and greatly encourages the progress it is making in his kingdom. Many of
the nobility speak it a little; and some of them even with ease and fluency,
although they have never been out of their island. The Marquis Natali, the
Counts Statela and Buschemi, the Duke of St. Micheli, etc. in whose company we
have enjoyed a great deal of pleasure, and whose knowledge and erudition is the
least part of their praise. Adieu.

Yours, etc.

LETTER XXXVI.
Palermo, July 28th.
I HAD almost forgot to say any thing of the opera: It would have been very
ungrateful, for we have been much delighted with it. The first and second man,
are both admirable singers, and I make no doubt you will have them in London in
a few years; neither of them are as yet known, and I dare say at present they
might be engaged for a very moderate price; but in Italy they will soon be
taught to estimate their value. The name of the first is Pacherotti; he is very
young, and an entire stranger in the musical world; yet I am persuaded, that
after he has been heard on the different theaters in Italy, he will be esteemed
one of their capital performers. His excellence is the pathetic, at present too
much neglected on most theaters; and indeed. I think, he gives more expression
to his cantabile airs, and makes his hearers feel more, because he feels more
himself, than any that I have seen in Italy. He indeed addresses himself to the
heart, while most of the modern performers sing only to the fancy.

The first woman is Gabrieli; who is certainly the greatest singer in the
world: And those that sing on the same theater with her, must be capital,
otherwise they can never be attended to. This indeed has been the fate of all
the other performers, except Pacherotti; and he too gave himself up for lost,
on hearing her first performance. It happened to be an air of execution,
exactly adapted to her voice, which she exerted in so astonishing a manner,
that before it was half done, poor Pacherotti burst out a crying, and ran in
behind the scenes; lamenting that he had dared to appear on the same stage with
so wonderful a singer; where his small talents must not only be lost, but where
he must ever be accused of a presumption, which he hoped was foreign to his
character.

It was with some difficulty they could prevail on him to appear again, but
from an applause well merited, both from his talents and his modesty, he soon
began to pluck up a little courage; and in the singing of a tender air,
addressed to Gabrieli in the character of a lover, even she herself, as well as
the audience is said to have been moved.

Indeed, in these very pathetic pieces, I am surprised that the power of the
music does not sometimes altogether overcome the delusion of character; for
when you are master of the language, and allow the united power of the poetry,
the action, and the music, to have its full force on the mind, the effect is
wonderfully great. However, I have never heard that this happened completely
but once, and it was no less a singer than Farinelli that produced it. He
appeared in the character of a young captive hero, and in a tender air was
soliciting mercy for his mistress and himself, of a stern and cruel tyrant who
had made them his prisoners. The person that acted the tyrant was so perfectly
overcome by the melting strains of Farinelli, that instead of refusing his
request as he ought to have done, he entirely forgot his character, burst into
tears, and caught him in his arms.

The performance of Gabrieli is so generally known and admired, that it is
needless to say any thing to you on that subject. Her wonderful execution and
volubility of voice have long been the admiration of Italy, and has even
obliged them to invent a new term to express it; and would she exert herself as
much to please as to astonish, she might almost perform the wonders that have
been ascribed to Orpheus and Timotheus; but it happens, luckily perhaps for the
repose of mankind, that her caprice is, if possible, even greater than her
talents, and has made her still more contemptible than these have made her
celebrated. By this means, her character has often proved a sufficient
antidote, both to the charms of her voice and those of her person, which are
indeed almost equally powerful; but if these had been united to the qualities
of a modest and an amiable mind, she must have made dreadful havoc in the
world. However, with all her faults, she is certainly the most dangerous siren
of modern times, and has made more conquests, I suppose, than any one woman
breathing.

It is but justice to add, that contrary to the generality of her profession,
she is by no means selfish or mercenary; but, on the contrary, has given many
singular proofs of generosity and disinterestedness. She is very rich; from the
bounty, as is supposed, of the last emperor, who was fond of having her at
Vienna; but she was at last banished that city, as she has likewise been most
of those in Italy, from the broils and squabbles that her intriguing spirit,
perhaps still more than her beauty, had excited. There are a great many
anecdotes concerning her, that would not make an unentertaining volume; and, I
am told, either are, or will soon be published.

Although she is considerably upwards of thirty, on the stage she scarcely
appears to be eighteen, and this art of appearing young, is none of the most
contemptible that she possesses. When she is in good humor, and really chooses
to exert herself, there is nothing in music that I have ever heard, to be
compared to her performance; for she sings to the heart as well as the fancy,
when she pleases; and she commands every passion with unbounded sway. But she
is capable of exercising these wonderful powers; and her caprice and her
talents exerting themselves by turns, have given her, all her life, the
singular fate of becoming alternately an object of admiration and of contempt.

Her powers in acting and reciting, are scarcely inferior to those of her
singing; sometimes, a few words in the recitative, with a simple accompaniment
only, produces an effect, that I have never been sensible of from any other
performer; and inclines me to believe what Rousseau advances on this branch of
music, which with us is so much despised. She owes much of her merit to the
instructions she received from Metestasio, particularly in acting and reciting;
and he allows that she does more justice to his operas than any other actress
that ever attempted them.

Her caprice is so fixed and so stubborn, that neither interest, nor flattery,
nor threats, nor punishments, have the least power over it; and it appears,
that treating her with respect or contempt, have an equal tendency to increase
it.

It is seldom that she condescends to exert these wonderful talents; but most
particularly if she imagines that such an exertion is expected. And instead of
singing her airs as other actresses do, for the most part she only hums them
over, a mezza voce. And no art whatever is capable of making her sing, when she
does not choose it.

The most successful expedient has ever been found, to prevail on her favorite
lover, for she always has one, to place himself in the center of the pit, or
the front box; and if they are on good terms, which is seldom the case, she
will address her tender airs to him, and exert herself to the utmost. Her
present enamorato promised to give us this specimen of his power over her; he
took his place accordingly; but Gabrieli, probably suspecting the connivance,
would take no notice of him; so that even this expedient does not always
succeed.

The viceroy, who is fond of music, has tried every method with her to no
purpose. Sometime ago he gave a great dinner to the principal nobility of
Palermo, and sent an invitation to Gabrieli to be of the party. Every other
person arrived at the hour of invitation. The viceroy ordered dinner to be kept
back, and sent to let her know that the company waited her. The messenger found
her reading in bed; she said she was sorry for having made the company wait,
and begged he would make her apology, but that really she had entirely forgot
her engagement.

The viceroy would have forgiven this piece of insolence, but, when the company
came to the opera, Gabrieli repeated her part with the most perfect negligence
and indifference, and sung all her airs in what they call sotto voce, that is,
so low, that they can scarcely be heard. The viceroy was offended; but as he is
a good-tempered man, he was loath to make use of authority; but at last, by a
perseverance in this insolent stubbornness, she obliged him to threaten her
with punishment in case she any longer refused to sing.

On this she grew more obstinate than ever, declaring that force and authority
would never succeed her; that he might make her cry, but that he never could
make her sing. The viceroy then sent her to prison, where she remained twelve
days. During which time, she gave magnificent entertainments every day; paid
the debts of all the poor prisoners, and distributed large sums in charity. The
viceroy was obliged to give up struggling with her, and she was at last set at
liberty amidst the acclamations of the poor. Luckily for us, she is at present
in good humor, and sometimes exerts herself to the utmost of her power.

She says she has several times been on terms with the managers of our opera,
but thinks she shall never be able to pluck up resolution enough to go to
England. What do you think (...) her reason? It is by no means a bad one. She
says she cannot command her caprice; but, for the most part, that it commands
her; and that there, she could have no opportunity of indulging it: For, says
she, were I to take it into my head not to sing, I am told the people there
would certainly mob me, and perhaps break my bones; now I like to sleep in a
sound skin, although it should even be in a prison. She alleges too that it is
not always caprice that prevents her from singing; but that it often depends
upon physical causes; and this indeed I can readily believe: For that wonderful
flexibility of voice that runs with such rapidity and neatness through the most
minute divisions, and produces almost instantaneously so great a variety of
modulation, must surely depend on the very nicest tone of the fibers. And if
these are in the smallest degree relaxed, or their elasticity diminished; how
is it possible that their contractions and expansions can so readily obey the
will, as to produce these effects? The opening of the glottis which forms the
voice, is extremely small, and in every variety of tone, its diameter must
suffer a sensible change; for the same diameter must ever produce the same
tone: So wonderfully minute are its contractions and dilatations, that Dr.
Keil, I think, computes, that in some voices, its opening, not more than the
tenth of an inch, is divided into upwards of 1200 parts, the different sound of
every one of which is perceptible to an exact ear. Now, what a nice tension of
fibers must this require! I should imagine every the most minute change in the
air, must cause a sensible difference, and that in our foggy climate the fibers
would be in danger of losing this wonderful sensibility; or at least, that they
would very often be put out of tune. It is not the same case with an ordinary
voice; where the variety of divisions run through, and the volubility with
which they are executed, bear no proportion to those of a Gabrieli.

One of the ballets of our opera, is a representation of Vauxhall gardens, and
this is the third time that I have seen Vauxhall brought upon the Italian
theater; at Turin, at Naples, and here. The gardens are well represented, and
the idea must have been given by some person that had been on the spot. A
variety of good English figures are brought in: Some with large frizzled wigs
sticking half a yard out behind their necks; some with little cut scratches,
that look extremely ridiculous. Some come in cracking their whips, with
buckskin breeches and jockey caps. Some are armed with great oaken-sticks;
their hair tied up in enormous clubs, and stocks that swell their necks to
double the natural size. But what affords the principal part of the
entertainment is, three quakers who are duped by three ladies of the town, in
concert with three jack-tars, their lovers. These characters, as you may
believe, are much exaggerated, though, upon the whole, they are supported with
humor, and have afforded us a good deal of laughing; however, we were hurt to
see the respectable character of quakers turned into such ridicule; and as the
people here were altogether unacquainted with it, we have been at some pains to
explain to them the simplicity and purity of their manners, and the
incorruptible integrity of their principles.

Although the Sicilians in general are a good sort of people, and seem to be
endowed with a large share of philanthropy and urbanity; yet it must be owned
they have no great affection for their neighbors on the continent; and indeed
the dislike is altogether reciprocal. It is somewhat singular; I am afraid not
much for the honor of human nature; that through all Europe, the two
neighboring nations have a perpetual jarring with each other. I could heartily
wish that we had been an exception from this rule; but am sorry to see from our
newspapers, which are sent to the nobility of this city, that at present we are
rather the most distinguished for it; at least our animosities, if there really
are any, make by much the greatest noise of all. We have often been asked by
foreigners what was the ground of the mighty quarrel, that such torrents of the
most illiberal abuse have been poured out by a people so celebrated for
liberality of sentiment; and it is with difficulty we can persuade them, that
although from the papers, this sometimes appears to be the voice of the nation,
yet in fact, it is only confined to a set of the most worthless and despicable
incendiaries; like him who set the house in a flame, on purpose to pilfer
during the conflagration. But the abuse that is levelled at the king, surprises
them more than all the rest; and you cannot conceive their amazement and
indignation when we assured them, that notwithstanding all this, he was the
most virtuous and benevolent prince on earth. Then, exclaimed a Sicilian
nobleman, you must certainly be the most damnable people on the globe. I was a
good deal struck with the suddenness of the charge; and it was not without many
explanations of the liberty of our constitution, and particularly that of the
press, that I could prevail with him to retract his sentiments; and think more
favorably of us. Still he insisted, that so egregious an abuse of this
liberty, was only a farther proof of his position; and that there must be
something essentially wrong, in a nation that could allow of such abuse
levelled at the most sacred of all characters: The highest virtue united to the
highest station. We assured him that what he heard, was only the voice of the
most abandoned and profligate wretches in the nation; who, taking advantage of
the great freedom of the press, had often made these newspapers the vehicles of
the most detestable sedition. That both the king and queen were beloved by all
their subjects, at least by all those of worth; -- that they never were spoken
of, but as the most perfect model of conjugal union and happiness, as well as
of every social endowment; and that they could have no enemies, but the enemies
of virtue.

However, after all, we could but patch up a peace with him. He could not
comprehend (he said) how the voice of a few incendiaries should be louder than
the general voice of the nation. We told him, that people who were pleased
commonly held their tongue; and that sedition and libel ever made a greater
noise than panegyric; just as the fire-bell is rung louder, and is more
listened to than the bell for rejoicing.

Adieu. Our pilot says the wind is not fair, so that possibly we may still stay
a day or two longer.

Ever yours.

LETTER XXXVII.
Palermo, July 29th.
WERE I to enter upon the natural history of this island, it would lead me into
a vast field of speculation, for which I have neither time nor abilities:
However, a variety of objects struck us as we traveled along, that it may not
be amiss to give you some account of. There are a variety of mineral waters,
almost through the whole of Sicily. Many of these are boiling hot; others still
more singular, are of a degree of cold superior to that of ice, and yet never
freeze.

In several places, they have fountains that throw up a kind of oil on their
surface, which is of great use to the peasants, who burn it in their lamps, and
use it to many other purposes; but there is still a more remarkable one near
Nicosia which is called Il Font Canalotto. It is covered with a thick scum of
a kind of pitch, which amongst the country people is esteemed a sovereign
remedy in rheumatic, and many other complaints.

The water of a small lake near Naso is celebrated for dying black every thing
that is put into it; and this it is said to perform without the mixture of any
other ingredient, although the water itself is remarkably pure and transparent.

They have a variety of sulphurous baths, like those near Naples, where the
patient is thrown into a profuse sweat, only from the heat of the vapor. The
most celebrated are those of Sciaccia, and on the mountain of St. Cologero; not
in the neighborhood of Aetna, as I expected, but at a great distance from that
mountain. But indeed I am much inclined to believe, that not only mount Aetna,
but the greatest part of Sicily, and almost the whole of the circumjacent
islands, have been originally formed by subterraneous fire; but I shall have an
opportunity of speaking more largely on this subject, when I give you an
account of the country round Naples.

I have observed lava, pumice, and tusa in many parts of Sicily, at a great
distance from Aetna; and there are a variety both of mountains and valleys that
still emit a hot vapor, and produce springs of boiling water.

About a mile and a half to the west of this city, at a small beach where we
often go a swimming, there are many springs of warm water, that rise even
within the sea, at the depth of five or six feet. We were at first a good deal
surprised to find ourselves almost instantaneously both in the hot and cold
bath; for at one stroke we commonly passed through the hot water, which only
extends for a few feet around the spring. It gave us a momentary glow, and
produced a very odd, uncouth sensation, by no means an agreeable one. I
mentioned this singularity to several gentlemen here, who tell me they have
observed the same thing.

Not a great way from this is a celebrated fountain, called Il Mar Dolce, where
there are some remains of an ancient naumachia; and in the mountain above it,
they show you a cavern, where a gigantic skeleton is said to have been found;
however, it fell to dust when they attempted to remove it; Fazzello says, its
teeth were the only part that resisted the impression of the air; that he
procured two of them, and that they weighed near two ounces. There are many
such stories to be met with in the Sicilian legends, as it seems to be an
universal belief, that this island was once inhabited by giants; but although
we have made diligent inquiry, we have never yet been able to procure a sight
of any of these gigantic bones which are said to be still preserved in many
parts of the island. Had there been any foundation for this, I think it is
probable, they must have found their way into some of the museums; but this is
not the case; nor indeed have we met with any person of sense and credibility
that could say they had seen any of them. We had been assured at Naples, that
an entire skeleton, upwards of ten feet high, was preserved in the museum of
Palermo; but there is no such thing there, nor I believe any where else in the
island. This museum is well furnished both with antiques and articles of
natural history, but is not superior to what we have seen in many other places.

The number of souls in Palermo are computed at about 150,000. Those of the
whole island, by the last numeration, amounted to 1,123,163; of which number
there are about 50,000 that belong to the different monasteries and religious
orders. The number of houses are computed at 268,120, which makes betwixt five
and six to a house.

The great standing commodity of Sicily, which has ever constituted the riches
of the island, was their crops of wheat; but they cultivate many other branches
of commerce, though none that could bear any proportion to this, were it under
a free government, and exportation allowed. Their method of preserving their
grain will appear somewhat singular to our farmers: Instead of exposing it as
we do, to the open air, they are at the greatest pains to exclude it entirely
from it. In many places, where the soil is dry, particularly near Agrigentum,
they have dug large pits or (...) in the rock. Th^^ open by a small hole at
top, and swell to a great width below; here they pour down their grain, after
it has been made exceedingly dry; and ramming it hard, they cover up the hole,
to protect it from rain; and they assure us it will preserve in this manner for
many years.

The Soda is a plant that is much cultivated, and turns out to considerable
account. This is the vegetable, that by the action of fire, is afterward
converted into mirrors and crystals. Great quantities of it are sent every year
to supply the glass-houses at Venice. They have likewise a considerable trade
in liquorice, rice, figs, raisins, and currants, the best of which grow amongst
the extinguished volcanoes of the Lipari Islands. Their honey is I think, the
highest flavoured I have ever seen; in some parts of the island even superior
to that of Minorca: This is owing, no doubt to the quantity of aromatic plants,
with which this beautiful country is every where overspread. This honey is
gathered three months in the year; July, August, and October. It is found by
the peasants in the hollows of trees and rocks; and is esteemed of a superior
quality to that produced under the tyranny of man. The country of the Lesser
Hybla is still, as formerly, the part of the island that is most celebrated for
honey. The Count Statela made us a present of some of it, gathered on his
brother the prince of Spaccaforno's estate, which lies near the ruins of that
city.

Sugar is now no article of the Sicilian commerce, though a small quantity of
it is still manufactured for home consumption; but the plantations of the
sugarcane, I am told, thrive well in several parts of the island.

The juice of liquori^^ (...) prepared both (...) Calabria, and is sent to the
northern countries of Europe, where it is used for colds. The juice is squeezed
out of the roots; after which it is boiled to a consistency, and formed into
cakes, which are packed up with bay leaves in the same order that we receive
them.

In some of the northern parts of the island, I am told, they find the
shellfish that produces a kind of flax, of which gloves and stockings are
made; but these two are found in greater quantities in Calabria.

Their plantations of oranges, lemons, bergamots, almonds, etc. produce no
inconsiderable branch of commerce. The pistachio-nut too is much cultivated in
many parts of the island, and with great success. These trees, like many
others, are male and female: The male is called Scornobecco, and is always
barren; but unless a quantity of these are mixed in every plantation, the
pistachio-tree never bears a nut. But of all the variety that is cultivated in
Sicily, the manna-tree is esteemed the most profitable; it resembles the ash,
and is I believe of that species. About the beginning of August, during the
season of the greatest heat, they make an incision in the bark, near to the
root of the tree; a thick whitish liquor is immediately discharged from the
wound, which soon hardens in the sun, when it is carefully taken off and
gathered into boxes. They renew these incisions every day during the season,
observing, however, only to wound one side of the tree; the other side they
reserve for the summer following.

The cantharides-fly is a Sicilian commodity: It is found on several trees of
Aetna, whose juice is supposed to have a corrosive or abstersive quality,
particularly the pi^^ and the fig tree; and I am told the cantharides of Mount
Aetna are reckoned preferable to those of Spain.

The marbles of Sicily would afford a great source of opulence, were there any
encouragement to work the quarries: Of these they have an infinite variety, and
of the finest sorts. I have seen some of them little inferior to the giall and
verd antiqua, that is now so precious. The beautiful yellow columns you must
have observed in the royal chapel of Casserto are of the first kind. They have
likewise some that very much resemble lapis lazuli and porphyry.

At Centorbi they find a kind of soft stone that dissolves in water, and is
used in washing instead of soap, from which property it is called Pietra
Saponaro. They likewise find here, as well as in Calabria, the celebrated
stone, which, upon being watered and exposed to a pretty violent degree of
heat, produces a plentiful crop of mushrooms: But it would be endless to give
you an account, of all the various commodities and curious productions of this
island; Aetna alone affords a greater number than many of the most extensive
kingdoms, and is no less an epitome of the whole earth in its soil and climate,
than in the variety of its productions. Besides the corn, the wine, the oil,
the silk, the spice, and delicious fruits of its lower region; the beautiful
forests, the flocks, the game, the tar, the cork, the honey, of its second; the
snow and ice of its third; it affords from its caverns a variety of mineral and
other productions; cinnabar, mercury, sulphur, alum, nitre, and vitriol; so
that this wonderful mountain at the same time produces every necessary, and
every luxury of life.

Its first region covers their tables with all the delicacies that the earth
produces; its second supplies them with game, cheese, butter, honey; and not
only furnishes wood of every kind for building their ships and houses, but
likewise an inexhaustible store of excellent fuel; and as the third region,
with its ice and snow, keeps them fresh and cool during the heat of summer, so
this contributes equally to keep them warm and comfortable during the cold of
winter.

Thus you see, the variety of climates is not confined to Aetna itself; but, in
obedience to the voice of man, descends from that mountain; and, mingling the
violence of their extremes, diffuses the most benign influences all over the
island, tempering each other to moderation, and softening the rigours of every
season.

We are not then to be surprised at the obstinate attachment of the people to
this mountain, and that all his terrors have not been able to drive them away
from him: For although he sometimes chastises; yet, like an indulgent parent,
he mixes such blessings along with his chastisements, that their affections can
never be estranged; for at the same time that he threatens with a rod of iron,
be pours down upon them all the blessings of the age of gold.

Adieu. We are now going to pay our respects to the viceroy, and make our
farewell visits. This ceremony never fails to throw a damp on my spirits; but I
have seldom found it so strong as at present, there being little or no
probability that we shall ever see again a number of worthy people we are just
now going to take leave of, or that we shall never have it in our power to make
any return for the many civilities we have received from them.

Farewell. The wind we are told is fair, and I shall probably be the bearer of
this to the continent, from whence you may soon expect to hear from, etc.

LETTER XXXVIII.
Naples August 1st.
AFTER two days delightful sailing, we have again arrived in this city; where,
to our infinite joy; we have found all the worthy friends we had left behind
us. This indeed was necessary, to wipe out the impressions which the leaving of
Sicily had occasioned. We shall still remain here, at least for three months,
'till the season of the Mal Aria is entirely over. You know the danger of
traveling through the Campania during that season; which although it is looked
upon by many of our learned doctors as a vulgar error, yet we certainly shall
not submit ourselves to the experiment.

We propose to pass the winter at Rome, where we shall probably find occupation
enough for four or five months. From thence by Loretto, Bologna, etc. to
Venice; the old beaten track. We shall then leave the parched fields of Italy,
for the delightful cool mountains of Switzerland; where liberty and simplicity,
long since banished from polished nations, still flourish in their original
purity; where the temperature and moderation of the climate, and that of the
inhabitants are mutually emblematical of each other. For whilst other nations
are scorched by the heat of the sun, and the still more scorching heats of
tyranny and superstition; here the genial breezes for ever fan the air, and
heighten that alacrity and joy which liberty and innocence alone can inspire;
here the genial flow of the soul has never yet been checked by the idle and
useless refinement of art; but opens and expands itself to all the calls of
affection and benevolence. But I must stop. You know my old attachment to that
primitive country. It never fails to run away with me. We propose then, to make
this the scene of our summer pleasures; and by that time, I can foresee, we
shall be heartily tired of Art, and shall begin again to languish after Nature.
It is she alone that can give any real or lasting pleasure, and in all our
pursuits of happiness if she is not our guide, we never can attain our end.

Adieu, my dear friend. You have been our faithful companion during this Tour,
and have not contributed a little to its pleasure. If it has afforded equal
entertainment to you, we shall beg of you still to accompany us through the
rest of our travels. A man must have a miserable imagination indeed, that can
be in solitude, whilst he has such friends to converse with; the consideration
of it soon removes the mountains and the seas that separate us, and produces
those sympathetic feelings, which are the only equivalent for the real absence
of a friend; for I never sit down to write, but I see you placed on the
opposite side of the table, and suppose that we are just talking over the
transactions of the day. And without your present to animate me, how is it
possible that I could (...) had patience to write these enormous epistles?
Adie^ We are soon going to make some excursions through the kingdom of Naples:
And if they produce any thing worthy of your observation, we must beg that you
will still submit to be one of the party.

I ever am, Most sincerely and affectionately, yours, PAT. BRYDONE.

FINIS.

