MODERN CHIVALRY.

Modern Chivalry: CONTAINING THE ADVENTURES OF Captain John Farrago, AND TEAGUE
OREGAN, HIS SERVANT.

VOLUME 1.

BY H. H. BRACKENRIDGE.

QUICQUID AGUNT HOMINES, NOSTRI, FARRAGO LIBELLI.

Juvenal. PHILADELPHIA: Printed and sold by JOHN M'CULLOCH, No. 1, North
Third-street.

M.DCC.XCII.

MODERN CHIVALRY.
INTRODUCTION.
IT has been a question for some time past, what would be the best means to fix
the English language. Some have thought of Dictionaries, others of Institutes,
for that purpose. Swift, I think it was, who proposed, in his letters to the
Earl of Oxford, the forming an academy of learned men, in order by their
observations and rules, to settle the true spelling, accentuation, and
pronunciation, as well as the proper words, and the purest, most simple, and
perfect phraseology of language. It has always appeared to me, that if some
great master of style should arise, and without regarding sentiment, or
subject, give an example of good language in his composition, which might serve
as a model to future speakers and writers, it would do more to fix the
orthography, choice of words, idiom of phrase, and structure of sentence, than
all the Dictionaries and Institutes that have been ever made. For certainly, it
is much more conducive to this end, to place before the eyes what is good
writing, than to suggest it to the ear, which may forget in a short time all
that has been said.

It is for this reason, that I have undertaken this work; and that it may
attain the end the more perfectly, I shall consider language only, not in the
least regarding the matter of the work; but as musicians, when they are about
to give the most excellent melody, pay no attention to the words that are set
to music; but take the most unmeaning phrases, such as sol, fa, la; so here,
culing out the choicest flowers of diction, I shall pay no regard to the idea;
for it is not in the power of human ingenuity to attain two things perfectly at
once. Thus we see that they mistake greatly, who think to have a clock that
can* at once tell the hour of the day, the age of the moon, and the day of the
week, month, or year; because the complexness of the machine hinders that
perfection which the simplicity of the works and movements can alone give. For
it is not in nature to have all things in one. If you are about to choose a
wife, and expect beauty, you must give up family and fortune; or if you attain
these, you must at least want good temper, health, or some other advantage: so
to expect good language and good sense, at the same time, is absurd, and not in
in the compass of common nature to produce. Attempting only one thing,
therefore, we may entertain the idea of hitting the point of perfection. It has
been owing to an inattention to this principle, that so many fail in their
attempts at good writing. A Jack of all Trades, is proverbial of a bungler; and
we scarcely ever find any one who excels in two parts of the same art; much
less in two arts at the same time. The smooth poet wants strength; and the
orator of a good voice, is destitute of logical reason and argument. How many
have I heard speak, who, were they to attempt voice only, might be respectable;
but undertaking, at the same time, to carry sense along with them, they utterly
fail, and become contemptible. One thing at once, is the best maxim that ever
came into the mind of man. This might be illustrated by a thousand examples;
but I shall not trouble myself with any; as it is not so much my object to
convince others as to show the motives by which I myself am governed. Indeed, I
could give authority which is superior to all examples; viz. that of the poet
Horace; who, speaking on this very subject of excellence in writing, says,
Quidvis, that is, whatever you compose, let it be, simplex duntaxit and unum:
that is, simple, and one thing only.

It will be needless for me to say any thing about the critics; for as this
work is intended as a model or rule of good writing, it cannot be the subject
of criticism. It is true, Homer has been criticized by a Zoilus and an
Aristotle; but the one contented himself with pointing out defects; the other,
beauties. But Zoilus has been censured, Aristotle praised; because in a model
there can be no defect; error consisting in a deviation from the truth, and
faults, in an aberration from the original of beauty; so that where there are
no faults there can be no food for criticism, taken in the unfavourable sense
of finding fault with the productions of an author. I have no objections,
therefore, to any praise that may be given to this work; but to censure or
blame must appear absurd; because it cannot be doubted but that it will
perfectly answer the end proposed.

Being a book without thought, or the smallest degree of sense, it will be
useful to young minds, not fatiguing their understandings, and easily
introducing a love of reading and study. Acquiring language at first by this
means, they will afterward gain knowledge. It will be useful especially to
young men of light minds intended for the bar or pulpit. By heaping too much
upon them, style and matter at once, you surfeit the stomach, and turn away the
appetite from literary entertainment, to horse-racing and cock-fighting. I
shall consider myself, therefore, as having performed an acceptable service to
all weak and visionary people, if I can give them something to read without the
trouble of thinking. But these are collataral advantages of my work, the great
object of which is, as I have said before, to give a model of perfect style in
writing. If hereafter any author of supereminent abilities, should choose to
give this style a body, and make it the covering to some work of sense, as you
would wrap fine silk round a beautiful form, so that there may be, not only
vestment, but life in the object, I have no objections; but shall be rather
satisfied with having it put to so good a use.

CHAP. I.
JOHN FARRAGO, was a man of about fifty-three years of age, of good natural
sense, and considerable reading; but in some things whimsical, owing perhaps to
his greater knowledge of books than of the world; but, in some degree, also, to
his having never married, being what they call an old bachelor, a
characteristic of which is, usually, singularity and whim. He had the advantage
of having had in early life, an academic education; but having never applied
himself to any of the learned professions, he had lived the greater part of his
life on a small farm, which he cultivated with servants or hired hands, as he
could conveniently supply himself with either. The servant that he had at this
time, was an Irishman, whose name was Teague Oregan. I shall say nothing of the
character of this man, because the very name imports what he was.

A strange idea came into the head of Captain Farrago about this time; for, by
the bye, I had forgot to mention that having being chosen captain of a company
of militia in the neighborhood, he had gone by the name of Captain ever since;
for the rule is, once a captain, and always a captain; but, as I was observing,
the idea had come into his head, to saddle an old horse that he had, and ride
about the world a little, with his man Teague at his heels, to see how things
were going on here and there, and to observe human nature. For it is a mistake
to suppose, that a man cannot learn man by reading him in a corner, as well as
on the widest space of transaction. At any rate, it may yield amusement.

It was about a score of miles from his own house, that he fell in with what we
call Races. The jockeys seeing him advance, with Teague by his side, whom they
took for his groom, conceived him to be some person who had brought his horse
to enter for the purse. Coming up and accosting him, said they, You seem to be
for the races, Sir; and have a horse to enter. Not at all, said the captain;
this is but a common palfrey, and by no means remarkable for speed or bottom;
he is a common plough horse which I have used on my farm for several years, and
can scarce go beyond a trot; much less match himself with your blooded horses
that are going to take the field on this occasion.

The jockeys were of opinion, from the speech, that the horse was what they
call a bite, and that under the appearance of leanness and stiffness, there was
concealed some hidden quality of swiftness uncommon. For they had heard of
instances, where the most knowing had been taken in by mean looking horses; so
that having laid two, or more, to one, they were nevertheless bit by the bet;
and the mean looking nags, proved to be horses of a more than common speed and
bottom. So that there is no trusting appearances. Such was the reasoning of the
jockeys. For they could have no idea, that a man could come there in so
singular a manner, with a groom at his foot, unless he had some great object of
making money by the adventure. Under this idea, they began to interrogate him
with respect to the blood and pedigree of his horse: whether he was of the
dove, or the bay mare that took the purse; and was imported by such a one at
such a time? whether his sire was Tamerlane or Bajazet?

The Captain was irritated at the questions, and could not avoid answering. --
Gentlemen, said he, it is a strange thing that you should suppose that it is of
any consequence what may be the pedigree of a horse. For even in men it is of
no avail. Do we not find that sages have had blockheads for their sons; and
that blockheads have had sages? It is remarkable, that as estates have seldom
lasted three generations, so understanding and ability have seldom been
transmitted to the second. There never was a greater man, take him as an orator
and philosopher, than Cicero: and never was there a person who had greater
opportunities than his son Marcus; and yet he proved of no account or
reputation. This is an old instance, but there are a thousand others.
Chesterfield and his son are mentioned. It is true, Philip and Alexander may be
said to be exceptions: Philip of the strongest possible mind; capable of almost
every thing we can conceive; the deepest policy and the most determined valor;
his son Alexander not deficient in the first, and before him in the last; if it
is possible to be before a man than whom you can suppose nothing greater. It is
possible, in modern times, that Tippo Saib may be equal to his father Hyder
Ali. Some talk of the two Pitts. I have no idea that the son is, in any
respect, equal to old Sir William. The one is a labored artificial minister:
the other spoke with the thunder, and acted with the lightning of the gods. I
will venture to say, that when the present John Adamses, and Lees, and
Jeffersons, and Jays, and Henrys, and other great men, who figure upon the
stage at this time, have gone to sleep with their fathers, it is an hundred to
one if there is any of their descendents who can fill their places. Was I to
lay a bet for a great man, I would sooner pick up the brat of a tinker, than go
into the great houses to choose a piece of stuff for a man of genius. Even with
respect to personal appearance, which is more in the power of natural
production, we do not see that beauty always produces beauty; but on the
contrary, the homliest persons have oftentimes the best favored offspring; so
that there is no rule or reason in these things. With respect to this horse,
therefore, it can be of no moment whether he is blooded or studed, or what he
is. He is a good old horse, used to the plough, and carries my weight very
well; and I have never yet made enquiry with respect to his ancestors, or
affronted him so much as to cast up to him the defect of parentage. I bought
him some years ago from Niel Thomas, who had him from a colt. As far as I can
understand, he was of a brown mare that John M'Neis had; but of what horse I
know no more than the horse himself. His gaits are good enough, as to riding a
short journey of seven or eight miles, or the like; but he is rather a pacer
than a troter; and though his bottom may be good enough in carrying a bag to
the mill, or going in the plough, or the sled, or the harrow, etc. yet his wind
is not so good, nor his speed, as to be fit for the heats.

The jockeys thought the man a fool, and gave themselves no more trouble about
him.

The horses were now entered, and about to start for the purse. There was Black
and all Black, and Snip, John Duncan's Barbary Slim, and several others. The
riders had been weighed, and when mounted, the word was given. It is needless
to describe a race; every body knows the circumstances of it. It is sufficient
to say, that from the bets that were laid, there was much anxiety, and some
passion in the minds of those concerned: So, that as two of the horses, Black
and all Black, and Slim, came out near together; there was dispute and
confusion. It came to kicking and cuffing in some places. The Captain was a
good deal hurt with such indecency amongst gentlemen, and advancing, addressed
them in the following manner: Gentleman, this is an unequal and unfair
proceeding. It is unbecoming modern manners, or even the ancient. For at the
Olympic games of Greece, where were celebrated horse and chariot races, there
was no such hurry scurry as this; and in times of chivalry itself, where men
ate, drank, and slept on horseback, though there was a great deal of
pell-meling, yet no such disorderly work as this. If men had a difference, they
couched their lances, and ran full tilt at one another; but no such indecent
expressions, as villain, scoundrel, liar, ever came out of their mouths. There
was the most perfect courtesy in those days of heroism and honor; and this
your horse-racing, which is a germ of the amusement of those times, ought to be
conducted on the same principles of decorum, and good breeding.

As he was speaking, he was jostled by some one in the crowd, and thrown from
his horse; and had it not been for Teague, who was at hand, and helped him on
again, he would have suffered damage. As it was, he received a contusion in his
head, of which he complained much; and having left the race-ground, and coming
to a small cottage, he stopped a little, to alight and dress the wound. An old
woman who was there, thought they ought to take a little of his water, and see
how it was with him; but the Captain having no faith in telling disorders by
the urine, thought proper to send for a surgeon who was hard by, to examine the
bruise, and apply bandages. The surgeon attended, and examining the part,
pronounced it a contusion of the cerebrum. But as there appeared but little
laceration, and no fracture, simple or compound, the pia matter could not be
injured; nor even could there be more than a slight impression on the dura
matter. So that trepaning did not at all appear necessary. A most fortunate
circumstance; for a wound in the head, is of all places the most dangerous;
because there can be no amputation to save life. There being but one head to a
man, and that being the residence of the five senses, it is impossible to live
without it. Nevertheless, as the present case was highly dangerous, as it might
lead to a subsultus tendinum, or lock-jaw, it was necessary to apply
cataplasms, in order to reduce inflammation, and bring about a sanative
disposition of the parts. Perhaps it might not be amiss, to take an anodyne as
a refrigerant. Many patients had been lost by the ignorance of empirics
prescribing bracers; whereas, in the first stage of a contusion, relaxing and
antifebrile medicines are proper. A little phlebotomy was no doubt necessary,
to prevent the bursting of the blood vessels.

The Captain hearing so many hard words, and bad accounts of this case, was
much alarmed. Nevertheless he did not think it could be absolutely so
dangerous. For it seemed to him that he was not sick at heart, or under any
mortal pain. The surgeon observed, that in this case he could not himself be a
judge. For the very part was affected by which he was to judge, viz. the head;
that it was no uncommon thing for men in the extremest cases to imagine
themselves out of danger; whereas in reality, they were in the greatest
possible: that notwithstanding the symptoms were mild, yet from the contusion,
a mortification might ensue. Hypocrates, who might be styled an elementary
physician, and has a treatise on this very subject, is of opinion, that the
most dangerous symptom, is a topical insensibility; but among the moderns,
Sydenham considers it in another point of view, and thinks that where there is
no pain, there is as great reason to suppose that there is no hurt, as that
there is a mortal one. Be this as it may, antiseptic medicines might be very
proper.

The Captain hearing so much jargon, and conscious to himself that he was by no
means in so bad a state as this son of Escalapius would represent, broke out
into some passion. It is, said he, the craft of your profession to make the
case worse than it is, in order to increase the perquisites. But if there is
any faith in you, make the same demand, and let me know your real judgment. The
surgeon was irritated with his distrust, and took it into his head to fix some
apprehension in the mind of his patient, if possible, that his case was not
without danger. Looking steadfastly at him for some time, and feeling his pulse,
there is, said he, an evident delirium approaching. This argues an affection of
the brain, but it will be necessary, after some soporiferous draughts, to put
the patient to sleep. Said the Captain, If you will give me about a pint of
whiskey and water, I will try to go to sleep myself. Adeleterious mixture, in
this case, said the surgeon, cannot be proper; especially a distillation of
that quality. The Captain would hear no more; but requesting the man of the
cabin, to let him have the spirits proposed, drank a pint or two of grog, and
having bound up his head with a handkerchief, went to bed.

CHAP. II. Containing some general Reflections.
THE first reflection that arises, is, the good sense of the Captain; who was
unwilling to impose his horse for a racer; not being qualified for the course.
Because, as an old lean beast, attempting a trot, he was respectable enough;
but going out of his nature, and affecting speed, he would have been
contemptible. The great secret of preserving respect, is the cultivating and
showing to the best advantage the powers that we possess, and the not going
beyond them. Every thing in its element is good, and in their proper sphere all
natures and capacities are excellent. This thought might be turned into a
thousand different shapes, and clothed with various expressions; but after
all, it comes to the old proverb at last, Ne suitor ultra crepidam, Let the
cobbler stick to his last; a sentiment we are about more to illustrate in the
sequel of this work.

The second reflection that arises, is, the simplicity of the Captain; who was
so unacquainted with the world, as to imagine that jockeys and men of the turf
could be composed by reason and good sense; whereas there are no people who are
by education of a less philosophic turn of mind. The company of horses is by no
means favorable to good taste and genius. The rubbing and currying them, but
little enlarges the faculties, or improves the mind; and even riding, by which
a man is carried swiftly through the air, though it contributes to health, yet
stores the mind with few or no ideas; and as men naturally consimilate with
their company, so it is observable that your jockeys are a class of people not
greatly removed from the sagacity of a good horse. Hence most probably the
fable of the centaur, among the ancients; by which they held out the moral of
the jockey and the horse being one beast.

A third reflection is, that which he expressed; viz. the professional art of the
surgeon to make the most of the case, and the technical terms used by him. I
have to declare, that it is with no attempt at wit, that the terms are set
down, or the art of the surgeon hinted at; because it is so common place a
thing to ridicule the peculiarities of a profession, that it savours of mean
parts to indulge it. For a man of real genius will never walk in the beaten
track, because his object is what is new and uncommon. This surgeon does not
appear to have been a man of very great ability; but the Captain was certainly
wrong in declining his prescriptions; for the maxim is, Unicuique in art, sua
perito, credendum est; every one is to be trusted in his profession.

CHAP. III.
THE Captain rising early next morning, and setting out on his way, had now
arrived at a place where a number of people were convened, for the purpose of
electing persons to represent them in the legislature of the state. There was a
weaver who was a candidate for this appointment, and seemed to have a good deal
of interest among the people. But another, who was a man of education, was his
competitor. Relying on some talent of speaking which he thought he possessed,
he addressed the multitude.

Said he, Fellow citizens, I pretend not to any great abilities; but am
conscious to myself that I have the best good will to serve you. But it is very
astonishing to me, that this weaver should conceive himself qualified for the
trust. For though my acquirements are not great, yet his are still less. The
mechanical business which he pursues, must necessarily take up so much of his
time, that he cannot apply himself to political studies. I should therefore
think it would be more answerable to your dignity, and conducive to your
interest, to be represented by a man at least of some letters, than by an
illiterate handicraftsman like this. It will be more honorable for himself, to
remain at his loom and knot threads, than to come forward in a legislative
capacity: because, in the one case, he is in the sphere where God and nature
has placed him; in the other, he is like a fish out of water, and must struggle
for breath in a new element.

Is it possible he can understand the affairs of government, whose mind* has
been concentered to the small object of weaving webs; to the price by the yard,
the grist of the thread, and such like matters as concern a manufacturer of
cloths? The feet of him who weaves, are more occupied than the head, or at
least as much; and therefore the whole man must be, at least, but in half
accustomed to exercise his mental powers. For these reasons, all other things
set aside, the chance is in my favor, with respect to information. However,
you will decide, and give your suffrages to him or to me, as you shall judge
expedient.

The Captain hearing these observations, and looking at the weaver, could not
help advancing, and undertaking to subjoin something in support of what had
been just said. Said he, I have no prejudice against a weaver more than another
man. Nor do I know any harm in the trade; save that from the sedentary life in
a damp place, there is usually a paleness of the countenance: but this is a
physical, not a moral evil. Such usually occupy subterranean apartments; not
for the purpose, like Demosthenes, of shaving their heads, and writing over
eight times the history of Thucydides, and perfecting a style of oratory; but
rather to keep the thread moist; or because this is considered but as an
inglorious sort of trade, and is frequently thrust away into cellars, and damp
outhouses, which are not occupied for a better use.

But to rise from the cellar to the senate house, would be an unnatural hoist.
To come from counting threads, and adjusting them to the splits of a reed, to
regulate the finances of a government, would be preposterous; there being no
congruity in the case. There is no analogy between knotting threads and framing
laws. It would be a reversion of the order of things. Not that a manufacturer
of linen or woolen, or other stuff, is an inferior character, but a different
one, from that which ought to be employed in affairs of state. It is
unnecessary to enlarge on this subject; for you must all be convinced of the
truth and propriety of what I say. But if you will give me leave to take the
manufacturer aside a little, I think I can explain to him my ideas on the
subject; and very probably prevail with him to withdraw his pretensions. The
people seeming to acquiesce, and beckoning to the weaver, they drew aside, and
the Captain addressed him in the following words:

Mr. Traddle, said he, for that was the name of the manufacturer, I have not
the smallest idea of wounding your sensibility; but it would seem to me, it
would be more your interest to pursue your occupation, than to launch out into
that of which you have no knowledge. When you go to the senate house, the
application to you will not be to warp a web; but to make laws for the
commonwealth. Now, suppose that the making these laws, requires a knowledge of
commerce, or of the interests of agriculture, or those principles upon which
the different manufactures depend, what service could you render. It is
possible you might think justly enough; but could you speak? You are not in the
habit of public speaking. You are not furnished with those common place ideas,
with which even very ignorant men can pass for knowing something. There is
nothing makes a man so ridiculous as to attempt what is above his sphere. You
are no tumbler for instance; yet should you give out that you could vault upon
a man's back; or turn head over heels, like the wheel of a cart; the stiffness
of your joints would encumber you; and you would fall upon your backside to the
ground. Such a squash as that would do you damage. The getting up to ride on
the state is an unsafe thing to those who are not accustomed to such
horsemanship. It is a disagreeable thing for a man to be laughed at, and there
is no way of keeping ones self from it but by avoiding all affectation.

While they were thus discoursing, a bustle had taken place among the crowd.
Teague hearing so much about elections, and serving the government, took it
into his head, that he could be a legislator himself. The thing was not
displeasing to the people, who seemed to favor his pretensions; owing, in some
degree, to there being several of his countrymen among the crowd; but more
especially to the fluctuation of the popular mind, and a disposition to what is
new and ignoble. For though the weaver was not the most elevated object of
choice, yet he was still preferable to this tatter-demalion, who was but a
menial servant, and had so much of what is called the brogue on his tongue, as
to fall far short of an elegant speaker.

The Captain coming up, and finding what was on the carpet, was greatly
chagrined at not having been able to give the multitude a better idea of the
importance of a legislative trust; alarmed also, from an apprehension of the
loss of his servant. Under these impressions he resumed his address to the
multitude. Said he, This is making the matter still worse, gentlemen: this
servant of mine is but a bog-trotter; who can scarcely speak the dialect in
which your laws ought to be written; but certainly has never read a single
treatise on any political subject; for the truth is, he cannot read at all. The
young people of the lower class, in Ireland, have seldom the advantage of a
good education; especially the descendants of the ancient Irish, who have most
of them a great assurance of countenance, but little information, or
literature. This young man, whose family name is Oregan, has been my servant
for several years. And, except a too great fondness for women, which now and
then brings him into scrapes, he has demeaned himself in a manner tolerable
enough. But he is totally ignorant of the great principles of legislation; and
more especially, the particular interests of the government. A free government
is a noble possession to a people: and this freedom consists in an equal right
to make laws, and to have the benefit of the laws when made. Though doubtless,
in such a government, the lowest citizen may become chief magistrate; yet it is
sufficient to possess the right; not absolutely necessary to exercise it. Or
even if you should think proper, now and then, to show your privilege, and
exert, in a signal manner, the democratic prerogative, yet is it not descending
too low to filch away from me a hireling, which I cannot well spare, to serve
your purposes? You are surely carrying the matter too far, in thinking to make
a senator of this hostler; to take him away from an employment to which he has
been bred, and put him to another, to which he has served no apprenticeship: to
set those hands which have been lately employed in currying my horse, to the
draughting-bills, and preparing business for the house.

The people were tenacious of their choice, and insisted on giving Teague their
suffrages; and by the frown upon their brows, seemed to indicate resentment at
what had been said; as indirectly charging them with want of judgment; or
calling in question their privilege to do what they thought proper. It is a
very strange thing, said one of them, who was a speaker for the rest, that
after having conquered Burgoyne and Cornwallis, and got a government of our
own, we cannot put in it whom we please. This young man may be your servant, or
another man's servant; but if we choose to make him a delegate, what is that to
you. He may not be yet skilled in the matter, but there is a good day a-coming.
We will empower him; and it is better to trust a plain man like him, than one
of your high flyers, that will make laws to suit their own purposes.

Said the Captain, I had much rather you would send the weaver, though I
thought that improper, than to invade my household, and thus detract from me
the very person that I have about me to brush my boots, and clean my spurs. The
prolocutor of the people gave him to understand that his surmises were useless,
for the people had determined on the choice, and Teague they would have for a
representative.

Finding it answered no end to expostulate with the multitude, he requested to
speak a word with Teague by himself. Stepping aside, he said to him, composing
his voice, and addressing him in a soft manner; Teague, you are quite wrong in
this matter they have put into your head. Do you know what it is to be a member
of a deliberative body? What qualifications are necessary? Do you understand
any thing of geography? If a question should be, to make a law to dig a canal
in some part of the state, can you describe the bearing of the mountains, and
the course of the rivers? Or if commerce is to be pushed to some new quarter,
by the force of regulations, are you competent to decide in such a case? There
will be questions of law, and astronomy on the carpet. How you must gape and
stare like a fool, when you come to be asked your opinion on these subjects?
Are you acquainted with the abstract principles of finance; with the funding
public securities; the ways and means of raising the revenue; providing for the
discharge of the public debts, and all other things which respect the economy
of the government? Even if you had knowledge, have you a facility of speaking.
I would suppose you would have too much pride to go to the house just to say,
Ay, or No. This is not the fault of your nature, but of your education; having
been accustomed to dig turf in your early years, rather than instructing
yourself in the classics, or common school books.

When a man becomes a member of a public body, he is like a racoon, or other
beast that climbs up the fork of a tree; the boys pushing at him with
pitch-forks, or throwing stones, or shooting at him with an arrow, the dogs
barking in the mean time. One will find fault with your not speaking; another
with your speaking, if you speak at all. They will have you in the news papers,
and ridicule you as a perfect beast. There is what they call the caricatura;
that is, representing you with a dog's head, or a cat's claw. As you have a red
head, they will very probably make a fox of you, or a sorrel horse, or a
brindled cow, or the like. It is the devil in hell to be exposed to the squibs
and crackers of the gazette wits and publications. You know no more about these
matters than a goose; and yet you would undertake rashly, without advice, to
enter on the office; nay, contrary to advice. For I would not for a thousand
guineas, though I have not the half of it to spare, that the breed of the
Oregans should come to this; bringing on them a worse stain than stealing
sheep; to which they are addicted. You have nothing but your character, Teague,
in a new country to depend upon. Let it never be said, that you quitted an
honest livelihood, the taking care of my horse, to follow the new fangled whims
of the times; and to be a statesman.

Teague was moved chiefly with the last part of the address, and consented to
give up the object.

The Captain, glad of this, took him back to the people, and announced his
disposition to decline the honor which they had intended him.

Teague acknowledged that he had changed his mind, and was willing to remain in
a private station.

The people did not seem well pleased with the Captain; but as nothing more
could be said about the matter, they turned their attention to the weaver, and
gave him their suffrages.

CHAP. IV.
CAPTAIN FARRAGO leaving this place, proceeded on his way; and at the distance
of a mile or two, met a man with a bridle in his hand; who had lost a horse,
and had been at a conjurer's to make enquiry, and recover his property.

It struck the mind of the Captain to go to this conjuring person, and make a
demand of him, what was the cause that the multitude were so disposed to
elevate the low to the highest station. He had rode but about a mile, when the
habitation of the conjurer, by the direction and description of the man who had
lost the horse had given, began to be in view. Coming up to the door, and
enquiring if that was not where conjurer Kolt lived, they were answered Yes.
Accordingly alighting, and entering the domicile, all those things took place
which usually happen, or are described in cases of this nature, viz. there was
the conjurer's assistant, who gave the Captain to understand that master had
withdrawn a little, but would be in shortly.

In the mean time, the assistant endeavored to draw from him some account of
the occasion of his journey; which the other readily communicated; and the
conjurer, who was listening through a crack in the partition, overheard.
Finding it was not a horse or a cow, or a piece of linen that was lost, but an
abstract question of political philosophy which was to be put, he came from his
lurking place, and entered, as if not knowing that any person had been waiting
for him.

After mutual salutations, the Captain gave him to understand the object which
he had in view by calling on him.

Said the conjurer, This lies not at all in my way. If it had been a dozen of
spoons, or a stolen watch, that you had to look for, I could very readily, by
the assistance of my art, have assisted you in the recovery; but as to this
matter of men's imaginations and attachments in political affairs, I have no
more understanding than another man.

It is very strange, said the Captain, that you who can tell by what means a
thing is stolen, and the place where it is deposited, though at a thousand
miles distance, should know so little of what is going on in the breast of man,
as not to be able to develope his secret thoughts, and the motives of his
actions.

It is not of our business, said the other; but should we undertake it, I do
not see that it would be very difficult to explain all that puzzles you at
present. There is no need of a conjurer to tell why it is that the common
people are more disposed to trust one of their own class, than those who may
affect to be superior. Besides, there is a certain pride in man, which leads
him to elevate the low, and pull down the high. There is a kind of creating
power exerted in making a senator of an unqualified person; which when the
author has done, he exults over the work, and, like the Creator himself when he
made the world, sees that "it is very good." Moreover, there is in every
government a patrician class, against whom the spirit of the multitude
naturally militates: And hence a perpetual war; the aristocrats endeavoring to
detrude the people, and the people contending to obtrude themselves. And it is
right it should be so; for by this fermentation, the spirit of democracy is
kept alive.

The Captain, thanking him for his information, asked him what was to pay; at
the same time pulling out half a crown from a green silk purse which he had in
his breeches pocket. The conjurer gave him to understand, that as the solution
of these difficulties was not within his province, he took nothing for it. The
Captain expressing his sense of his disinterested service, bade him adieu.

CHAP. V. Containing Reflections.
A Democracy is beyond all question the freest government: because under this,
every man is equally protected by the laws, and has equally a voice in making
them. But I do not say an equal voice; because some men have stronger lungs
than others, and can express more forcibly their opinions of public affairs.
Others, though they may not speak very loud, yet have a faculty of saying more
in a short time, and even in the case of others, who speak little or none at
all, yet what they do say containing good sense, comes with greater weight; so
that all things considered, every citizen, has not, in this sense of the word,
an equal voice. But the right being equal what great harm i^ it is unequally
exercised? is it necessary that every man should become a statesman? No more
than that every man should become a poet or a painter. The sciences, are open
to all; but let him only who has taste and genius pursue them. If any man
covets the office of a bishop, says St. Paul, he (...) a good work. But again,
he adds this caution, Ordain not a novice, lest being lifted up with pride, he
falls into the condemnation of the devil. It is indeed making a devil of a man
to lift him up to a state to which he is not suited. A ditcher is a respectable
character, with his over-alls on, and a spade in his hand; but put the same man
to those offices which require the head, whereas he has been accustomed to
impress with his foot, and there appears a contrast between the man and the
occupation.

There are individuals in society, who prefer honor to wealth; or cultivate
political studies as a branch of literary pursuits; and offer themselves to
serve public bodies, in order to have an opportunity of discovering their
knowledge, and exercising their judgment. It must be chagrining to these, and
hurtful to the public, to see those who have no talent this way, and ought to
have no taste, preposterously obtrude themselves upon the government. It is the
same as if a brick-layer should usurp the office of a tailor, and come with his
square and perpendicular, to take the measure of a pair of breeches.

It is proper that those who cultivate oratory, should go to the house of
orators. But for an Ay and No man to be ambitious of that place, is to
sacrifice his credit to his vanity.

I would not mean to insinuate that legislators are to be selected from the
more wealthy of the citizens, yet a man's circumstances ought to be such as
afford him leisure for study and reflection. There is often wealth without
taste or talent. I have no idea, that because a man lives in a great house, and
has a cluster of bricks or stones about his backside, that he is therefore fit
for a legislator. There is so much pride and arrogance with those who consider
themselves the first in a government, that it deserves to be checked by the
populace, and the evil most usually commences on this side. Men associate with
their own persons, the adventitious circumstances of birth and fortune: So that
a fellow blowing with fat and repletion, conceives himself superior to the poor
lean man, that lodges in an inferior mansion. But as in all cases, so in this,
there is a medium. Genius and virtue are independent of rank and fortune; and
it is neither the opulent, nor the indigent, but the man of ability and
integrity that ought to be called forth to serve his country: and while, on the
one hand, the aristocratic part of the government, arrogates a right to
represent; on the other hand, the democratic contends the point; and from this
conjunction and opposition of forces, there is produced a compound resolution,
which carries the object in an intermediate direction. When we see therefore, a
Teague Oregan lifted up, the philosopher will reflect, that it is to balance
some purse-proud fellow, equally as ignorant, that comes down from the sphere
of the aristocratic interest.

But every man ought to consider for himself, whether it is his use to be this
draw-back, on either side. For as when good liquor is to be distilled, you
throw in some material useless in itself to correct the effervescence of the
spirit; so it may be his part to act as a sedative. For though we commend the
effect, yet still the material retains but its original value.

But as the nature of things is such, let no man, who means well to the
commonwealth, and offers to serve it, be hurt in his (...) when some one of
meaner talents is preferred. The people are a sovereign, and greatly despotic;
but, in the main, just.

I have a great mind, in order to elevate the composition, to make quotations
from the Greek and Roman history. And I am conscious to myself, that I have
read over the writers on the government of Italy and Greece, in ancient, as
well as modern times. But I have drawn a great deal more from reflection on the
nature of things, than from all the writings I have ever read. Nay, the history
of the election, which I have just given, will afford a better lesson to the
American mind, than all that is to be found in other examples. We have seen
here, a weaver a favored candidate, and in the next instance, a bog-trotter
superseding him. Now it may be said, that this is fiction; but fiction, or no
fiction, the nature of the thing will make it a reality. But I return to the
adventures of the Captain, whom I have upon my hands; and who, as far as I can
yet discover, is a good honest man; and means what is benevolent and useful;
though his ideas may not comport with the ordinary manner of thinking, in every
particular.

BOOK II.
CHAP. I.
THERE was, in a certain great city, a society who called themselves
Philosophers. They had published books, they called Transactions. These
contained dissertations on the nature and causes of things; from the stars of
the heaven to the fire-flies of the earth; and from the sea-crab to the
woodland buffaloe. Such disquisitions, are doubtless useful and entertaining to
an inquisitive mind.

There is no question, but there were in this body some very great men; whose
investigations of the arcana of nature, deserve attention. But so it was, there
had been introduced, by some means, many individuals, who were no philosophers
at all. This is no unusual thing with institutions of this nature; though, by
the bye, it is a very great fault. For it lessens the incentives of honor, to
have the access made so easy, that every one may obtain admission. It has been
a reproach to some colleges, that a diploma could be purchased for half a
crown. This society were still more moderate; for the bare scratching the
backside of a member has been known to procure a fellowship. At least, there
have been those admitted who appeared capable of nothing else.

Nevertheless, it was necessary, even in these cases, for the candidates to
procure some token of a philosophical turn of mind; such as the skin of a dead
cat, or some odd kind of a mouse trap, or the like* or have some phrases in
their mouths* about minerals and petrifactions; so as just to support some idea
of natural knowledge, and pass muster. There was one who had got in by finding,
accidentally, the tail of a rabbit, which had been taken off in a boy's trap.
Another by means of a squirrel's scalp, which he had taken care to stretch and
dry on a bit of osier, bended in the form of a hoop. The beard of an old fox,
taken off and dried in the sun, was the means of introducing one whom I knew
very well: Or rather, as I have already hinted, it was beforehand intended he
should be introduced; and these exuviae, or spoils of the animal kingdom, were
but the tokens and apologies for admission.

It happened, as the Captain was riding this day, and Teague trotting after
him, he saw a large owl, that had been shot by some body, and was placed in the
crotch of a tree, about the height of a man's head from the ground, for those
that passed by to look at. The Captain being struck with it, as somewhat larger
than such birds usually are, desired Teague to reach it to him; and tying it to
the hinder part of his saddle, rode along.

Passing by the house of one who belonged to the society, the bird was noticed
at the saddle-skirts, and the philosopher coming out, made enquiry of the genus
and nature of the fowl. Said the Captain, I know nothing more about it, than
that it is nearly as long as a turkey buzzard. It is doubtless, said the other,
the great Canada owl, that comes from the Lakes; and if your honor will give
me leave, I will take it and submit it to the society, and have yourself made a
member. As to the first, the Captain consented; but as to the last, the being a
member, he chose rather to decline it; conceiving himself unqualified for a
place in such a body. The other assured him that he was under a very great
mistake; for there were persons there who scarcely knew a B from a bull's foot.
That may be, said the Captain; but if others choose to degrade themselves, by
suffering their names to be used in so preposterous a way as that, it was no
reason he should.

The other gave him to understand, that the society would certainly wish to
express their sense of his merit, and show themselves not inattentive to a
virtuoso; that as he declined the honor himself, he probably might not be
averse to let his servant take a seat among them.

Said the Captain, He is but a simple Irishman, and of a low education; his
language being that spoken by the aborigines of his country. And if he speaks a
little English, it is with the brogue on his tongue; which would be unbecoming
in a member of your body. It would seem to me, that a philosopher ought to know
how to write, or at least to read. But Teague can neither write nor read. He
can sing a song, or whistle an Irish tune; but is totally illiterate in all
things else. I question much if he could tell you how many new moons there are
in the year; or any the most common thing that you could ask him. He is a
long-legged fellow, it is true; and might be of service in clambering over
rocks, or going to the shores of rivers, to gather curiosities. But could you
not get persons to do this, without making them members? I have more respect
for science, than to suffer this bog-trotter to be so advanced at its expense.

In these American states, there is a wide field for philosophic search; and
these researches may be of great use in agriculture, mechanics, and astronomy.
There is but little immediate profit attending these pursuits; but if there can
be inducements of honor, these may supply the place. What more alluring to a
young man, than the prospect of being, one day, received into a society of men
truly learned; the admission being a test and a proof of distinguished
knowledge. But the fountain of honor, thus contaminated by a sediment foreign
from its nature, who would wish to drink of it?

Said the philosopher, At the first institution of the society by Dr. Franklin
and others, it was put upon a narrow basis, and only men of science were
considered proper to compose it; and this might be a necessary policy at that
time, when the institution was in its infancy, and could not bear much
draw-back of ignorance. But it has not been judged so necessary of late years.
The matter stands now on a broad and catholic bottom; and, like the gospel
itself, it is our orders to go out into the highways and hedges, and compel
them to come in. There are hundreds, whose names you may see on our list, who
are not more instructed than this lad of yours.

They must be a sad set indeed then, said the Captain. Sad or no sad, said the
other, it is the case; and if you will let Teague go, I will engage him a
membership.

I take it very ill of you, Mr. Philosopher, said the Captain, to put this
nonsense in his head. If you knew what trouble I have lately had with a parcel
of people that were for sending him to Congress, you would be unwilling to draw
him from me for the purpose of making him a philosopher. It is not an easy
matter to get hirelings nowadays; and when you do get one, it is a mere
chance, whether he is faithful, and will suit your purpose. It would be a very
great loss to me, to have him taken off at this time, when I have equipped
myself for a journey.

Teague was a good deal incensed at this refusal of his master, and insisted
that he would be a philosopher. You are an ignoramus, said the Captain. It is
not the being among philosophers will make you one.

Teague insisted that he had a right to make the best of his fortune: and as
there was a door open to his advancement, he did not see why he might not make
use of it.

The Captain finding that it answered no end to dispute the matter with him, by
words of sense and reason, took a contrary way to manage him.

Teague, said he, I have a regard for you, and would wish to see you do well.
But before you take this step, I would wish to speak a word or two in private.
If you will go, I may perhaps suggest some things that may be of service to
you, for your future conduct in that body.

Teague consenting, they stepped aside; and the Captain addressed him in the
following manner:

Teague, said he, do you know what you are about? It is a fine thing, at first
sight, to be a philosopher, and get into this body. And indeed, if you are a
real philosopher, it might be some honor, and also safe, to take that leap.
But do you think it is to make a philosopher of you that they want you? Far
from it. It is their great study to find curiosities; and because this man saw
you coming after me, with a red head, trotting like an Esquimaux Indian, it has
struck his mind to pick you up, and pass you for one. Nay, it is possible, they
may intend worse; and when they have examined you awhile, take the skin off
you, and pass you for an overgrown otter, or a musk-rat; or some outlandish
animal, for which they will, themselves, invent a name. If you were at the
museum of one of these societies, to observe the quantity of skins and
skeletons they have, you might be well assured they did not come by them
honestly. I know so much of these people, that I am well persuaded they would
think no more of throwing you into a kettle of boiling water, than they would a
tarapin; and having scraped you out to a shell, present you as the relics of an
animal they had procured, at an immense price, from some Guinea merchant. Or if
they should not at once turn you to this use, how, in the mean time, will they
dispose of you? They will have you away through the bogs and marshes, catching
flies and mire-snipes; or send you to the woods for a pole-cat; or oblige you
to descend into draw-wells for fog, and phlogistic air, and the Lord knows
what. You must go into wolves dens, and catch bears by the tail; run over
mountains like an opossum, and dig the earth like a ground hog. You will have
to climb upon trees, and get yourself bit by flying squirrels. There will be no
end to the musketoes you will have to dissect. What is all this to diving into
mill-dams and rivers, to get craw-fish. Or if you go to the ocean, there are
alligators to devour you like a cat-fish. Who knows but it may come your turn,
in a windy night, to go aloft to the heavens, to rub down the stars, and give
the goats and rams, that are there, fodder. The keeping the stars clean, is a
laborious work; a great deal worse than scouring and irons, or brass kettles.
There is a bull there would think no more of tossing you on his horns than he
would a puppy dog. If the crab should get you in his claws he would squeeze you
like a lobster. But what is all that to your having no place to stand on? How
would you like to be up at the moon, and to fall down when you had missed your
hold, like a boy from the topmast of a ship, and have your brains beat out
upon the top of some great mountain; where the devil might take your skeleton
and give it to the turkey-buzzards?

Or if they should, in the mean time, excuse from such out of door services,
they will rack and torture you with hard questions. You must tell them how long
the rays of light are coming from the sun; how many drops of rain fall in a
thunder gust; what makes the grasshopper chirp when the sun is hot; how muscle
shells get up to the top of the mountains; how the Indians got over to America.
You will have to prove absolutely that the negroes were once white; and that
their flat noses came by some cause in the compass of human means to produce.
These are puzzling questions; and yet you must solve them all. Take my advice,
and stay where you are. Many men have ruined themselves by their ambition, and
made bad worse. There is another kind of philosophy, which lies more within
your sphere; that is moral philosophy. Every hostler or hireling can study
this, and you have the most excellent opportunity of acquiring this knowledge
in our traverses through the country; or communications at the different
taverns or villages, where we may happen to sojourn.

Teague had long ago given up all thoughts of philosophy, and would not for the
world have any more to do with it; and therefore, without bidding the
philosopher adieu, they pursued their route as usual.

CHAP. II. Containing Observations.
THE institution of the American Philosophical Society, does great honor to
the founders; and what has been published by that body, comes not behind what
has appeared from societies of the same nature elsewhere. But of late years, it
has ceased to be presumptive evidence, at least what the lawyers call violent
presumption, of philosophical seize, to be a member; owing to the
spurious brood of illiterate persons that have been admitted indiscriminately
with the informed; this again, owing to a political dispute in the government
where this society exists. For when there are parties in a commonwealth, they
naturally subdivide themselves, and are found even in the retreats of the
muses. It has become the question with this society, not whether a man is a
philosopher or not, but what part he had taken in some question on the carpet.
The body conceived itself to pay a compliment to the person admitted, as if it
could be any honor to a man to be announced what he is not. The contrary is
the case here. For as honor is the acknowledgement which the world makes of a
man's respectability, there can be no honor here; for it has become a mere
matter of moonshine to be a member. To be or not be, that is the question; but
so trifling, that it is scarcely ever made. The way to remedy this, would be to
have an over hauling of the house, and derange at least three parts in four. As
in the case of Tarquin, and the three remaining books of the Sybiles, you would
receive as much for the fourth part of that body, should you set them up at
market, as for the whole at present.

I have often reflected with myself, what an honor it must be, to be one of
the society of the French acadamy; forty, of twenty-four millions of people,
are there selected in consequence of literary characters already established.

I recollect the time when I had high ideas of philosophical membership in
America. But it does not appear to me now to be the highest thing that a man
could wish, since even a common Teague Oregan, trotting on the high way, has
been solicited to take a seat. It may be said, that this is an exaggeration of
the facts; and can be considered only as burlesque. I profess it is not
intended as such, but as a fair picture of what has taken place. Should it be
considered in the light of burlesque, it must be a very lame one; because where
there is no excess there can be no caricatura. But omitting all apologies and
explanations, let the matter rest where it is.

BOOK III.
CHAP. I.
IT was somewhat late when the Captain arrived at an inn this evening. There
was there before him, a young clergyman, who had been preaching that day in a
neighboring congregation; but had not as usual, gone home with an elder; but
had come thus far on his way toward another place, where he was to preach the
next day.

The Captain entering into conversation with the clergyman, sat up pretty late.
The subject was what might be expected; viz. the affairs of religion and the
church. The clergyman was a good young man; but inclining to fanaticism, and
being righteous over much: The Captain on the other hand, somewhat skeptical in
his notions of religion: Hence, a considerable opposition of sentiment between
the two. But at length, drowziness seizing both, candles were called for, and
they went to bed.

It was about an hour or two after, when an uproar was heard in a small chamber
to the left of the staircase which led to the floor on which they slept. It
was Teague, who had got to bed to the girl of the house. For as they would
neither let him go to Congress, nor be a philosopher, he must be doing
something. The girl not being apprized, or not choosing his embraces, made a
great outcry and lamentation. The clergyman, who slept in an adjoining chamber,
and hearing this, out of the zeal of his benevolence and humanity, leaped out
of bed in his shirt, and ran in to see what was the cause of the disturbance.
The Captain also jumping up, followed soon after, and was scarcely in the
chamber before the landlord coming up with a candle, found them all together.

The maid gave this account of the matter, viz. That between sleeping and
waking she felt a man's hand lifting up the bed-clothes; upon which she shouted
out murder. But whether it was any body there present, or some one else, she
could not tell.

Teague, whose natural parts were not bad, and presence of mind considerable,
instantly took the resolution to throw the matter on the clergyman. By shaint
Patrick, said he, I was aslape in my own bed as sound as the shates that were
about me, when I heard the sound of this young crature's voice crying out like
a shape in a pasture; and when after I had heard, aslape as I was, and come
here, I found this praste, who was so wholly, and praching all night, upon the
top of the bed, with his arms round this young crature's neck; and if I had not
given him a twitch by the nose, and bid him ly over, dear honey, he would have
ravished her virginity, and murdered her, save her soul, and the paple of the
house not the wiser for it.

The clergyman stared with his mouth open; for the palpable nature of the
falsehood, had shocked him beyond the power of speech.

But the landlady, who in the mean time was come up, and had heard what Teague
had said, was enraged, could supply speech for them both. Hey, said she, this
comes of your preaching and praying, Mr. Minister. I have lodged many a
gentleman; but have never had such doings here before. It is a pretty story
that a minister of the gospel should be the first to bring a scandal upon the
house.

The Captain interrupted her, and told her there was no harm done. The maid was
not actually ravished; and if there was no noise made about it, all matters
might be set right.

The clergyman had by this time recovered himself so much as to have the use of
his tongue; and began by protesting his innocence, and that it was no more him
that made the attack upon the maid, than the angel Gabriel.

The Captain, interrupting him, and wishing to save his feelings, began by
excusing or extenuating the offense. It is no great affair, said he, after all
that is said or done. The love of women is a natural sin, and the holiest men
in all ages have been propense to this indulgence. There was Abraham that got
to bed to his maid Hagar, and had a bastard by her, whom he named Ishmael.
Joshua, who took Jericho by the sound of ram's horns, saved a likely slut of
the name of Rahab, under a pretense that she had been civil to the spies he had
sent out, but in reality because he himself took a fancy for her. I need say
nothing about David, who wrote the Psalms, and set them to music; and yet in
his old days had a girl to sleep with him. Human nature is human nature still;
and it is not all the preaching and praying on earth can extinguish it.

The clergyman averred his innocence, and that it was that red-headed gentleman
himself, meaning Teague, who was in the room first, and had been guilty of the
outrage. Teague was beginning to make the sign of the cross, and to put himself
into an attitude of swearing, when the Captain thinking it of no consequence
who was the person, put an end to the matter, by ordering Teague to bed, and
himself bidding the company good night.

The clergyman finding no better could be made of it, took the advice of the
landlord, and retired also. The landlady seemed disposed to hush the matter up,
and the maid went to sleep as usual.

CHAP. II.
IT is not the nature of the female tongue to be silent. The landlady could not
avoid informing her gossips, and even some of her guests, of what had happened
the preceding evening in her house. The report, so unfavourable to the
clergyman, had therefore got out; and coming to the ears of the consistory, was
the occasion of calling him before them, to answer to the accusation. The
clergyman much alarmed, though conscious of innocence, bethought himself of
applying to the Captain, to extort from his waiting man a confession of the
truth, and relieve his character. Accordingly having set out on a bay horse
that he had, he found the Captain, and addressed him in the following manner:

Captain, said he, the affair of that night at the tavern, is like to be of
serious consequence to me. For though I am innocent as the child unborn, yet
the presumption is against me, and I am likely to fall under church censure. It
may be sport to you, but it is a matter of moment to me. Now, as sure as God is
in heaven, I am innocent; and it must have been the devil, or that red headed
Irishman of yours, that made the disturbance.

The Captain gave him the comfort of assuring him that he might make himself
easy; for be the matter as it might, he would take care that Teague should
assume it, and bear the blame. The clergyman politely thanked him; declaring,
at the same time, that he would not forget him in his prayers, Sunday or
Saturday, while he had an hour to live. The Captain, not so much from any
mercenary motive of benefit, by his spiritual solicitations, as from a real
love of humanity and justice, had determined to do him essential service in
this affair. Accordingly, when the clergyman had retired, calling Teague before
him, he began in this manner: Teague, said he, from what I know of your
disposition, I have no more doubt than I have of my existence, that it was
yourself who made that uproar with the girl at the tavern where we lodged;
though I could not but give you credit for your presence of mind in throwing it
upon the clergyman. But whether the matter lies with you or him, is of no
consequence. You can take it upon you, and lay up treasure in heaven. It will
be doing a good work; and these people, you may be assured, have a considerable
influence in the other world. This clergyman can speak a good word for you when
you come there, and let you into half the benefit of all the prayers he has
said on earth. It will be no harm to you, for your character in this respect is
as bad as it can well be.

Teague said he did not care much; but thought the priest ought to pay a little
smart money; for it was a thankless matter to do these things for nothing. Said
the Captain, these people are not the most plenty of money; but I will advance
half a crown toward the accommodation. Teague was satisfied, and ready to
acknowledge whatever was demanded of him.

Accordingly having come before the presbytery on the day appointed for the
trial. Teague made confession of the truth; viz. That being in the kitchen with
the girl, and observing her to be a good looking hussy --

But suppose we give the speech in his own dialect. Master prastes, said he, I
persave you are all prastes of the gosple, and can prach as asily as I can take
a chaw of tobacco. Now the trut of de story is dis; I was slaping in my bed,
and I tought vid myself it was a shame amonst christian paple that a young
crature should slape by herself, and have no one to take care of her. So I
tought vid myself, to go and slape vid her. But as she was aslape, she made
exclamation, and dis praste that is here before you, came in to save her shoul
from the devil; and as the captain my master, might take offense, and the
devil, I am shartain that it was no better person, put it into my head, to lay
it on the praste This is the trut master prastes, as I hope for shalvation in
the kingdom of purgatory, shentlemen.

On this confession, the clergyman was absolved, to the great joy of the
presbytery, who considered it as a particular providence that the truth was
brought to light.

CHAP. III. Containing Reflections.
IT must appear from the incident at the public house, with what caution
presumptive testimony is to be admitted. Our criminal law admits it, but lays
it down as a rule, that it be admitted with caution. There is what is called
violent presumption; that is, where such circumstances exist, as usually attend
the fact. Presumptive proof of this nature is held sufficient to convict. I
doubt much, whether reason or experience approve the doctrine. Reason tells us,
that there may be all the circumstances that usually attend the fact, and yet
without the fact itself. Experience evinces that it has been the case; for we
have heard of persons convicted of a capital offense; and yet with their last
breath asserting innocence. Nay, in the case of some who have been convicted of
homicide, the persons who have been supposed to have been murdered, have
afterward been found alive.

But on abstract principles, a conclusion of certainty cannot be drawn from
presumptive proof. Because in cases of the most violent presumption, there is
still a possibility of innocence; and where there is a possibility, there must
be a doubt; and will you hang man, woman, or child, where there is a doubt.

In all cases there ought to be complete proof; because the convicted person is
to be completely punished; and the jury, previous to this, must make complete
oath of the guilt.

It is the ground of the doctrine of presumptive proof, that where you cannot
help suspecting, you ought to be positive; whereas the just conclusion would
be, that where you cannot help suspecting, there you ought to suspect still,
but no more.

It would be a curious question in arithmetic how many uncertainties make a
certainty? In mathematics, the three angles of a triangle, are equal to a right
angle. But these are all angles, that are put together; that is, they are
things of the same kind, but the greatest angle, and the longest side will
never make a triangle, because there is no inclusion of space. There must be a
number of things of the same kind to make an aggregate whole; so that ten
thousand possibilities, probabilities, and violent presumptions, can never
constitute a certainty.

Presumptive proof is of the nature of the semi plena probatio of the Roman
law; going but halfway toward proof, it can never amount to proof at all.
For, as the saying is, a miss is as good as a mile. I would, therefore,
recommend to all jurors, to take care that unless the witnesses swear
positively to the fact, they do not find a verdict, guilty; because, as the
current cannot rise higher than the source, so the verdict of the juror ought
not to be more absolute than the oath of the witness. In all cases, therefore,
short of positive testimony, acquit.

These hints may also be of service to young attorneys, and weak judges; so
that honest people may not lose their lives, or be rendered infamous, without
full proof of the offense. It is hard enough to suffer when there is full
proof, but to be in the power of a juror's or a judge's imagination, comparing
and construing circumstances, and weighing possibilities, contingencies, and
what might have been, or what might not have been, as the humor, caprice,
wheel, or whim of the brain may suggest, is inconsistent with that fair trial
which, in a free government, ought to be enjoyed. Was I a judge or juror, no
one would I condemn without positive testimony of the fact. For it would not be
in my power to restore that same or life which I took away from the innocent.
And if a guilty person should escape, it was none of my look out; but the
business of Providence to furnish proof, if it was intended that man should
punish; and if proof is not furnished, let Providence take the matter on
himself, and punish the culprit either in this life or in a future state.
Invisible things belong to the Omniscient; and it would seem great arrogance in
man to take upon him to decide in cases of uncertainty. I hope, therefore, yet
to see the doctrine of presumptive proof, in criminal cases, wholly, in courts
of justice, discountenanced. I can declare, that in the course of my experience
at the bar, I have had one hung, and several others within an ace of it, who
were innocent; and this on the doctrine of presumption and probability. The one
that was hung was a tory case, where the popular clamor was against the man;
and light presumption became violent, under such a charge.

I shall say no more on this subject; because it seems to me that I have been
affecting to speak sense, whereas my business is to speak nonsense; this being
the only way to keep out of the reach of criticism; because critics can say no
more than you yourself allow; so that a charge of nonsense cannot hurt. It is
thus that persons who have a long nose, or disproportion of some other feature,
take the laugh upon themselves first, and so escape ridicule. The truth is, I
will not give myself the trouble to write sense long. For I would as soon
please fools as wise men; because the fools are the most numerous, and every
prudent man will go with the majority. I shall return to the adventures of the
Captain.

CHAP. IV.
THE Presbytery sat a day or two at this place, on church affairs, and the
Captain delaying with them, lodged at the same house. Teague, in the mean time,
having an opportunity of ingratiating himself with the clergymen, by rubing
down their horses, and other menial services. For it is the national character
of the aboriginal Irish, to give fair words; and Teague was not deficient in
this address. What with master Prasting, and giving a great deal of what is
called Blarney, he insinuated himself into their good graces; and by affecting,
now and then, to be seen at prayers by himself, and to have a sorrowful
countenance, he induced them to believe that he was in the first stage of
conviction, and likely to become a pious man. Having made this progress in
their good opinion, he ventured to suggest what was the ultimate object of his
ambition; viz. the being a candidate for holy orders. The Presbytery, to whom
the matter was represented by the individuals more particularly acquainted with
him, thought favorably of the proposition. For though his common seize
might not be great, yet if the grace of God had wrought upon him, he might
become a valuable man.

The Captain having got a hint of this, took the first opportunity of
addressing the Presbytery. Gentlemen, said he, you are deceived in this
ragamuffin. For, notwithstanding all the pretensions he may lately have to
religion, you may be well assured that it is all hypocrisy, and that he has no
more religion than my horse.

The Presbytery suspecting the Captain to be a carnal man, and regardless of
the ministry, gave little heed to what he said, and seemed disposed to take
Teague upon trials.

The Captain finding the case to stand thus, and that in spite of all he could
do, he was likely to lose his servant, took his usual method of addressing the
hopes and fears of Teague himself.

Taking him aside, he began, with all possible art, to impress such fears and
apprehensions, as the nature of the case suggested. Teague, said he, do you
know what you are about? You have got into your vagaries once more. You want to
preach, do you? Are you apprised of the difficulty of this work? The first
thing you will have to do, is to take a text; and when that is done, you have
to split it into parts. There are what are called heads; and these you must
divide into firstlys, and secondlys, and thirdlys, and fourthlys, and so on,
till you come to twentiethlys, perhaps. Are you furnished with a concordance?
or do you know what a concordance is? Can you find a text to suit your purpose
when you want it? Can you explain the scriptures; the meaning of Daniel's ram
and the he-goat, or the seven trumpets in the Revelations? You are mistaken if
you think your Irish will pass for Hebrew.

You think it a great honor to preach now-a days. It was an honor once; but
the thing is now become so common, that it is of little consequence to preach
or not.

But do you know how it will behove you to conduct yourself, if you take this
office upon you. You will have to compose the muscles of your face to greater
seriousness than your disposition can afford. You must quit whoring. How will
you like that, Teague. It would look very ill after sermon to be catched in bed
with a girl at a tavern.

But do you know why these men are so anxious to have you of their mess? The
truth of the matter is, they carry on a war with the devil, and they wish to
recruit you for the service. Do they give you any bounty-money. Take my word,
there will be but little of this going. Take my advice then, and let them
settle their own quarrels. It is a silly thing to be drawn into a party, when
there is but little to be got by it: Nay, worse than little: For it will be all
on the other side. Think you the devil will forget the mischief you do him in
this world, and not resent it when he comes across you in a future state? When
you are preaching and praying, do you think he will not hear all that you throw
out against him. You may rely upon it, there will be enough to give him
information; and as a story never loses in the telling, it is ten to one they
will make the matter worse than it was. Take my advice, therefore, and make no
enemies while you can help it. Steer through life as smoothly as possible. Keep
a good tongue in your mouth, and let those who choose to dispute with Beelzebub,
dispute. I never knew any good come of broils and quarrels, especially with low
characters. And, to say the truth of it, this Satan, as they call him, is very
little of the gentleman. Even where he is well disposed, he will do but little
good to one; but a most dangerous creature where he takes a dislike. When you
go to hell, as, one day, you must, you can expect but little quarter, after
abusing him in this world. He will make you squeel like a pig; take you by the
throat, and kick you like a cat. His very scullions will piss upon you, and
give you no better life than a dog among their feet; while these very
clergymen, that put you forward to blackguard for them, will stand by laughing
in their sleeves that you could be such a fool.

The representation had the desired effect upon Teague, and he thought no more
of the matter.

CHAP. V. The Conclusion, with Observations.
THE overtures made by Teague, to be admitted to the ministry, and the
simplicity of the ecclesiastics in listening to his pretensions, made a great
noise through the neighborhood; in as much as the young man labored under a
want of education, and was not qualified by theological reading. But I do not
see, why it should be thought blamable; provided the matter was not too much
hurried and hastily brought forward. For give him a little time, and he might
have been instructed to preach as well as some that I myself have heard.
Especially if at first setting out, he had confined himself to historical
passages of scripture; such as the history of Sampson, and Gideon, and Barak,
and the like: Only he must have taken care that in pronouncing Barak, with the
brogue upon his tongue, he did not make it Burke; for that is a patronimic name
of his country, and he might inadvertently have fallen into this pronunciation.

I acknowledge, that in the regular churches, such as that of the
Presbyterians, there is still kept up some opinion of the necessity of
literature. But do we not see that with other denominations; such as the
Quakers, the Methodists, and Anabaptists, it is totally disregarded and thrown
out? Because when human gifts or acquirements are absent, that which is
supernatural more evidently appears.

Do not Quakers, and Methodists, and Baptists, preach very well? At any rate,
they do a great deal of good, and that is the first object of preaching.
Whether such sermonists, avail themselves most of sense or sound, I will not
say; but so it is they do good; and that without the aid of any human learning
whatever.

It is very true, that formerly in the infancy of the church, a knowledge of
languages and sciences, might be requisite. But the case is quite altered now.
The Scripture has been well explained, and frequently preached over; every text
and context examined, and passages illustrated. The Hebrew roots, so to speak,
have been all dug up; and there is scarcely a new etymology to be made. Are
there any new doctrines to discover? I should think it impossible. At any rate,
I should conceive it unnecessary. There are enough in all conscience: The
inventing more, would be like bringing timber to a wood, or coals to Newcastle.

This being the case, I feel myself disposed to agree with those who reject
human learning in religious matters altogether. More especially as science is
really not the fashion at the present time. For as has been before seen, even
in the very province of science itself, it is dispensed with; that of natural
philosophy, for instance. In state affairs, ignorance does very well, and why
not in church? I am for having all things of a piece; ignorant statesmen,
ignorant philosophers, and ignorant ecclesiastics. On this principle, Teague
might have done very well as a preacher. But the selfishness of the Captain
prevailed, and obstructed his advancement.

BOOK IV.
CHAP. I. Containing preliminary Observations.
I AM very happy in the composition of this work; for though but of a trifling
nature as to sentiment; yet, in what I do write, no one can attribute to me the
least tincture of satire, or ridicule of individuals or public bodies. This is
what I very much dislike in others, and would be far from indulging in myself.
I acknowledge, indeed, that in my earlier years, and in the course of my
academical studies, I had contracted some taste, and even habit, this way;
owing to my reading the dialogues of Lucian, in the original Greek. Had I read
them in a translation, they might have made less impression. But by means of a
difficult language, studying them slowly, the turn of thought became more
deeply impressed upon my mind. Moreover, afterward, when I came to have some
acquaintance with the modern wits, such as Cervantes, Le Sage, and especially
Swift, I found myself still more inclined to an ironical, ludicrous way of
thinking and writing. But finding the bad effects of this, in many respects,
leading me into broils with individuals, and rendering me obnoxious to public
bodies, I saw the indiscretion, and bad policy of such indulgence; and have for
several years past, carefully avoided every thing of this kind. It is indeed
acting but a poor part in life, to make a business of laughing at the follies
of others. It is injurious to one's self; for there is a great deal more to be
gained by soothing and praising what men do, than by finding fault with them.
It may be said of satire, what was said of anger by some philosopher, It never
pays the service it requires. It is your scratching, rump-tickling people, that
get into place and power. I never knew any good come of wit and humor yet.
They are talents which keep the owner poor. For this reason, I have taken care
to repress all propensity to this vice; and I believe I can say it with truth,
that since I have come to the years of a man's understanding, I have carefully
avoided every thing of this nature. Had it not been for this prudence, I should
not have been in a fair way, as I now am, to be a member of Congress, or a
judge on the bench, or governor of a commonwealth, or secretary of state, or
any thing that I may have in view. Had I remained an admirer of Rabelais, or
Stern, or other biting, jeering writers, that I at first met with, I might at
this day have been considered as a wit only, without the least advancement in
state affairs. But I would sooner see your Juniuses, and your Peter Pindars,
libelling kings and ministers, at hell, than sacrifice my interest to my
passion, or my vanity, by strokes of wit, which is but another name for
ill nature.

In this treatise, which is simply a relation of the adventures of an
individual, I have nothing to do with strictures upon particular persons, or
the affairs of men in general, and so have no temptation to the folly I have
just mentioned. The reader, if any body ever reads it, will find nothing here
but philanthropic and benevolent ideas.

Indeed, as it has been known that I was engaged in writing something, persons
who either took, or pretended to take, some interest in my affairs, have urged
me very much to depart a little from my usual way, and make use of a little
irony, by way of seasoning to the composition; for, in this case, it would be
received better, and procure more readers; mankind being naturally delighted
with ridicule. But the truth was, I could see nothing to be ironical about;
owing, perhaps, to my not being in the habit of looking for the ridiculous, and
so having lost the talent of discovering it. But my resolution that I had taken
would have fully preserved me from such a lapse, however numerous the objects
of ridicule might be, that presented themselves. This will serve as an apology
to those who have solicited me on this head, and relieve me from such
solicitations for the future.

CHAP. II.
DETAINING some time in a village, there was a great deal said about a certain
Miss Fog, who was the belle of the place. Her father had made a fortune by the
purchuse of public securities A garrison having been at this place, and troops
quartered here, he had been employed as an issuing commissary! When the
commissioners sat to adjust unliquidated claims, he had a good deal in his
power, by vouching for the accounts of the butcher, and baker, and wood-cutter,
and water-drawer, and waggoner, and all others of all occupations whatsoever,
whose claims were purchased by himself, in the mean time, and when the
certificates issued in their names, they were to his use. The butcher and
baker, no doubt, long before had been paid out of the flesh killed, or bread
baked; because it is a good maxim, and a scriptural expression, "Muzzle not the
ox that treads out the corn." But the public has a broad back, and a little
vouching, by a person interested, is not greatly felt. These certificates,
though at first of little value, and issued by the commissioners with the
liberality of those who give what is of little worth, yet by the funding acts
of the government, having become in value, equal to gold and silver, the
commissary had a great estate thrown upon him; so that, from low beginnings, he
had become a man of fortune and consequence. His family, and especially the
eldest daughter, shared the advantage; for she had become the object of almost
all wooers. The Captain, though an old bachelor, as we have said, had not
wholly lost the idea of matrimony. Happening to be in a circle, one evening,
where Miss Fog was, he took a liking to her, in all respects save one, which
was, that she seemed, on her part, to have taken a liking to a certain Mr.
Jacko, who was there present; and to whose attention she discovered a facility
of acquiescence. The Captain behaved, for the present, as if he did not observe
the preference; but the following day, waiting on the young lady at her
father's house, he drew her into conversation, and began to reason with her, in
the following manner:

Miss Fog, said he, you are a young lady of great beauty, great sense, and
fortune still greater than either. -- This was a sad blunder in a man of
gallantry, but the lady not being of the greatest sensibility of nerve, did not
perceive it. -- On my part, said he, I am a man of years, but a man of some
reflection; and it would be much more advisable in you to trust my experience,
and the mellowness of my disposition in a state of matrimony, than the vanity
and petulence of this young fop Jacko, for whom you show a partiality. The
color coming into the young lady's face at this expression, she withdrew, and
left him by himself. The Captain struck with the rudeness, withdrew also, and,
calling Teague from the kitchen, mounted his horse and set off.

The next morning shortly after he had got out of bed, and had just come down
stairs at his lodging, and was buttoning the knees of his breeches, a light
airy looking young man, with much bowing and civility, entered the hall of the
public house, and enquiring if this was not Captain Farrago to whom he had the
honor to address himself, delivered him a paper. On the perusal, it was found
to be a challenge from Mr. Jacko.

The fact was, that Miss Fog, in order the more to recommend herself to her
suitor, had informed him of the language of the Captain. The young man, though
he had no great stomach for the matter, yet according to the custom of these
times, could do no less than challenge. The bearer was was what is called his
second.

The Captain having read the paper, and pausing a while, said, Mr. Second, for
that I take to be your style and character, is it consistent with reason or
common sense, to be the aider or abettor of another man's folly; perhaps the
prompter: for it is no uncommon thing with persons to inflame the passions of
their friends, rather than allay them. This young woman, for I shall not call
her lady, from vanity, or ill nature, or both, has become a talebearer to her
lover, who, I will venture to say, thanks her but little for it; as she has
thereby rendered it necessary for him to take this step. You, in the mean time,
are not blameless, as it became you to have declined the office, and thereby
furnished an excuse to your friend for not complying with the custom. For it
would have been a sufficient apology with the lady to have said, although he
was disposed to fight, yet he could get no one to be his armor-bearer or
assistant. It could have been put upon the footing, that all had such regard
for his life, that no one would countenance him in risking it. You would have
saved him by this means, all that uneasiness which he feels at present, least I
should accept his challenge. I am not so unacquainted with human nature, as not
to know how disagreeable it must be to think of having a pistol ball lodged in
the groin or the left breast, or, to make the best of it, the pan of the knee
broke, or the nose cut off, or some wound less than mortal given; disagreeable,
especially to to a man in the bloom of life, and on the point of marriage with
a woman to whose person or fortune he has no exception. I would venture to say,
therefore, there will be no great difficulty in appeasing this Orlando Furioso,
that has sent me the challenge. Did you know the state of his mind, you would
find him at prayers this moment, that I would ease his fears, and make some
apology. A very slight one would suffice. I dare say, his resentment against
Miss Fog is not slight, and that he would renounce her person and fortune both,
to get quit of the duel. But the opinion of the world is against him, and he
must fight. Do you think he has any great gratitude to you for your services on
this occasion. He had much rather you had, in the freedom of friendship, given
him a kick on the backside, when he made application to you; and told him, that
it did not become him to quarrel about a woman, who had, probably, consulted
but her own vanity, in giving him the information. In that case, he would have
been more pleased with you a month hence, than he is at present. I do not know
that he has an overstock of sense; nevertheless, he cannot be just such a fool,
as not to consider, that you, yourself, may have pretensions to this belle, and
be disposed to have him out of the way before you. He must be a fool, indeed,
if he does not reflect, that you had much rather see us fight than not; from
the very same principle that we take delight in seeing a cock-match, or a
horse-race. The spectacle is new, and produces a brisk current of thought
through the mind; which is a constituent of pleasure, the absence of all
movement giving none at all.

What do you suppose I must think of you, Mr. Second; I, who have read books,
and thought a little on the subject; have made up my mind in these matters, and
account the squires that bring challenges from knights, as people of but very
small desert. Thinking men have condemned the duel, and laws have prohibited
it; but these miscreants still keep it up, by being the conductors of the
fluid. My indignation, therefore, falls on such, and I have long ago fixed on
the mode of treating them. It is this: a stout athletic man calls upon (...)
with a challenge in his hand, I knock him down, if I can, without saying a
word* If the natural arm be not sufficient for this purpose, I avail myself of
any stone, wooden, or iron instrument that I cast my eye upon, not just to take
away his life, if I can help it; but to hit the line as exactly as possible,
between actual homicide, and a very bad wound. For in this case, I should
conceive, a battery could be justifiable, or at least excuseable, and the sine
not very great; the bearing a challenge being a breach of the peace, in the
first instance. This would be my conduct with a stout athletic man, whom I
might think it dangerous to encounter with fair warning, and on equal terms.
But in the present case, where -- (Here the second began to show signs of fear,
raising himself, and inclining backwards, opening his eyes wider, and casting a
look toward the door) -- where, continued the Captain, I have to do with a
person of your slender make, I do not adopt that surprise, or use an artificial
weapon; but with these fists, which have been used in early life to
agricultural employments, I shall very deliberately impress a blow. The second
rising to his feet, began to recede a little. Be under no apprehensions, said
the Captain; I shall use no unfair method of biting, gouging, or wounding the
private parts. Nay, as you appear to be a young man of a delicate constitution,
I shall only choke a little. You will give me leave to take you by the throat
in as easy a manner as possible.

In the mean time, the second had been withdrawing toward the door, and the
Captain with outstretched arms, in a sideway direction, proceeding to intercept
him. In an instant, he was seized by the neck, and the exclamation of murder
which he made at the first grasp, began to die away in hoarse guttural murmurs
of one nearly strangled, and laboring for breath. The Captain meaning that he
should be more alarmed than hurt, dismissed him with a salutation of his foot
on the backside, as a claude ostium, as he went out. You may be, said he, a
gentleman in the opinion of the world; but you are a low person in mine; and so
shall it be done to every one who shall come upon such an errand.

CHAP. III.
HAVING thus dismissed the secondary man, he called in his servant Teague, and
accosted him as follows: Teague, said he, you have heretofore discovered an
ambition to be employed in some way that would advance your reputation. There
is now a case fallen out, to which you are fully competent. It is not a matter
that requires the head to contrive, but the hand to execute. The greatest fool
is as fit for it as a wise man. It is indeed your greatest blockheads that
chiefly undertake it. The knowledge of law, physic, or divinity is out of the
question. Literature, and political understanding is useless. Nothing more is
necessary than a little resolution of the heart. Yet it is an undertaking which
is of much estimation with the rabble, and has a great many on its side to
approve and praise it. The females of the world, especially admire the act, and
call it valor. I know you wish to stand well with the ladies. Here is an
opportunity of advancing your credit. I have had what is called a challenge
sent me this morning. It is from a certain Jacko, who is a suitor to a Miss
Fog, and has taken offense at an expression of mine, respecting him to this
female. I wish you to accept the challenge, and fight him for me.

At this proposition, Teague looked wild, and made apology that he was not much
used to boxing. Boxing, said the Captain; you are to fight what is called a
duel. You are to encounter him with pistol, and put a bullet through him if you
can. It is true, he will have the chance of putting one through you; but in
that consists the honor; for where there is no danger, there is no glory. You
will provide yourself a second. There is an hostler here at the public house,
that is a brave fellow, and will answer the purpose. Being furnished with a
second, you will provide yourself with a pair of pistols, powder and ball of
course: In the mean time, your adversary notified of your intentions, will do
the like. Thus apparalelled, you will advance to the place agreed upon. The
ground will be measured out; ten, seven, or five steps; back to back, and
coming round to your place, fire. Or taking your ground, stand still and fire;
or it may be* advance and fire as you meet, at what distance you think proper.
The rules in this respect are not fixed, but as the parties can agree or the
seconds point out. When you come to fire, be sure you keep a steady hand, and
take good aim. Remember that the pistol barrel being short, the powder is apt
to throw the bullet up. Your sight therefore, ought to be about the waist-band
of his breeches, so that you have the whole length of his body, and his head
into the bargain, to come and go upon. It is true, he in the mean time, will
take the same advantages of you. He may hit you about the groin, or the belly.
I have known some shot in the thigh, or the leg, or the private parts. The
throat also, and the head are in themselves vulnerable. It is no uncommon thing
to have an arm broke, or a splinter struck off the nose, or an eye shot out;
but as in that case, the ball mostly passes through the brain, and the man
being dead at any rate, the loss of sight is not greatly felt.

As the Captain spoke, Teague seemed to feel in himself, every wound which was
described, the ball hitting him, now in one part, and now in another. At the
last words, it seemed to pass through his head* and he was half dead, in
imagination. Making a shift to express himself, he gave the Captain to
understand, that he could by no means undertake the office. What! said the
Captain; you whom nothing would serve, some time ago, but to be a legislator,
or philosopher, or preacher, in order to gain fame, will now detract a business
for which you are qualified. This requires no knowledge of finances, no reading
of natural history, or any study of the fathers. You have nothing more to do
than to keep a steady hand and a good eye.

In the early practice of this exercise; I mean the combat of the duel, it was
customary to exact an oath of (...) combatants, before they entered the (...),
that they had no enchantments, or power of witchcraft, about them. Whether you
should think it necessary to put him to his voir dire, on this point, I shall
not say; but I am persuaded, that on your part, you have too much honor, to
make use of spells, or undue means, to take away his life, or save your own.
You will leave all to the chance of fair shooting. One thing you will observe,
and which is allowable in this battle, you will take care not to present
yourself to him with a full breast, but angularly, and your head turned round
over the left shoulder, like a weather cock. For thus a smaller surface being
presented to an adversary, he will be less likely to hit you. You must throw
your legs into lines parallel, and keep them one directly behind the other.
Thus you will stand like a sail hauled close to the wind. Keep a good
countenance, a sharp eye, and a sour look; and if you feel any thing like a
cholic or a palpitation of the heart, make no noise about it. If the ball
should take you in the gills, or the gizzard, fall down as decently as you can,
and die like a man of honor.

It was of no use to urge the matter; the Irishman was but the more opposed to
the proposition, and utterly refused to be after fighting in any such manner.
The Captain finding this to be the case, dismissed him to clean his boots and
spurs, and rub down his horse in the stable.

CHAP. IV.
ON reflection, it seemed advisable to the Captain to write an answer to the
card which Colonel, or Major Jacko, or whatever his title may have been, had
sent him this morning. It was as follows:

SIR,
I HAVE two objections to this duel matter. The one is, lest I should hurt you;
and the other is, lest you should hurt me. I do not see any good it would do me
to put a bullet through any part of your body. I could make no use of you when
dead, for any culinary purpose, as I would a rabbit or a turkey. I am no
cannibal to feed on the flesh of men. Why then shoot down a human creature, of
which I could make no use. A buffalo would be better meat. For though your
flesh might be delicate and tender; yet it wants that firmness and consistency
which takes and retains salt At any rate it would not be fit for long sea
voyages. You might make a good barbecue, it is true, being of the nature of a
racoon or an opossum; but people are not in the habit of barbecuing any thing
human now. As to your hide, it is not worth the taking off, being little better
than that of a year old colt.

It would seem to me a strange thing to shoot at a man that would stand still
to be shot at; in as much as I have been heretofore used to shoot at things
flying, or running, or jumping. Were you on a tree now like a squirrel,
endeavoring to hide yourself in the branches, or like a racoon, that after
much eyeing and spying I observe at length in the crotch of a tall oak, with
boughs and leaves intervening, so that I could just get a sight of his hinder
parts, I should think it pleasurable enough to take a shot at you. But as it
is, there is no skill or judgment requisite either to discover or take you down.

As to myself, I do not much like to stand in the way of any thing that is
harmful. I am under apprehensions you might hit me. That being the case, I
think it most advisable to stay at a distance. If you want to try your
pistols, take some object, a tree or a barn door about my dimensions. If you
hit that, send me word, and I shall acknowledge that if I had been in the same
place, you might also have hit me.

J. FARRAGO.


CHAP. V. Containing Reflections.
CAPTAIN Farrago was a good man, but unacquainted with the world. His ideas
were drawn chiefly from what may be called the old school; the Greek and Roman
notions of things. The combat of the duel was to them unknown. Though it seems
strange, that a people who were famous for almost all arts and sciences, should
have remained ignorant of its use. I do not conceive how, as a people, they
could exist without it. But so it was, they actually were without the knowledge
of it. For we do not find any trace of this custom in the poets or historians
of all antiquity.

I do not know at what period, precisely, the custom was introduced; or to whom
it was owing; but omitting this disquisition, we content ourselves with
observing, that it has produced as great improvement in manners, as the
discovery of the loadstone, and mariner's compass, has at navigation. Not that
I mean to descant, at full length, on the valuable effects of it; but simply to
observe, that it is a greater aid to government than the alliance of church and
state itself. If Dr. Warburton had had leisure, I could wish he had written a
treatise upon it. Some affect to ridicule it, as carrying to a greater length
small differences, than the aggravation may justify. As for instance, a man is
angry enough with you to give you a slap in the face; but the custom says, he
must shoot you through the head. I think the smaller the aggravation, the nicer
the sense of honor. The heaviest mind will resent a gross affront; but to kill
a man where there is no affront at all, shows a great sensibility. It is
immaterial whether there is or is not an injury, provided the world thinks
there is; for it is the opinion of mankind we are to consult. It is a duty
which we owe them to provide for their amusement. Non nasscimur nobis ipsis; we
are not born for ourselves, but for others. Decorum pro patria mori; it is a
becoming thing to die for one's country; and shall it not also be accounted
honorable to throw one's life away for the entertainment of a few particular
neighbors and acquaintances. It is true, the tears that will be shed upon your
grave, will not make the grass grow; but you will have the consolation, when
you leave the world, to have fallen in the bed of honor.

It is certainly a very noble institution, that of the duel; and it has been
carried to very great perfection, in some respects. Nevertheless, I would
submit it to the public, whether still further improvement might not be made in
the laws and regutions of it. For instance, could it not be reduced nearer to
an equality of chances, by proportioning the caliber, or bore of the pistol;
the length of the barrel, also, to the size of the duellist who holds it; or by
fixing the ratio of distance in proportion to the bulk of combatants. To
explain myself: When I am to fight a man of a small size, I ought to have a
longer pistol than my adversary, because my mark is smaller; or I ought to be
permitted to come nearer to him. For it is altogether unfair that men of
unequal bulk should fire at equal distances, and with equal calibers. The
smaller size multiplied by the larger space, or larger pistol, would equal the
larger size multiplied by the smaller space or smaller pistol. If this
amendment of the duel laws should be approved by men of honor, let it be added
to the code.

BOOK V.
CHAP. I.
NOT long after this, being at a certain place, the Captain-was accosted by a
stranger in the following manner: Captain Farrago, said he, I have heard of a
young man in your service who talks Irish. Now, Sir, my business is that of an
Indian treaty-maker; and am on my way with a party of kings, and half kings to
the commissioners, to hold a treaty. My king of the Kickapoos, who was a Welsh
blacksmith, took sick by the way, and is dead. I have heard of this lad of
yours, and could wish to have him a while to supply his place. The treaty will
not last longer than a couple of weeks; and as the government will probably
allow three or four thousand dollars for the treaty, it will be in our power to
make it worth your while, to spare him for that time. Your king of the
Kickapoos, said the Captain; what does that mean? Said the stranger, it is just
this: You have heard of the Indian nations to the westward, that occasionally
make war upon the frontier settlements. It has been a policy of government, to
treat with these, and distribute goods. Commissioners are appointed for that
purpose. Now you are not to suppose that it is always an easy matter to catch a
real chief, and bring him from the woods; or if at some expense one was
brought, the goods would go to his use; whereas, it is much more profitable to
hire substitutes and make chiefs of our own: And as some unknown gibberish is
necessary, to pass for an Indian language, we generally make use of Welsh, or
Low Dutch, or Irish; or pick up an ingenious fellow here and there, who can
imitate a language by sounds of his own, in his mouth, and throat. But we
prefer one who can speak a real tongue, and give more for him. We cannot afford
you a great deal at this time for the use of your man; because it is not a
general treaty where 20,000, or 30,000, dollars are appropriated for the
purpose of holding it; but an occasional, or what we call a running treaty, by
way of brightening the chain, and holding fast friendship. The commissioners
will doubtless be glad to see us, and procure from government an allowance for
the treaty. For the more treaties, the more use for commissioners. The business
must be kept up, and treaties made if there are none of themselves. My
Pianksha, and Choctaw chiefs, are very good fellows; the one of them a Scotch
pedlar that talks the Erse; the other has been some time in Canada, and has a
little broken Indian, God knows what language; but has been of great service in
assisting to teach the rest some Indian custom and manners. I have had the
whole of them for a fortnight past under my tuition, teaching them war songs
and dances, and to make responses at the treaty. If your man is tractable, I
can make him a Kickapoo in about nine days. A breech-clout and leggins, that I
took off the blacksmith that died, I have ready to put on him. He must have
part of his head shaved, and painted, with feathers on his crown; but the paint
will rub off, and the hair grow in a short time, so that he can go about with
you again.

It is a very strange affair, said the Captain. Is it possible that such
deception can be practiced in a new country. It astonishes me, that the
government does not detect such imposition. The government, said the Indian
treaty-man, is at a great distance. It knows no more of Indians than a cow does
of Greek. The legislature, hears of wars and rumors of wars, and supports the
executive in forming treaties. How is it possible for men who live remote from
the scene of action, to have adequate ideas of the nature of Indians, or the
transactions that are carried on in their behalf. Do you think the one half of
those savages that come to treat, are real representatives of the nation. Many
of them are not savages at all; but weavers, and pedlars, as I have told you,
picked up to make kings and chiefs. I speak of those particularly that come
trading down to inland towns, or the metropolis. I would not communicate these
mysteries of our trade, were it not that I confide in your good sense, and have
occasion for your servant.

It is a mystery of iniquity, said the Captain. Do you suppose that I would
countenance such a fraud upon the public? I do not know, said the other; it is
a very common thing for men to speculate, now adays. If you will not, another
will. An 100 dollars might as well be in your pocket as another man's. I will
give you that for the use of your servant, for a week or two, and say no more
about it. It is an idea new to me entirely, said the Captain, that Indian
princes, whom I have seen escorted down as such, were no more than trumpery,
disguised, as you mention; that such should be introduced to polite assemblies,
and have the honor to salute the fair ladies with a kiss, the greatest
beauties thinking themselves honored by having the salutation of a sovereign?
It is so, said the other; I had a red headed bricklayer once, whom I passed for
a Chippawaw; and who has dined with clubs, and sat next the President. He was
blind of an eye, and was called blind Sam by the traders. I had given it out
that he was a great warrior, and had lost his eye by an arrow, in a contest
with a rival nation. These things are now reduced to a system; and it is so
well known to those who are engaged in the traffic, that we think nothing of it.

How the devil, said the Captain, do you get speeches made, and interpret them
so as to pass for truth. That is an easy matter, said the other; Indian
speeches are nearly all alike. You have only to talk of burying hatchets under
large trees, kindling fires, brightening chains; with a demand, at the latter
end, of blankets for the backside, and rum to get drunk with.

I much doubt, said the Captain, whether treaties that are carried on in
earnest, are of any great use. Of none at all, said the other; especially as
the practice of giving goods prevails; because this is an inducement to a fresh
war. This being the case, it can be no harm to make a farce of the whole
matter; or rather a profit of it; by such means as I propose to you, and have
pursued myself.

After all, said the Captain, I cannot but consider it as a kind of contraband
and illicit traffic; and I must be excused from having any hand in it. I shall
not betray your secret, but I shall not favor it. It would ill become me,
whose object in riding about in this manner, is to give just ideas on subjects,
to take part in such ill-gotten gain.

The Indian-treaty man finding it in vain to say more, withdrew.

CHAP. II.
THE Captain apprehending that he might not yet drop his designs upon the
Irishman, but be tampering with him out of doors, should he come across him,
sent for Teague. For he well knew, that should the Indian treaty man get the
first word of him, the idea of making him a king, would turn his head, and it
would be impossible to prevent his going with him.

Teague coming in, said the Captain to him; Teague, I have discovered in you,
for some time past, a great spirit of ambition, which is, doubtless,
commendable in a young person; and I have checked it only in cases where there
was real danger, or apparent mischief. There is now an opportunity of advancing
yourself, not so much in the way of honor as profit. But profit brings honor,
and is, indeed, the most substantial support of it. There has been a man here
with me, that carries on a trade with the Indians, and tells me that red-headed
scalps are in great demand with them. If you could spare yours, he would give a
good price for it. I do not well know what use they make of this article, but
so it is the traders find their account in it. Probably they dress it with the
hairy side out, and make tobacco pouches for the chiefs, when they meet in
council. It saves dyeing, and besides, the natural red hair of a man, may, in
their estimation, be superior to any color they can give by art. The taking
off the scalp will not give much pain, it is so dexterously done by them with a
crooked knife they have for that purpose. The mode of taking off the scalp is
this; you lie down upon your back; a warrior puts his feet upon your shoulders,
collects your hair in his left hand, and drawing a circle with the knife in his
right, makes the incision, and, with a sudden pull, separates it from the head,
giving, in the mean time, what is called the scalp yell. The thing is done in
such an instant, that the pain is scarcely felt. He offered me an 100 dollars,
if I would have it taken off for his use, giving me directions, in the mean
time, how to stretch it and dry it on a hoop. I told him, No; it was a
perquisite of your own, and you might dispose of it as you thought proper. If
you chose to dispose of it, I had no objections; but the bargain should be of
your own making, and the price such as should please yourself. I have sent for
you, to give you a hint of this chapman, that you may have a knowledge of his
wish to possess the property, and ask accordingly. It is probable you may bring
him up to a half Johannes more, by holding out a little. But I do not think it
would be advisable to lose the bargain. An hundred dollars for a little hairy
flesh, is a great deal. You will trot a long time before you make that with me.
He will be with you probably to propose the purchase. You will know when you
see him. He is a tall looking man, with leggins on, and has several Indians
with him going to a treaty. He talked to me something of making you a king of
the Kickapoos, after the scalp is off; but I would not count on that so much;
because words are but wind, and promises are easily broken. I would advise you
to make sure of the money in the first place, and take chance for the rest.

I have seen among the prints of Hogarth, some such expression of countenance
as that of Teague at this instant; who, as soon as he could speak, but with a
double brogue on his tongue, began to intimate his disinclination to the
traffic. The hair of his scalp itself, in the mean time had risen in opposition
to it. Dear master, vid you trow me into ridicule, and the blessed shalvation
of my life, and all dat I have in the vorld, to be trown like a dog to de
savages, and have my flesh tarn of my head to give to dese vild bastes to make
a napsack to carry their parates and tings in, for an 100 dollars or the like.
It shall never be said that the hair of the Oregans made mackeseens for a vild
Indian to trat upon. I would sooner trow my own head hair and all in de fire,
dan give it to dese paple to smoke wid, out of deir long pipes.

If this be your determination, said the Captain, it will behove you to keep
yourself somewhat close; and while we remain at this public house, avoid any
conversation with the chapman or his agents, should they come to tamper with
you. For it is not improbable, while they are keeping you in talk, proposing to
make you a Kickapoo chief, and the like, they may snatch the scalp of your
head, and you not be the wiser for it.

Teague thought the caution good, and resolving to abide by it, retired to the
kitchen. The maid at this time, happening to want a log of wood, requested
Teague to cut it for her. Taking the ax accordingly, and going out, he was busy
chopping, with his head down; while, in the mean time, the Indian treaty-man
had returned with one in Indian dress, who was the chief of the Killinoos, or
at least passed for such; and whom he brought as having some recruiting
talents, and might prevail with Teague to elope, and join the company. I
presume, said the Indian treaty-man, you are the waiter of the Captain who
lodges here at present. Teague hearing a man speak, and lifting up his head,
saw the leggins on the one, and the Indian dress on the other; and with a kind
of involuntary effort, threw the ax directly from him at the Killinoo. It
missed him but about an inch, and fell behind. Teague, in the mean time,
raising a shout of desperation, was fixed on the spot, and his locomotive
faculties suspended; so that he could neither retreat nor advance, but stood
still, like one enchained or enchanted for a moment; the king of the Killinoos,
in the mean time, drawing his tomahawk, and preparing for battle.

The Captain, who was reading at a front window, hearing the shout, looked
about, and saw what going on at the woodpile. Stop villain, said he, to the
king of the Killinoos; you are not to take that scalp yet, however much you may
value it. He will not take an 100 dollars for it, nor 500, though you make him
king of the Kickapoos, or any thing else. It is no trifling matter to have the
ears slit in tatters, and the nose run through with a bodkin, and a goose quill
stuck a cross; so that you may go about your business; you will get no king of
the Kickapoos here. Under cover of this address of the Captain, Teague had
retired to the kitchen, and ensconced himself behind the rampart of the maid.
The Indian treaty-man, and the Killinoo chief, finding the measure hopeless,
withdrew, and turned their attention, it is to be supposed, to some other
quarter, to find a king of the Kickapoos.

CHAP. III. Containing Observations.
THE Captain was certainly to be commended in declining to countenance the
imposition of making Teague a Kickapoo chief. Had he been disposed to adventure
in a contraband trade of this kind, he might have undertaken it as a principal,
and not as furnishing an assistant only. He could have passed Teague for a
chief, and himself for an interpreter. He might pretend to have conducted this
prince from a very distant nation, and that he had been several moons in
traveling, and wanted, the Lord knows how much, goods for his people, that
otherwise would come to war. By this means, the Captain would have taken the
whole emolument of the treaty, and not have been put off with a small share of
the profit which another made by it.

I should like to have seen Teague in an Indian dress, come to treat with the
commissioners. It would be necessary for him only to talk Irish, which he might
pass for the Shawanee, or other language. The Captain could have interpreted in
the usual words on these occasions.

The policy of treating with the Indians is very good; because it takes off a
great deal of loose merchandise, that might otherwise lie upon our hands, and
cuts away superfluities from the finances of the government; at the same time,
as every fresh treaty lays the foundation of a new war, it will serve to check
the too rapid growth of the settlements. The extremities of a government, like
the arm or ancle of an individual, are the parts at which blood is to be let.

Struck with the good effects of treating with the savages, and that our wise
men who conduct affairs, pursue the policy, I have been led to wonder, that the
agricultural societies, have not proposed treaties with the wolves and bears,
that they might not clandestinely invade our sheep and pig folds. This might be
done by sending messages to the several ursine and vulpine nations, and calling
them to a council fire, to which four or five hundred wagon load of beef
should be sent, and distributed. If it should be said, that this would restrain
them no longer from their prey than while they continued to be satiated, the
same might be said of the Potawatamies, or other Indian nations; and yet we see
that those at the head of our affairs think it prudent to negotiate with them.

A bear and wolf treaty might seem an odd thing at first; but we should soon
come to be accustomed to it. I should be sorry abuses should prevail, by
treaty-making men passing rough water-dogs for bears, or mastiffs for wolves,
upon our secretaries at war, or subordinate commissioners; which might be done
as in the case of the savages, where it is pretended that some tribe that had
not been at the general treaty, now sends a chief to represent them and to get
goods.

If our traders go amongst the wolves in consequence of a treaty, I could wish
they could check themselves in the introduction of spirituous liquors. A drunk
wolf, or bear, would be a dangerous animal. It may be thought, that a bear or
wolf chief would not get drunk, as it would be setting a bad example to their
people; but I have seen Indian kings lying on the earth drunk, and exposing
their nakedness, like Noah to Shem, Ham, and Japheth; and if Indians that are a
sort of human creature, act thus, what might we not expect from a poor brute
wolf or bear.

If treaties with the wolves and bears should be found to succeed, it might not
be amiss to institute them also with the foxes. This is a sagacious animal, and
particularly destructive to ducks and other fowls. It would be a great matter
to settle a treaty with them, which might be done at the expense of nine of ten
thousand dollars laid out in goods.

BOOK VI.
CHAP. I.
MEANING to remain some time in a certain town to which he came, the Captain
had his horse put out to pasture, and took private lodgings. The first day at
dinner, he was struck with the appearance of a young man who sat at table, but
could not be said to dine with them; for except a little water, and a bit of
bread, he ate or drank nothing; and though sometimes addressed, he made no
answer. There was a settled melancholy in his countenance, and he often sighed
deeply. He had been in this house six weeks, and had behaved uniformly in the
same manner. In the evening he would walk by himself till midnight. Whence he
came, or what was his object, no one knew. He had bespoke a back room, and
wished to have one where there was but little light; also, that a little water,
and a bit of bread might be sent when he should require it. The landlady not
choosing to have a person in the house who was unwilling to be seen, declined
the circumstance of sending in provisions to his room; but thought it proper he
should come to table. He did so; but entered into no conversation, though much
pains was taken to engage him. He had paid his boarding regularly, and did not
seem to be in want of money. This was the account given by the family, when the
young man retired from dinner.

The Captain's curiosity was much excited; for being a philanthropic man, he
found himself interested in the history of this person. Taking an opportunity
that very evening, when the young man was walking in the back porch, he joined
him, and with the bluntness of a plain man, insisted to converse with him. Sir,
said he, it is from no motive of vain curiosity, that I thus solicit. It is
from a disposition to know and alleviate your griefs. For it is evident to me
that something hangs heavy on your mind. I am a man, as you see, advanced in
life, and have had some experience. It is possible it might be in my power to
say or do something that might serve you; at least, it is my disposition to
soothe your melancholy. If it should be an unfortunate murder, the guilt of
which lies upon your mind, you will find no accuser in me; I shall preserve a
secret obtained in this manner. Probably it might have been a duel, and with
such alleviating circumstances, that though the law would take hold of it,
humanity will excuse.

The young man finding the charge of murder, or suspicion of it, ready to be
fixed upon him, spoke. Said he, I am no murderer, but a murdered man myself. I
am in love with a young woman of the most celestial beauty, but of a cruel
heart.

The beauty may be more in your brain than in her face, said the Captain; for,
as the poet says, There are three, the children of imagination, the madman, the
lover, and the poet. The madman sees more devils than vast hell can hold; the
lover, all as frantic, sees Helen's beauty in a brow of Egypt. I am not
unacquainted with the nature of this passion; and have seen a gypsey myself, in
my time, that have had dominion over me. Perhaps I may have been carried to as
much extravagance as other people; and therefore am a proper person to advise
against it. A principal source of my extravagance, was an opinion that the jade
who had hold of my affections at the time, would pity me when she heard of the
pain which her beauty gave me; that she would be afraid I would hang myself for
her sake; that she would come to soothe and caress me, in order to prevent it.
Far from it. My uneasiness was the proof of her power to wound; and the more
distress I felt, the greater credit to her beauty. She would not have lost a
sigh which she caused me for any consideration. My lamentations were as
agreeable to her, as the groans of the damned are to the devil. And so it must
be with every woman; because self love induces it. Hanging is the last thing
they would be at. If they could get the lover brought to this, they are then at
the height of fame. It falls but to the lot of one here and there to have a man
drown himself for her; and when it does happen, it makes such a noise that all
covet it.

I would venture to say, that this female whom you fast and pray about so much,
would be very unwilling to breathe the soul into you, were it once out. Instead
of fasting, she is eating; and while you sigh in the night, she snores.

You have an opinion, perhaps, that you may bend her by your perseverance. That
is a mistake. A man that once comes to this state of sighing, and dying, has
but little chance; because he has surrendered himself; and there is nothing
more to be won. Were there any possibility of succeeding, it would be by first
conquering yourself; dismissing all idea of her partiality for you; for it is
owing to this secret vanity, and self-flattery, that you still pursue. Absolute
despair is the first step toward the cure of love. It is either drowning or
curing, with you at present. As you have not drowned yourself, you are in a
fair way to be cured.

I know very well how you missed the matter with this hussy. You appear to be a
young man of great sensibility of feeling; and I presume made your addresses
with great refinement of thought and manners. You talked to her of flames and
darts, and flowers and roses; read poetry in the mean time, and thought a great
deal of Phillis, and Amaryllis; and entertained her with names and incidents in
romances, and sung and recited soft love songs about Amanda, and Phebe, and
Colin; whereas your way was to have talked careless nonsense, and sung such
songs as Pady Kelly, and Tristram Shandy-O; and told her stories of girls that
had run off with pedlars, or gone a campaigning with the soldiers. These ideas
are light and frolicsome, and co-natural to springing love. Hence it is that
men of but loose and irregular education, succeed better with the fair, than
scholars that are learned in the classics.

But to bring the matter to a point, the true way is to get another mistress;
and profit by your experience with the first. No more of sighing and dying in
the case; but singing, and laughing, and jumping like a young fox. Hint a
little with respect to certain matters that are between the sexes; but let it
be done in so delicate a manner, that, though she understands you, she is not
obliged to do it. What I mean, is to make her think you would rather debauch
her than marry her. Bring her to this suspicion, and I warrant you. Her whole
study will be to entrap you into matrimony. For it is natural for the human
mind, when it observes a great security and confidence in another, to imagine
there must be some ground for it. It will argue a consciousness, on your part,
of having as good or better in your power. It will impress her with the same
idea; and imagination governs the world.

When the mind is bent upon any object, it is relieved by the conversation of
those who understand it, and, as it were, dissolve with them in the same ideas.
The young man was pleased with the conversation of the Captain, and seemed
cheared; agreed to join the family, and be a little sociable. By degrees he
became so; and what by the conversation of the Captain, sometimes explaining
and sometimes ridiculing the passion of love; and the young ladies of the
family, in the mean time, rallying him on his weakness, he came a little to his
senses, (for love is a phrenzy), and began to behave like a common man. For it
having come out now, that love was the cause of his distress and singularity of
conduct, some pitied him, and others rallied it with good humor and
philanthropy. It had, however, become the general topic in the family, and was
carried down to the kitchen among the servants.

Teague hearing of it took it into his head that he must be in love too; and
counterfeiting a demure look, and absence of mind, and walking by himself, and
living on spare diet, as he had heard the young man that was in love did, he
wished to have it understood that his mind was under the dominion of the same
passion. This being observed, was represented to the Captain; who being at a
(...) to know what was the matter, called Teague, and began to interrogate him.
The bog-trotter, with some seeming reluctance, acknowledged that it was love.
Said the Captain, You in love, you great bear; with whom are you in love? That
dear cratur, said the Irishman, that has the black hair, and the fair face, and
her name is Mrs. Sally, in the house there. She is a fair as the wool or the
snow, and gives me the cholic, and the heart-burn, every time I look at her
fair eyes; God save her soul from damnation, but I love her as I do the very
food that I ate, or the clothes that I ware upon my back.

It appeared to be Miss Sally, a very pretty girl, the eldest daughter of the
landlady; who, by the bye, I mean the ladlady* was a widow, and had two
daughters and a niece with her; the handsomest of whom was this Miss Sally,
with whom Teague had become enamoured. For simple and ignorant nature will
fasten on beauty, as well as the most instructed in the principles of taste.

The Captain having been a good deal troubled, heretofore, with the pretensions
of this valet, in wishing to be a member of the legislature, a philosopher, a
preacher, and now a lover, thought he had now a good opportunity of repressing
his presumption for the future. There was a young man, a brother in the family,
who had been some time in the service, as a lieutenant, and had leave of
absence at this time on a visit to his mother and sisters. The Captain well
knew, that being in the pride and heat of youth, he would consider Teague's
advances to his sister as an insult on the family, and chastise him
accordingly. With this view, counterfeiting every possible disposition to serve
the bog-trotter, the Captain recommended to him to make a confident of the
brother, and endeavor to gain his interest with the sister.

Accordingly, one morning when the officer was in his chamber, Teague made his
approach; and composing his woe begone countenance as well as he could, and
explaining the cause of it, solicited his interest with the lady.

There was a whip in a corner of the room, with which the lieutenant had been
riding; seizing this hastily, he made an attack upon the person of the lover,
in a manner far beyond what was decent or moderate. The valet retreating with
considerable outcries, made complaint to the Captain; who gave him to
understand, that as this outrage was committed by his intended brother-in-law,
it must be considered in the nature of a family quarrel, and he could not
interfere.

The advances of Teague became the subject of conversation in the family, and
of much mirth and laughter. The young man who had been in the state of
melancholy before described, and had been cheered a little, was now in a great
degree cured by the imitation of the valet. For ridicule is a better cure for
love than passion. It is better to make the patient laugh than think.

Having now a disposition to pursue his travels, the Captain sent for his
horse, and set out.

CHAP. III. Containing Observations.
THE observations which we make when the narration of the fact is ended, are
something like the sentiments delivered by the chorus in the ancient plays; a
kind of moral on what was said; or like the moral as it is called to a fable.
In this view therefore; we shall endeavor to say something.

The young man that we have seen so deeply in love, was of a handsome personal
appearance, and of an eye and physiognomy that indicated sensibility and
understanding; and yet it is probable the female of whom he was so much
enamoured, may have been both homely, and destitute of good mental qualities.
Whence could a repulse in this case happen. From a thousand causes. We will
specify some of them. The very circumstance of his being beyond her first
hopes, may have put him beyond her last wishes. A female wooed by a man her
superior, may be led to think she has still a chance for better; and that there
must be diamonds in her hair, or some hidden advantages on her part, of which
she was herself ignorant* otherwise such advances would not be made to her; or
she may apprehend some defect on the part of the lover, of which he is
conscious; otherwise, he would not stoop beneath his natural expectations.

It is possible the Amanda may not have been of the same class and quality with
himself. This would of itself account for the repulse. Should the eagle come
from the firmament, and make his advances to the pheasant, he would find
himself unsuccessful; for the brown bird would prefer a lover of her own
species: or, should the rein deer, which is a most beautiful creature, woo a
frog, the croaking animal would recede into the marsh, and solace itself with a
paramour of its own choosing. When, therefore, unexperienced young persons place
their affections on an object, and do not find a suitable return, they ought to
save their pride, and make the inference, that they had descended from their
element, and fastened on an animal unworthy of their notice.

These observations, in addition to those made by the Captain to the young man,
may be of use to unfortunate lovers; and if so, it will be a recompense for the
trouble we have given ourselves in making them.

BOOK VII.
CHAP. I.
IT was about an hour before sunset, that the Captain fell in company with one
who had the Cincinnati eagle at his breast, and riding on together, put up at
the inn.

The landlady and the servants, having never seen the badge before, were a good
deal struck with the effigy of the eagle, and the ribband at which it was
pendant. Interrogating Teague, who had come in company, and whom they took to
be a common servant to both, or at least acquainted with the affairs of either,
what was the meaning of that bird, or what bird it was, that the gentleman had
at his breast? Teague knew as little about it as they did; but unwilling to be
thought ignorant, took upon him to inform them. It is, said he, a goose; and
the maining is, that the shentleman would ate a goose, if your anours would get
one roasted this avening, for his anour to ate with the Captain, who is my
master; for we have ate nothing all day long, and a roasted goose with a
shoulder of mutton, a pace of poark, and bafe and cabbage, and the like, would
be a very good slake for a fasting stomach. So, God save your soul, dear honey,
and make haste, and get a goose knocked down and put to the fire, to keep their
anours from starving, and to go to bed in a good humor, when they have drank a
cup of ale or a mug of cider after the goose; and, bless your soul, dear honey,
let it be a good large fat goose, that there may be a rib or a wing left, that
a poor servant may have something to ate, at the same time. The shentleman was
very right to hold out a token, like the sign of a tavern-keeper, with a goose,
or a pigeon, or a turkey, that paple may know what he wants, and not be after
the trouble of asking whether he would choose roast bafe and parates, or pork
and parsnips, may it plase your anour.

The landlady was a good deal distressed, having no goose about the house. But
sending out to her neighbors, she made shift to collect a couple of ducks,
which Teague acknowledged would be a very good substitute. Supper being
ordered, these were served up, with an apology from the landlady, that she had
not been able to procure a goose; which she hoped the gentleman with the ribbon
would excuse, as she was informed that a roasted goose was so much to his
taste. A roasted goose to my taste! said the officer; what reason have you to
think that a roasted goose is so much my choice? Surely madam you cannot mean
wit, or to insinuate that I myself am a goose? for one animal preys not upon
another; the maxim is, dog will not eat dog. I cannot therefore be a goose if I
eat one.

Here the landlady explained her meaning, giving the information she had
received from the servant. The Captain was greatly irritated, and would have
called him in and chastised him instantly, had not the officer interfered;
declaring that though it was an eagle, not a goose that he wore at his breast,
yet he was not dissatisfied at the mistake, in as much as it had brought a
couple of good ducks to the table, a fowl of which he was particularly fond.

This incident, in itself laughable, led the officer to relate the trouble he
had had with a clergyman who had made a worse mistake than this, taking the
eagle for a graven image, contrary to the injunction of the decalogue, which
prohibits the making any such representation for the purpose of worship, as he
alleged this to be. In answer to the clergyman, he had alleged the
improbability that he who had been in the service so many years, at a distance
from church, or church worship, except when a deistical chaplain came the way,
should think so much of religion, as to have any worship at all; much less to
have become superstitious, and to wear an image at his bosom. The truth was,
that he worshipped any god, true or false, very little; at least, said few or
no prayers, on such occasions; and was very far from being an idolater, and
paying adoration to a gold or silver image; that this was nothing more than a
hieroglyphic, being the effigies of a bald eagle, which is a native of America,
and designates the cause for which her soldiery had fought; in the same manner
as the eagle was the standard of the Roman legion; or the lion and the unicorn
are the arms of England, or the thistle that of Scotland; that the emblem of
the American bald eagle had, on these principles, been chosen by the Cincinnati
for their badge; of which society he was a member, and wore this device, not
venerating it as the image of any bird or beast whatsoever.

The clergyman admitted, that, in strictness, this symbol might not be a graven
image, as the term would intend engraving on wood or metal, with the point of
an instrument; and under this mental reservation, the wearer might save himself
in saying that it was not a graven image: but it was at least a molten one,
which comes within the meaning of the prohibition; being the representation of
a fowl, and doubtless for the purpose of idolatry. For what else could be the
use or meaning of it. It was not a common broach, used as a ligament to the
shirt or coat; and it was unworthy of a man to suppose it could be worn merely
for ornament; boys and petit maitres delighting in these things, but no one
else. It could not be any sort of time-piece, worn for the purpose of
ascertaining distance. In fact, it was the portrait of a bird, the signal of
some heathen deity; as the cock was sacred to Escalapius, the owl to Minerva,
the peacock to Juno, and the dove to Venus. The eagle was sacred to Jupiter;
and it was most probable, that it was in honor of this false god, that the
image was worn.

It answered no end to reason with the ecclesiastic; for he grew but the more
enraged, and insisted that it was an idol; showing from some texts of
scripture, that in the last times idolaters were to spring up; and that this
society, which the Cincinnati instituted, might be the Gog and Magog spoken of
in the Apocalypse.

Said the Captain, It was natural enough for the clergyman to make this
deduction; as in maintaining the cause of truth against Pagans, he is led to
dwell much on the subject of idolatry. But for my part, the principal objection
that lies with me against your institution, is that which lies against all
partial institutions whatsoever; they cut men from the common mass, and
alienate their affections from the whole, concentring their attachments to a
particular point and interest. A circumstance of this kind is unfavourable to
general philanthropy, giving a temporary and artificial credit to those who are
of the body, amongst themselves; so that while some lend character, others
borrow; and the individuals do not stand on the natural basis of their own
merit. On this principle, I do not much approve of clubs and societies, unless
in the case of some humane or charitable institution; or for the purpose of
carrying on some beneficial work or improvement. I do not know that in your
conveening annually together, you have any object in view of this nature. I
have not heard of any bridges you have built, or any canals dug, or locks made
for the purpose of facilitating navigation. I do not see of what use your
institution is; unless it be, that your pronouncing an oration now and then,
may be favorable to eloquence. But of this I much doubt, as such abstract
discourses usually degenerate into common place. The great object of an orator
is, to persuade the judgment, or affect the passions. In this case, the
judgment is already persuaded, the affections already gained. Having therefore,
no object, what exertion can the mind make? Be the cause what it may, certain
it is that such compositions are seldom or ever found to be models of
eloquence; more especially where the subject is of an extensive nature, as the
revolution of America, and the struggles of its heroes. For here so wide a
canvass is spread, that it is difficult to fill it up; and to take a particular
part would seem to be a dereliction of the rest; for which dereliction no
special reason could be given. You could not embrace all the characters who
have figured or have fallen, or catch at particular (...) of the illustrious.
Confining yourself, therefore, to general observations* you make no particular
impression, and your orations become frigid to the hearers.

I have felt the truth of all this, said the Cincinnati gentleman, and the
difficulty of composing an oration to satisfy my own wishes. For being
appointed by the society to pronounce one at our next meeting, to which I am
now on my way, I have been trying my hand at it, and find it as you say, very
difficult; but have attributed this, not to the nature of the composition; but
to the inferiority of my powers. Not so, said the Captain; for in the hands of
the greatest masters, this kind of composition labors. We do not find that
even the oration of Isocrates, on the Lacedemonian war, which he was ten years
in composing, has obtained such celebrity among the ancients, as such great
labor would bespeak. I have read the panegyric of Trajan, by Pliny; and find
it but a cold composition. Plato's oration in honor of those who had fallen in
the battles of Marathon and Platea, is the best of this kind that antiquity can
produce, and doubtless has great excellence of simplicity of painting. The
touches are delicate and fine, and I do not know but we may place it among the
most beautiful productions. It amuses with magic wildness of fancy, at the same
time, restrained and guided by an exquisite judgment. But it is rather a poem
than an harangue. For though the composition is in prose, yet it breathes the
soul of a bard, and is enchanting by the flow of the words, and the elevation
of the images. In modern times, the best thing we have of this nature, is the
panegyric of Cromwell, supposed to be written by the great Milton, but not
delivered. The ingenuity discovered in the mode of praising him, deserves every
possible commendation. But the greater part of addresses that I have seen to
great men nowadays, or orations on public occasions, are turgid, or jejune,
or little worth our notice.

After this, said the Cincinnati gentleman, I shall hesitate to show you the
essay I have made toward a composition of this nature, as you appear to be so
good a judge in this respect, and to know the deficiencies that may appear in
any effort of this kind.

Nay, rather, said the Captain, you ought to be the more confident in so doing;
for knowing the difficulty of the work, I shall be the more ready to excuse
what comes short of perfection.

I shall then take the liberty, said the Cincinnati gentleman, to read you a
few paragraphs. I shall be happy to hear it, said the Captain. The Cincinnati
gentleman read as follows:

Compatriots -- I wish to say those things that never have been said, and that
never will be said again. Because, in this case, there will be the
characteristics of novelty and singularity; the two great constituents of
pleasure in all intellectual entertainments. But what can I say new? Has not
the whole world resounded with the justness of the cause in which we have been
engaged; with the greatness of the attempt to withstand the power of Britain?
And have not we, ourselves, felt, seen, and known the great variety and change
of good or bad fortune? What will it contribute to our immediate enjoyment to
go over such scenes, unless the particular achievements of each officer can be
enumerated, which decency forbids, and which indeed, cannot be done in the
limits of one harangue. Leaving, therefore, ourselves, and these scenes, wholly
out of the question, let us speak a little of those whom we left behind. But
why need we speak; for all time will speak of them. The bards that shall live,
will draw hence their choicest allusions. Consider them, indeed, as more happy
than you, because they ascended from among the group of their companions, who
were at that time instant witnesses of their achievments. The warriors who fall
in battle, are the most glorious subjects of panegyric. Hector and Achilles,
form the most splendid part of the song of Homer, and in a great degree,
because their bodies were interred in the presence of the two armies. Oh what a
noble object! an army mourning a brave officer, and tears drawn even from the
foe, struck with the sublime of his personal prowess, and excellent knowledge
of the military art. Much unlike, and far above those who languish with
sickness on a bed in calm life, where relations standing round, wish the
departure of the shade, and gape for the possession which he leaves behind. But
the fame of a soldier none but himself can enjoy, there can be no heir or
devisee of his property. It is his own, and it mounts with him. His blood only
remains to bless the earth, from which flowers and roses spring, and clothe the
woods and groves with enchantment and delight. For here the song of poesy is
awakened, and at morn, and noon, and at still eve, they are heard who rehearse
where the brave fell, and where they sleep. Sublime spirits! whether you
inhabit the Pagan elysium or the Christian heaven, you are happy; and listen to
those immortal lyres which are strung to the deeds of heroes.

So much for the exordium of the oration; it was all he had yet written. The
evening passed away in hilarity; and the conversation turned again on the
Cincinnati order; but particularly what may be called the arms of the
institution, viz. Britannia represented as a fine woman, with her bosom bare,
affrighted; and Cincinnatus, an accoutred knight, attacking her thus unarmed,
as St. George did the dragon; the eagle, the bird of Jove, in the mean time
grasping the lightning in his claws, an image that would seem unnatural:
Whereas the eagle might be represented in the clouds near Jove, where the
lightning might be left to work its forked course, without the handing of the
eagle; and in the other figure, Cincinnatus might raise his lance against the
lion that supports the crown, not against the goddess of the island.

From these strictures which the Captain, without pretending to be a
connoisseur, made, the transition was easy to a criticism on the motto of the
badge; viz. Omnia reliquit, servare, rempublicam. The infinitive is here used
instead of the gerund, with the preposition, ad servandam; as if it was
intended to express his motion, or change of place, and not the object. But in
fact, the motto does not at all express that in which the merit of Cincinnatus
did consist. It was not in his leaving every thing to accept the commission of
the Roman senate; but in resigning his commission, and, the work done, going to
his plough again. His praise would have been expressed better by the phrase of,
Victor ad aratrum redit. In fact, it cannot apply well to our army; most of our
officers not having much to leave when they accepted their commissions; but
discovered a Cincinnati-like disposition, in returning after war to the
employments of civil life. It is true, there would have been less tinsel, and
more bullion, in the patriotism of retiring without a badge, as Cincinnatus
did: But it is a thing that can do little harm, and it is pleasing to indulge a
whim.

It may doubtless be said, that there were officers that left the plough, and
fought, and returned to it, as well as those who are within the limitations of
the institution, and entitled to a badge; that, troops who had served a short
enlistment, and militia persons, at least those who fought a little, were not
wholly destitute of some claim to the badge of merit. Even those who lost
property might be said to suffer, and advance pretensions to the reward of
honor. Not that all of them should claim gold medals, or even silver; but some
brass, some copper, pewter, a bit of tin, or pot metal, just as the specific
value of their services might entitle them. Perhaps while some wore it at the
breast, others might be enjoined to wear it at the breeches pocket, and thus,
as well by the point from which appendant, as by the bob itself, designate the
proportion of their honor.

After this, some things were said on the subject of introducing honourary
members; against which the Captain declared himself: That every thing ought to
be preserved sui generis; as nature makes no honourary animals; but all are of
the species, or take not the name: a bear is a real bear, a sheep is a sheep;
and there is no commixture of name, where there is a difference of nature. But
it did not appear to be of any great consequence, one way or the other. For the
order would never come to any great head, as there was no opposition given. For
this is necessary to keep alive attachment to what is arbitrary, and founded,
not in utility, but caprice. For as the fire dies without air, so whim without
contradiction.

The officer was a man of liberality and good sense, and acknowledged the truth
of this. But the evening being now far spent, candles were called for, and they
went to bed.

POSTSCRIPT.
THE preceding pages were written several years ago; during which time the
Captain has continued his travels: and having been favored with his journal, I
have occasionally made extracts, and put them in the form of a continued
history. Whether I shall publish any more, will depend on the reception of this.

I had first begun this work in verse, and have a volume by me, about two parts
in three as large as Butler's Hudibrass; from which composition, I have
extracted this; thinking it might be more acceptable in prose. When I visit
this city next, I may produce that in verse, and let the people take their
choice.

It is a happiness to a man to be able to amuse himself with writing. For it is
not every one that can play upon the violin, or the flute; and the fingers must
be employed some way. I may be blamed in not choosing some subject worthier of
my studies, and requiring a profound research. It might profit the world more;
but it would amuse myself less. Omnis labor improbus; all toil is grievous.
However, I have not been wholly inattentive to severer studies. I have several
law tracts by me; for which I mean, in due time, to solicit a subscription.
Nonum prematur in annum, in every work of moment, ought to be observed.

There are some light things which I may in the mean time throw out; a
comparison of Thucydides with Livy; thoughts on the Egyptian hieroglyphics; on
the Carthaginian commerce; a comparison of the French and English eloquence; a
supplement to Buffon, containing a description of several genera of animals,
not taken notice of by him; hints for the improvement of the microscope; on the
use of the Masoretic points; on the recent origin of the earth; on the criminal
code of the Siamese, etc.

If the world will excuse these, I will give them my word for it, they shall be
troubled little more; for except the examining my law tracts, I shall drop my
pen, finding it, as I advance in life, more advisable to apply myself to
making money. What things have been written, and are now lying by me, may
occasionally see the light.

It is a good deal owing to my solitary residence in the western country, at a
distance* from books and literary conversation, that I have been led to write
at all. It was necessary to fill up the interstices of business. If I should
remain in that country, the same circumstances may lead me to write still. If I
should remove to this city, or the seat of the federal government, I shall
avoid the tedium by other means.

I wish the present book, to sell for at least as much as will defray the
expense of printing; for I have no inclination to lose by it. If I had a little
time to stay in town, I could give it some celebrity by extracts, and remarks
upon it; publishing for and against. For it is of no consequence how a book is
made famous, provided that it is famous.

The truth is, as I have said, I value this book for little but the style. This
I have formed on the model of Xenophen, and Swift's Tale of a Tub, and
Gulliver's Travels. It is simple, natural, various, and forcible. I hope to see
it made a school book; a kind of classic of the English language.

In looking over it, I find in the whole work, but one word I would alter; it
is near the beginning: where I say figure on the stage, instead of appear, or
make a figure on the stage. I have carefully avoided the word unfounded instead
of groundless, a word in vogue, among members of Congress especially. The word
commit, is good, but being lately introduced, and too much hackneyed, I have
not used it.

Language being the vestment of thought, it comes within the rules of other
dress; so that as slovenliness, on the one hand, or foppery, on the other, is
to be avoided in our attire; so also in our speech, and writing. Simplicity in
the one and the other, is the greatest beauty.

We do not know at what time the Greek language began to be written as it was
by Hesiod or Homer. But we find it to have continued with little or no change,
from that time to the latest writers among the Byzantine historians, a period
of more than 3000 years. The Roman language is considered as improving from the
time of Ennius to the Augustine age. The language of the orators, poets, and
historians of that time is the standard. It was not so much in the use of
particular words, as an affectation in the thought, that Seneca is censured as
corrupting the language of the Romans. But Tacitus, after him, writes in a pure
style; and I have found but one conceit in expression in his whole history:
meaning to give the geography of a country of a certain tribe of the Germans;
they are, says he, separated from the Sequani by mount Jura, from the -- by the
lake --, from the -- by the river --, and from the Atabani by mutual fear. I do
not find so much fault with the style of Pliny, as the heaviness of his
thoughts and expressions. However, the Latin style of writing retained its
propriety and other excellencies tolerably well, till the monks got possession
of it, and brought it down to a jargon that is now exploded; and we recur to
the pure originals of Horace, Virgil, Cicero, and Sallust.

The French language is corrupting fast; and not in the use of words, but in
the affectation of surprise, in the structure of the sentence, or the turn of
the expression. Mirabeau was free from this; but not the Abbe Raynal. To give
an example: meaning to say, which he might have done in a simple manner, that
about this time the English cast their eyes upon Goa, as a place where, etc.
stating the advantages of such a port; he begins by telling you, that the
English had occasion for such a port, which, etc. enumerating the advantages;
and after this, with surprise comes upon you, and tells you, they wanted Goa.
Enfin, says he; that is, in fine they wanted Goa.

The English language is undoubtedly written better in America than in England,
especially since the time of that literary dunce, Samuel Johnson, who was
totally destitute of taste for the vrai naturalle, or simplicity of nature.

The language of the Scots writers is chaste, but the structure of the sentence
of the academic Dr. Robertson, especially offends in this particular; his
uniformity of period striking the ear with the same pulse, as the couplets of
our rhyme in Dryden and Pope. Hume is before him in this respect, writing as
naturally as a man speaks; his style rising and falling with the subject, as
the movements of the mind themselves.

I am quite out of patience with this postscript. I have written it, the
Printer informing me that he had a few pages of the last sheet to fill, which
must be left blank unless I had something more; but as I am in a hurry about
some small matters, and have no disposition to write, I believe I shall
conclude, and let him leave the remainder blank, or put in a paragraph of his
own, if he chooses it.

It just me strikes to add, that I am this moment come from being admitted a
Counselor in the supreme court of the United States; having written the
preceding part of this postscript just before the court sat.

In consequence of my admission in this honorable court, I feel myself
inspired with a consciousness of new dignity, and am determined to relinquish
the indulgence of all these light amusements, and apply myself for the future
to fathom the profound depths of the legal oceans and rivers.

Vale, Valete, Camen^.


