Robinson Crusoe, when he had been (...) years on a desolate Island where he
was shipwrecked, went to see what he could discover; -- armed himself with 2
guns, 2 pistols, and a sword.


THE WONDERFUL LIFE, AND SURPRISING ADVENTURES Of that RENOWNED HERO ROBINSON
CRUSOE, Who lived Twenty-eight Years ON AN UNINHABITED ISLAND, Which he
afterward colonised.

BOSTON: Printed and Sold by J. (...) CAMBRIDGE, near (...) 1792.

THE LIFE and ADVENTURES OF ROBINSON CRUSOE.
I WAS born of a good family, in the city of York, where my father had settled,
after his having got a handsome estate by merchandise. My heart began to be
very early filled with rambling thoughts; and though, when I grew up, my father
often persuaded me to settle to some business, and my mother used the tenderest
entreaties, yet nothing could prevail upon me to lay aside my desire of going
to sea; and I at length resolved to gratify my roving disposition,
notwithstanding the extreme uneas^ness my father and mother always showed at
the thought^ of my leaving them. A (...) my own destruction, I hardened, my
(...) the prudent and kind advice of the (...) indulgent parents; and I being
one day in Hull, where I met with one (...) who was going to sea (...) ship, he
easily persuaded (...)

On the first September, 1651, I went on board this ship, which was bound for
London, and without letting my father know the rash and disobedient step I had
taken, set sail; but no sooner was the ship out of the Humber, than the wind
began to blow, and the sea to rise in a most terrible manner. Having never been
at sea before, I was extremely sick, and my mind was filled with terror. I then
began to grow sensible of my wickedness, in disobeying the best of parents, and
their good counsel; tears and entreaties came a fresh into my mind, and filled
me with fear and remorse. I expected every wave would swallow us up, and in the
agony of my mind, made vows and resolutions, that if it should please God to
spare my life in this one voyage, I would go directly home to my father, and
never set soot into a ship again.

The next day the wind abated, and the sea grew calm, I was no longer sea sick,
and my companions laughed at my fears -- ridiculed my gravity, and with a bowl
of punch made me half drunk, and thus drowned my repentance and all my sober
reflections. The weather continued calm for several days, and we at length came
into Ya^mouth Road where we cast anchor to wait for a wind. After riding here
four or five days, the wind (...) very hard; the road however being reckoned
almost as good as an harbor, we were under no apprehension, but spent the time
in rest and mirth, till the eighth day in the mornings when the wind increased,
and we had all hands at work to strike our top-masts and cast our sheet anchor.

It now blew a terrible storm; I began to see terror and amazement in the faces
even of the seamen themselves; and as the master passed by me, I could hear him
say softly to himself, Lord be merciful to us, we shall all be lost. During the
first hurry I was stupid, lying still in my cabin in the steerage. I could ill
resume the penitence I had so apparently trampled upon: I even hardened myself
against it, and thought that this storm would pass over like the first. But
when the master came by me and said we should all be lost, I was terribly
frightened: I got up out of my cabin, and looked about; but such (...) sight I
never before saw; the sea ran (...) high, and broke upon us every three or four
minutes: A ship foundered at a distance; two ships that were near us had cut
their (...) by the board; and the mate and boatswar^ begged of the master to
let them cut away our foremast.

The storm still increased and I saw (what is but too seldom seen) the master,
the boatswain, and several others at prayers, expecting that every moment the
ship would go to the bottom. In the middle of the night, one of (...), who had
been down on (...) cried out we had sprung a leak, and (...) four feet water in
the hold, upon which all (...) were called to the pumps. I worked with the
(...) But the water gained upon us, and it was apparent that the ship would
founder; the storm however beginning to abate, the master fired guns for help,
and a light ship which had rid it out, just a head of us, ventured a boat out
to help us. It was with the utmost hazard that it came near us; but the men
ventured their lives to save ours; and our men casting a rope over the stern
with a buoy, they after much labor and hazard got hold of it, and we had
hardly left the ship a quarter of an hour when we saw her founder.

As it was impossible for the boat to get up with the ship to which she
belonged, we endeavored to reach the shore, and partly by rowing, and partly
by being driven by the waves we at last with great difficulty got to lands and
walked to Yarmouth, where we were received with great humanity.

Had I now had the sense to return home, my father would have received me with
tenderness: but I was afraid of being laughed at. I remained some time in doubt
what course to take; but having money in my pocket, I traveled to London by
land.

On my arrival in that city. I contracted an acquaintance with the master of a
ship who had been on the coast of Guinea, and was resolved to go again; and he
told me, that if I would go with him, I should be at no expense and should have
the advantage of trading (...) myself. Encouraged by this offer and by the
assistance of some friends, I raised 40l* which I said cut in such toys and
trifles as the captain directed me to buy. In this voyage I was continually
sick, yet under my worthy friend, I got a competent knowledge of the
mathematics, and the rules of navigation -- In a word, this voyage made me both
a sailor and a merchant; for I brought home five pounds nine ounces of gold
dust, which yielded me in London, at my return, almost 300l.

I was now set up for a Guinea trader; and my friend (the captain) dying soon
after his arrival, I resolved to go the same voyage again, and having left
200l. in the hands of my friend's widow, I embarked in the same vessel, with
one who was our former mate. -- This was one of the most unhappy voyages, that
ever man made; for as we were (...) between the Canary Islands and the Afr^^^^
shore, we were surprised, in the gray of the morning, by a Moorish rover of
Sallee, who gave chase to us, with all the sail she could make. We also crowded
all the canvas our yards could spread; but finding that the pirate gained upon
us, and would certainly come up with us in a few hours, we prepared to fight;
our ship having twelve (...) and the pirate eighteen. About (...) afternoon she
came up with us, and a very smart ^^^agement ensued; but after having twice
(...) the deck of the Moors, (...) lost three of our men, and had eight
wounded, we were obliged to submit, and were all (...) into Sa^lee, a port
belonging (...) Moors.

I was not carried, as the rest of our men were, to the Emperor's court, but
was kept by the captain of the rover as his own slave. My master having the
long boat of our English ship, had a cabin built in it, with some small lockers
to put in provisions. In this boat he frequently went out a fishing, and as I
was most dexterous at catching fish for him, he never went without me. One day
he had appointed to go out in this boat with two or three Moors of some
distinction, and had therefore sent over night a larger store of provisions
than usual; and ordered me to get ready two or three fusils of powder and shot,
which were on board his ship; for that they designed to have sport at fowling,
as well as (...). But in the morning he came on board, telling me that his
guests had declined going, and ordered me with the man and boy to sail out with
the boat, and catch some fish, for his friends were to sup with him.

At this moment the hopes of my deliverance darted into my thoughts, and I
resolved to furnish myself for a voyage. I told the Moor that we must not
presume to eat our master's bread; he said that was true, and brought a large
basket of (...), and three jars of fresh water into the boat. I knew where my
master's case of bottles stood, which appeared by their make to have been taken
(...) of some English prize, and I conveyed them into the boat, while the Moor,
whom we called Muly, was on shore; and also a great (...) of beeswax, with a
parcel of twines, of which I afterward made candles, an hatchet, a saw, and a
hammer.

Every thing being prepared, we sailed out of the port to fish; but purposely
catching none, I told Muly that this would not do, and that we must stand
farther off, which he agreeing to, set the sails, and I having the helm, ran
the boat out near a league farther, and then brought her too, as if I would
fish, when giving the boy the helm, I stepped forwards, and stooping behind the
Moor, took him by surprise, and tossed him overboard into the sea. He rose
immediately, for he swam like a cork and called to me to take him in; but
fetching one of the fowling pieces I presented it at him and told him, that if
he came near the boat, I would shoot him through the head; but as the sea was
calm, he might easily reach the shore. So he turned about, and swam a shore.

When he was gone, I turned to the boy, whom they called Xury, if you will be
faithful to me. I will make you a great man; but if you will not stroke your
face to be true to me, (that is swear by Mahomet, and his father's beard) I
must throw you into the sea in too. The boy smiled in my face, and spoke so
innocently, that I could not mistrust him; he swore to be faithful to me, and
go over (...) world with me.

While I was in view of Muly I stood out to sea that he might think me gone to
the Streights, as any body in his wits would have done; but it no sooner grew
dark, than I foolishly changed my course, and steered to the south, and having
a fresh gale of wind I made such sail, that before the end of the next day, I
believe I was beyond the Emperor of Morocco's dominions.

The principal thing I wanted was fresh water. We entered a creek in the
evening, resolving to swim on shore as soon as it was dark; but we then heard
such a dreadful roaring and howling of the wild beasts, that the poor boy was
ready to die with fear, and begged of me not to go on shore till day. Well
Xury, said I, then I will not, but we may then see men who will be as bad to us as
those lions: "Then we may give them the shoot gun says Xury, laughing, make
them run away;" such English Xury spoke, by conversing among us slaves. About
two or three hours after we saw monstrous great creatures come down to the sea
shore, and run into the water, in order to wash and cool themselves, making the
most hideous howlings and yellings. Xury was dreadfully frightened; but our
terror was greatly increased when we saw one of them swimming toward our boat.
Xury said it was a lion, and called out to me to weigh the anchor, and put out
to sea, and instantly I saw the wild beast within two oars length of us; but
though I was much surprised; I st^pt to the cabin door, and snatching up a gun,
fired at him; upon which he immediately turned about, and swam toward the
shore. But it is impossible to describe the horrible noises, and hideous cries
and howl^ag^, that were raised, as well upon the edge of the shore, as higher
within the country, upon the report of the gun (...) me, that there was no
going on (...) at night.

The next morning Xury asked for one of the jars, and said he would go and seek
for water. I asked him why he would go? The boy answered with so much
affection, that I could not help loving him. "If wild menu come, they eat me,
you go away." Well, Xury, said I, we will both go, and if the wild men come we
will kill them; having hauled the boat as near the shore as we thought proper,
waded to land, carrying nothing but our arms, and two jars for water.

I did not care to go out of fight of the boat, left any savages should come in
canoes down the river; but the boy seeing a low place about a mile up the
country, rambled thither; by and by I saw him come running toward me, when
thinking he might be pursued by some savages, or wild beasts, I ran to meet
him; but when I came nearer, I saw a hare hanging over his shoulder, which he
had shot; but the great joy that he came with, was to tell me he had found good
water, and seen no wild men's.

Early in the morning, Xury called to me, and told me* that we had best go
farther off the shore; for says he, look yonder lies a dreadful monster fast
asleep. I looked where he pointed, and saw it was a great lion; upon which,
charging my three guns, I took (...) at his head and dispatched him. I took off
his skin, and spreading it on the top of our cabin, the sun dried it in two
days time, and (...) afterward served me to lie upon.

After this stop, we still proceeded to the southward for ten or twelve days in
hopes of making the river Gambia or Senegal, or of meeting with some European
ship, living all the while very sparingly on our provisions, which began to
grow short. We now saw that the land was inhabited, and that the people were
black, and stark naked. Drawing nearer to land, they ran along the shore a good
way, with no weapons in their hands, except one of them, who had a lance. I
made signs to them for something to eat, and they making signs to me to stay, I
lowered my sail, and lay by; while two of them ran up into to the country, and
in less than half an hour returned with two pieces of dried flesh, and some
corn^ but though I was willing to accept it, I was loath to venture on shore to
them, and they were as much afraid of us; but they took a safe way for us all;
for they brought it to the shore, and laying it down, went away, and stood at a
distance till we fetched it on board, and then returned.

At this instant an opportunity offered of obliging them, for two furious wild
beasts, one pursuing the other, came (...) great swiftness from the mountain
(...) people were terribly (...) especially the women; and all (...) the man
who had the lance. But (...) to fall upon the Negroes, they (...) the sea, and
at last one of them came (...) than I first expected. However (...) prepared
for him, and as soon as he came within my reach I shot him.

As I was sailing with a fresh gale of wind by some islands, which I suppose to
be those of Cape Verde, and sitting down in the cabin (...) Xury cried out in a
fright, master, master, (...) ship! -- foolishly imagining that it was (...)
master's ship come so far in pursuit of us. (...) jumped out of the cabin, and
saw that it was a Portuguese vessel. I instantly stretched out to sea, with all
the sail I could make: But, when I began to despair of my ever coming near
enough to make any signal to those on board, they perceived me by the help of
their glasses, and supposing it same European boat belonging to a ship that was
lost, shortened sail, to let me come up.

On my coming near, they asked me what I was, in Portuguese, in Spanish, and in
French; but I understood none of them; at last, a Scots sailor on board called
to me, and I answered I was an Englishman, that I had made my escape out of
slavery from the Moor, at Sallee. They then bid me come on board, and very
kindly took me in and all my goods.

My joy at this deliverance was inexpressible. I immediately offered all I had
to the captain of the ship; but he generously told me, he would take nothing
from me; (...) said, that all I had should be delivered safe to me, when I came
to the Brasils; and that he would save my life on no other terms than on such
as he would be glad to be saved himself, if ever be happened to be in my
condition. He offered me 80 pieces of eight for my boat, 40 ducats for the
lion's skin, and for my boy-Xury, he offered me 60 pieces of eight, which I was
loath to take; for I was unwilling to sell the boy's liberty who had assisted
me so faithfully in procuring my own; but when I told him my reason, he owned
it to be just, and offered to give the boy an obligation to set him free in ten
years, if he turned Christian; and Xury readily consenting, I let the captain
have him.

We had a very good voyage to the Brasils, and arrived in All Saints Bay in
about twenty-two days. The generous treatment of the captain I can never enough
admires; he recommended me to an honest man who had a sugar-house, with whom I
lived till I had learnt the manner of planting and making sugar, after which I
took out a letter, of naturalization, purchased a piece of land that was
uncured, and became a planter.

I at first labored under soon (...) and was obliged to undergo (...). For two
years I rather planted (...) than any thing else; but having at (...)
sufficient quantity of land, (...) some tobacco and a few sugar canes (...).

Had I continued in the (...) in. I might have been happy, (...) rich apace, my
head began to be (...) subjects and undertakings beyond my reach. I had lived
here about four years, and had not only learned the language, but contracted an
acquaintance and friendship among my fellow planters, and several merchants. I
had frequently talked to them of the method of purchasing Negroes on the coast
of Guinea, and they being pleased with the project, easily prevailed on me to
make a voyage for that purpose. We fitted out a ship of about 120 tons burden,
which carried 6 guns, and 14 men, besides the master, his boy and myself; and
had no other cargo, but such toys as were* fit for trading with the Negroes.

In this vessel I set sail, with the hopes of purchasing slaves, to assist us
in our plantations; and stood to the northward, in order to stretch over to the
African coast. We had very good weather for about twelve days; but soon after
we had crossed the line, a violent hurricane drove us quite out of all human
knowledge, and for many days together, not any of us in the ship expected* to
fave their lives. -- In this distress one of our (...) died of a calenture, and
a man and a (...) washed overboard; but about the twelfth day, the storm
abating* we found we were in (...)* north lat. upon the coast of Guinea; upon
which it was resolved to stand away for* Barbados, in order to (...).

With this design we changed our course (...) but soon after a second storm
arose, which carried us with the same impetuosity westward, and drove us out of
the way of all human commerce* In this distress, one of our men, early one
morning, cried out Land! and we had no sooner run out of the cabin, in hopes of
seeing where we were, but the ship struck upon a sand, and in a moment, her
motion being stopped, the sea broke over her in such a manner, that we expected
we should all have perished. It is not easy to conceive our consternation, for
as the rage of the sea was still great, we supposed that the ship would in* a
few minutes break ^o pieces. Before the storm we had a boat at the stern, but
she was staved by dashing against the ship's rudder. We had another boat on
board which the mate laid hold of, and with the help of the rest of the men
flung her over the ship's side, and getting all into her, being eleven in
number committed our selves to God's mercy; the wind driving us toward the
shore we soon plainly* saw that the sea went so high that the (...) could not
escape, and that we should be inevitably drowned. However, we (...) toward
land; but after we had (...), or rather been driven about a (...) a wave,
mountain high came (...) of (...) and took us with such (...) the boat at once,
and separate (...) one another. This wave (...) toward the shore and having
(...) back and left me upon the (...), but half dead with the water (...)
however so much presence of (...) well as breath left that seeing myself nearer
the main land than I expected, I got upon my feet and endeavored to make
toward it as fast as I could* before another wave should return; but I saw the
sea come after me as high as a great hill, and as furious as an enemy; my
business was to hold my breath, and raise myself upon the water; taking care
that it did not carry me back with it -- The wave came upon me again, buried me
twenty or thirty feet deep, and I could feel myself carried with prodigious
swiftness toward the shore, but I he^d my breath, and endeavored to swim
forward with all my might. I was ready to burst with holding my breath, when I
found my head and hands shoot out above the surface of the water; and though I
could scarcely keep myself in this situation above two seconds; yet it gave me
breath and fresh courage. When the water went from me, I took to my heels and
ran toward the shore. But the sea overtaking me, hurrying me along as before,
dashed me against a piece of rock^, and left me senseless; but recovering
before the return of the waves* I held fast. In short, after another wave or
two I got to the main land; clambered up the clifts of the shore* and sat me
down upon the grass.

I now began to thank God that my life was saved, and rising up, I walked about
on (...) shore, filled with ecstasy, and wrapped up in the contemplation of my own
happy deliverance.

But I soon found my comforts abate; for I was wet, and had no clothes to shift
man; and looking round I saw no prospect but that on perishing with hunger, or
of being devoured by wild beasts; for I had no weapon either to kill any
creature for my sustenance, or to defend me from beasts that might desire to
kill me for theirs; (...) a word, I had nothing about me, but a knife, a
tobacco-pipe, and a little tobacco in a box; this was all my provision, and
night coming on, I put a little tobacco in my mouth, to prevent hunger, I
climbed into a tree. I then cut a stick for my defense; and placing myself so
as not to fall, if I should sleep -- being much fatigued, slept comfortably
till morning.

When I awaked it was broad day, the weather clear, and the storm abated; but
what surprised me most was* that in the night the ship had been lifted up from
the sand* by the swelling of the tide, and driven almost as far as the rock,
against which I had been dashed. (...) she standing upright, I wished myself on
(...).

A little after noon, I found the (...) calm, and the tide ebbed so far (...) I
could come within a quarter of a (...) the ship; when I saw that if we had
(...) on board, we had all been safe, and I had (...) been so miserable as to
be (...) company and comfort; and (...) forced (...) into my eyes. The weather
being (...) pulled off my clothes, and took to the (...) but when I came to the
ship, I found no means of getting aboard, she lying so high, that I could find
nothing within my reach; I swam round her twice, and observing a small piece of
rope hanging down, I took hold of it, and got into the forecastle. Here I found
that the ship was bulged, and had a great deal of water in the hold; but to my
great joy saw that all the ship's provisions were dry; and being well disposed
to eat, I went to the bread-room, and slipping on a waistcoat, filled my
pockets with biscuit, and eat as I went about other things.

As I found several spare yards, and some large spars of wood, I let them down
with ropes by the ship's sides, and putting them together I made a raft;
placing several pieces of blank and boards upon them.

I broke open and emptied three of the seamen's chests; then lowered them down
upon the raft, and filled them with bread, some dried goat'* flesh, and three
Dutch cheeses. I also let down the carpenter's chest* which was worth more to
me than a ship load of gold. I next found two good fowling pieces, and two
pistols, with some powder-horns, two barrels of powder, and two old rusty
swords, all of which I placed on the raft, and set off for the shore -- having
two or three broken oars, which served to push the raft along. I run it on a
flat piece of ground* and when the water ebbed. I placed my cargo (...) on land.

At night I barricadoed myself round with the chests and boards I had brought
on shore* of which I had made a kind of hut.

The next day, considering that I might yet get many useful things out of the
ship, particularly the rigging and sails, I resolved to make a second voyage. I
swam to the ship and making another raft, I took a number more of valuable
articles, viz. nails, spike a grindstone, a fore top-sail, some clot^ (...)
^^^edding; all these I brought safe to (...).

I now went to work to make a hut, with the sail and some poles; and into it I
put every thing that would spoil, either with the sun or rain. -- I pilled all
the empty chests and casks in a circle round the hut, to fortify it from any
sudden attack from man or beast; I blocked up the door with boards, and
spreading one of the beds upon the ground, laying my two pistols just at my
head ^and my gun by me, I went to bed, and slept very quietly all night.

I was not satisfied yet; but every day at low water, I went on board and
brought away something. Indeed had the calm weather c^^^ued, I believe I should
have brought away the whole ship, piece by piece, I (...) been on shore now
thirty days, and eleven times on board the ship; resolving to go (...) more
which I did. I found in (...) a part of scissors, ten or dozen knives and (...)
and about 30l. in gold and silver (...) the fight of this money I smiled to
myself (...) said aloud, O drug! what art thou good for I have no manner of use
for thee; (...) main where thou art. However, upon second thought, I took it
way -- the wind began to rise and blow off shore, I let myself down into the
water, and swans to land, which I performed with great difficulty, from the
weight of the things I had about me, and the roughness of the water.

It blow very hard all night, and in the morning when I looked out, no more
ship was to be seen. I was a little surprised; however, I comforted myself with
the reflection, that I had made the best use of my time. I now went in search
of a place to fix my dwelling; and found a little plain on the side of a rising
hill, which was as steep as the side of a house, so that nothing could come
down to me from the top: On the side of this rock was a hollow place, like the
entrance of a cave, before which I resolved to fix my tent. This plain was not
above 100 yards broad, and and twice as long, descending to the sea.

Before I set up my tent, I drew an half circle before the hollow place, which
(...) attended 20 yards, and in this half circle pitched two rows of strong
stakes, driving them into the ground like piles; they stood about five feet out
of the ground, sharpened on the top. Then I took the pieces a (...) I had cut
in the ship, and laid them it rows one upon another up to the top and this
fence was so strong, that neither man nor beast could enter it.

But for many days after I had taken all I could get out of the ship, I could
not forbear going up to the top of this hill, and locking out to the sea: I
sometimes fancied I saw a sail at a vast distance -- pleased myself with the
hopes of it; looked steadily at the place till I was almost blind; lost it
quite and then bemoaning my lonely situation, wept like a child, and increased
my misery by my folly.

But before the above works were completed a sudden storm of thunder and
lightning filled me with the greatest error; for my powder suddenly darted into
my mind, and my heart sunk within mean the thought that at one blast it might
all be destroyed; on which not only my defense but the providing of my food
entirely depended* No sooner as the storm over, when I laid aside every other
work to make a number of boxes and bags, in order to separate my powder; of
these I (...) about a hundred, and put about a pound and half of ^^der in each,
which took up my whole (...): I put them into holes, up and down the rocks in
such a manner that one (...) not fire another.

After I had been about ten or (...) on shore it came into my thought that
would (...) my reckoning of time and (...) to distinguish the Sundays from
(...) days. To prevent this, I set up a large (...) the shore where I first
landed, and (...) upon it with a knife, I came on shore ^ere, (...) 10th of
Sept. 1659. Upon the sides I cutevery day a notch, and every seventh notch was
as long again as the rest, and every first day of the month as long again as
that long one; and thus I kept weekly, monthly, and yearly reckoning.

I had got from my ship some pens, ink and paper;* some mathematical
instruments, and three good bibles, with several other books, which I carefully
secured. I also brought to shore with me two cars; and a dog swam on shore who
was a trusty servant to me many years; he was so good a companion that I was at
a loss for nothing he could fetch me; and he only wanted the power of speech to
become a most agreeable friend. Though I had amassed so (...), here were many
things I wanted, such as a (...), pick-axe, and shovel, needles, pins and
thread.

When my habitation was finished according to the first plan, I found it far
too small to contain my movables; every thing (...) confused heap, and I had
hardly room to turn myself; so I set about enlarging my cave and labored
heartily till I had worked side-ways into the rock farther than my out side
pale and hewing away through made a backdoor to my (...) house. I then made me
a table chair, which were great conveniences; (...) side of my cave and
knocked ^p pieces of wo^^d into the rock to hung my things on. When my cave was
set to rights it looked like a general magazine of all necessary things; and it
gave me great pleasure to see my goods in such order.

What a different situation was I in now, from that I was afraid of perishing
with hunger, or of being devoured by wild beasts!

But I had scarcely finished my habitation when I had like to have been buried
in its ruins. I was at work just in the entrance of my cave, when all of a
sudden the earth came tumbling down from the hill, and the ground shook
violently under me. There were three shocks at about eight minutes distance,
such as I believe would have overturned the strongest building; and about half
a mile from me a great piece of rock fell down* with the most terrible noise I
ever heard. The earthquake made my stomach sick, and I was as one stupid: --
But when the third (...) was over, and I felt no more, I began to take courage.

In rummaging among my things, I found a little bag with a few husks of corn in
it. I took and shook it out by the side of my fortification. This was just
before some heavy rain, and about a month afterward I saw some green stalk*
shooting out of the ground; but how great was my astonishment, when I saw about
ten or twelve cars of (...)! It was some time before I recollected the bag with
the husks, and these were (...) more to me than fifty times their weight (...)
and I carefully preserved them for seed.

When I had been about a year of the island (...) was taken extremely ill,
which frightened me terribly, imagining I should die for want of proper help.
This fit of illness proved a violent ague, which made me so weak I could hardly
carry my gun, and when the fit was on me, I was almost perished with thirst.
One night as I was ruminating on my sad condition, expecting the return of my
fit, it occurred to my thoughts* that the Brasilians took no physic but
tobacco, and I went, directed by Heaven, to search for some in a chest, and
there found a bible; I brought both that and the tobacco to my table; I steeped
some of the last in rum, some I burnt in a pan of coals, holding my head over
the fume, and some I chewed; during the interval of this operation, I opened my
book, and the first words on which I cast my eyes were, "Call upon me in the
day of trouble, and I will deliver thee." The words struck me; but I could read
no more; for the tobacco made me excessive sleepy. I therefore went to bed, and
falling into a sound sleep. I believe I slept two days; for I lost a day in my
reckoning, which I could no other way account for; another dose of this remedy
quite cured me*

I dug up a piece of ground with a wooden spade of my own making, and began to
sow my grain, which answered my wishes, and my crop amounted to half a peck of
each kind.

One day I took a ramble -- armed myself with a gun, a hatchet, and guarded by
my faithful dog. It being a clear day, I plainly discovered land; but whether
island or continent* I could not tell; but guessed that it could not be less
than 20 leagues off. I imagined it was some savage coast, and such indeed it
proved. In this journey I caught a young parrot, having knocked it down with a
stick; I brought it home with me, and taught it to speak. My dog seized a young
kid, and I saved it alive; which afterward became one of my domestics also,
and would never leave me.

I was now thoroughly resigned to my situation, and pretty regularly divided my
time between rest and labor. My corn was now coming up, and to defend it, I
set my dog to watch, which he did faithfully, and the corn grew and began to
ripen apace. I went to see how my harvest throve, and saw my little crop
surrounded with fowls of all sorts, I fired among them when there arose a
little cloud of fowls from the corn itself. This touched me sensibly, for a
single grain might be said in its consequences to be a peck loaf to me. While I
was loading my gun again I could see the thieves upon the trees round me*
waiting for my absence, and having gone a little way I turned my head and saw
them dropping one by one into my corn. I had not patience to stay till more
came but again let off my piece and having killed three, (...) them as we do
murderers in England* hanged them in chains to serve as a terror to the rest.
Not a (...) afterward came near my corn, or indeed near the place as long as
my scare crows hung there.

When my corn was ripe I made me a scythe with a sword, and cut off none but
the ears, which I rubbed out with my hands. At the end of my harvest I guessed
that I had two bushels and a half of barley. I kept all this for seed, and had
now a tolerable prospect of having as much as I wanted.

My clothes now began to decay; linen I had been without a good while* but the
weather was warm, and I had no great need of clothes, yet I was unwilling to be
quite naked; besides, the sun blistered my skin, and my head ached if I went
without a hat or cap; so I made myself two waistcoats out of some watch coats,
which lasted me a great while. I made a cap out of a goat's skin, with the hair
side outward, to throw off the rain, and also another waistcoat of the same
skins.

Three or four years after, I made a little boat, my umbrella, which I had
made, serving both for a ma^t and an awning. This I launched for a sea voyage;
but let this be a warning to all rash and inconsiderate pilots: I put off* and
found a great ledge of rocks lying about two leagues in the sea, some a ab^^e
water, and some under it and a great (...) of sand lying dry for half a (...)
beyond them, so that I should be obliged to go a great (...) out to sea to
double the point. Seeing (...) I thought of giving over the enterprise, and
casting anchor, went on shore, when throwing a sleep hill that overlooked the
(...) saw the full extent of it, and that a most furious current ran to the
east, with a strong eddy nearer the shore, so that I had nothing to do but to
get out of the current, and I should presently be in the eddy. I therefore
resolved to venture.

The wind, however, blowing pretty hard, I lay here two days, and the third day
in the morning* the wind having abated in the night, I found the sea calm and
set sail; but I no sooner got within the current, than found myself in a great
depth of water, and was carried along with such violence, that all I could do,
could not keep the boat on the edge of it; but I found that it hurried me
farther and farther out from the eddy, which was on the left hand. There was no
wind stirring to help me, and all that I could do with my pad^l^ sigmned
nothing; I now began to give myself ^ver for lost; I had no prospect before me,
but that of perishing; not by the sea, for that was calm enough; but of
starving with hunger. Now I looked back upon my desolate solitary island* as
the most pleasant place in the world; and stretched out my hands to it with
eager wishes. O happy (...) said I, I shall never see thee more. O miserable
creature that I am, whether am I going -- (...) I reproached myself with my
unthankful temper and how I had ^pined at my solitary condition, and now what
would I (...) to be on there again. I worked hard till my strength was almost
exhausted, and kept my boat as near as possible to that side of the current on
which the eddy lay; when about noon I thought I felt a little breeze of wind in
my face, blowing toward the shore. This revived my spirits, especially when in
about half an hour more it blew a small gentle gale. By this time I was gotten
at a frightful distance from the island; and had the least cloud or hazy
weather intervened, I should have been undone another way, for I had no compass
on board, and should never have known how to have steared toward the island,
if I had but once lost fight of it; but the weather continuing clear, I spread
my sail, standing away to the north, and got out of the current. They who know
what it is to have a reprieve brought them when at the gallows, or to be
rescued from thieves just going to murder them* may guess what was my present
joy; how gladly I put my boat into the stream of this eddy, and spread my sail
to the wind, running cheerfully before it, assisted by a strong edd, which
carried me about a league back again, directly toward the island, and the
breeze still continuing, I reached it before night.

When I was on shore, I fell on my knees, and gave God thanks for my
deliverance, resolving to lay aside all thoughts of escaping from the island in
my boat; and refreshing myself with such things as I had* I laid me down to
sleep. The next morning I made my way westward, and soon found that I was not
far off the place where I had been before. I reached my bower in the evening,
where I found every thing as I left it.

I got over the fence, and laid me down to sleep in the shade; but judge my
surprise, when I was awaked by a voice calling me by name several times, Robin,
Robin Crusoe, poor Robin Crusoe, where are you? Where have you been? I was so
dead asleep at first, that I thought I dreamt somebody spoke to me; but as the
voice continued to repeat Robin Crusoe, I awaked dreadfully frighted; but no
sooner were my eyes open, than I saw my Pol sitting on the hedge, and
immediately knew that it was he that spoke to me. I immediately called him, and
the poor sociable creature came as he used to do, and sat on my thumb, crying,
Poor Robin Crusoe, as if he had been overjoyed to see me again.

I had at length a great mind to go to the point of the island to see how the
shore lay, and resolved to travel thither by land. And now, reader, I will give
thee a short sketch of the figure I made, I had a great high shapeless cap made
of goat's skin, a jacket with the skirts coming down to the middle of my thighs
and a pair of open kneed breeches of the same with the goats hair hanging to
the middle of my legs. Stockings and shoes I had (...); but I had made a pair
of somethings, I scarce knew what to call them, to flap over my legs like
spattersashes, but of a most barbarous shape, and so indeed were all the rest
of my clothes: I had a broad belt of goats skin dried and in a frog hung on one
side a saw, and on the other a hatchet. I had another belt not so broad,
fastened over my shoulder. Under my arm hung two pouches for shot and powder;
on my back I carried a basket, on my shoulder a gun, and over my head a great
clumsy ugly goats skin umbrella. My beard was cut short except what grew on my
upper lip, which I had trimmed into a large pair of Mohammedan whiskers; but as
for my figure I had so few to observe me that it was of no manner of
consequence.

I was exceedingly surprised with the print of a man's naked foot on the shore
which was plainly to be seen in the sand. I stood like one thunder struck; I
listened; I looked round me; I could hear nothing, nor see any thing. I went
upon a rising ground to look farther; I walked backwards and forwards on the
shore, but I could see only that one impression; I went to look at it again,
there was plainly a foot, toes, heel and every part very distinct: How it came
there I knew not; but I hurried home to my fortifications, looked behind me
every two or three steps, and fancying every (...) and stump, to be a man. I
had no sleep that night, but my terror gradually wore of, and I ventured down
to take measure of the foot by my own, but I found it much larger. This filled
me again with (...) whimsies and when I went home I began (...) double my
fortifications.

After having secured my habitation in the strongest manner possible, I sought
for a place of security for my live goats, and at length found a piece of
ground which contained about three acres, in the middle of hollow and thick
woods, and rendered almost inaccessible by nature, so that it cost me but
little pains to make it so; and then I removed my goats into it.

After I had thus secured one part of my live stock, I went about the whole
island, and rambling more to the western point than I had ever done before, I
was presently convinced that the seeing the print of a man's foot was not such
a strange thing in the island, as I imagined; for on my approaching the shore,
I was perfectly confounded and amazed, nor is it possible to express the horror
I fel^ at seeing the shore spread with skulls, hands, feet, and other bones of
human bodies; -- and particularly a place, where, as I supposed, there had been
a fire made* and a circle dug in the earth for the savage monsters to sit down
to their inhuman feasts, on the bodies of their fellow creatures. I turned away
my face from the horrid spectacle; my no match grew sick, and I was just at the
point of fainting, and left the place as soon as possible.

When I got a little out of that part of the island, I looked up with the
utmost affection o^ ^^ul, and with tears in my eyes, gave God thanks for
placing me in a part of the world where I was distinguished from such wretched
creatures as these. In this frame of thankfulness I went home to my cattle, and
began to be much easier as to my safety, than I had been for some time before;
for I observed that these wretches never came to the island in search of what
they could get. I had been in the island a most eighteen years, and never saw
any sufficient proofs of their having been there before; and might be eighteen
more, concealed as I was if (...) did not discover myself to them. But (...)
that they might be driven to my side o^ the (...), I became cautious of making
a fire at my castle, as I called (...) and therefore went into the midst of the
woods, whereof I made charcoal, to se^^e me for my necessary occasions at home.

One day when I was cutting some brushwood, I found behind the (...) I was
cutting a hollow place which I was curious of looking into, and getting with
difficulty into its mouth, I found it was sufficient for me to stand upright in
it; but looking farther into the place, which was perfectly dark I saw two
broad shining eyes, which twinkled like two stars, from a dim light reflected
from the mouth of the cave (...) it this I went cut suffer than I got in; but
plucking up m^ courage, I took a great firebrand, and rushing in again with
(...) fl^^^ing in my hand* when I was almost as much frighted as before: for I
heard a loud sigh followed by a broken noise, and then a sigh (...). I stepped
back, struck with such surprise that I was in a cold sweat. However, I
recovered resolution enough to step forward again, and lifting up ray light, I
saw lying on the ground a most monstrous he* goat gasping for life. When
recovered from my fright, I began to look round me. This cave was but twevle
feet over, and I observed that on the farther side was an opening, into which I
crept on my hands and knees; but as I had no light I deferred going farther
than the entrance till the next day, when I brought candles of my own making,
and crept about ten yards, after which the roof rose to about twenty feet high,
and the wall reflected an hundred thousand lights from my two candles. It was a
delightful grotto, the floor dry and level, no damp to be felt, nor any noxious
creature to be seen.

I had now been twenty-two years in the island, and was so naturalized to the
place, that had I been secure as to the savages, I then fancied I could have
been contented to have staid in it, till, like the goat* I had died of mere old
age; but in my twenty-third year, going out at break of day, I was surprised
with the light of a fire upon the shore toward the end of the island; which,
to my great affliction, was on my side. In this extremity I went back directly
to my castle; pulled up the ladder after me, and put myself in the best posture
of defense* I staid within two hours, when I began to be impatient for
intelligence; but I had no spies to send out. Soon after I set my ladder to the
side of the hill, and went to the top: and lying down on my belly on the
ground, I discovered nine naked savages sitting round a fire. They had two
canoes with them, and at the turn of the tide they went away. As soon as I saw
them gone, I took two guns upon my shoulders* two pistols at my girdle, and a
great sword without a scabboard, and badened to the place, when I found that
there had been no less than five canoes of them on the shore, which I saw
altogether making over to the main. The sight of the horrid carnage they had
left behind them so filled me with horror and indignation that I meditated the
destruction of the next that came ashore.

Some time after, in the midst of a very stormy night I was startled at the
firing of a gun, I hasted up to the top of my hill, and heard another. I
imagined that these were signals of a ship in distress, and such it proved, as
I discovered the next day. I cannot explain by any possible energy of words,
the emotion I felt at the fight of this wreck. O that there had been but one
saved! I cried, that I might but have had one companion! one (...) creature to
have spoken to, and have comforted in his affection.

Under the power of this impression, ^^^^ing would serve me, but I must go in
(...) this wreck, which lay at a little distance* furnished myself with a stock
of provision (...) fear of being driven out to son; and have began my voyage, I
in two hours time reached the ship, which was Spanish built. She stuck fast
jammed in between two rocks, and all the stern and quarter were beaten to
pieces by the sea. On my coming near it, a dog yelped and cried; but there was
no other living creature on board; but I saw two men drowned in the cook room,
with their arms fast about one another, and all the ^oods were spoiled by the
water. I took twi^^^eamen's chests, and in them I found some neckcloths and
skirts, which were very useful to me; I 100 pieces of eight, and about a pound
weight of solid gold.

After this acquisition I lived in my old manner; though terrified with fears
of the savages. One morning very early I saw five canoes of them on shore. I
clambered up my hill, and by the help of my perspective discovered (...) than
thirty dancing round a fire. I soon after saw two miserable wretches dragged
cat of the boats, one of whom was immediately knocked down, but the other
starting from them, run with incredible swiftness along the sands, toward me.
I confess I was horridly frightened when I saw him come my way, imagining he
would be pursued by the whole body; however, I kept my (...) and quite lost my
apprehension, when I found but three following him. He greatly out ran them,
and was in a fair way of escaping them all, when coming to a creek, he plunged
into it, landed, and ran on as swift as before. Of the three that followed, but
two entered the water, the other returning back. I clapped myself in the way
between the pursuers and the pursued, hallooing aloud to him that fled and
beckoning with my hand for him to come back; then rushing at once upon the
foremost, knocked him down with the stock (...) piece: The other stopped as if
fright (...); but when I advanced toward him. I perceived he was sitting his
bow to shoot me, upon which I shot him dead directly The poor savage who had
fled was so terrified at the noise of my gun, that he seemed rather inclined to
fly than to come toward me. -- However, when I gave him signs of
encouragement, he came nearer, kneeling down every ten or twelve steps; on his
coming close to me he kneeled down again, laid his head upon the ground, and
placed my foot upon it. The man that I knocked down came to himself, and my
savage began to be afraid, I (...) presented my piece at he man, when the poor
fellow whose life I had saved, made a motion for my sword, which I gave him,
and he struck off his enemy's head at one blow, and in a quarter of an hour
buried both the bodies in the sand. I then took him to my cave, and gave him
bread and a bunch of raisins to eat.

He was a well made handsome fellow of about 26 years of age, of an olive
colored complexion, with long black hair. I began to speak to him, and to
teach him to speak to me; and first, I made him to know that his name should be
Friday, which was the day wherein I saved his life. I taught him to say Master,
and let him know that was to be my name. The next day I gave him clothes, at
which he seemed much pleased.

Having now more courage, and consequently more curiosity, I took my man Friday
with me, giving him the sword in his hand, with the bow and arrows at his back,
which I found he could use very dexterously. I also gave him to carry one god,
and taking two for myself, away we marched to the place where his enemies had
been: When I came there my blood ran cold in my veins; the place was covered
with human bones and the ground dyed with blood; great pieces o^ flesh were
^elt here and there half eaten, mangled and ^^^^ched. I saw three skulls, five
hands, and the bones of three or four legs and feet; and Friday, by his signs
made me understand, that they brough: over four prisoners to feast upon, that
three of them were eaten up* that he, pointing to himself was the fourth, and
that they had been conquered, and taken prisoners in war*

I caused Friday to collect the remains of this horrid carnage* then to light a
fire, and burn them to a she. When this was done we returned to our castle. The
next day I made a little tent on the outside of my fortification, and at night
took in my ladder, that he might not be able to get at me while slept. But
there was no need of this precaution; for never man had a more faithful
servant; he had the same affection for me as a child has for a father, and I
dare say* he would have sacrificed his life to save mine.

After I had been two or three days returned to the castle, I thought that in
order to bring him off from the relish of human flesh, I ought to let him taste
other flesh; so I took him out one morning to the woods, in order to take a kid
from my herd; but as I was going, I saw a she* goat lying down in the shade,
and two young kids sitting by her; when making signs to Friday not to stir, I
shot one of them. Poor Friday trembled and looked so amazed, that I thought he
would have sunk down; he did not see the kid I had shot, but ripped up his
waistcoat to feel if he was not wounded; and, as I found presently, thought I
was resolved to kill him. But taking him by the hand, I laughed at him, and
pointing to the kid I had killed, beckoned to him to run and fetch it, which he
did; and while he was wondering how it was killed, I loaded my gun and seeing a
parrot sit upon a tree, I showed it to him, and made him understand that* I
would kill it; accordingly I fired, and he immediately saw it fall; he looked
frightened again, and I believe if I would have let him, would have worshipped
both me and my gun* as for the gun itself, he would not so much a touch it for
several days after; but would talk to it, when he was by himself, which I
afterward understood, was to desire it not to kill him.

Having brought home the kid, I feasted Friday the next day with a piece of it
roasted. This he admired very much, and made me to understand that he would not
eat man's flesh any more. I now found it necessary to sow a larger quantity of
corn than I used to do, and therefore with Friday's assistance enlarged my
fence. In short, this was the pleasantest yeur I had led in the island; for as
my man began to talk pretty well, I had some use for my tongue again.

I soon learnt from Friday's discourse, that he had formerly been among the
savages, who used to come on shore on the farther part of the island, on the
same man eating occasions, which he was now brought for; and some time after, I
took him to that side which was the same I formerly mentioned; he knew the
place, and told me he was there once, when they eat up twenty men, two woman,
and a child; but not knowing how to tell twenty, he numbered them by laying so
many stones in a row, and pointing to me to tell them over.

I did not fail to instruct this poor creature as well as I was able, in the
principles of religion, and he listened to me with great attention* One day
when I had been talking to him on this subject, he told me, that if our God
could hear us beyond the son, he was a greater God than their Benamnukee, who
lived but a little way off, and yet could not hear till the Oowokakee, or
priests, went up to the great mountains where he dwelt, to speak to him. In
short, by instructing him, I informed myself; for by seriously considering what
I had never thought of before, I more strongly impressed a sense of my duty
upon my own mind and at length made him a better christian than I had been
myself. I then told him my story, and let him into the mystery of gunpowder and
bullets, and taught him how to shoot; I gave him a knife, which he was
wonderfully delighted with; also made him a belt with a frog hanging to it and
instead of a hanger, gave him a hatchet.

I descried to him the countries of Europe, and particularly England, how we
lived, how we worshipped God, and how we traded in ships to all the parts of
the world: I gave him an account of the wreck I had been on board o^ and showed
him the ruins of our boat, which we lost when I escaped, and which I could not
stir with all my strength then, but was now almost fallen to pieces. Upon
seeing this boat, Friday stood musing a great while, and said nothing; when
asking that he was thinking of (...) at (...), "Met such boat like came to
place at my nation. -- We save the white men's from drown." I (...) asked him,
if there were (...) he men's, as he called them, in the boat? Yes, he said, the
boat full of white men's: I asked him how many? He told me upon his fingers,
seventeen. I then asked him, what became of them? And he replied, They live,
they dwell at my nation. I presently imagined, that these might be the men
belonging to the ship that was cast away in sight of my island, who after the
ship had struck on a rock, had saved themselves in their boat. I then enquired
what was become of them, and he assured me that his countrymen gave them
victuals. I asked him why they did not kill them, and eat them? He said, No,
they make brother with them. They no eat men's but when make war fight; that is,
they never eat any man but such as are taken in battle.

A considerable time after this* being on the top of a hill at the east side of
the island from whence I had discovered land, Friday looked very earnestly
toward it, and in a kind of surprise f^ll a jumping and dancing, crying, O
joy.! O glad! there be my country, there my nation! I observed that his eyes
sparkled, and his countenance discovered an extraordinary sense of pleasure.
This observation gave me some uneasiness, and I could not help apprehending,
that if he should get back to his own nation, he would not only forget all his
religion, but his obligations to me, and would perhaps come back with an
hundred or two of his countrymen, and make a feast upon me, at which he might
be as (...) as he used to be with those of his enemies when they were taken in
war. But I ^longed the poor honest creature very much*

One day, walking up the same hill I called to him and said, Friday, do not you
wish yourself in your own country again? Yes, said he, I* be much a glad to be
at my own nation. What would you do there? said I: Would you eat man's flesh
again, and be a savage as you was before? He looked full of concern, and,
shaking his head, said, no, no, Friday tell them to live good; tell them to
pray God; tell them to eat corn bread, cattle flesh, milk, no eat man's flesh
again. Why then, said I to him* they will kill you. He looked grave, and said
no, they no kill me, they willing love learn. He meant they would be willing to
learn. I then told him, that I would make a canoe for him; and he replied, that
he would go, if I would go with him. I go! said I, why they will eat me if I go
there. No no, says he, me make them no eat you, me make they much love you. He
then told me how kind they were to the seventeen white or bearded men, as he
called them, who came on shore in distress.

From this time I had a mind to venture over, and see if I could possibly join
those bearded men, not doubting but that we might find some means of escaping
from thence. I therefore went with Friday to the other side or the island, and
(...) him my boat, when he getting into it* managed it with the greatest
dex^^^ity; but thinking it too little. I afterward should him the first (...)
made, which I could not get into the water; he said that was big enough; but as
it had lain two or three and twenty years, the sun had split it. I therefore
told him, that we would go and make one as big as that, and he should go in it.
At this he looked very uneasy, and I asked what was the matter with him. To
which he returned, Why angry, mad with Friday? what me done? I told him I was
not angry with him. No angry! no angry! says he, why then send Friday home to
my nation? Why said I, Friday did you not say you wished you were there? Yes,
yes says he, wish be both there, no wish Friday there, no master there. I go
there Friday! said I, What should I do there? You do great deal much* good,
sober, ^^me man's; you tell them know God, pray God, and live new life. -- Alat,
Friday, said I. thou know not what thou say; I am but an ignorant man
myself. Yes, yes, says he* you teach me good, you teach them good. No, no,
Friday, said, (...) you shall go without me, are leave me here to live by
myself, as I did before -- He looked confused and running to a hatchet took it
up hastily, and gave it me -- What must I do with this? said I, You take kin
Friday, says he. What must I kill you (...) said I again. He returns very
quick, What you send Friday, ^o send Friday away. This he spoke with such
earnestness, that I saw the tears stand in his eyes.

Upon the whole, as I found by all his discourse, a settled affection to me and
that nothing should part him from me; so I found that his desire to return to
his country, was founded on his affection to the people, and his hopes of my
doing them good.

I was now entered into the 27th year of my captivity, and one morning I bid
Friday go to the sea shore to see if he could find a turtle; but he had not
long been gone, when he came running back like one that felt not the ground, on
which he trod, and before I had time to speak, cried, O master! O master! O
sorrow! O bad! What Is the matter, Friday, said I. O yonder there, said he, one,
two, three! Canoe! one, two, three! Well, Friday, said I, do not be frightened:
He was however terribly afraid, imagining that they were come to look for him.
I asked him, whether if I resolved to defend him, he would stand by me, and do
as I bid him. He said Me die, when you bid me die, Master. I then loaded four
muskets with five small bullets in each. and each of my two pistols with a
brace of bullets. I hung my great sword naked by my side, and gave Friday his
hatchet.

I then took my perspective glass, and went up the side of the hill, when I saw
twenty-one savages, three prisoners, and three canoes. They were landed at a
small distance: where the shore was low, and where a thick wood came almost
close down to the sea: and I was so filled with indignation, that I was
resolved to kill them all. I gave Friday one pistol to stick in his girdle, and
three guns upon his shoulder; took one pistol and the other three guns myself;
and having put a bottle of rum in my pocket, I marched with Friday to attacked
them. I sent Friday to some trees that was near them to see what they were
about; he soon returned and told me, that they were all about a fire eating the
flesh of one of their prisoners, and that a bearded man lay bound upon the sand
whom he said they would kill next. I went to the tree, and plainly saw a white
man lying on the beech with his hands and feet tied with flags. I observed
another tree, and a little thicket beyond it, to which I could go undiscovered.
I therefore took a circuit to it, where I had a full view of them, at the
distance of about eighty yards.

I had not a moment to lose, for nineteen of the horrid wretches sat huddled
together on the ground, and the other two were stooped down to untie the
christian in order to murder him. Now, said I, Friday, do as you see me do. I
laid the muskets down, and took up one, and then we both fired. Three were
killed and five wounded. The savages (...) in a dreadful consternation, and all
who were unhurt jumped up instantly on their (...) knowing which way to run. We
in (...). By at them again; when we found only (...) drop; but a good many
wounded, and they ran about screaming and bleeding. We th^n rushed out of the
thicket, and cut the (...) that bound the poor victim, and gave him a sword and
pistol, which he had no sooner got than he flew upon his murderers. In short,
seventeen of them were killed, and four of them getting into a canoe, got out
to sea.

I resolved to pursue them, and going to one of the canoes. I found another
poor creature lie there alive, bound hand and foot. I immediately cut the
twisted flags, and seeing that he had been bound so tight that he was almost
dead, I gave him a dram, and ordered Friday to tell him of his deliverance; but
when the poor fellow looked in his face, and heard him speak, it would have
moved any one to tears, to have seen how he kissed, embraced, cried, danced,
sung, and then cried again. I asked him what was the matter, he said it was his
own dear father. He then sat down by him, held the old man's head close to his
bosom. At my desire Friday took the Spaniard into the canoe, and placed him by
his father, and paddled them along ashore, (...) brought them near my (...),
while I (...).

The Spaniard gave me an account of the (...) the situation, of his (...)
resolved that he and Friday's (...) should go in the boat and fetch then over.

About eight days after they were gone, Friday waked me one morning by crying
out, Master they are come. I dressed myself and hasted up to the top of the
hill, and plainly discovered an English ship lying at anchor. At first I felt
in my mind a tumult of joy, but it was-soon turned into fear; for though I knew
them to be my countrymen, I was suspicious of them. -- They ran the boat ashore
on the beach, and eleven men landed, three of them unarmed, who by their
gestures I thought to be prisoners, for they seemed to be pleading for mercy.
At this sight I was stiffened with horror, and Friday called out to me in his
broken English, O master! you see Englishmens eat prisoners as well as savage
men's. No, no, said I, Friday, I am afraid they will murder them; but you may be
(...) they wont eat them. At this instant I saw a villain lift up his arm to
kill one of the prisoners; but he did not strike him. I (...) now for the
Spaniard, and Friday's father (...) was gone with him. In the mean time (...)
boat got a ground; and I heard one of them say to another who was going to it.
Why let her alone, lack, it will be a (...) next (...) this convinced me that
they were (...) trymen. I knew (...) that they would (...) to ramble about this
(...) fore designed to attack them (...) dark; but a few hours after (...) them
rambling about. I imagined (...) a sleep: all but the three (...) sat under the
shelter of a tree, but a little way from me. To them I went and said, What are
you, Gentleman? They started at the noise; but when they saw my uncouth figure,
they prepared to fly. I then said, Gentlemen, perhaps you may have a friend
near you, whom you little expect. He must be sent directly from heaven, said
they, bowing; for our condition is past the help of man. All help is from
heaven, Sir, I replied; I see you are in distress, and am willing to serve you.
The poor man, with a gush of tears, answered, Am I talking to a man or an
angel? A man, an Englishman, said I; ready to assist and save you: Tell me your
case. I was commander of that ship, he replied; my men have mutinied against
me, and if they do not murder me, they intend to leave me and two gentlemen
ashore in this desolate place. They are but in that thicket, and I tremble for
fear they have seen you, and heard us speak: if they have, they will murder us
all. I asked what arms they had got, and finding they had but one, I told him
it was easy to kill them all, or to take them prisoners. I then gave each of
them a musket, and advised them to (...) among them at once; but he was
cautious of shedding blood. The captain reserving his own piece, two men shot
one of the villains dead, and wounded another, whom the captain knocked down
with the stock of his musket. There were three more in company, one of whom
was wounded. They begged for mercy, and I coming up, gave orders for sparing
their lives, on condition of their being bound hand and foot while they stayed
in the island.

After securing all our prisoners, we consulted together how to recover the
ship, there being still twenty six men on board. While we were securing the
boat, we heard the ship fire a gun, as a signal for the boat to come on board.
Soon after, another boat with ten men with arms, approached the ashore. We had
a view of them as they came; and as soon as they got to the place where the
other boat lay, the ran their boat on the beach, and came all on shore. They
hallooed for their companions; and seeing the holes beat in the other boat,
they immediately returned and rowed from the shore; but quickly coming back
again, seven of them landed* leaving three in the boat, who kept at a distance
from the shore. We now lost all hopes of recovering the ship; for we imagined
that if we seized the seven men, the rest would return to the ship and she
would set sail; however we had no remedy but patience.

Those who came on shore kept close together, marching up the hill, under which
(...) habitation lay. When at the (...) hallooed; but did not venture sat (...)
then ordered Friday and the (...) rising ground, and shout, in (...) them. They
heard the noise (...) wards it, till they came to the (...) then called to the
boat to set them over. They having crossed the creek left two men in the boat,
taking the other with them. We left Friday and the mate decoying the fellows up
into the woods, while we surprised the two men they had left, one lying in the
boat, and the other asleep on the shore. The last starting up at our approach,
the captain knocked him down, and called to him in the boat to yield, or he was
a dead men. This he did, and heartily joined us.

Several hours after, Friday came back and told me they had heartily tired the
men, by hallooing to them from different places; for he heard them complain,
they were so tired they could not walk. At length we saw them all go to the
boat, which was aground in the (...), the tide having ebbed out. When they saw
the two men gone, they called to one another in the most lamentable manner,
saying they were got in an enchanted island, that it was either inhabited, and
they should be murdered, or that there were devils in it, and they should be
devoured. They hallooed and called their comrades by their names, and then ran
about winging their hands like men in despair; (...): I drew my ambuscade
nearer and (...) Friday and the captain to creep upon their hands and feet,
that they might not be (...) and to go very near them before they fired but one
of the principal ringleaders of the (...) with two of the crew came toward as,
and the captain was so eager at having him in his power, that he let fly, and
killed him and another man on the spot; the third an for it, I immediately
advanced with my whole army, when the man we took out of the boat, by my order,
called to one of them by his name Tom Smith. The fellow answered, Who is that,
Robinson! The other replied, Ay, ay, for God's sake, Tom, throw down your arms
and yield, or you are all dead men this moment. Yield! who must ye yield to;
says Smith. Where are they? Here they are, says he; here is our captain with
fifty men with him, the Boatswain and Will Fry are killed, and I am a prisoner.
Will they give us quarter? says Smith. The captain then called out. You know my
voice, if you lay down your arms and submit, you shall all have your lives but
Will Atkins. Upon which Will Atkins cried out for God's sake, captain, spare my
life, the rest are as bad I; which was not true, for he had used the captain
very ill, at the beginning of the mutiny. The captain told him he must lay down
his arms at discretion, and (...) to the governor's mercy. Upon, which they all
submitted, and the captain expect (...) with them, on their villainous (...)
him.

It was now determined to seize the (...) the captain chose five o^ those to
(...) assist him, while I kept the (...) their fidelity. We then stopped (...)
the broken boat, and having (...) both, the captain went to the (...) night,
got on board, and being faithfully seconded, they knocked down the second mate
and carpenter, with ^he but end of their muskets, and soon overcame all the
rest: killed the rebel captain, and fired several guns to give me signal of
their success, which filled me with great joy.

When I saw my deliverance thus put in my hands, I was ready to sink with
surprise; I was not able to answer one word, but a stood of tears brought me to
myself. The captain called aloud to the boat, and bid them bring the governor's
present ashore; and indeed it was a present fit for a governor. Among other
things there was a very good suit of clothes, with shirts and neck cloths. I
dressed myself in them, and then appeared as governor before the prisoners. I
asked them what they had to say in their own defense, telling them I had power
to execute them there. They pleaded the captain's promise of mercy and I told
them that I intended to go passenger in the ship, with all my men; the captain
returning to the ship to get every thing ready for my reception.

When he was gone, I talked to the men, told them my story, and left a letter
for the fifteen Spaniards, and made them promise to treat them in common with
themselves. The next day I went on board the ship, taking Friday with me; but
did not sail that night; and before we put off, two of the men swam to (...)
from the shore, desiring to be taken in, or they should be murdered, which we
did. Two of our men left us, and joined them ashore. Th^^ I left the Island,
after being on it 28 years.

On my arrival in England, I was as perfect a stranger as if I had never been
known there. My father and mother were dead. The owner of the ship I had saved,
made me a present of near 200l. I then went to Lisbon, to see after my effects
in the Brasils, and found the generous captain, who had been my friend, still
alive, and he put me in a way of recovering the produce of my plantation, to
the amount of 50, 000l. besides 1000l. a year.

Having converted my money into bills of exchange, I resolved to travel to
England by land, over the Pyrenean mountains. Poor Friday was terribly
frightened when he saw mountains covered with snow. On our way, our guide was
assaulted by two wolves; he called out to us, and I bid Friday hasten to see
what was the matter; when like a ^old fellow he rode up and shot the wolf which
had fastened on the man, and the other fled. -- After this, a monstrous bear
rushed out of a wood, which surprised us all except Friday, who with joy,
cried, O! O! O! master, you give me leave, me shakee te hand with him, me makee
you good laugh: You fool, said I, he will eat you up. Eatee me up: (...) you good
laugh. The bear walked (...) Friday calls to him, Harkye, harkye (...) s^eakee
wit you, and then flung a great (...) at his head. As soon as he felt the (...)
came after him, with monstrous long strides. Away ran Friday toward us, as if
he wanted help. Is this your making us laugh, you ^^g? said I in a passion;
mount your horse, that we may shoot the creature. No shoot, no shoot, said be,
you get much laugh, and layingdown (...) gun, he climbed up a tree. The bear
stopped to smell at the gun, and climbed the tree after him, when Friday
getting to the small end of a large branch, and the bear about the middle, he
fell a shaking it, crying, Now you see me teachee the bear dance. The bear
turned to go back, and Friday said, What you come no farther, pray you come
farther, you no come farther, me go. You no come to me me come to you. Then
bending the bough, down he slipped of it, and taking up his gun stood still.
The bear finding his enemy gone, came with the hinder end foremost down the
tree; when Friday clapping the muzzle of his gun to his ear, shot him dead.
Then (...) to us, cried, So we kill bear in my (...). So you kill them, said I,
you rogue; (...) you have no guns. No, says he, no gun but (...) great much
long arrows. During (...) we were terribly pestered by the (...) which we
killed seventy. I however arrived safe at Dover in good health.

(...) after I married, and retired in the (...) to a little farm: but in the
middle (...) my wife died, leaving me (...). By the loss of my sage counsell^r
(...) like a ship without a pilot that could only sail before the wind. One of
my brother's children was going a voyage to China, came and asked me if I would
go with him and see my beloved Island. I consented and having made my will, and
settled (...) estate on my children, we set sail, taking (...) me some
servants, two carpenters, a (...) and an ingenius fellow, whom I called (...)
Jack-of-all-trades, with all kinds of necessaries, for the use of my subjects
on the island.

In this voyage we took on board the passengers and crew of a ship consumed by
fire, and set them on shore at Newfoundland, and soon after relieved another
ship, where all on board were perishing for want of provisions. On board this
last were three passengers, an old lady, her son, and a maid servant. They were
barely alive when we met with them, and the old lady died that night. The youth
and the maid went with us to my island, as did a young priest whom we took out
of the other ship.

As soon as we came in sight of land, (...) Friday if he knew where he was, he
(...) at it and cried, O yes, O there (...) and capered like a mad fellow, Now
(...) I, we shall see your father (...) looked dejected, and said, No, (...) He
long ago die. He much old (...)

When we went a shore, the (...) was the Spaniard, whose (...) had ordered that
none should (...) however, Friday saw his (...) like an arrow out of a bow.

I enquired of the Spaniard the situation of the island, who told me the three
barbarians, not contented with being moderately their masters, wanted to be
their murderers. The Spaniards who were brought over by Friday's other, worked
for them while they rambled ^out the island. The three Englishmen would not let
their two countrymen, who afterward came on shore, live with them; but they
being industrious fellows, built themselves two little huts at a distance,
cultivated some land, and had a little thriving farm. The three unnatural
rascals told them that the island was theirs by the gifts of the governor, and
that they should not build upon their land, without paying them rent. The two
honest men, as I call them for distinction, refused, upon which they set fire
to one of the huts; blows ensued, in which the two got the better of the three.

About this time a great number of savages of different nations landed and
fought a battle, in which thirty-two men were killed upon the spot. Three of
the routed party ran up into the woods, who being taken prisoners, they made
them their slaves. -- Their terror of the savage armies made them all friends
for some time; but about two years after, they were obliged again to disarm the
turbulent Englishmen.

They obliged them now to live in a different part of the island, and cultivate
the earth for themselves; when the mad rogues, weary of working, took the
canoe, and went among the savages to get them servants. The people treated them
very civilly, and in exchange for a knife, a hatchet, and six or seven bullets,
gave them eleven men, and five women, whom they had taken prisoners to ea^^

Before they came to the island, they (...) eight of their prisoners at
liberty. The Spaniards would not marry any of the woman, but each of the
Englishmen chose one of them for his wife, and afterward became civilized.

They had now another visit from the savages; they kept close while they were
in the island; but when they saw them embark, had the curiosity to go to the
place where they had been; they found three savages left fast asleep upon the
shore; they took them prisoners (...) but unfortunately one of them made his
escape and soon after returned with a large body or his countrymen. This fellow
had been kept at one of the huts of the honest Englishmen, and these two poor
men had but just time to remove their wives and children, before they saw their
houses in flames. However, they formed themselves in a body, and attacked them.
The savages were defeated with great loss, and they left the island.

About six months after this (...) were invaded by a most formidable (...)
ty^ight canoes full of savages, armed (...) and arrows. To oppose this force
(...) were seventeen Spaniards, five Englishmen (...) day, and six flaves. The
old Spaniard, (...) life I had saved, commanded, and Will Atkins one of the
three daring Englishmen, commanded under him.

The savages came forward like lions, and Atkins, with six men, were placed
behind thicket, and after suffering about fifty to pass (...), ordered three of
his men to fire among the ^^ickest of them. How many they killed they knew not;
but the poor wretches seemed frightened to the last degree. Then the other
three fired, and after them the first three in less than a minute. Had they now
retired as they were ordered, it would have been well; but staying to charge
again, some savages at a distance saw them, and surrounded them behind, wounded
Atkins himself, and killed an Englishman, a Spaniard, and a gallant Indian
slave.

Atkins was then obliged to retire as were also the Spaniards, who had behaved
with great gallantry, killing about fifty of their enemies. Atkins, though
wounded, would have had the governor march and charge them in a body; but the
Spaniard replied, Seignior Atkins let them alone till morning, when they will
be stiff with their wounds, and faint with loss of blood. That Is true,
Seignior, replied Atkins but so shall I too. It being a clear moonlight night,
they concluded to fall on them then. They attacked them in three parties, and
did great execution, killing in the two fights one hundred and eighty. The rest
with (...) got to the seaside, where their canoes lay. But as soon as they
defeated them, the commander senta party to destroy their boats, and they soon
made them unfit for swimming at sea. When they saw this, it made the poor
wretches quite desperate; they ran about the island -- trod the corn under
foot, and did (...) men inestimable damage, who were forced (...) hunt them
like wilc^^ ^easts. However, when they were reduced by hunger and slaughter to
thirty-seven in number, they submitted, and the Spaniards gave them food, and
permitted them to have a plantation.

This was the situation of the island at my arrival, with the addition of
twenty little children, for the women had all been fruitful. -- My coming was a
particular relief, because I furnished them with every thing they wanted.

When the Spaniards and English were all assembled, I told them that I came to
establish them there, and not to remove them; but before I delivered them the
stores I had brought I asked them one by one, if they could shake hands with
each other, and engage in a strict friendship and union of interest, so that
there might be no more misunderstanding among them. Will Atkins said very
frankly, they had met with afflictions enough to make them all sober, and
enemies enough to make them all friends; that for his part he would live and
die with them, and if I desired it would (...) she Spaniards' pardon (...) had
done them; but the Spaniards (...) behaved so well in sighting (...) (...)
enemies, that they wished never to have any separate interest. Upon these frank
declarations of friendship, we made a splendid east, all dining together. At
this feast we were innocently merry, and then I produced (...) cargo, and
presented the artificers I had ^^ught with me. I took on shore with me (...)
young man, and the maid, with the French priest we had saved out of the burning
ship. -- This priest, who was a very worthy man, talking to me one day about my
island, said that I ought to attempt the conversion of my savage Subjects, and
to have the women lawfully married to the men they lived with. I told him I
could not stay for the first, and as to the last I would speak to the men about
it. He then said, in a kind of ecstasy, if I would give him leave, he would stay
himself in the island to be their instructor, adding, he should be thankful if
he could be the happy instrument of con^er^ing these thirty-seven savages,
though he never set his foot off the island while he lived. Some time after
this I conversed with my English men about their wives; and Will Atkins (...)
spokes man for the rest, said, that if any man would carry him to England, and
make him should of the best ship in the navy, he would (...) go without
carrying his wife and children with him, and that he would be married the (...)
day (...) there was a clergyman upon the (...) told them that the French (...)
a minister, and that they should (...) the next morning; but before this pious
priest would perform the ceremony, he wanted to persuade the men to convert
their wives; but as they did not understand French nor he English, I was their
interpreter on both sides. He told them, that he was afraid th^^ were but
indifferent Christians, and (...) they would promise to teach their wives,
(...) would not marry them. Atkins said if I was to tell my wife of God and
Christ, and heaven or hell, and that wicked people went to the devil, she would
ask me where I intended to go? The priest said, Let him but repent himself, and
he will soon become an excellent preacher to his wife. The poor fellow seemed
much affected, and said, he would have some talk with her.

While he was gone, the priest married the other three couple. Will Atkins then
came in, and I began to talk with him, and asked him who his father was? He
answered, a better man than I shall ever be, he was a clergyman^punc; he would
have given me a good education, but like a beast, I despised all instruction. I
murdered my poor father; for my bad behavi^^r broke his heart. But how comes
this to touch you just now, Will? I replied. Why, said he, you set me to each
my wife, and she has been preaching such a sermon to me, as I shall (...)
forget. I told her God had appointed marriage; when she told me, I had no God
in (...) country, you no know him! No say, O to (...) No do good ting for him!
that no impossible I replied, marriage was right for all that Why said she, he
no makee good live? You tell me he is great, can makee kill when he will. Why
he no makee kill when he serve him. He, no know? Yes, I answered, he knows and
sees all things and hears us speak. What! returned she, he no hear you swear,
curse, speak are great damn! Yes, yes, he hears it all, I cried. Where be then
the muchee great power strong! He never makee kill, never angry when we do
wicked, then he no good himself, or no great able. Yes my dear, says I, he does
sometimes punish in this world, and many are cut off in their sins, and then go
to hell, where they are miserable for ever. He no makee you dead! she returned,
and you no tell him tank you for all that! I am an ungrateful dog that is true,
I returned. I wish you make me know God, she replied, I no makee him angry; I
no do bad wicked ting. I Will pray to God to teach you he replied; when she
returned. He give all ting, then he make me good (...) I wish to be good; he
spare me, no makee (...) me when I be good. Me take, think, (...) him to be
great God, me will tank (...) with you, my dear. Atkins said, that he could
here for bear no longer but prayed with his wife. In a word, the poor woman,
after some convers^^ion with the priest, in which I wa^ interpreter* desired to
be bant^ed (...) and she was afterward (...) my Jack of all trades was (...)
woman whom I had (...).



Soon after this, having by (...) authority, divided the lands (...) to prevent
quarreling, I left the (...) and not been from it three (...) great number of
(...) very nigh us, on which (...) them to put back, which they (...) charged
about five hundred arrows at us, and wounded one of our men. Being unwilling to
fire upon them, I ordered Friday to speak to them, when instantly they
discharged another (...) of arrows, that killed poor Friday, no, (...) man
being in their sight. Enraged at (...) loss of my old servant, I gave them a
broadside, which overset many of their canoes, and the rest fled so fast, that
in a little time there was not one of them to be seen.

We now steered to the East Indies ^^ayed a few days at the Cape of Good Hope,
where we took in fresh water, and failed to Madagascar, where the people
behaved with civility, and traded with our men; but one night, many of the crew
being on shore, and I in the boat, which was (...) anchor very near it, we
heard them fire their gun, and call aloud for the assistance of the boat. We
soon rowed to shore; but our men were in too much haste, and jumped into the
water; for they were pursued by three of four hundred of the natives. Seven of
them we took up, one was killed in the beginning of the fray, and one was left
behind. I found that this outrage proceeded from the fellow that was missing,
who endeavored to be rude (...) girl, that came to fell them milk. I was (...)
willing to go and leave the fellow is the lands of these barbarians, and
therefore the next (...) we went on shore. We (...) wisdom may (...) but could
not find (...) wanted (...) then for going (...) they (...) to seek for their
(...) Indian town, which was at a little distance* nor could I dissuade them
from this mad exploit. Their first design was only plunder; but finding their
comrade mangled, and hung on (...) tree, they were so enraged, that they set
(...) to the town in three places. My nephew; (...) was in the ship at a
distance, seeing the flam^^ came with thirteen men to the boat where was. He
was surprised to see me and the supercargo in the boat, with no more than two
sailors; but however he resolved to (...) after his men, and I went with him.
When we came near the town, we saw three women stark naked, and after them
sixteen or seventeen men flying in the greatest consternation, pursued by three
of our English butchers. My very soul shrunk within me, and I verily believe,
had our three English sailors continued their pursuit, I should have ordered
out men to fire upon them. Some of the poor flying wretches were miserably
burnt. We soon saw our boatswain, who was one of the forwarde^t in these acts
of (...). He set up a shout of triumph at seeing me: Captain, noble captain, I
am glad you are come, cried he, villains, hell hounds, dogs, we have (...) to
spare none of them; I Will kill as many of them as poor Tom had hairs -- (...)
cried I, what are you doing I, stand still, or you are a dead man this (...)
Why, si^, said he, if you want a reason (...) what we have done, look here; the
(...) me the poor fellow hanging (...) (...), with his throat cut. At this
fight, my nephew, and those we brought with us, were as enraged as those who
had been in the massacre, and all went together to finish their ^^oody work,
leaving with me only the supercargo, and two other men, with whom I walk^^oack
to the boats, and returned on board, ^^^ding the pinnace back to fetch the men,
who got on board in the morning, unhurt, except one of them being a little
scortched, and another having sprained his uncle.

I was extremely angry with my nephew, and all the men, about this affair; and
at last, on my frequently showing my abhorence of this massacre as I always
called it, they mutined. I was then on shore at Bengal, and one and all said,
they would leave the ship, if ^ever set my foot in it. My nephew, the captain,
was obliged to comply, but sent me money and necessaries.

I took lodging in the house of an English woman, where I got acquainted with a
merchant; we bought a ship, and went a voyage to China, which proved very
successful, and made another to the spice islands, with the like good fortune.
We then bought a large vessel; but this purchase had like to have cost (...)
our lives; for the people of whom we had bought her, having their captain
killed on shore, had can away with the ship, and turned pirates; this we heard
in the river Cambodia, which obliged (...) and we were pursued by (...) of the
East India company's coats, which we kept off with our guns, and made the best
of our way to Tonquin, under the utmost horror of being seized, (...) hanged as
pirates. Our ship having sprung a ^eak, we here laid her down to stop it. While
she was in this condition the natives not seeing our men came round (...) in
twelve large boats, supposing it to be (...) wreck; we were in an ill posture
for fighting; all hands being at work repairing the ship's bottom; we
immediately set about righting the ship; but before we could do it, they had
boarded our boat to make prisoners of some of our men. The first they seized
was an Englishman, who, instead of firing the musket he had in his hand, laid
it down in the boat, and seizing the fellow by the ears, he by main force
dashed his brains out against the gunnel; while a Dutchman, with the butt end
of the musket, knocked down five of them. In the mean time a fellow who
attended the carpenter with a kettle of boiling pitch, saluted the Pagans with
a ladle of the hot stuff, which the carpenter seeing, cried. Well done, Jack,
and dipping a mop into the boiling pitch, sprinkled it profusely over them
which made them howl most dreadfully; and another kettle of the same materials,
gave us a complete victory, without firing a gun.

We left this bay the next morning, and sailed to Nanquin, when to our great
joy (...) sold our vessel to a merchant of Japan, and afterward traveled with
a large caravan, through China, Siberia, and Muscovy, and arrived at London on
the 10th of January, 1705, having been absent from England, this last time, ten
years, and nine months. And now resolving to harrass myself no more, I am
preparing for a longer journey than all those; for I have lived seventy-two
years, ^^^equered with infinite variety, and have ^^en taught sufficiently the
value of retirement, and the blessing of ending my days in peace, and in the
true worship of my Almighty Deliverer.

FINIS.

