A FAITHFUL NARRATIVE OF THE WONDERFUL DEALINGS OF GOD, TOWARD POLLY DAVIS, OF
NEWGRANTHAM In the State of NEW HAMPSHIRE.

Taken from her own Mouth, and the Testimony of several Witnesses of
established and approved Veracity, who were present with her through the Scenes
of Distress, and that sudden and surprising Recovery, contained in the
following Account: taken as above, on the 12th day of September, in the year of
our LORD JESUS CHRIST, 1792.

By the Reverend Mr. BUROUGHS, of HANOVER and the Reverend Mr. EASTERBROOKS,
of NEWGRANTHAM.

BOSTON: Printed for, and sold by the Booksellers.

A FAITHFUL NARRATIVE, etc.
WITH regard to her temper of mind, her views of supernatural objects, and her
apprehensions with regard to the state of her soul toward GOD, she related as
follows:

From my youth up to my first awakening, I lived without GOD in the world, in a
stupefied forgetfulness of the obligations I had ever been under to him. and of
the solemn account I must one day render unto him of the deeds done in the
body, and of all my views and aims; till it pleased a sovereign GOD, two years
ago last July, to send his spirit to convince me of my sins, and lay open to my
view the awful danger that was impending over me. At which time my sins were
set in order before me, in such dreadful array, and the enmity of my heart, and
my native opposition to GOD, arising to my view, produced such distress and
agony of soul, as to overpower all sense of bodily pain, though I had for some
time before been exercised with severe distress in body, and was at this time
reduced to such a state of weakness, accompanied with continual wrecking pain,
that my life was almost despaired of from day to day.

It appears to me astonishing, upon every recollection, that the agony of my
mind did not disolve the frame of my nature, and how I could subsist under the
smart and agony of such a wounded spirit. It seems to me now, that had it
continued much longer, it must unavoidably have overpowered the remains of life
in me, and put a period to my existence on earth. But after having remained for
several days in this anguish of spirit, and dreadful bondage of soul, I found
relief in a manner most unexpected.

After I had laid myself down on my bed, my mind was led to a most delightful
and realizing view of the entire safety of trusting in the Divine Power and
Mercy; that there was such a fullness in GOD, of that which I needed for relief
and comfort, that my heart within me was constrained to rejoice, and could not
but roll my burden upon the Lord. At this time the words of the Psalmist, in
which he says, "Thou have brought my feet up out of the miry clay," etc. were
to my soul sweeter than honey or the honeycomb; and also the 16th hymn of the
third book of Dr. WATTS'S Hymns, was to my soul like a feast of fat things, and
of wine upon the lees. For some considerable time after this, I enjoyed, almost
without any intermission, a most sweet and refreshing sense of the beauty and
glory of divine objects. But not understanding the treachery of my own heart,
and the deceitfulness of sin, I was allured away by degrees, into a
forgetfulness of GOD, and from a close walk with him, through an apprehension
that I might innocently indulge myself in joining with young people in what is
usually termed civil merriment; and which I was induced to do more especially
and principally that I might not become an object of ridicule among them. But
before I was aware of the danger I had incurred by turning in such a manner to
vanity, I found that my heart was sensibly alienated from GOD, and my whole
soul was overwhelmed in guilt and darkness, and during the time of my
persisting to join with young company in what is termed civil recreation and
merriment, I felt those lashes and stings of conscience, which before this I
had ever been an utter stranger to. In this state of sensible guilt and
darkness, I continued like one forsaken of GOD, and shut out from his presence,
till the first day of last July, when I was seized with convulsions, which came
upon me with such violence, that it appeared to myself and others, that my
animal frame must soon yield to the force of the disorder, and my life soon
come to a period.

She continued in this situation till the night of the 11th of July, when she
was suddenly seized with a most violent cramp in her stomach, which was
accompanied with such agony and distress, that it appeared impossible for her
to live from one hour to another. In this situation she continued till the
following night, when the cramp in her stomach increased to such a degree, that
the constant wreck and agony of body cnnstrained her to a continual rolling and
tumbling on her bed, during which time she remained speechless, but appeared to
have her senses; for when any spoke, she would take them by the hand, and
intimate that she understood what they said. All hopes of life were now at an
end in the view of the family, and neighbors, who had come together at the
house on this occasion. But after having continued in this extremity of
distress till about midnight, she appeared to be more easy, upon which the
neighbors retired to their several homes. But soon after this she was suddenly
seized again, and supposed by the family to be dead; and accordingly the
neighbors were called together to the house, with the tidings that POLLY was
dead. Upon the arrival of the nearest neighbor, he observed that she lay
stretched out on her back, with her eyes about half open, and the sight of her
eye turned up into her head. She appeared at (...) entirely lifeless; but upon
trial, he (...) some motion in her pulse. After (...) for an hour or more, she
sudden (...) sigh, and opened her eyes and (...):

I have seen hell naked before (...) expected to plunge into it. The (...)
beyond all description. It was a region of most dismal darkness and smoke. In
the midst of these doleful shades, appeared to my view a person whom I knew;
and after having had a sight of him, he appeared to sink down into the darkness
and smoke of the horrible pit. I heard the groans of the damned spirits, which
indicated that agony and distress which is beyond all utterance or conception.
In the utmost extremity of danger, and when I appeared to myself to be ready to
plunge into the dismal gulf of darkness and misery, my Savior took me by the
hand, and told me to follow him. Upon which he led me through a place
resembling the most dismal miry clay; and from thence through a hideous
wilderness, after passing which every object which opened to my view appeared
to be clothed with an inexpressible beauty. My Savior addressed me, and said,
he had brought my feet out of the miry clay, and had set them upon a rock; and
he himself appeared to be the rock upon which my feet stood. I was admitted
into the heavenly world, where the Lord looked upon me and smiled, and told me
I must return and warn a wicked world for a little season; but should, in a
short time return again. He told me I should be much more sick than I had been,
but should wholly recover and be well for a season, I saw thousands of the
heavenly host clothed in that beauty which cannot be uttered; and heard those
songs of praise, the melody of which is beyond the power of language to describe

Upon her having declared to the bystanders these discoveries, she remained for
the space of three days and three nights without food or sleep during the whole
of which time she was almost incessantly employed in praying and, praising GOD,
and warning others to prepare for death. After this she gradually recovered to
such a degree of health, as to be able to walk about the house; and, at times,
to walk abroad. In this space she frequently said that she should be much
sicker than ever she had been; but should certainly reeover to a better state
of health than she had enjoyed for four years past, She frequently pointed out
the week in which she should be taken sick, and reduced to such a state of
extreme weakness and distress; and accordingly on Friday of the same week she
had mentioned, (which was the 27th of July) she was suddenly seized with a most
violent cramp convulsion, which was soon accompanied with a profuse discharge
of blood from her stomach; in which situation she continued, till the 13th of
August; during which time she was reduced apparently to the last extremity, and
all visible prospect of the possibility of her living was now at an end.

For the space of sixteen days she was not known to turn herself in the bed,
except once. From Monday night to the Saturday night following, she remained
entirely without food or drink, except for once she took down a little water;
and upon her having for once swallowed a morsel of food, her stomach
immediately rejected it. She was so weak, that it was with difficulty, and very
seldom, she could make any one understand her by whispering in their ear. On
Saturday she was thought to be dying; but as she had all along intimated to
those about her that she should certainly recover, so she now continued to
intimate the same, by signs, to the bystanders. In this situation she continued
till about eight o'clock, in the evening; at which time, to the surprise of the
bystanders, she spoke out in plain and audible words, and said, "Stand by, and
let me get up" Immediately upon which she sprang up from her bed, and walked
the room with an astonishing nimbleness and alacrity, praising God, and calling
on the bystanders to join with her, to praise that blessed Savior, who had
appeared for her in that wonderful manner. But they stood like persons
overwhelmed In astonishment, to see the wonders of GOD'S power displayed in
such a manner, in restoring one to health and strength in a moment, who had
been reduced to so low a state by extreme sickness. Upon this recovery, she
related that she saw one standing in white, who said to her, "If you will get
up, you shall be able to walk; and you must go up to SCOTT'S;" (which was one
mile distant from her house) and accordingly that evening she rode to Capt.
SCOTT'S and tarried some hours, and returned home; and having retired to bed a
little after daybreak, she arose early on the morning, and before sunrise was
on her way to meeting at Cornish, to the distance of five miles; from whence
she returned home on the same day.

From the time of her recovery, she has enjoyed hitherto a much better state of
health, than for four years past; and is now as well as is usual for a female
of a delicate constitution; and remains an evident monument of the Divine Power
and Goodness.

The above mentioned POLLY DAVIS requests that her most affectionate love may
be presented to every reader; and asks leave to testify, "That a sense of GOD'S
love in the heart is better than wine: and that all things which can be
desired, are not to be compared to it. Under a sense of this, she asks liberty
to call upon every reader to come and taste that the LORD is gracious; and that
her fellow youth, in speical, would remember him in their early days, and
regard his glory as their governing object. She does entreat them, in special,
to forsake the vanities of the world and pride of life: And if they would walk
with GOD, so as to enjoy the light of his countenance, and have comfort in
their souls, they do sacredly abstain from, and forever abandon, that kind of
foolish talking and jesting, and that recreation and merriment, which generally
passes, even amongst many professors of religion, for civil and innocent. --
She certainly knows, by what she has found upon trial, that these things, in
their operation, will be like wormwood and gall to the soul.

Under a sense that we are called with an high and holy calling, she
affectionately entreats every one to consider, what manner of persons we ought
to be, in all holy conversation and godliness; looking for, and hastening unto
the day of GOD, that we may be found of him in peace at his appearing, and
finally be received into his eternal kingdom.

FINIS.

