AN HISTORICAL ACCOUNT OF THE CLIMATES AND DISEASES OF THE UNITED STATES OF
AMERICA; AND OF THE REMEDIES AND METHODS OF TREATMENT, WHICH HAVE BEEN FOUND
MOST USEFUL AND EFFICACIOUS, PARTICULARLY IN THOSE DISEASES WHICH DEPEND UPON
CLIMATE AND SITUATION.

COLLECTED PRINCIPALLY FROM PERSONAL OBSERVATION, AND THE COMMUNICATIONS OF
PHYSICIANS OF TALENTS AND EXPERIENCE, RESIDING IN THE SEVERAL STATES.

BY WILLIAM CURRIE, Fellow of the College of Physicians of Philadelphia.

Nullius addictus jurare in verba magistri. -- Hor. PHILADELPHIA: PRINTED BY T.
DOBSON, AT THE STONE-HOUSE, No. 41, SOUTH SECOND-STREET.

M,DCC,XCII.

TO JOHN REDMAN, M. D. PRESIDENT OF THE COLLEGE OF PHYSICIANS OF PHILADELPHIA,
etc.
Worthy Sir,
DESIROUS of paying my respects to a man distinguished for liberality of
sentiment, and consistency of conduct, as well as for professional talents, and
encouraged by the indulgence you have shown to such literary productions as
have utility and the interests of the community for their object, I have
ventured to inscribe the following work to you: and I request you to do me the
honor of accepting it, not as a compliment of mere civility, but as a tribute
of gratitude and attention, to which you are justly entitled from

Your much obliged and Very humble servant, THE AUTHOR.
Philadelphia, Dec. 29, 1791.
INTRODUCTION.
I WAS induced to undertake the troublesome and difficult task of collecting
and publishing a concise and faithful account of the Climates and Diseases of
the United States of America, by a desire of removing the trouble and
inconvenience which result from accommodating the rules of practice and forms
of prescription made in other countries to the diseases which occur in this,
where the climate, soil, and modes of living of the inhabitants, and of course
their constitutions, and the semieology of diseases, even of the same genus,
are in many respects different; and by a presumption, that such an account
might contribute in some measure to improve the treatment of epidemics,
especially in this country.

WITH these objects in view, I opened a correspondence with several physicians
of talents and experience residing in the several states, and with their
assistance, joined to my own personal observations, and such information as I
could collect from the few books which contain any thing relative to the
subject, have composed the following pages; in which I have endeavored to
exhibit, a synopsis or general view of the situation and climate of each state;
and of those diseases in particular which depend upon climate and situation,
(with occasional remarks on others); and an account of the remedies and methods
of treatment which have been found most uniformly successful.

AS health is a blessing which enhances the value of every enjoyment, and long
life the natural desire of all mankind, I have endeavored to point out the
circumstances most favorable thereto, as well as those productive of disease
and death. For this purpose I have inserted a number of meteorological tables
and bills of mortality.

AS climate and situation have a remarkable influence upon the constitution and
health, as well as upon the complexion and figure of mankind, and as the
temperature of climate depends upon various circumstances besides latitude, or
proximity to the equator; I have been at some pains in endeavoring to show
what those circumstances are, the causes on which they depend, and the means by
which they may be altered.

IN the investigation of the nature and causes of diseases, and in determining
the effects of remedies, I have been uniformly governed by actual experience,
never by hypothesis or plausible conjectures, being convinced that for want of
this precaution, the schools of physic have successively fallen into the most
incongruous and palpable errors, and the greatest masters of reasoning have
proved the most unsuccessful interpreters of nature's laws.

BUT I am by no means an advocate for the exclusion of reasoning or theory
(founded on cautious and judicious induction) from medical pursuits, as has
unfortunately of late become too much the fashion.

FOR without reasoning, it would be impossible to acquire a knowledge of the
proximate causes of diseases, or the particular conditions of the system on
which the symptoms of diseases depend.

AND as there are several diseases of a different nature, and produced by
causes entirely different in their operation, which have many symptoms in
common; the practitioner who is not possessed of this knowledge, must
inevitably commit many fatal mistakes.

BUT this knowledge so indispensibly necessary to enable a physician to
distinguish one species of disease from another, as well as to discover the
indications he ought to pursue in the cure, can only be acquired, (after a
previous acquaintance with the structure, connection of parts, and economy of
the human body in a sound and healthy state) by much study and reflection, and
by the strictest enquiry into the condition of the several functions of the
body in disease.

WHOEVER therefore undertakes the cure of diseases without this knowledge is an
empiric, and merits the contempt and detestation of every one who values the
lives and safety of his fellow creatures; for "though he may kill by license,
he can only cure by chance."

THE annals of every age, and the bills of mortality of every country, would,
if unveiled, produce proofs as strong as those of Holy Writ, that more lives
have been destroyed by the villainy of quacks, and the ignorance and
officiousness of nostrum-mongers, than by disease, owing to the credulity of
the ignorant, and the remissness of government: I am, therefore, much surprised
that our enlightened legislatures (whose duty it is to protect the lives as
well as the privileges and property of those whom ignorance or want of
information renders liable to imposition) have never yet made provision to
prevent the like deplorable effects in this country.

THE difficulty of obtaining authentic and satisfactory information on a
subject never before attempted in America, has obliged me to leave many parts
mutilated and imperfect: and want of sufficient leisure has prevented me from
paying requisite attention to systematic arrangement; but as the work has some
claim to originality, abounds with a number of interesting facts, and is
intended as an introduction to a complete system of practice, (now ready for
the press,) exhibiting all the latest and most important discoveries which have
been made in medicine, I trust it will meet with that candor and indulgence to
which the best intentions are entitled.

Philadelphia, Dec. 29, 1791.
AN HISTORICAL ACCOUNT OF THE CLIMATES AND DISEASES OF THE UNITED STATES OF
AMERICA.
An ACCOUNT of the DISEASES which occur in the several States of NEW ENGLAND,
viz. NEW HAMPSHIRE, MASSACHUSETTS, RHODE ISLAND and CONNECTICUT.
"THE Diseases which occur in different parts of these states in the Winter and
Spring Seasons among the farmers and mechanics who reside at a distance from
the larger trading cities and towns, are principally the Catarrh -- Quinsy --
Pleurisy -- Rheumatism -- Toothache -- Inflammation of the Intestines, or of
the Peritonaeum -- Hectic fevers from internal Abscesses -- Phlegmons --
Erysipelas -- Opthalmia, or Sore Eyes -- Spitting of Blood -- Bleeding at the
Nose -- Piles -- and sometimes, but rarely, the Scurvy, in families that live
slovenly and eat nothing but salt meat and stale butter."

"THE greatest number of the disorders which have been enumerated are found to
be less frequent in Winter than in the Spring."

THE winds which prevail during the greatest part of Winter, from the north and
north west, though they are severe and piercing cold, occasioned by the great
body of snow which covers the immense mountains over which they pass, instead
of producing diseases, (by whatever mode of operation cold air acts upon animal
bodies,) give vigor to the constitutions, and a freshness and bloom to the
complexion of the inhabitants, unknown in southern climates.

"IN the early part of the Spring, 'while the season as yet is unconfirmed, and
often at eve resumes the chilly blast,' those diseases are more frequent, but
even then they are commonly the effect of imprudent exposure to cold and rainy
weather, getting the feet wet, sitting on the damp ground, sleeping in damp
sheets, neglecting to change wet clothes after exposure to the rain, etc. etc.
or from frequent excesses or debauches in strong liquor, especially of fresh
distilled rum."

"THE Smallpox, which is an exotic disease, depending on specific infection,
though once permitted, is not allowed at present to be communicated by
inoculation in these states Nor in any of the states, except New York,
New Jersey, Pennsylvania, Delaware and South Carolina.
. Whenever it happens to appear in the natural way, all intercourse is avoided
with the infected, except by those who have had the disease; and these last are
excluded from all society after their attendance on the sick, till they have
performed quarentine, after the manner of those in other countries who have
been infected with the Plague."

"THE diseases which occur in the summer and autumnal seasons are very few and
rare. Those most commonly met with on high and dry situations, are, Phrenitis
from Insolation, Diarrhoeas, Choleras, a species of fever attended with
symptoms of great debility, without being infectious or accompanied with any
symptom indicative of inflammatory Diathesis. -- This fever is confined to
persons who have been over-fatigued by hard labor during the hot weather."

"IN low marshy situations, where there is much stagnant water, and which are
subject to great inundations from the Spring freshes, intermittents sometimes
occur; and when the Summers have been remarkably hot and dry, Remittents,
accompanied with bilious symptoms, have frequently been observed to prevail --
In the same situations and under apparently similar circumstances, the
Dysentery also sometimes occurs, but more particularly among those who live on
vegetable diet and watery drinks."

"IN the populous city of Boston, where people of different occupations and
professions are collected together, the catalogue of diseases is greater, and
they are more complex and difficult to cure." -- This is the case in all large
cities where the houses are built close together, and the occupations of the
inhabitants are unfavourable to exercise; and the more so, as they recede from
habits of temperance; especially where luxury and fashion take the lead of
reason and common sense.

THE farmer while he tames the stubborn soil and forces it to reward his
labors, insensibly acquires vigor of body and resolution of mind, and at the
same time respires a salubrious air; but manufacturers and mechanics, confined
to sedentary occupations, or condemned to vegetate in cellars and close
apartments, breathe infection, and their minds become contracted as well as
their lives abridged.

IN addition to the diseases already mentioned, the following may be numbered
as occurring occasionally, though they can not be ascribed to any peculiarity
of climate, soil, or local situation.

"CYNANCHE Maligna, or Putrid Quinsy, Scarlatina Anginosa -- Hepatitis --
Nephritis -- Podagra, or Gout -- Phthisis Pulmonalis, (very frequent) --
Epilepsy -- Apoplexy -- Palsy -- Asthma -- Hooping Cough -- Colic -- Insanity
-- Melancholy -- all the varieties of Dropsy -- Hypochondria -- Hysteria --
Scrophula, etc."

AS the causes of these will be explained hereafter, I shall only observe in
this place, that though a course of intemperance never fails of being
destructive to health in a longer or shorter time, it is much slower in
producing its effects in these northern states than in those to the southward
-- Many have been known to live in a high and dry situation in the daily habit
of intoxication to old age; and those called soakers or tiplers, who drink a
pint or two of rum, or half a gallon or a gallon of cider per day, and make use
of moderate exercise, are seldom known to be troubled with any complaint, but
that of hard times and scarcity of money. But the vice of drunkenness does not
predominate in this country, as Montesquieu observes it does through others, in
proportion to the coldness of the climate. Vide Spirit of Laws, Book 14th.

"IN the spring season the inhabitants of Boston are much subject to catarrhal
affections or coughs, owing to the coldness and moisture of the winds which
prevail there at this season. These begin to rise about ten o'clock, A. M. and
continue to blow till near sunset."

DOCTOR Isaac Senter, in a letter to the author, dated Newport Newport and
Providence are the two principal towns in this state: The former lies in
latitude 41, 35; contains 1000 houses, chiefly of wood, and 5530 inhabitants.
This island is 68 miles in length and 40 in breadth. Providence about 30 miles
N. W. of Newport -- contains 700 houses.
, (Rhode Island) Feb. 19th, 1791, informs him that The epidemics, as well as
most of the infectious diseases which visit this island, differ in some
respects very considerably from the same complaints in the other sea ports of
New England -- The Dysentery is not only less frequent here, but is generally
much less mortal. The remitting fevers of the summer and autumn are seldom
fatal, and the Putrid Fever, though rarely a native of this island, generally
occurs in cold weather.

THE infectious diseases which I have seen here, all except the smallpox, are
more mild than elsewhere.

SINCE my remembrance the genuine Intermitting Fever, was very common in
different parts of the inland country of New England; but for twenty years past
has seldom been met with any where east of NewYork.

DR. Senter farther remarks, That the reigning epidemics of the different
seasons in New England, are very similar, and the Intermitting Fever is not the
only disease that has become very rare within these last twenty years.

PEOPLE in this state are frequently affected with the Diarrhoea or Cholera,
after having used violent exertions in the harvest field, exposed to the
insufferable blaze of the sun, after they have eaten too freely of vegetable
substances and fresh meats, and have drank such drinks as have not been
sufficiently fermented.

THE moderate use of rum at such a time has been found serviceable, as it
restrains fermentation and prevents debility or relaxation. It also prevents
the ill effects which are frequently occasioned by drinking cold water when the
body is heated by exercise, and debilitated by the action of excessive heat.

IN this last circumstance, laudanum in small doses mixed with hot toddy or
strong tea, and frequently resumed, is a sovereign remedy.

THOUGH Connecticut appears to be subject to nearly equal degrees of the
extremes of cold and heat with Massachusetts and NewHampshire, and to more
frequent and sudden changes of weather, it appears from its almost incredibly
rapid increase of population to be more healthy than either of them -- but if
the reports of travelers are to be credited, it is less so than Rhode Island,
which is emphatically called the Garden of Eden.

THE heats in summer, which are extreme in other parts of New England, are
allayed in Rhode Island, by the cool and refreshing breezes from the sea. This
is to be understood of those parts which approach the sea coast -- farther back
in the country the sea breezes have less effect, and the weather is
consequently less variable. In winter, however, they pay dearly for these
advantages from exposure to the N. W. wind, the tyrant of this country, which
renders this island bleak and uncomfortable.

DR. Foulke, in a discourse which he read lately before the American
Philosophical Society observes, that, "in other countries, men are divided,
according to their wealth or indigence, into three classes. The opulent, the
middling, and the poor; the idleness, luxuries, and debaucheries of the first,
and the misery, and too frequent intemperance of the last, destroy a greater
proportion of these two; the intermediate class is below those indulgences
which prove fatal to the rich, and above those sufferings to which the
unfortunate poor fall victims -- this is therefore the happiest division of the
three: Of the rich and poor, North America furnishes a much smaller proportion
than any other district of the known world. In Connecticut particularly the
distribution of wealth and its concomitants is more equal than elsewhere; and
therefore, as far as excess or want of wealth may prove destructive or salutary
to life, the inhabitants of this state may plead exemption from disease
Connecticut is the most populous in proportion to its extent, of any of the
thirteen states. It is laid out in small farms, from 50 to 3 or 400 acres each,
which are held by the farmers in ^ee simple; and are generally cultivated as
well as the nature of the soil will admit, and the whole state resembles a well
cultivated garden. With that degree of industry which contributes to happiness,
it produces the necessaries and conveniences of life in great plenty. In 1756
the number of inhabitants in this state was 130, 611 -- in 1774 there were 197,
856 -- The increase in 18 years was 67, 245. From 1774 to 1782, the increase
was only 11, 294. This comparatively small increase was owing to the
destructive effects of the war, and to the numerous emigrations to Vermont and
other states. The inhabitants of all the states of New England are almost all
of English descent. There are no Dutch, French or Germans, and very few Scotch
or Irish among them.
."

The following Account of the Ages of different Persons who died in
Connecticut, between the years 1771 and 1777, and from 1777 to 1782, when
compared with those of other States and Countries, will serve to show the
advantages which its Inhabitants enjoy in point of health and longevity over
most others.
FROM January 1st, 1771, to January 1st, 1777, 239 persons died at Milford, of
which 33, or about one-seventh part were upwards of 70 years old; and 84, or
about one-third part of the whole, were under 10 years.

FROM January 1st, 1777, to June 3d, 1782, died at Milford, 417 persons; of
which 31, or about one-thirteenth part of the whole number, were 80 years old
and upwards.

OTHER calculations of a similar kind, made in different parts of the state
from the bills of mortality, confirm the justness of the above proportion. --
See the Memoirs of the American Academy of Arts and Sciences for more accurate
bills of mortality, communicated by professor Wigglesworth, etc.

The following Observations on the Weather and Diseases at Salem Salem is a sea
port town, containing about 9000 inhabitants; in a flat situation, with a sandy
soil, remote from marshy grounds or stagnant water.
, in Essex county, and state of Massachusetts, five leagues N. E. of Boston,
for the year 1786, are extracted from a communication by Edward Augustus
Holyoke, M. D. to the Massachusetts Medical Society.
JANUARY, 1786.
Day. abroad. in house. Thermometer. highest 29th 46 44 At noon. lowest 18th 5
5 12

THE most common disorders this month, (which was a healthy one) were bad
Coughs, Fevers, chiefly Ephemeras, and those of a mild and moderate kind,
Odontalgiae, Rheumatisms; besides a few instances of Cynanchae Malignae or,
more probably, Scarlitina Anginosa, etc.

FEBRUARY.
Day. abroad. in house. Thermometer. highest 10th 47 45 At noon. lowest 1st 22
12 27

No remarkable variation of the Barometer -- Wind generally N. W. and S. W. --
seldom easterly -- great quantities of snow -- weather generally moderate.

THIS month very healthy.

A FEW patients with Coughs, some Hectical cases; Pleurisies; a few Asthmatics,
and two instances of fatal Ileus.

MARCH.
Day. abroad. in house. Thermometer. highest 26th 78 64 At noon. lowest 11th 31
33

WIND from N. W. and frequently high and blustering, and weather mostly very
cold; but on the 25th and 26th remarkably warm, and the air smoky and hazy.

DISEASES this month similar to those of February, but more numerous. The
Pertussis made its appearance about the middle of this month.

APRIL.
Day. abroad. in house. Thermometer. highest 28th 63 56 At noon. lowest 2d 30
33

Barometer remarkably stationary.

ON the 1st and 2d a violent snow storm, from N. E.

DIEASES.

PERTUSSIS, epidemical amongst children; a few adults also affected with it.
Bad Coughs brought on by the long continuance of damp and raw weather, a number
of which terminated in Phthisis; some other Pulmonic affections, and a few
Rheumatisms; and many with Abscesses both internal and external.

MAY.
Day. abroad. in house. Thermometer. highest 27th 71 63 At noon. lowest 6th 48
52

ON the 6th and 7th a storm from N. E. with much rain -- Very few pleasant
days, but much cold and wet, with almost constant easterly winds.

DISEASES.

BAD Coughs very frequent, as well as Pneumonic and Rheumatic complaints;
Catarrhs; patients subject to Epilepsy more frequently affected than usual.

THE generality of weather cold and cloudy* with the wind almost constantly
easterly.

In the years 1781, 1782, and 1783, the thermometer was higher in June than any
other month of the year: But the highest that it was observed to rise at any
time in either of those last mentioned years was 89 during the hottest part of
the day. Memoirs of the American Academy of Arts and Sciences.
JUNE.
Day. abroad. in house. Thermometer. highest 4th 93 85 At noon. lowest 15th 71
10 65

Barometer very stationary.

No considerable rains, but showers on six several days. A little thunder on
four days. Moderate winds, chiefly between N. W. and S. W. -- about a third of
the month fine agreeable warm weather -- The rest of the month rather damp,
cool, and unpleasant.

DISEASES.

HECTICAL cases, and bad Coughs, numerous. Several cases of Pleurisy and
Rheumatism -- Diarrhoeas numerous, owing perhaps to changing customary clothing.

JULY.
Day. abroad. in house. Thermometer. highest 16th 91 5 85 At noon. lowest 18th
60 64

WINDS most prevalent from the west, though frequently from the east -- two or
three sultry dog days -- about one-third of the month the air was damp, and the
winds blew from the eastward -- Two remarkable changes from hot to cold, one on
the 12th, the thermometer at 4 o'clock, P. M. at 82, and at 7 the same evening
at 59 and on the 27th at noon 89, and at 10 o'clock, P. M. down to 64.

DISEASES

OF the Alimentary Canal, Diarrhoea, Dyspepsia, and Gastrodynioe very rife --
Some Dysenteries and Choleras -- a few with Pleurodine -- Apthae in children --
Diseases of various species, and very numerous.

AUGUST.
Day. abroad. in house. Thermometer. highest 6th 88 84 At noon. lowest 31st 62
60

RAIN on five days, and a few slight showers besides -- two days foggy -- many
easterly winds, though more frequent westerly ones, but none high -- much damp
weather -- on the whole unusually cool.

DIEASES.

DYSPEPSIA and Diarrhoea most common; a few cases of Pleurisy, and some of slow
continued Fever, (commonly called the long Fever), the same as that described
by Huxham under the title of Slow Nervous Fever, and appears to have been
occasioned by excessive fatigue, and the application of highly stimulant powers
to bodies affected with Nervous Diathesis, i. e. in a defective state of tone.

SEPTEMBER.
Day. abroad. in house. Thermometer. highest 2d 30th 71 30 74 At noon. lowest
24th 48 59

PREVAILING winds from the westward, though frequently interrupted by easterly
breezes, but no brisk gales; much dry agreeable weather.

DISEASES.

THE variation of the barometer for six months past, but small.

FEVERS, for the most part, of a mild, low kind, very numerous: none of which
however, ended fatally; a few Pleurisies; Dysenteries frequent; Hemoptyses, etc.

OCTOBER.
Day. abroad. in house. Thermometer. highest 1st 83 76 At noon. lowest 30th 40
43

Two or three inches of snow fell on the 30th. Winds prevailed chiefly from S.
W. W. and N. W.

DISEASES.

FEVERS, beginning with Pleuritic symptoms, degenerated into those of the low
Nervous type, and in some cases continued for three, four, or five weeks.
Dysenteries were common, but generally terminated favorably. Pertussis
disappeared, after having continued seven or eight months.

NOVEMBER.
Day. abroad. in house. Thermometer. highest 7th 59 55 At noon. lowest 28th 10

No storms or high winds, which is remarkable as there are generally more in
this month than in any other -- some snow on four days -- Winds from S. W. W.
and N. W. above two-third of the month -- weather very variable though more
than a third fair and dry.

DISEASES

ALL of an inflammatory species, but not numerous; a few with Cholerae
Dysenteri^ae, which is remarkable so late in the year.

DECEMBER.
Day. abroad. in house. Thermometer. highest 31st 45 43 At noon. lowest 12th 17
20

Two very violent storms at E. N. E. in which an immense quantity of snow fell,
viz. on the 4th and 5th, and on the 9th and 10th. Winds from the westward much
the greatest part of the month, and not very high.

DISEASES.

THIS month was remarkably heal by; few or no febrile disorders, and not many
Phlegmasiae.

To an account of the diseases to which we are incident in this place (Salem)
at the present day, it may (...) b^ improper to subjoin a few words respecting
such as seldom or never do happen, and of such as were frequent formerly, but
seldom or never make their appearance here at present.

THE first I shall mention is the Rickets. This disease was formerly (about
thirty-five or forty years ago) pretty common here, and more especially among
negro children, as I very well remember: but is now become so rare that I have
not seen it more than three or four times, these eight or ten years, according
to the best of my remembrance.

DR. Glisson and others, the first writers on Rickets, inform us, that it first
made its appearance about thirty years before they wrote, i. e. about the year
1620, in the counties of Dorset and Somerset, in Great Britain; which, if true,
shows it to be of a very modern date; and from a chart of the fatal diseases,
etc. in London, collected and published by Dr. William Black, it appears, that
i^ has been gradually declining in that city these seventy or eighty years
past; particularly from 1702 to 1717, (a period of fifteen years) there died of
the Rickets 3916; and that from 1762 to 1777, (another period of the same
length) there died only 104. All these observations seem to indicate an utter
extinction of this scourge of infants.

ANOTHER is the ^he Colica Pictonum, or Dry Belly-Ach, as it was commonly
called* This painful and distressing complain^, till about twenty-four or
twenty-six years ago, was so frequent, that it was no uncommon thing to have
six or eight patients, or more ill of it in a winter, the season in which i^
mostly prevailed, though it was not confined to cold weather: But now, for
these twelve or fifteen years back, I imagine there have not been five persons
ill of it in this town, if we except a very few who dealt in lead, and who it
was evident derived their disease from that source, such as painters, etc.

THIS species of Colic was formerly attributed to hard drinking; and it is
certain that persons addicted to spirituous liquors were generally the subjects
of it; but its rare appearance now cannot be owing to an increase of
temperance, for I fear it is a melancholy that intemperance is as prevalent at
this period as it has been these forty years.

QUERY? Can this difference be accounted for from the very general disuse of
pewter? Formerly the most usual drinking vessel in the houses of the poorer
classes of people, was a pewter quart-pot, and those made use of in eating,
such as plates, porringers, etc. were of the same material; which, when not
frequently scowered are apt to be converted into ceruss. But the use of pewter
is now in general disuse, and by the revolution of fashion* its place is
supplied by more modish stone ware, called Queen's-Ware.

BOTH the last mentioned diseases, I am informed, are more rare in some of the
neighboring towns than they are in this: as to others I have no information;
nor how the case is in the more distant parts of the country.

PERHAPS it would be interesting to enqui^^, what diseases have become extinct,
or very rare among us, and what new ones have succeeded in their room.

WE see no Intermitting Fevers generated here, though 35 or 40 years ago they
sometimes occurred.

TYPHUS, both mitior and gravior of Dr. Cullen, were frequent with us from 25
to 35 years ago, especially in Autumn, and proved fatal to many in the vigor
and prime of life; it is now comparatively very rare.

SCURVY is a disease we very seldom meet with: Sailors sometimes return from
sea with it, and for the most part recover very soon; but I have never met with
more than a very few instances of it generated here at home, in the course of
my practice.

PUERPERAL Fever very seldom occurs here.

I SHALL conclude with observing, what I suppose must have been observed by all
the elder Practitioners among us, that acute diseases are much less frequent
among us in this town, as well as much less fatal than formerly; and that
Chronic diseases, particularly Phthisis Pulmonalis, have taken their place; and
although our species descend to the grave by paths a little different from the
old ones, yet they arrive at it no faster than formerly, as our bills of
mortality, in proportion to our numbers, are by no means increased.

BILL of MORTALITY, for the Town of SALEM, for the year 1786.
DEATHS.
January, 7 February, 12 March, 13 April, 13 May, 17 June, 12 July, 12 August,
12 September, 12 October, 10 November, 6 December, 13 Total, DISEASES.
Inflammatory Fever, 2 Slow Nervous Fever, 4 Mixed Fever, 5 Hydrocephalic
Fever, 1 Anomalous Fever, 5 Inflammatory Quinsy, 1 Putrid Quinsy, 3
Inflammation in the Thorax, 4 Angina Pectoris, 1 Inflammation in the Abdomen, 1
Empiema, 1 Cholera Morbus, 2 Cholera Dysenterica, 9 Dysenteria, 3 Diarrhoea, 2
Lienteria, 2 Colic, viz. Ileus, 2 Spasmodic, 1 Calculi, 1 Trismus Infantum, 1
Convulsion 3 Palsy, 2 Insanity, 1 Asthma, 1 Hooping Cough, 13 Dropsy, viz.
Anasarca, 2 Ascites, 2 Pulmonary Consumption, 20 Hectical Decay, 7 Atrophy, 6
Cancer, 1 Worms, 2 Apthae, 2 Still-Born, 6 Casualties, viz. Murdered, 1
Executed, 1 Drowned, 1 Diseases unknown, 17 Total, 139


OF which ten were infants, within the month.

FROM other bills of mortality published in the Memoirs of the American Academy
of Arts and Sciences, it appears that the number of births exceeds that of the
deaths in the proportion of two to one.

METEOROLOGICAL OBSERVATIONS, Made at BOSTON, A. D. 1790.
For JANUARY.
THERMOMETER. Days. 7 A.M. 1 P.M. On the 6th the mercury was down at 5. It had
been as high as 52 at 1 P.M. only two days before, viz. on the 4th. 1st. 39 38
5 15th. 25 26 28th. 38 32 For FEBRUARY.
THERMOMETER. Days. 7 A.M. 1 P.M. On the 10th the thermometer was down to 7
decimals above 0 -- at 7 A.M. which was the lowest, and on the 25th it was as
high as 39 at the same time of day. 1st. 27 36 15th. 30 44 30th. 18 5 36 For
MARCH.
THERMOMETER. Days. 7 A.M. 1 P.M. The lowest this month was on the 9th, when
the mercury was only two degrees above 0. The highest was 50, on the 6th. 1st.
19 31 5 15th. 32 36 5 30th. 32 42 5 For APRIL.
THERMOMETER. Days. 7 A.M. 1 P.M. Highest degree of heat this month was 70 at 1
o'clock, P.M. on the 4th day. The lowest was 27 on the 8th. 1st. 32 5 50 15th.
41 43 30th. 42 5 58 For MAY.
THERMOMETER. Days. 7 A.M. 1 P.M. The highest degree of heat this month, at 1
o'clock P.M. was 80 on the 10th. The lowest was 41 on the 6th. 1st. 49 0 67
15th. 52 59 30th. 52 64 For JUNE.
THERMOMETER. Days. 7 A.M. 1 P.M. Highest was 88 on the 19th, 1 P.M. Lowest 55
on the 4th, 8 A.M. 1st. 56 65 5 15th. 68 78 30th. 63 71 For JULY.
THERMOMETER. Days. 7 A.M. 1 P.M. Highest degree of heat 92, at 10' clock P.M.
on the 7th. Lowest at 8 A.M. 58 on the 20th. 1st. 69 75 15th. 69 83 30th. 67 5
80 For AUGUST.
THERMOMETER. Days. 7 A.M. 1 P.M. Highest degree 92 on the 16th, at 1 P.M.
Lowest 53, at 8 A.M. on the 24th. 1st. 63 70 15th. 72 76 30th. 64 84 For
SEPTEMBER.
THERMOMETER. Days. 7 A.M. 1 P.M. Highest 85 at 1 P.M. on the 2d. Lowest 39, at
8 A.M. on 24th. 1st. 58 70 15th. 55 68 30th. 53 56 For OCTOBER.
THERMOMETER. Days. 7 A.M. 1 P.M. Highest degree of heat 74 on the 6th 1 P.M.
Lowest 26, on 27th 8 A.M. 1st. 46 62 15th. 50 60 30th. 49 5 66 For NOVEMBER.
THERMOMETER. Days. 7 A.M. 1 P.M. Highest degree of heat on the 1st 60. Lowest
on the 26th, 15. Winds amazingly variable. 1st. 35 60 15th. 45 58 30th. 24 5 33
For DECEMBER.
THERMOMETER. Days. 7 A.M. 1 P.M. Highest degree of heat was 40 a^ P.M. on the
11th. Lowest 2 de^^mals above 0, on 8th, 9th, and 18th 1st. 17 35 15th. 15 22 5
30th. 7 5 13 At 9 at night below 0.

REMARKS.
IN New Hampshire, which is situated between the 42 and 45 of north latitude
the land near the sea is generally low; but farther in the country it rises
into hills and in some parts, is very mountainous. The highest part of a ridge
of mountains in it, which extend N. E. and S. W. are called the White
Mountains. These mountains are estimated to be 9000 feet above the level of the
sea, and are covered with snow and ice nine or ten months in the year, during
which time they exhibit that white appearance, from whence they have derived
their name. From their summit is exhibited an amazing view, extending 60 or 70
miles in every direction -- And though more than 70 miles within land they may
be discerned many leagues off at sea, from whence they appear like an exceeding
bright cloud in the horizon. Three of the largest rivers in New England receive
a great part of their waters from these mountains.

THE ground is generally covered with snow the greatest part of the winter:
Rain falls but seldom during that season.

THIS state embosoming a number of very high mountains, and lying in the
neighborhood of others, whose towering summits are covered with snow and ice
three-quarters of the year, is intensely cold in the Winter season.

THE heat of its Summers, though of short duration, is also intense, especially
about noon and a little while after.

CONNECTICUT river passes through the western parts of this state.

PORTSMOUTH, its metropolis, stands on the S. E. of Piscataqua river, about 2
miles from the sea, and contains about 600 houses, and 4400 inhabitants. This
is the only port in the state.

THERE are many small streams of water in the state, issuing from the ponds and
swamps in the valleys. There are also several small lakes, and one near the
center of it about 20 miles in length, and from 3 to 8 in breadth.

MASSACHUSETTS is watered and fertilized by the following rivers, viz.
Merrimak, Charles, which rises from five or six sources, Motherbrook, Taunton,
whose source is from the Blue Mountains which lie back of Milton and Braintree,
and forms the principal drain of the country lying east of these mountains;
Concord, formed of 3 branches, one issuing from Framingham pond, the other two
from Marlborough mountains; Mystic and Medford empty into Boston harbor;
Ipswich empties into the Atlantic at the town of Ipswich; Westfield empties
into Connecticut river at Springfield; the Chicabe empties into the same.
Deerfield river rises in Vermont, and passes through a large tract of most
excellent meadow; this empties into Connecticut river.

BOSTON, the capital of Massachusetts, contains about 1800 houses, and,
according to a late com^utation, 14,640 inhabitants; of these 6578 were males,
and 8070 females.

"THERE are a great many pleasant towns both maritime and inland, in
Connecticut. The capitals of the state are, the cities of Hartford and
New Haven. The former is situated at the head of navigation on the west side of
the majestic and spacious river Connecticut, about 15 miles above its entrance
into the Sound: The number of houses do not exceed 300. New Haven is situated
at the head of a bay, on a plain circumscribed on three sides by high hills --
and is bounded east and west by two small rivers," contains only 500 dwelling
houses made of timber. The number of males in the whole state exceeded the
number of females by 1570; but in New Haven there were found in 1787, to be 49
females more than males.

The following is an Account of the DEATHS which happened at Salem, (situate 15
miles north east of Boston, and which contains about 6000 Inhabitants), from
January 1st, 1790, to Januaay 1st, 1791.
January 17th, under 2 years 62 February 10th, between 2 and 5 24 March 7th, 5
10 9 April 8th, 10 20 3 May 22d, 20 30 25 June 20th, 30 40 12 July 19th, 40 50
14 August 30th, 50 60 8 September 24th, 60 70 10 October 13th, 70 80 16
November 11th, 80 90 5 December 15th, 90 100 2 103 1 Dead born, 5 196

OF which 106 were males, 90 females -- 11 negroes and 3 Indians are included.

ABOUT 1 in 70 dies annually in New Haven.

THE Smallpox, by the vigilant execution of the laws subsisting in the several
New England states, has never prevailed generally among the inhabitants, except
in Boston, where it was epidemical, A. D. 1649, 1666, 1678, 1689, 1702, 1721,
1730, 1752, and in 1764, and where the success attending inoculation, though at
that time in its infant and imperfect state, became incontestibly evident.

IN New York, Pennsylvania, etc. the like precautions have not been taken, and
the Smallpox has been often epidemic there, especially in their capital towns
-- and inoculation has been practiced with almost incredible success, whenever
the cold and abstemious regimen has been observed, notwithstanding the too
liberal and injudicious use of mercury. Since the practice of giving mercury
has been growing into disrepute, and another more simple, consisting
principally of mild laxatives, vegetable diet, and exposure to a colder
temperature than usual during the eruptive Fever, there is scarce an instance
of one in a thousand dying of this disease.

Though the reverend C. Mather, one of the principal ministers of Boston,
recommended it to the physicians, to make the experiment of inoculation, when
the mortality in the natural way was very distressing, they all declined it
except Dr. Boylston, who began with his own children and servants: For this
innovation he was considered as an impious person by the generality of his
fellow-citizens, and suffered much in his interest on that account. Mr. Mather
had read a favorable account of the operation in the Philosophical
Transactions, communicated by Timotheus from Constantinople.
A. D. 1721, the number of individuals in Boston was 10,567, at which time the
disease was very common. The number of those who died of it was 844, which was,
according to Mr. Gales calculation in his Historical Memoirs, about one in
seven. At this time only 286 were inoculated in and about Boston, whereof 6
died, i.e. 1 in 48. This was the first introduction of inoculation into
America. It was introduced into London about the same time by Lady W. Montague
in the reign of George the ^st.

A. D. 1730 -- Of 4000, which had the disease in the natural way, about 500
died, i.e. in the proportion of 125 to every thousand. Of nearly 400
inoculated, 12 died, or about 1 of 33.

A.D. 1752, there was an exact account taken, by order of the magistrates of
the town of Boston, and rendered upon oath, (in order to remove the prejudices
and objections made against inoculation) of all who had the small pox, either
in the natural way, or by inoculation, and of the precise number of those who
died of it in either way: By this account it appears that the number of those
who had the disease in the natural way, including blacks, amounted to 5544; of
which number there died, including blacks, 574 -- The whole number inoculated,
including blacks, was 2113, of which 30 died. At this time all present had the
Smallpox, except about 174; the total of residenters at that time (including
1544 negroes) was 9710. Those who fled to escape the Smallpox were estimated
at 1800.

IN 1764, of 3000 inoculated patients, only 5 died, and these were children
under five years of age.

THREE hospitals were afterward erected in different parts of Massachusetts,
for the purpose of receiving patients desirous of being inoculated, and
regulated in such manner, as to prevent the infection from spreading, or being
communicated to any of the rest of the inhabitants, as was expected; but
through some trespass of the rules, and the refractory disposition of some of
the patients, the whole utility of the institution was frustrated: Whereupon
the law permitting inoculation was repealed, and another passed prohibiting it
under severe penalties. Since that time, any person who has the misfortune to
enter that state with the disease, or any of the infection adhering to his
apparel or goods, and any one is thereby infected with the disease, he is
liable to pay to the party so infected treble damages and costs of suit.

THUS the practice of inoculation for the Smallpox stands wholly interdicted
within the New England states, and the inhabitants are deprived, through a
mistaken policy, of rendering one of the most formidable and loathsome diseases
mild and harmless.

OF THE CLIMATE AND DISEASES OF NEW YORK.
THE diseases which occur in the several parts of this state, differ so little
in number, nature, and causes, from those of the New England states, that I
think it unnecessary to enumerate any except those peculiar to the fashionable
and luxurious.

"THIS state extends from the 40 to the 45th degree north latitude, is bounded
south eastwardly by the Atlantic ocean; east by Connecticut, Massachusetts, and
Vermont; north by the 45th degree of latitude, which divides it from Canada;
southwest and south by Pennsylvania and New Jersey. It is intersected in
different parts by ridges of mountains, running in a north east and south west
direction." These mountains occasion the winds in winter to be very cold and
piercing, (for the air on mountains is always cold in proportion to their
height.)

THE difference between the constitutions of the inhabitants of the city and
country parts of New York is almost incredible. Inflammatory diseases are much
less frequent in the city than in the country, and in general are much less
rapid and violent in their progress than formerly: Nor do they admit of the
same antiphlogistic method of cure which is found necessary with people whose
occupations require exercise in the open air.

AN active farmer, with an acute rheumatism, often requires the loss of 60 or
70 ounces of blood in the course of the disease; but the citizen, confined to a
sedentary occupation, can seldom bear half that quantity.

THE citizens are affected with a numerous train of Nervous complaints, of
which the inhabitants of the country have no idea. These appear to influence
all their other complaints. Great numbers of them are enfeebled and enervated;
and it is not uncommon to observe high degrees of irritability under the
external appearance of firmness and vigor.

THE Hypochondria, Palsies, Cachexies, Dropsies, and all those diseases which
arise from laxity and debility are at this period endemic not only in New York,
but also in Boston, Philadelphia, and Baltimore; and the Hysterics, which used
to be peculiar to females, as the name indicates, now attacks many of both
sexes indiscriminately. It is evident that so great a revolution in the
constitutions of people could not be effected without the concurrence of many
causes. Among the principal of these may be ranked, sedentary occupations, the
intemperate use of spirituous liquors, and the daily use of strong tea.

THAT a strong infusion of hyson tea is an exceedingly powerful stimulant to
the Nervous system, and intoxicates like spiritous liquors, must be manifest to
every one who has ever observed a number of ladies assembled at a tea table. It
is on its narcotic or intoxicating quality, that its pernicious effects depend.

BUT the greatest evils which contract the duration, and embitter the
enjoyments of life, are derived from the sources of sloth, intemperance and
irregular desires.

THE narrowness, irregularity, and confined situation of many of the streets
and buildings in the city of New York, render it much more liable to diseases
than Boston, and notwithstanding its superior situation, it is more subject to
sickness, during the Summer and Autumnal seasons, than Philadelphia. Whether
its water, which is brakish and unpalatable, contributes to this circumstance
or not, has never been satisfactorily ascertained.

THE narrowness and irregular form of its streets, the height of the houses,
and the crowded manner in which they are built, occasion it to be insufferably
hot in summer.

THE number of inhabitants in the whole state, in January, 1791, was computed
to be 324,127, of which 18,000 were negroes. The number in the city was 27,000,
besides strangers and sailors.

A COMPARATIVE view of the state of this city at present, with that which it
exhibited 30 years ago, is flattering to the present age, particularly in the
improvements in literature, architecture, elegance and politeness.

TABLE of Meteorological Observations, for 1790.
For JANUARY.
THERMOMETER. Days. 8 A.M. 2 P.M. 1st. 37 42 15th. 35 36 30th. 28 34 For
FEBRUARY.
THERMOMETER. Days. 8 A.M. 2 P.M. 1st. 15th. 28th. For MAY.
THERMOMETER. Days. 8 A.M. 2 P.M. Highest was 74, which was on the 24th. Lowest
was 45. 1st. 45 60 15th. 55 66 30th. 57 63 For JUNE.
THERMOMETER. Days. 8 A.M. 2 P.M. Highest was 80 on the 17th. Lowest 57 on the
10th. 1st. 65 68 15th. 69 75 30th. 68 73 For JULY
THERMOMETER. Days. 8 A.M. 2 P.M. Highest 80. Lowest 64. 1st. 64 73 15th. 70 76
30th. 70 76 For AUGUST.
THERMOMETER. Days. 8 A.M. 2 P.M. Highest on the 14th, 85. Lowest on the 20th,
64. Prevailing winds, S. W. 1st. 68 74 15th. 78 82 30th. 66 70 For SEPTEMBER.
THERMOMETER. Days. 8 A.M. 2 P.M. 1st. 66 71 15th. 62 67 30th. 60 64 For
OCTOBER.
THERMOMETER. Days. 8 A.M. 2 P.M. Highest 71 on the 4th. Lowest 42 on the 11th.
1st. 57 60 15th. 57 58 30th. 54 56 For NOVEMBER.
THERMOMETER. Days. 8 A.M. 2 P.M. 1st. 50 56 15th. 47 55 30th. 32 35 For
DECEMBER.
THERMOMETER. Days. 8 A.M. 2 P.M. Highest 47. Lowest 21. 1st. 36 40 15th. 29 40
30th. 35 37

Of the CLIMATE of NEW YORK
The following is an Abstract of Dr. Mitchell's Remarks respecting the Climate
of NewYork.
IT has been long known that the temperatures of countries are to be estimated,
not merely by the distance from the equator, but also by their remoteness from
the margin and level of the ocean.

THE following facts will, perhaps, enable you to form some idea of the
difference between this climate and some others under the same parallel.

IN July, 1788, the mercury in Farenheit's thermometer rose in my chamber in
the city of New York, as high as the 103d degree above 0. And in Februry, 1789
at Albany, it sunk to the 24th degree below 0, by the natural changes of the
weather.

LIGHTNING, during Summer and Autumn, is very frequent, particularly near the
islands and sea coasts: And (for what reason I do not well understand) the
thunder showers almost invariably come from the north west.

IT is remarkable that the flash will kill vegetables no less suddenly than
animals, by depriving them of their excitability, or suscepbility of being
excited by the stimuli necessary to life, rather than by destroying their
organization; for animated matter becomes defunct in three ways: 1st. By a
destruction of organization, as by mortal wounds. 2d. When the organization is
entire, but its capacity to receive the impressions of stimuli is taken away,
as by long exposure to fixed, or phlogisticated air, or by excessive electrical
shocks; and 3d. Where the organ and capacity are complete, but where, however,
no stimuli are applied, as in seeds and in eggs before impregnation, and in
animals, not irrecoverably drowned, before resuscitation.

ON Long Island, Indian corn is planted after the beginning or about the middle
of May; and the new crop is fit for grinding in 150 days; but the same kind of
grain brought from Nova Scotia, grows here to maturity in 96 days, while that
brought from Carolina, does not ripen in less than 190. Buck-wheat grows from
the seed to perfection in 84 days.

FROST commonly occurs in every month of the year, excepting June, July, and
August; and has now and then even happened in June and August. It comes
frequently about the first of September; and I remember on the 4th of May,
1774, a considerable quantity of snow fell.

IN the Spring the blossoms of peach, apple, and other fruit trees, and the
sprouting foliage of plants, are often hurt by it; but from causes which I do
not fully comprehend, it prevails most in low lands, valleys and plains See
this explained under the account of the Climate of Virginia.
.

DROUGHT of six or eight weeks continuance sometimes parch us, and again rain
falls to the depth of five or six inches on a level, in four hours. Winds are
very variable; the sea breezes, which blow from the south, are our warmest in
Winter, and from the north west, our coolest in Summer. In the Winter the north
west winds are the most boisterous and piercing: though the north east are
generally attended with storms of snow and sleet.

THE abundance of melting snow and ice, which frequently overspreads the
country, far and near, subjects those whose feet are exposed to the sloppy
colliquation, to Colds, Catarrhs, Coughs, and their consequences.

MR. Kalm remarks, that at "Albany the wind blows commonly from the south in
Summer, and brings a great drought along with it. Sometimes it rains a little,
after which the wind veers to N. W. blowing for several days from that point,
and then returning to the south." See Kalm's Travels, Vol. II. page 243.

THE same gentleman informs us, that the cold is generally very severe on the
river Hudson; at Albany, in the middle of winter, the ice is sometimes three or
four feet thick. "On the 3d of April, 1749, some of the inhabitants crossed the
river with six pair of horses. The ice commonly dissolves here about the latter
end of March or beginning of April. The water at this time, some years, rises
three fathom higher than it commonly is in summer. The inhabitants make no use
of stoves, and their chimneys are so wide as to admit a cart and horses to be
driven through them.

"THE water of the wells (continues Mr. Kalm) in this town was very cool, when
I was there in June 1749, but had a kind of acid taste, which was not very
agreeable. It also contained a number of little insects which were probably
Monoculi: These insects were from one and an half geometrical line to four in
length."

MR. Kalm thinks this water not wholesome, but the inhabitants who drink it
every day, do not feel the least inconvenience from it. Albany is about 146
miles from NewYork.

THE Rheumatism and Pleurisy are the most common diseases in this part of
America. Intermittents and Dysenteries are seldom heard of. The Phlogistic
Diathesis is so prevalent, that the physicians use venaesection for almost
every complaint, and at every season of the year.

THE excessive heat, however, which prevails here from the middle of July to
the latter end of August, sometimes gives rise to fevers attended with very
anomalous symptoms, which often baffle the sagacity of the most experienced
practitioners.

The following Information respecting the Diseases, depending on Climate and
situation was communicated to the Author by Dr. John Jones of Philadelphia,
formerly Professor of Surgery, etc. at King's College, New York -- DR. Jones
died since the above was communicated.
at present Vice President of the College of Physicians of Philadelphia.
IN the Winter and Spring the following diseases are more or less epidemic
every year in the city of New York, viz.

Inflammatory Quinsy -- The Suffocating Cartarrh of children -- The common
Catarrh -- Peripneumony -- Pleurisy -- Hepatitis, and Rheumatism.

THE Nephritis, Cystitis and Hysteritis, occur at all seasons.

THE epidemics of Summer, are only Cholera and Diarrhoea.

IN Autumn there seldom or ever occurs any epidemic which can be ascribed to
the influence of the climate or situation, except Diarrhoeas, accompanied with
Griping; but these are rather sporadic than epidemic, except when a rainy
Autumn succeeds a hot and dry Summer." These Diarrhoeas, however, according to
Dr. Jones's observations, frequently terminate in very dangerous Dysenteries.

HE has also sometimes observed Intermitting and Remitting Fevers to be very
general after the autumnal equinox, when the season has been rainy; though
there are no sources of Marsh Miasmata; neither marshy grounds, nor ponds of
standing water within its vicinity. About a mile above the city there is one
pond, from whence the city is supplied with fresh water; but it is always pure.

THOUGH the diseases which are mentioned as occurring in Winter and Spring, are
most common at those seasons, they also occur in some constitutions every month
of the year.

THOSE diseases produced by luxury, debauchery, and idleness, are the same
every where.

OF THE DISEASES WHICH OCCUR IN NEW JERSEY.
THE diseases which occur in the eastern part of this state (which extends to
the 41st degree of north latitude), where the land is elevated and dry, are the
same with those of Pennsylvania, in similar circumstances; but in the west
division of the state, as well as in the counties on the seacoast, and the
marshy bottoms along the numerous creeks with which it is supplied, the
inhabitants are much more subject to Intermittents and Bilious complaints.

THE parts which are dry, sandy, and produce nothing but pine and spruce, are
famous for prolific women, from whence the ladies of Philadelphia, who are not
able to endure the fatigue and trouble of nursing their offspring, are
furnished with wet nurses.

THE flat and marshy parts of this state, which are very numerous, are infested
with myriads of musquetoes, which give intolerable annoyance to man and beast.
-- Their bites often occasion an Erysipelas, both painful and dangerous. These
insects, however, are never observed to be troublesome when the mercury is
below the 60th degree. I do not know the degree of cold which renders bugs
inactive, but have been kept awake by them at Salem, as late as the 10th of
November.

PERTH Amboy, the most beautifully situated town in this state, affords a
picturesque and romantic view, and is one of the most healthy places in the
state.

"WE may generally determine the relative healthiness of any situation and
climate, from a knowledge of the prevailing state of the weather. Cold and
moisture occasion inflammatory complaints, in all countries and climates, if
intense, and especially if preceded by hot weather. While heat and moisture
combined, especially in situations not favorable for ventilation, commonly
produce Intermittent or Bilious complaints."

IT is from the situation and climate of countries that we are to compute the
probabilities of enjoying health and prolonging life. In all the low marshy
situations of this state, I know from personal observation, that the
inhabitants are generally sickly, many of which are Leucophlegmatic and
Dropsical -- The women frequently Chloriotic, are generally pale, squalid, and
have carious teeth: But in the high, dry, and mountainous parts, they are
healthy and long-lived.

THE most unwholesome situations, and soils the most unproductive, may be
rendered salutary by industry and art.

THE dykes and drains of Holland, which carry off immense quantities of water
into the ocean, prevent or destroy one of the principal sources of Fevers, the
generation of Marsh Miasmata.

"DR. De Monchy, an eminent physician at Rotterdam, observes, that vapors and
exhalations, driven by a land wind, seawards, are found salubrious or morbific,
according to the quality of the soil, whether sandy, gravelly, loamy, or
marshy; yet the healthy state of some English men of war, under the command of
commodore Mitchell, which lay at anchor in the channel, between South Beveland
and the island of Walcheren, parts of the Province of Zealand, in both of which
places the Fever raged alike among the natives and the English soldiers
cantoned there, is a proof that the moist and putrid airs of the waters, mud
and marshes, was dissipated or corrected before it reached them; and that a
situation open on all sides to the wind, is one of the best preservatives
against the maladies of a neighboring, low, and marshy country." De Monchy's
Essay on the Causes and Cure of Diseases, in Voyages to the West Indies, page
12.

THE Dysentery prevailed in Salem, and the adjacent country, which borders upon
the Delaware, and is very low and marshy, in September, 1788; but from its
readily yielding to the cortex, in substance, combined with very small doses of
species e scordio cum opio, it appears to have been entirely symptomatic, and
not a primary disease; for, wherever it is a primary disease, and the griping
and tenesmus are the leading symptoms, the disease can not be cured without
repeated purging in the day time, and the exhibition of opium at night. Under
such circumstances, the frequent exhibition of stimulating remedies,
astringents, cordials, and opiates are generally injurious, and frequently
fatal.

Extract of a Letter from Dr. P. MASHEAU, residing at Elizabeth-Town,
(communicated in 1791.)
NOT a doubt remains with me, that the Dysentery is not an inflammatotory
affection of the Bowels, as Akenside and others have supposed, but a contagious
Fever, accompanied with frequent ^^^ols, severe pain and griping, followed by
^^nesmus.

THE places where this malady is most frequently observed are morasses; and the
bowels are particularly disposed to be affected by it, where people make use of
fermentative liquors too freely: For instance, near this place there is a
little village called Springfield, where the inhabitants (who drink large
quanties of Spruce beer) are very subject to to this disease, after the middle
of August; which, I am persuaded, in conjunction with the relaxing effects of
their local situation, is the principal cause of their being so subject to it.

I HAVE never seen any harm done by the Purpurea Digitalis in any species of
Dropsy; on the contrary, I have exhibited it lately, in form of extract, with
very great success.

I TRIED its virtues on a patient in a very debilitated condition after the
operation (...) the paracentesis. The bark of Peru was given along with it,
which, together with the exercise of riding on horseback, prevented any farther
accumulation of water, and effected a cure. But unless the Digitalis is
assisted by exercise and tonics, etc. it is seldom of much avail.

I HAVE never seen the Hydrocephalus, you mention, cured subsequent to symptoms
of Strabismus occurring, but have three times seen it cured prior to the
occurrence of this symptom, by the Ung. Merc. rubbed on the skin covering the
Carotids, in large quantities. Worms are, no doubt, a frequent cause of Fever;
but, at the same time, are of advantage by the irritation they produce on the
absorbent system. I have never seen the Tetanus cured by Dr. Rush's method; but
cured two patients lately with opium and mercurial ointment.

THE Typhus is never generated in this town to my knowledge, nor do I recollect
to have met with a case of Fever that was contagious since my residence here.

LOCAL affections are the exciting causes of the Inflammatory Fever, as appears
from the ceasing of the fever, so soon as either resolution or suppuration has
taken place.

OF THE SITUATION, CLIMATE, AND DISEASES OF PENNSYLVANIA.
THIS state is situate between 39 43 and 42 north latitude; peninsulated by six
considerable rivers, whose numerous branches supply it with inexhaustible
streams of the purest water.

THE ground rises almost imperceptibly as we proceed westward, for more than
200 miles; after which it becomes very mountainous and rocky, and so continues,
till we pass the great range of the Alleghany, from whence to the gently
flowing Ohio, the ground is very much broken and uneven; being a repetition of
ridge after ridge, but no mountains.

THERE are very few tracts of swamp or marshy ground in this state, except
along the Delaware and Susquehanna. The greatest part of the state is divided
into small plantations, which, in general, are in a tolerable, but by no means
in a perfect, state of cultivation.

PHILADELPHIA, at present the metropolis of the United States, when the last
census was taken, contained 42,400 inhabitants, including all ages, sexes, and
descriptions; and 6651 dwelling-houses, exclusive of stores and work-shops,
etc. Vide Philadelphia Directory, by Clement Biddle, Esquire.


THE situation of this city, between the rivers Delaware and Schuylkill (whose
waters are preserved fresh and pure by the motion of the tides), is elevated
and delightful.

A few nuisances are still suffered to remain in it, such as slaughter-houses,
tan-yards, and grave-yards.
THE streets are so arranged as to favor ventilation, and to admit a free
circulation of air through every part The narrowness of the streets, however,
occasion a great increase of heat in Summer, in consequence of the reflection
of the sun from the stone pavements, walls, etc. and it is too remote from the
ocean to be refreshed by sea-breezes.
. They are also preserved dry and clean; the dirty water and filth being
conveyed by aquaeducts under ground, or by common sewers, into the river.

THE neck of land which lies below the city between the two rivers, though it
is low and flat, is preserved from being overflowed by the tide-waters, by
banks; and the rain water which falls upon it is prevented from stagnating and
becoming putrid or mephitic by numerous drains. This tract of ground is also
converted into immensely productive meadows, by the art of cultivation.

An ACCOUNT of the Quality of the WATER at PHILADELPHIA.
THE greatest part of the pump-water of Philadelphia, which is the only kind
that is drank or made use of for tea-water, or culinary purposes by the
inhabitants, is impregnated with selenite, or a combination of mineral acid
with calcareous earth.

WHEN this water boils, a whitish powder is separated from it, which forms a
crust on all the vessels in which it is frequently boiled.

THIS water is called hard, because it does not mix uniformly with soap, but
curdles or runs into flakes.

A SMALL quantity of the sal. tartari, or clean dry pot-ash, added to this
water precipitates the selenite contained in it. Ten or fifteen grains are
commonly sufficient to precipitate what is contained in a pint. The exact
proportion may always be found by adding a few grains from time to time till it
ceases to occasion white clouds.

THIS water is very disagreeable to the palates of most people who reside at a
distance from the city, and is sometimes offensive to their stomachs and
bowels. But custom has rendered it both agreeable and wholesome to the
inhabitants; so that they have not a wish for any other.

IT is a common opinion that water impregnated with calcareous earth, or any
stony matter, subjects those who make constant use of it to the Stone or
Gravel. But whatever other mischief these waters may have to answer for, they
are innocent of this. For very few, comparatively, of the inhabitants of this
city are troubled with that disease. Besides, there are numerous circumstances
recorded which prove, that calculous concretions in the kidneys and bladder are
all of an animal origin, entirely different from every species of fossil stone
in every thing except the name.

THERE are several medicinal springs in Pennsylvania impregnated with iron, but
none with aerial acid, or fixed air, as yet known.

THOSE most noted are, one called Harrowgate, four miles from Philadelphia --
one at Bristol, on the river Delaware, twenty miles above the city -- one in
Chester county, called the Yellow Spring, about thirty-two miles from the city.

BRISTOL and the Yellow Spring are much neglected for want of suitable
accommodations; but Harrowgate, where the entertainment and accommodations are
tolerable, is much frequented, though it is by no means so strong a Chalybeate
as either of the others.

THAT the yellow Spring, in Chester county, is strongly impregnated with iron,
is rendered certain by the following circumstances: The conduits, or canals,
through which the water passes, are lined with a yellow scum like ochre, as
well as the basins and reservoirs into which it is received. This yellow
matter, collected, washed, dried, and thoroughly roasted over a strong fire, is
capable of being attracted by the magnet; and, when sublimed with sal ammoniac
into flowers, and afterward dissolved in spirits of wine, affords a bright and
styptic tincture of iron. Other concurring remarks of their chalybeate nature,
are likewise afforded by the purple color they make when mixed with a strong
infusion of green tea, and of a blacker color with powder of galls, and the
iron mould they occasion upon linen -- The same dried scum, being digested in
volatile alkaline spirits, will occasion a blue color when mixed with common
water. These waters also impart an astringent or styptic taste to the tongue --
these are all certain characteristics of a fine irony rust, or the real and
material existence of iron in these waters.

FROM the sensible quality of these waters they appear to be perfectly
neutralized, for they have not the least taste of acidity.

CHEMICAL experiments prove that no metals are soluble, or can possibly enter
the composition of water, unless the metal be first dissolved or converted into
a salt, or vitriol.

OF all the metals there is none that dissolves so readily, in all kinds of
acids, as iron. Thus pure water itself, on account of the fixed air, or aerial
acid, which enters its composition, soon dissolves, and forms a union with this
metal. A piece of red hot iron, quenched in water, communicates an astringency
to it; and it is a familiar observation, that the moisture of the air, rain,
etc. corrodes iron, turns it into rust, and impregnates itself therewith. In
the same manner all springs which wash the beds of iron ore, or pass through
red clay grounds, become impregnated with iron Those chalybeate waters, in
which the impregnation of fixed air, now called the aerial acid, predominates,
are the best. An artificial mineral water of this kind may be made by
dissolving one grain of sal mar^is, in a pint of spring water, and impregnating
with fixed air, from a mixture of oil of vitriol and chalk, by means of Nooth's
machine.
.

Of the CLIMATE of PENNSYLVANIA.
The following Account of the Climate of Pennsylvania, is extracted principally
from the Observations of Dr. Rush.
THE river Delaware was frozen over near three months during the Winter of
1780: The thickness of the ice in the river, near the city of Philadelphia, was
from 16 to 19 inches, and the depth of the frost in the ground was from four to
five feet, according to the exposure of the ground and the quality of the soil.

IN the month of January, the mercury stood for several hours at 5 degrees
below 0, in ^^^enheit's thermometer, and during the whole of this month it
never rose, except one day in the city of Philadelphia, to the freezing point.

"THE cold of the Winter of 1783 -- 4 was as intense, but not so steady as that
of 1780 -- A thaw took place in January, this year, which rendered the Delaware
navigable for a few days.

THE Summer which succeeded the Winter of 1780, was uniformly warm. The mercury
in the thermometer, during this Summer, stood on one day, the 15th of August,
at 95, and fluctuated between 93 and 80 for many weeks. The thermometer stood
in the shade in the open air.

THERE are seldom more than 20 or 30 days in Summer or Winter, in Pennsylvania,
in which the mercury rises above 80 in the former, or falls below 30 in the
latter season.

THE warmest part of the day, in Summer, is at 2 o'clock in ordinary, and at 3
in the afternoon in extremely warm weather. -- From these hours the heat
gradually diminishes till the ensuing morning. -- The coolest part of the 24
hours is at the break of day.

THERE are seldom more than three or four nights in a Summer, in which the heat
of the air is nearly the same as in the preceding day. -- After the warmest
days, the evenings are generally agreeable, and often delightful. -- The higher
the Mercury rises in the day time, the lower it falls the succeeding night.
When the Mercury is at 80 it generally falls to 68 while it descends when at 60
only to 56. This disproportion between the temperature of the day and night in
Summer, is always greatest in the month of August. The dews at this time are
heavy in proportion to the coolness of the evening: They are sometimes so
considerable as to wet the clothes; and there are instances, in which
marsh-meadows, and even creeks, which have been dry during the Summer, have
been supplied with their usual waters, from no other source than the dews which
have fallen in this month, or in the first weeks of September. There is another
circumstance connected with the one just mentioned, which contributes very much
to mitigate the heat of Summer; and that is, it seldom continues more than two
or three days very great without being succeeded by showers of rain,
accompanied sometimes by thunder and lightning, and succeeded by a north west
wind, which produces a coolness in the air, that is highly invigorating and
agreeable.

THE warmest weather is generally in the month of July, but intensely warm days
are often felt in May, June, August, and September, (particularly in the two
last mentioned months.)

THE transitions from heat to cold are often very sudden, and sometimes to very
distant degrees. After a day in which the mercury has stood at 86 and even 90,
it has sometimes fallen, in the course of a single night, to the 65th and often
to the 60th degree. In a Summer month, in the year 1775, the mercury was
observed to fall 20 in an hour and an half. The weather is equally variable
during the greatest part of the Winter "The weather on the west side of the
great range of mountains, collectively called the Alleghany Mountains, is much
more temperate and regular than on the east side. The inhabitants never feel
those quick transitions of the wind from north and south, as those so
frequently experience, who live eastward of the mountains, and near the sea.
The hot southwardly winds become chilled by passing over the long chain of
these mountains." Morse's Geography.
. The mercury fell from 37 to 4 below 0, in 24 hours, between the 4th and 5th
of February, 1788.

THE rivers Delaware, Schuylkill, and Susquehanna, have been frozen so as to
bear horses and carriages of all kinds; and thawed, to be passable in boats,
two or three times in the course of the same Winter.

DEWS begin to fall very copiously in August.

THE time in which frost and ice begin to show themselves in the neighborhood
of Philadelphia, is generally about the latter end of October, or beginning of
November; but the intense cold seldom sets-in before the 20th or 25th of
December. The coldest weather is commonly in January. A cold day in Winter is
often succeeded by a moderate evening.

THE greatest degree of cold which has been observed at Philadelphia, within
the last 20 years, is 5 below 0; and the greatest degree of heat upon record,
in the same place is 95.

THE standard temperature of the air is 52, which is the temperature of our
deepest wells; as also the mean heat of the common spring water.

THE Spring in Pennsylvania, is generally less pleasant than in many other
countries. In March, the weather is stormy, variable, and cold. In April, and
sometimes in the beginning of May, it is moist, and accompanied by a degree of
cold, which has been called rawness, and which, from its disagreeable effects
upon the temper, may be called the Sirocco of this country.

THE month of May, in 1786, will long be remembered, for having furnished a
very uncommon instance of the absence of the Sun for 14 days, and of constant
damp or rainy weather.

THE month of June June, 1791, was an exception to these observations, for the
heat was intense, and had been so from the latter end of May. The wind blew
constantly from the S. and S. W.
is the only month in the year which resembles a Spring month in the southern
countries of Europe. The weather is then generally temperate, the sky is
serene, and the verdure of the country is universal and delightful.

THE Autumn is the most agreeable season of the year in Pennsylvania. The cool
evenings and mornings, which generally begin about the first week in September,
are succeeded by a moderate temperature of the air during the day. This weather
continues with a gradual and almost imperceptible increase of cold, till after
the middle of October: After which more rain falls, and coldness succeeds. The
indians predict the cold of Winter from the quantity of rain which falls during
the Autumn The greater the moisture, the greater will be the evaporation, and
the greater the evaporation, the greater will be the coldness of the atmosphere.
."

IN Winter the winds generally come from the north west in fair, and from the
north east in wet weather. The former are uncommonly dry as well as cold, the
latter are insufferably cold and moist.

THE winds in fair weather in the Spring, and in warm weather in the Summer,
generally blow from the south west, and from west north west. The south west
winds frequently bring with them refreshing showers, and moderate the heat of
the weather, particularly when succeeded by a north west wind.

THE dissolution of the ice and snow in the Spring, is sometimes so sudden as
to swell the creeks and rivers in every part of the state, to overwhelm large
tracts of land in their vicinity, and destroy the crops of the disappointed
farmer and grazier. The wind at these times commonly comes from the south west.

It appears from Mr. Kalm's Travels, that the Winter set in sooner formerly
than it did when he was in America, which was from 1748 to 1751.

According to the account which he received from Isaac Norris, Esquire the river
Delware, when the English first settled in Pennsylvania, was commonly covered
with ice about the middle of November, old style; so that the merchants were
obliged to clear out their ships before that time, for fear of the navigation's
being obstructed if they delayed. On the contrary, adds Mr. Kalm, this river
seldom freezes over, at present, before the middle of December, old style. The
Spring returns here much later than formerly.


IT is a prevailing opinion, that the extremes of heat, moisture, and cold, are
annually diminishing in this state, by the clearing of woods, draining of
swamps, and other arts of cultivation.

THOUGH the Sun (says Doctor Hugh Williamson) is doubtless the general source
of heat, yet we observe that countries are not heated in proportion to their
distance from the Sun, nor in proportion to their distance from the Equator.
When the rays of the Sun strike the earth in a perpendicular direction, they
will be reflected in the same direction on the particles of the air through
which they have passed, and thus increase their heat.

A GREATER number of rays will likewise strike the earth in that direction,
than when they fall obliquely, hence the greater heat in that direction,
caeteris paribus.

AIR is observed to be heated to very different degrees in different countries,
which are in the same latitude, according as they abound in rough mountains,
fertile plains, or sandy desert, as they are surrounded by land or by sea, or
according to the different winds which prevail in those countries. The
temperature of Pennsylvania is very different from that of Portugal; and that
of England is different from that of Saxony, on the neighboring continent,
though they are under the same parallels. In order then, to form a judgment of
the climate of any country, we must not only consider the latitude of the
place, but also the face and condition of the country, and the winds most
prevalent there at the different seasons of the year; if any of these should
change, the climate must also be changed more or less, for it is in a great
measure governed by these.

THE surface of a country may be changed by the arts of human industry in
clearing its woods, draining off its waters, and levelling its mountains, (as
is exemplified in China) where by these means the air, in very unfavourable
situations, has been rendered exceedingly wholesome, according to the accounts
of the observing Lind.

A TRANSIENT view of the cause of winds will convince us that their course may
also be changed.

IT is well known that most winds are occasioned by the heat of the Sun.

WERE the Sun to stand still over any part of the surface of the earth, the
wind would constantly blow to that place from all directions: For the air in
that part being rarefied by the heat of the Sun, would be expanded, and thus
become specifically lighter, whence it would ascend, and the heavier air in the
neighboring parts, would rush into its place; this too being heated by the
Sun's rays, and by the warm surface of the earth, would instantly ascend and
give place to that which is colder and more dense.

BUT as the Sun moves, or seems to move between the tropics, from east to west,
there would be a constant current of air seting toward the Sun from the N. S.
and E. while the current, which would also come from the west, is prevented or
turned back by the Sun, which moves with great rapidity in an opposite
direction. The current, coming from the north and south, falls in with that
from the east, and is presently bent in the same direction. This constitutes
the Trade Winds In the Gulf of Guinea the S. W. wind propels all the clouds,
formed by marine exhalations, which float along the south coast of Africa,
toward the land, and being compressed by them, against the mountains, it
frequently occasions deluges of rain.

The continual easterly trade-wind, likewise, where its impetuosity is felt
along the eastern coast of America, brings with it the like bad weather.
Muschenbrook.


, which are found in the Atlantic, and in the great South Sea.

WERE the surface of the earth homogeneous -- were it all covered with water,
or all smooth dry land, the easterly winds would always prevail quite round the
globe to some distance beyond the tropics. But the waters along the equator are
divided by two or three considerable portions of land, which retain the heat in
a different manner from the water, and reflect the Sun's rays in very different
proportions, so that they not only stop the easterly current of air, but often
change it to the opposite direction. For along the westerly coast of Africa and
South America, the winds commonly blow from the west; that is, they blow from a
cold ^urface to that which is warmer, from the sea upon the land. In warm
countries, or in the warm seasons of any country, the surface of the land is
warmer than the surface of the water. [But the reverse is the case in cold
countries, and in cold seasons of any country, without the tropics.]

The surface of the earth being immoveably exposed to the sun, receives and
retains the heat, and grows warmer by every additional ray. The surface of the
sea is not soon heated., because the particles which are uppermost this hour,
will presently be overwhelmed by those that are colder, and these by others in
succession.

FROM these trite and general observations respecting the cause of winds, the
reason is obvious, why north west winds prevail during the winter season, in a
country lying, as this does, in a direction nearly from the N. E. to the S. W.
-- The surface of the earth at this season being always colder than that of the
sea. To this may be added, that our coast is constantly washed by a current of
warm water, which being driven to the west by the easterly trade-winds near the
equator, is checked in the gulf of Mexico, and forced to escape to the north
eastward to give place to the succeeding current.

LET us now enquire, whether any change of circumstances would reduce the
violence of these north west winds, which prevail in Winter.

IT has been proved by experiments, that hard and smooth surfaces, receive,
retain, and reflect heat, better than those which are soft, rough, or unequal;
and a clear, smooth, plain field, especially if sandy and dry, is observed to
reflect more heat than one that is covered with trees, bushes, or grass, and
more particularly if the soil is moist." -- It has also been discovered that a
simple solution of water in air always produces a sensible increase of cold.

FROM these premises established on experiments and observation, it may be
rationally concluded, that when in the course of time, this continent becomes
populated, cleared, cultivated, improved, and the moisture of the soil
exhausted far into the frozen regions of the north, that the bleak winds will
become more mild, and the Winters less cold in the middle states, but more
especially in those to the southward.

WHAT Philosophy teaches us to expect in the present instance, appears to be
confirmed by what has happened in the climate of Italy. The temperature of
which, we are assured from unexceptionable authority, is at present much more
mild than it was when Virgil wrote his Georgics. This change of climate Dr.
Williamson ascribes to the population and consequent culture which has
gradually taken place in the more northern countries of Europe.

Perhaps it may be apprehended, that if the cultivation, and levelling a
country, would mitigate the severity of the Winters, it would increase the heat
of the Summers in a proportionate degree. But common observation, as well as
the principles of Philosophy, show that there is no foundation for such
apprehension. For during the greatest Summer heats it it found, that the
extraordinary heat of the atmosphere does not rise to any considerable height,
and in the upper reons it is perpetually cold, both because the air in those
regions is too remote from the earth to be warmed by the heat reflected from
its surface, and because the air in those higher regions, not being pressed by
such a weight of incumbent atmosphere, is too rare to be susceptible of a great
degree of heat.

HENCE it is evident, that nothing is wanting, in the midst of Summer, to
render the country agreeably cool, but a proper mixture of the cold air which
is above, with the warm air below. This may be effected by any cause which
increases the winds, such as showers of rain, thunder gusts, and the cooler air
of mountains pressing toward more heated parts, to restore the equilibrium,
agreeable to the established laws of matter and motion.

FROM all the circumstances which have been mentioned, there is no unreasonable
prospect (and I am sure it is a very pleasing one), that when this country
comes to be diversified by vast tracts of clear land, intersected by ridges of
rude mountains, the land winds in Summer, to say nothing of those which come
from the sea, or from the lakes, charged with moisture, must certainly be much
purer and salutary, as well as temperate and uniform, than they are at present.

SHOULD that delightful era ever arrive, how glorious, how enviable, will be
the lot of the Americans "did they their bliss but know" -- For whom the earth
pours forth with liberal hand, her choicest stores In this favored portion of
the world, we have already, in a great measure, regained the native dignity of
our species -- We are exempt from the desolating effects of war; we are under
no oppression from misguided or intolerant religion; we are strangers to those
feudal institutions which have enslaved the greatest part of Europe, as well as
to that accursed despotism which prevails over half the globe; our laws are
simple and just, though too much retarded in their execution; our industry is
unrestrained, and every thing prospers.
.

NOTWITHSTANDING what has been said in favor of the prospect of a change of
climate for the better in the United States, it must not be concealed, that it
has been confidently asserted by gentlemen of extensive geographical knowledge,
that no such change has taken place in the climate of China, the capital of
which, Pekin, is situated in latitude 39 54, which is nearly the same degree of
latitude, and on the same parallel with Philadelphia, though almost the whole
extent of country north of it is cleared, and in a state of the most perfect
cultivation. -- The greatest cold experienced there in the course of five
years, was 5 below 0, the greatest heat was 98; but in July, 1773, the Mercury
rose there to 108 and 110. -- Vid. the quotation in Dr. Rushe's account of the
climate of Pennsylvania; and Kirwan's Estimate of the temperature of different
Latitudes.

WE have incontestable proofs that heat does not altogether depend upon
proximity to the equator, but varies at inconsiderable distances, chiefly
according to the elevation of the ground, and the current of the winds, as also
from the nature of the soil.

UPON these, the temperature of the climate, the color, strength and activity,
the constitutions and health, of the inhabitants greatly depend. And it is a
fact, which ought to be known to every body, that in countries the most noted
for sickness and mortality, and in the hottest climates, those who have it in
their power to select elevated situations, where the soil is gravelly and dry,
may enjoy good health, provided they lead temperate and regular lives, during
every season of the year. -- See Linds' Essay on Hot Climates.

ACCORDING to the observations of Mr. Reinhold Foster, it is not only the
clearing of woods, but cultivation and population, that alter the climate of a
country, and make it mild and temperate. "The Romans looked upon the winters of
Germany and England as very severe; but happily both countries have at present
a much more mild climate than formerly, owing to the three circumstances
abovementioned.

"NEAR Petersburgh, under 60 N. L. the river Neva, was covered with ice in
1765, in the beginning of December, and cleared of it April 11th, 1766. At
Tsaritsin, which is under 48 40. N. L. the river Volga was covered with ice the
26th of November, 1765, and the ice broke in the river, April 27th, 1766 (all
old style). Is it not almost incredible, that in a place almost 12 degrees
nearer to the south, the effects of cold should be felt longer and more
severely than in the more northern climate? And though the neighborhood of
Petersburgh has a great many woods, the cold was, however, less severe and
lasting: Tsaritsin, on the contrary, has no woods for many hundred miles in its
neighborhood, if we except some few trees and bushes along the Volga and its
isles, and the low land along it; wherever the eye looks to the east, there are
vast plains without woods, for many hundred miles.

THE clearing a country of woods cannot, therefore, alone contribute so much to
make the climate milder, but cultivation does more. In an hundred square miles
near Tsaritsin, there is not so much cultivated land as there is within ten
miles of Petersburgh; it is in proportion to the number of the inhabitants of
both places, and this makes the chief difference of the climate. There is still
another consideration; Petersburgh lies near the sea, and Tsaritsin in an
inland country, and, generally speaking, countries near the sea have been
observed to enjoy a milder climate. These few remarks will be, I believe,
sufficient to enable every body to judge of the changes of the climate in
various countries, which, no doubt, grow warmer and more temperate as
cultivation and population increase.

MR. Kalm (in Vol. II. p. 249) says, the corn near Quebec, in Canada, formerly
was never ripe till the 15th or 16th of September; but that for some years
previous to the year 1749, the harvest began in the last week of August (old
style). -- The inhabitants also informed him, that formerly the corn never
ripened; but since the woods have been sufficiently cleared, the beams of the
sun have had more room to operate, and it ripens perfectly.

"SOME parts of Italy bear melancholy proofs of the alterations that accidental
causes make on the atmosphere; for the Campagna di Roma, where the ancient
Romans enjoyed as salubrious air as is to be found on any part of the globe, is
now almost pestilential, through the decrease of inhabitants, which has
occasioned a stagnation of waters and putrid exhalations."

Of the DISEASES of PENNSYLVANIA.
DAILY observations convince us, that the diseases which occur in this state,
are not very numerous or complicated, except in the city, where the greatest
part of the inhabitants are employed in sedentary occupations.

THE diseases which occur in the country are generally of an inflammatory
nature, and are most frequent the latter end of Autumn, and in the early part
of Spring; these are often occasioned by unavoidable or imprudent exposure to
cold and rainy weather, and by the neglect of changing wet and damp clothes for
dry and warm ones; but more commonly by the neglect of putting on a Winter
dress as soon as frosty weather begins in Autumn, and by the imprudent practice
of changing warm and thick clothing for a thinner and cooler dress too early
in the spring: Even in the low and marshy situations, the richer inhabitants,
who have dry apartments, and who live on substantial diet during the autumnal
season, when Intermitting and Remitting Fevers are epidemic, are much less
liable to be affected by the poisonous effluvia of the putrid soil than the
poorer class, who are more exposed, and obliged to live abstemiously, and to go
thinly clad. The poorer class of people, who reside in the towns and large
villages (though laboring under all the disadvantages of indigence) where the
impurities with which the atmosphere is charged, in consequence of the action
of heat upon a moist soil, and the extrication of fixed air from decaying and
putrid vegetables, is corrected by numerous fires, and ventilation is favored
by the arrangement of the houses into streets, are less subject to the
disorders in question, than those who live in detached houses, or in the
suburbs, where that advantage is wanting.

THE great and sudden changes which so frequently happen in the state of the
weather, both in Summer and Winter, may be considered as the principal causes
of the diseases of this state. -- For it appears from Kirwan's Estimate of
Climates, that there is no country in the known world, so subject to sudden and
violent changes of weather as this.

The following is a Catalogue of all the Diseases, depending on climate and
situation, which occur at different seasons of the year, in this state, viz.
In WINTER and SPRING.
Phrenitis, or inflammation of the brain; Opthalmia, or inflammation of the
eye; Erysipelas, or inflammation of the skin; Odontalgia, or tooth ach;
Rheumatism, or inflammatory affection of the muscles and joints; Catarrh, or
taking cold; Cynanche Tonsillaris, or inflammatory quinsy; Cynanche Trachealis,
or suffocating catarrh; Pleurisy, or inflammation of the pleura; Peripneumony,
or inflammation of the lungs; Hepatitis, or inflammation of the liver;
Splenitis, Nephritis, Cystitis, Hysteritis, and c. Gastritis, or inflammation
of the stomach, Enteritis, or inflammation of the intestines.
In SUMMER.
Colic, Diarrhoea, and Cholera.
In AUTUMN.
Intermitting Fever, Remitting Fever, and the Dysentery.
INFLAMMATORY diseases, however, are not confined to Winter or Spring, but
frequently occur at all seasons, especially to persons accustomed to daily
exercise, in every kind of weather, and to free indulgence in animal food and
spiritous drink.

THE Epilepsy, the Apoplexy, and the Palsy, occur more frequently the latter
end of Autumn, and beginning of Winter, than at any other season. The Gout,
occurs, more frequently in the Spring and Autumn, than at any other season; but
there are very few people troubled with it at all here. Hemorrhages, are more
frequent the latter end of Spring and beginning of Summer than any other time.

THE greatest number of the cases of Phthisis, Pulmonalis, which have come
under my observation, have been preceded by Hemoptysis.

ALL the cases of Tetanus that I have hitherto seen, except one, were
occasioned by laceration, or puncture of tendinous or muscular parts. The only
case which ever came under my care, that was not occasioned by external injury,
was occasioned by exposure to a N. E. wind, accompanied with rain, when the
person was debilitated, in consequence of confinement, and the free use of
Mercury. -- This patient was a pilot by occupation, in the 32d year of his age,
and had been much addicted to free and irregular living. -- He was entirely
deprived of the power of swallowing by the disease; but was relieved in about
30 hours, in consequence of being put into a semi-cupium of water as warm as
could be borne without injury by a person in health, and by emollient oily
Glisters, containing 60 drops of Laudanum, repeated every six hours.

AS soon as he recovered the power of swallowing, he took a bolus of opium, gr.
ij. Tart. Emet. gr. every six hours, with Snake-root tea, for two or three
days; after which he gradually recovered without any other medicine.

CONTAGIOUS diseases occur at all seasons, particularly the Small Pox, Measles,
Scarlatina-Anginosa, Cynanche-Ulcerosa, or Putrid Quinsy, Typhus, Hooping Cough
Mumps, etc.

OF late years the Small Pox has never been entirely extinct in the city of
Philadelphia: The Measles has been less constant: The Scarlatina has been
epidemic here in the Autumn and Winter, for some years past; but at present, it
is only Sporadic, viz. in October, 1791.

SOME one or more contagious disease, being always more or less prevalent in
the city, is one reason why a greater proportion of children die annually in
the city than in the country.

THE Influenza, or contagious Catarrh, has been epidemic in America three
different times. The first time of its appearance that I can find recorded, was
in the Autumn of 1733; previous to which it had spread over every country in
Europe, beginning in the North of Germany. From Europe it appears to have been
imported into America. It was again observed, and recorded particularly by Dr.
Thomas Bond, in 1761. At that time its progress was traced from the West India
islands to Halifax in Nova Scotia, where it appeared in the Spring; from thence
it reached Boston, and the neighboring states, and afterward spread in a most
rapid manner over the whole continent of North America, without being retarded
in its progress by any alteration in the sensible qualities of the atmosphere
or the course of the winds, till the month of July, after which it was no more
heard of.

THIS disease made its appearance a third time in America, in 1789. It was
first observed at New York, in September, from whence it spread, in the course
of six or eight weeks, over every part of the union, and passed to several of
the West India Islands; but whether it proceeded to the Spanish settlements in
South America, or whether the Aborigines of North America were affected by it,
I have not been able to learn. Persons of all ages and descriptions were
affected by it in Philadelphia; and its contagious effects were so uncommonly
rapid, that many supposed its cause was blended with, or suspended in the
atmosphere, and conveyed by the winds; but the analogy of every other species
of contagion contradicts this supposition. Its continuance in Philadelphia was
about six weeks: how it was generated, or from whence it was derived, I have
not been able to inform myself. The origin of this disease appears to be as
obscure as that of the Small Pox or Measles. The first account of its
appearance in Europe, upon record, was in the year 1557, at which time its
progress was traced from Asia to Constantinople, etc. The symptoms in general
resembled the common Catarrh from taking cold; but it differed from it
materially in being attended, in most cases, with a considerable prostration of
strength, and impaired vigor in all the functions of the body.

I WAS always guided in my practice by the symptoms present, and do not
recollect a case that did not do well: The symptoms were so mild with
multitudes, that they required no medicinal aid. In general, mild Antimonials,
and the Antiphlogistic Regimen, were found serviceable; and when the
inflammatory symptoms subsided, Opium afforded relief to the Cough.

SEVERAL were benefited by bleeding; but in general the patients recovered
sooner when it was omitted, except when Pneumonic symptoms; such as acute pain,
and full or hard pulse indicated it The following is extracted from a Letter
from Dr. Rush, respecting the periods in which the Influenza has appeared in
America, dated Oct. 7th, 1791.

"FROM the most successful enquiries I have been able to make, I have found
that the Influenza prevailed in this country in the year 1733. It was again
epidemic in the year 1749. This last information I received indirectly from the
late Dr. Barnet of Elizabeth Town; who added, that the universal remedy for it
among the common people, was a drink composed of a jill of vinegar, a pint of
water, and two table spoonfulls of melasses. It appeared again in the spring of
the year 1761, and was both violent and universal. I recollect all its symptoms
perfectly, it being the first year I began the study of medicine. It was
distinguished by the name of "this Cold," and "the great Cold." Dr. Gilchrist,
takes notice of it in the Physical and Literary Essays of Edinburgh.
Notwithstanding this epidemic was so universal as to check business in many
places, and to exclude all other subjects of conversation, yet I was lately
surprised to find only three of the citizens of Philadelphia, who had retained
a distinct recollection of it. Dr. Shoest, in his travels through North
America, mentions it upon the authority of the late Dr. Thomas Bond.

"THE Influenza made its next appearance in the Winter, 1770-1; an account of
which I have preserved in my notebook, and have found it to agree exactly with
the histories of the Influenza in this and other countries. I need not mention
to you its appearance in the Autumn of 1789. My inquiries and observations
satisfy me, that it appeared again in the Spring of 1790, and in the Winter of
1790-1. I shall not trouble you with a detail of the facts upon which I ground
this assertion, as I have prepared a full account of them to be laid before the
public in a 2d vol. of Medical Enquiries, which I am now preparing for the
press."


.

THE Hydrophobia is so rare an occurence here that I have never seen a case of
it. Dr. Rush and Dr. Percival have, in my opinion, thrown more light on the
nature of this disease than any other writers.

THE accounts which have been published respecting the fascinating power of
Snakes in this country, have originated in ignorance and credulity, and are
entirely groundless; as well as those tales which are often told of their
breeding in the livers of Dogs which have been bitten by them.

THE experiments of the industrious and ingenious Fontana, of Tuscany, furnish
ample proof, that the bite of the Viper is seldom fatal to men, or the larger
class of animals, though it instantly kills small ones: hence a presumption
arises, that the remedies employed by the Indians owe their credit to ignorance
of this circumstance. According to the last quoted writer, the immediate
application of Lunar Caustic, to a part bitten by a Snake, prevents it from
having any ill effect: This produces an eschar, and a considerable wound, which
is afterward to be dressed with common Cerate.

FEWER diseases prevail in Autumn, when the ground is frequently refreshed by
showers, and the ponds are replenished with water, than in dry ones. This
circumstance is thus explained by Dr. Rush It is remarked by Dr. Percival,
"that wet seasons are generally more free from epidemic diseases, than dry
ones. And that those years are most unfavourable to health, in which heavy
rains fall about the beginning of Summer, and are succeeded by great and
uninterrupted hea^s. For the earth being thus drenched with moisture, and the
low lands overflowed with water, the exhalations become constant, copious, and
often putrid."

"JOAN LEO, in his history of Africa relates, that if heavy rains fall in that
country, during the months of July and August, the Plague usually breaks out
the September following. But in European climates, it is well remarked by Sir
John Pringle, that frequent showers in Summer, cool the air, check the excess
of vapor, dilute and refresh the corrupted waters, and precipitate the noxious
effluvia, which float in the atmosphere." Percival's Essays, 4th Edition, vol.
2d. p. 22.


"While the creeks and rivers are confined within steady bounds, there is
little or no exhalation of febrile miasmata from their shores." "The dry
Summers of 1780, 1781 and 1782, by reducing the rivers and creeks, far below
their ancient marks, while the wet Spring of 1784 and 1785, by swelling them
beyond their natural heights, have when they have fallen, left a large and
extensive surface of moist ground, exposed to the action of the sun, and of
course to the generation and exhalation of febrile miasmata."

As tables of Meteorological Observations will be annexed, which will show the
variableness and vicissitudes to which the weather is liable in this climate, I
shall add nothing farther on the subject here; but shall now proceed to give an
account of the diseases to which the inhabitants of Philadelphia are more
particularly liable.

THE diseases to which the opulent and fashionable class of the men; are most
subject are these, viz. Apoplexy, Palsy, Epilepsy, Dyspepsia, Jaundice, Gout,
Asthma, Hypochondria, Dropsy, etc.

THE ladies are most subject to the following, viz. Headache, accompanied with
sickness at stomach, Spasmodic, Asthma, Hysteria, Dyspepsia, Hypochondria,
Catarrh, Hemoptysis, Phthisis Pulmonalis, Colic, Menorrhagia, Abortion,
Sterility, Melancholia, Chronic weaknesses, etc.

DAILY observation teaches us, that the generality of the diseases just
mentioned, to which men of fashion and opulence are most subject, proceed from
excessive indulgence in the pleasures of the table, and in drinking wine and
other liquors to excess, joined to the want of proper exercise -- dosing away
the salutary hours of the morning in bed; respiring the confined air of a
chamber; and to discontent of mind for want of some interesting pursuit.

By the joint effects of intemperance and indolence, the digestion sooner or
later never fails of being impaired. And as on the due performance of
digestion, much of our health, ease, and prospect of longevity depends, we
ought most studiously to avoid every thing that has a probable chance of
interrupting it.

THE quality of Aliment most wholesome, may generally be determined by the
experience of each individual: The principal inconvenience arises from quantity.

THE judicious Dr. Fothergill observes, that "the Author of Nature, has so
formed and constructed the organs of digestion, that we can gradually
accommodate ourselves to every species of Aliment. A great part of the eastern
world, subsists principally upon rice and other vegetables: many countries live
almost solely on fish; others on a mixed diet of animal and vegetable
substances, without suffering injury."

No kind of food hurts us, if gradually accustomed to it; but this is not the
case in regard to quantity. From errors in this, in a great measure, proceed
the formidable progeny which have already been enumerated.

"IN a weak stomach, a large proportion of bread is indigestible; it turns
four, produces Heart-burn, Flatulencies, Spasmodic pains, etc. Valetudinarians
should therefore always use it with moderation."

IN Philadelphia animal food, of one kind or other, constitutes the chief part
of our nourishment.

THAT there are some kinds of more easy, some of harder digestion than others,
is well known to every body. The most difficult of these, will be digested
without occasioning much disturbance, if taken in small quantities; but if a
person eats as much of ham, salted beef or bacon, as he ought to do of fresh
fish or chicken, he may, and generally will, suffer by it.

AFTER a plentiful dinner of animal food, it is now the custom here, to
introduce deserts of rich Sweetmeats, Custards, Jellies, and Fruits, and of
various kinds; all of which at such time is unnatural and improper, because of
the extraordinary stimulus such a load of heterogeneous substances must give to
the fibers of the stomach, both in a mechanical and chemical sense. "By these
means fresh labor is added to a tired digestion." The rule where fashion
cannot altogether be dispensed with, is carefully to observe, that the sum of
all together, does not exceed due bounds, or encroach upon the first feelings
of satiety.

WITH respect to strong liquors, the less in quantity, when in good health, the
more consistent with the preservation of health and long life. The safest and
most natural practice is to drink as much wine and water, or any other
agreeable fermented liquor, durthe repast, as thirst or inclination may
require, and then to dismiss the bottle entirely; after which a dish of strong
coffee may be introduced with propriety.

"THE sick Headache, as it is called, is generally the consequence of an
indigested meal, frequently of a heavy supper; and for the cure, requires the
occasional use of mild Pukes, laxatives of Rubarb with Columboroot, and a
strict attention to regimen and daily exercise in the open air in seasonable
weather."

THE diseases to which the women of fashion are most subject, in general,
proceed from the opposite extreme: From too great abstemiousness in meats of a
nutritive quality; from wine, but especially from the want of exercise, while
they indulge too much in regaling themselves with strong infusions of
palatable, but noxious, Tea.

A CONSIDERABLE number of their complaints also, proceed from the frequent
changes of dress, and the alternate vicissitudes from heat to cold, to which
fashion, and the love of pleasure, expose them. There are instances of young
ladies in this city, who, for the sake of an elegant and admired shape, apply a
leather bandage, dipped in water, round their waists every night when going to
bed, which contracts as it becomes dry. The pernicious effects of this
experiment must be evident to every person of common sense. They are also often
injured by confined air.

"THE plant in the green house, the Sheep in the cot, and the most admired
Beauty beneath her gilded roof," are equally injured by confined air.

FROM the best information which I have been able to obtain, more than
one-fifth of all the children born in this city, die under two years of age --
A considerable portion of these, fall victims to the contagious diseases which
never cease to prevail; but the greatest part die of Cholera, Diarrhaea, and
Remitting Fever."

MECHANICS who follow sedentary occupations, are particularly subject to
Dyspepsia, Colic, Costiveness, Haemorrhoids, Hypochondria, OEdema, Pain in the
Thorax, Phthisis, Scurvy, Itch, Gravel.

"OF all the causes which conspire to render life short and miserable, none has
greater influence than the want of proper exercise."

WHOEVER examines the structure and functions of the human body, must be
convinced of this.

"THE Body is composed of an infinite number of vessels, whose Fluids cannot be
pushed on, without the action and pressure of the Muscles; but if the Muscles
remain inactive, the Fluids will stagnate, and obstructions will be formed,
which cannot fail to occasion diseases. Both the sanguiferous vessels and the
Lymphatics, are furnished with numerous Valves for the purpose of preventing
the retrograde motion of their contents; but without the assistance of the
Muscles, this admirable contrivance is of little use."

THIS part of the animal economy proves to a demonstration, the necessity of
exercise for the preservation of health.

"WHEN confined and unwholesome air is added to the want of exercise, diseases
must be the consequence."

IT is owing to the combination of these two circumstances, that so many of the
children of the poorer sort of the inhabitants of this city die annually.

THE exercise of walking is preferable to any other mode, for those who are not
greatly debilitated or infirm; because a greater number of Muscles are thereby
put in action than by any other.

THOSE who are confined to sedentary employments, should therefore devote a
certain portion of their time, to taking a walk every day a few squares in the
open air, and employ one afternoon of every week in some active diversion.

A NUMBER of tradesmen are often crowded together in the same small apartment;
this is particularly the case with Weavers, Tailors, Shoemakers, etc. In this
situation they generally continue for many hours at a time, often with the
addition of several candles burning, whereby the air becomes charged with the
Phlogiston issuing from them, as well as from the Lungs, which renders it unfit
for expanding the Lungs sufficiently, and of supplying the blood with the
matter of heat. See Priestley's Philosophical Experiments; Crawford, on Heat;
and Goodwin on Respiration.

MANY Artists are liable to diseases, in consequence of their particular
occupations. Chemists, Brass-founders, workers in the various Minerals and
Metals, Painters, Printers, etc. owing to the noxious effluvia (inseparable
from those occupations) being received into the system, by the Lungs or Stomach.

"THE Scholar, the Philosopher, and the Statesman, who devote almost the whole
of their time to study and reflection, seldom fail to impair their
constitutions, or of becoming Valetudinarians."

"AND many young ladies, who regardless of exercise, customary meals, or
necessary repose, are perpetually employed in reading Love-inspiring Novels,
not only impair their constitutions, but pervert their imaginations, and
corrupt their morals to such a degree, that they are ever after rendered unfit
for the offices of domestic life, and unqualified to promote domestic felicity."

"THE constant confinement of children within doors, and at School in crowds,
proves destructive to the lives of multitudes, and never fails to render the
constitutions of those whom it does not destroy, delicate and infirm."

"To be shut up several hours in the day in a School, as soon as a child can
speak intelligibly; secluded from the benefit of exercise, and the refreshment
of the open air, and compelled to learn what he cannot comprehend, is not only
cruel, but inhuman." See Dr. Gregory's Essays.

AMONG the very poorest sort of people in the city, are sometimes engendered
Fevers of the most contagious and malignant nature, as well as the most
loathsome cutaneous diseases. These proceed from want of proper food and
raiment, and from living in close, confined, and dirty apartments; in Garrets,
Cellars, etc. -- destitute of the common necessaries of life, in a vitiated
atmosphere.

"IT is remarkable, that not only the human species, but Cattle also, which
have been kept upon too scanty an allowance of provision, or on that which is
of a bad quality, are generally afflicted with diseases of the skin, which
seldom fail to disappear when plentifully supplied with that which is
wholesome, and more nourishing."

"THE diseases to which Laborers and Mechanics, who are employed in laborious
occupations, are most subject, are, for the most part, very different from the
foregoing: To these, the Erysipelas is very incident: This is occasioned by
whatever gives a sudden check to the perspiration, after the heat of the body
has been considerably augmented by exercise or any other cause; by the drinking
of cold water, wet feet, keeping on wet clothes, sitting or lying on the damp
ground, or exposing the body to a current of air while in a state of increased
perspiration."

PEOPLE who reside in the country, are often injured by handling a small tree,
growing in m^ist swampy grounds, called by Linnaeus Rhus Vernix, or poison
Sumac, and by a small creeping Vine, resembling the Ivy, called Rhus Radicans,
or Poison Vine. These like the juice of the West India Cashu Nut, raise
numerous minute Vessications over the surface of the skin, and cause
considerable tumors of the parts affected. The vessications contain a thin
transparent serum; they frequently ulcerate and become purulent. -- The cure
consists in washing the parts, not ulcerated, with weak Lead-water, or common
Cold-water, and in dressing the ulcerated parts with Goulard's or Turner's
Cerate.

THIS class of people are very apt to be affected with Vomitting and Purging,
Bilious Colic, etc. -- From eating heavy four bread, vegetables of difficult
digestion, and drinking weak stale small-beer, or the like.

"SUCH as have to lift or carry heavy burdens, as Porters, Laborers,
Carpenters, Shipwrights, etc. are very subject to Hernias, and to spitting of
blood," etc.

"THIS last is owing to the vessels of the Lungs being over distended, from
their being obliged to draw in the air with much greater force, and also to
keep their Lungs more distended than is necessary for common respiration."

THE following is a copy of a letter from Dr. B. Rush, dated January 19th, 1791.

THE slow Nervous Fever, as described by Dr. Huxham, was a very common disease
in Philadelphia, during my apprenticeship, (from the year 1760 to 1766) also
for many years after, I settled in the city, which was in the year 1769.

THE late Dr. Thomas Cadwallader, who died in the year 1779, in the 71st year
of his age, informed me, that he remembered the time when that species of Fever
made its first appearance among our citizens, and that it had gradually
traveled here from Connecticut, where it was known by the name of the Long
Fever. It was very common during the late war, and appeared to be kept up by
the intercourse of our city with the American Hospitals and British Prison
Ships. During the last seven years it has gradually disappeared. In the course
of the three last years. I have seen but few cases of it. It was very
remarkable, that it never made its appearance in our city until the weather
became cool. I have suspected from this circumstance, that it always had a
portion of inflammatory, or what Dr. Cullen calls Synochoid Diathesis, mixed
with it.

IN July, the exciting causes of Fever seem to produce Cholera Morbus; in
August and September, Remitting Fevers, with bilious discharges; and in October
and November, the slow Nervous Fever, of Dr. Huxham.

THE disappearance of this Fever is probably owing to the greater attention
which has been paid latterly to cleanliness and fresh air, by all classes of
people, both in sickness and health THE (...) of people (...) supplied with
clothing (...) than they ^er^ before the (...).
. The remote cause of this Fever, I have suposed to be Contagion, either from a
diseased body, or from a morbid matter generated in the extremities of the
arteries from low diet, the want of cleanliness, and above all from that
languor which is induced upon the circulation, by grief, or any other sedative
passion of the mind. I think too I have seen this Fever where it evidently
arose from a neglected or ill-treated inflammatory Fever, in which neither of
the above causes has operated. In this case it has occured in the Winter and
Spring. In the latter season, I have seen it succeed Pleurisy, and accompanied
through all its duration by the same kind of troublesome Cough, which occurs in
the last stage of that disease, when it arises from other causes.

MANY cases have come under the author's notice of persons of an infirm habit
falling into the slow Nervous Fever, or Typhus Mitior, after having been
debilitated more than common by fatigue and grief, without being exposed to
contagion, but only in consequence of a sudden check of perspiration. Hence it
appears that the same remote cause produces a different form of disease,
according to the difference of constitution on which it operates.

THE combined debilitating effects of fatigue and grief are very common causes
of this Fever, in persons of relaxed and infirm Constitutions, and it appears
to depend entirely upon a diminution of nervous energy, but is most commonly
the effect of infectious effluvia. See Dr. Hunter's opinion respecting the
effects of vitiated air in producing Nervous Fever, in the London Medical
Transactions.

THE Pulmonary Consumption appears to be the most frequent, as well as the most
fatal of the Chronic Diseases which occur in Philadelphia. The greatest
proportion of those who die of this malady, from the most accurate observations
which I have been able to make, belong to the society of the Friends; and of
these, the number is nearly in the proportion of three females to one male.

PERHAPS the want of vivacity in the people of this society, and the sedentary
lives of their females, are the principal causes of this difference; these
certainly in some measure counter-balance the advantages which they enjoy from
their superior cleanliness, neatness, and sobriety.

THE late judicious and experienced Dr. Fothergill, in my opinion, has given
the best directions for the successful treatment of the Pulmonary Consumption
of any author that has written on the subject. See his Works in Quarto,
published by J. Cokely Lettsom, M. D.

THE method of treating this complaint by the daily exhibition of Pukes, as
recommended by Dr. Reid, is in general a very injudicious and pernicious one.
The one recommended by the late Dr. Brown, is still more exceptionable.

THE improvements proposed by Dr. Rush, I have never had an opportunity of
seeing put in practice; but have had considerable experience of the good
effects produced by observing the method recommended by Dr. Fothergill,
particularly in the incipient stage of the disease. When the disease is
contracted in a northern climate, the patient should always pass his Winters,
if possible, in a climate within the tropics.

Observations on the Weather and Diseases which occurred at Philadelphia, in
the year, 1790.
Meteorological Table for JANUARY.
THERMOMETER. BAROMETER. WIND. WEATHER. Days. 7 O'clock, A. M. 1 st. 26 29 9 S.
W. dry and clear. 10th. 21 30 1 N. W. clear, dry. 20th. 27 30 N. W. do. 30th.
24 30 S. W. clear.

"THE greatest height of the Mercury in the Thermometer this Month, was on the
4th, which was 40; and on the 6th, it was down to 20, which was its lowest."

"THE Barometer was at 30 5 on the 6th, which was its highest, and at 29 6, on
the 9th, which was its lowest."

THE DISEASES

MOST prevalent, were Catarrh and Rheumatism.

Meteorological Table for FEBRUARY.
THERMOMETER. BAROMETER. WIND. WEATHER. Day, 7 o'clock, A. M. 1 st. 35 30 1 N.
W. cloudy. 10th. 8 30 5 N. W. clear. 20th. 38 29 8 S. W. cloudy. 28th. 3^ 29 9
S. W. clear.

"THE weather this Month was very changeable; alternately cloudy, clear, cold,
and warm; with some sharp frosts, and frequent rains, attended with high winds*
The wind for the most part blew from the N. W. S. W. and N. E. On the 10th, the
Thermometer was at 8, and on the 24th at 40, which were its highest and lowest
stations this month."

DISEASES

MOST prevalent, were the same as in January. The pleurisy, and other
inflammatory complaints, were also met with in different parts of the city.

Meteorological Table for MARCH.
THERMOMETER. BAROMETER. WIND. WEATHER. Days. 7 A. M. and 3 P. M. 1st. 30 40 30
3 30 2 N. E. snow and rain. 10th. 1^ 28 30 5 30 5 W. clear and cold. 20th. 33
49 30 6 30 4 S. E. S. clear. 30th. 48 46 30 3 30 2 N. E. W. clear.

"A GREATER proportion of clear and moderate weather occured this month than
usual at this season of the year. But on the 4th, the Mercury was as low as 4,
which was lower than it had been any time before this Winter. On the 7th, there
was a storm of hail and rain, the wind at N. W. and very high. The only
considerable snow this season, fell on the 10th of this month, but only
remained on the ground three days."

DISEASES.

VARIOUS kinds of inflammatory diseases, and also the Measles and Hooping
Cough, occurred very frequently this month. Several people addicted to the
pleasures of the table, and accustomed to a sedentary inactive manner of living
were affected with the Gout. But the Rheumatism was more common than any other
complaint, especially toward the latter end of the month.

Meteorological Table for APRIL.
THERMOMETER. BAROMETER. WIND. WEATHER. Days. 7 A. M. 3 P. M. idem. i^^m. 1st.
24 2 59 ^0 5 30 3 S. W. clear, windy. 10th. 50 68 29 7 29 5 N. E. thund. rain.
20th. 43 56 29 11 29 8 S. hard rain. 30th. 46 61 30 11 ^0 N. W. cloudy, windy.

RESULT.

Thermom. 7th greatest degree of cold, 33. 4th greatest degree of heat, 78.

"THE weather in general this month was clear, cool and pleasant." The diseases
the same as those in March.

Meteorological Table for MAY.
THERMOMETER. BAROMETER. WIND. WEATHER. Day^ ^ A. M. 3 P. M. 1st. 45 5 65 7 30
3 30 2 S. W. clear, cloudy. 10th. 50 82 6 30 4 30 2 S. W. idem. 20th. 53 4 66 9
29 10 29 6 S. E. S. rainy, cloudy. 30th. 56 7 63 5 E. rainy, etc.

RESULT.

Thermom. 8th greatest degree of cold, 41, 11th greatest degrees. of heat, 90 5.

THE greatest degree of cold in May, 1791, was on the 14th, when it was 45 9.
The greatest degree of heat was on the 30th, 91 6.

Barom. 8th greatest elevation, 30 6. 21st least elevation, 29 6.

PREVAILING winds were from N. W. and S. W.

"THIS month was very dry, clear, calm and pleasant."

THE DISEASES

OF this month were very few. The Small Pox, by Inoculation, was very general
and successful.

Meteorological Table for JUNE.
THERMOMETER. BAROMETER. WIND. WEATHER. Days. 7 A. M. 3 P. M. 1st. 65 81 30 W.
clear. 10th. 59 63 29 8 N. E. rainy. 20th. 54 81 W. N. W. clear, windy. 30th.
66 79 W. cloudy.

RESULT.

Thermom. 3d greatest degree of cold, 54, 17th greatest degree of heat, 92,

WIND S. W. and W.

JUNE, 1791.

Thermom. 21st greatest degree of cold, 58, 9th greatest degree of heat, 94,

VERY few diseases prevailed this month; but in the same month of the year
1791, inflammatory diseases were very frequent; especially Rheumatism, Cynanche
Tonsillaris, or inflammatory Quinsy, and Pleurisy; several were affected with
Cholera and Diarrhea, in consequence of a sudden change from hot to cold
weather, which took place the latter end of this month; the wind having shifted
suddenly from the South to the N. W. after a thunder gust.

SUCH are the various and even opposite effects produced by the same exciting
cause when it operates upon different constitutions, or according to the nature
of the Diathesis present in the system.

Meteorological Table for JULY.
THERMOMETER. BAROMETER. WIND. WEATHER. Days. 7 A. M. 3 P. M. 1st. 63 5 78 8 29
11 W. cloudy. 10th. 61 2 79 2 30 8 W. S. W. idem. 20th. 65 8 79 9 29 10 N. W.
idem. 30th. 63 5 86 30 10 S. W. fair, cloudy.

RESULT.

Thermom. 24th greatest degrees. of heat, 90 5, 12th greatest degrees. of cold, 54 5,

WIND W. and S. W.

ON the 23d 24th and 25th of July, 1791, the Thermometer was from 93 to 95, at
two o'clock, P. M.

"SCARCE any rain fell this month, except a few slight showers; there was very
little thunder and lightning, which was considered as very extraordinary."

"WHEN the Barometer is low, it always indicates storms or falling weather."

DISEASES.

DIARRHAEAS and Choleras were epidemic the latter end of this month, especially
among children. This is the case about the same time every year, according as
the extreme heats set in sooner or later.

THE Cholera generally came on in the night time, or after a change from very
hot to considerably cooler weather, whereby a sudden check was given to the
perspiration, and the nervous system amazingly debilitated.

A FEW drops of Laudanum, in a Peppermint or Cinnamon Julep, frequently
repeated; spirituous fomentations to the abdomen, applied very warm, and the
application of heated Flannels to the extremities, scarce ever failed of curing
the Cholera; having first favored the evacuation of the bilious matter from the
stomach, by frequent draughts of Camomile Tea, or Coffee made of toasted
Oatmeal.

THE Diarrhaea (if indubitable signs of laxity and debility are present) can
only be cured by tonics, spirituous drinks, warm clothing, cleanliness, pure
air, and moderate exercise, with the occasional use of Laudanum, in very small
but frequent doses, and a regimen of very easy digestion, and of an Alkaline
quality.

A STRONG decoction of Peruvian Bark, with the addition of a little powder of
Galls and Cinnamon, given in small draughts repeatedly in the day time, and a
small dose of Paregoric Elixir at night, has succeeded in numerous cases after
stronger astringents, Aromatics and Absorbents, had failed.

A decoction of Rice, Cinnamon, and a little Chalk makes a very suitable drink.

WHEN a child has a Fever or a Diarrhaea, the complaint is generally ascribed
to worms, even by those who ought to know better. The sufferer is therefore
compelled to take something to destroy Worms, when nine times in ten none
exist; or if they do, they are by no means the cause of Fever, at least they
are never the direct or exciting cause. It is true they may irritate persons of
exquisitely sensible and weak Nerves, sufficiently to induce a Spasm of the
bowels and occasion Diarrhaea, Colic, and even convulsions; but it is
impossible for them to produce a genuine Fever.

SEVERAL cases of Rheumatism, and a few of Pleurisy, occurred even this month.

Meteorological Table for AUGUST.
THERMOMETER. BAROMETER. WIND. WEATHER. Days 7 A. M 2 P. M. 1st. 65 7 77 4 29
11 N. E. cloudy. 10th. 71 4 84 4 29 10 W. cloudy, clear. 20th. 61 2 75 9 30 2
N. N. E. fair. 30th. 68 83 7 29 11 N. E. fair, cloudy.

RESULT.

Thermom. 14th AUGUST 15th, 1791. The Thermometer was at ^2 at 2 o'clock, P. M.
On the 30th, it was 94; but tell the day following to 76. The wind shifting
from South to N. W. after a heavy gust of rain.
greatest degrees, of heat, 92 7. 24th greatest degrees. of cold, 58 5.

WIND S. W. and N. E.

THE weather, during the greatest part of this month, was very warm; and when
the wind blew directly from the South, it was almost insufferably oppressive;
but when ever it came from a N. W. direction, it was very refreshing and
pleasant.

DISEASES.

THE acute diseases which occurred this month, were nearly similar to those of
the preceding one. In addition to these, the Dysentery became very frequent
toward the latter end of the month, at which time the dews were very heavy and
chilling.

THE following method of treating the Dysentery, scarce ever failed of success.

AFTER the patient's stomach was cleared out by a mild Puke, and his bowels by
a full dose of Glauber's Salts; he took a paper of the following powder, in a
draught of agreeable beverage, every three hours, or if much griped and
troubled constantly with Tenesmus, every two hours.

Rs. Pulv. Sal. Glaub, j. Tart. Emetic, gr. j. m. f. chapter no. vj. vel viij.
THIS was continued every day in the same manner, as long as the griping or
tormina of the bowels and scanty mucous stools continued, and afterward
occasionally if the morbid symptoms returned.

WHERE this medicine caused griping, the Tart. Emet. was omitted, and the
powder given without it.

WHEN it become very disagreeable to the patient, Castor Oil, or Cream Tart.
with a small quantity of Tart. Emet. was substituted.

FROM one to two grains of Opium, or a proportionable quantity of Laudanum, was
also given to an adult every night, from the time of taking the first purge
till cured.

WHEN the patient's strength was not greatly impaired, he was confined to mild
cooling drinks, acidulated with Lemon Juice, or syrup of Tamarinds; and his
diet was Spoon Meats without Wine or Spices, and all the ripe and juicy Fruits
of the season. Sweet Milk and Butter Milk were also allowed but when the
strength was considerably impaired, Wine-Whey, and Sangree were allowed for
common drink, and Panada or Tapioca, with Wine and Nutmeg, for food, etc.

WHEN the griping was very distressing, and the rectum appeared excoriated,
Glisters of Barley Water and Gum Arabic were occasionally injected, to which
were frequently added a few drops of Laudanum. The Abdomen was also sometimes
fomented with Flannels, wrung out of a bitter decoction, as hot as could be
borne, and afterward rubbed with warm Laudanum, and spirits of Camphor, or
Camphorated Oil and Laudanum.

As soon as the griping was removed, a decoction of Cortex Peruv. with eight or
ten drops of Elixir Vitrioli, was administered four or five times a day, a more
liberal use of Wine directed, and an Anodyne continued at night. To prevent a
relapse, exercise, and a Flannel Vest, etc. with other warm clothing, were
recommended.

THIS, and this alone, is the only certain and successful method of treating
the Dysentery, when it is an Idiopathic disease. I never saw a case where
Blisters were of any real service, except when the disease was only
symptomatic, or combined with the Intermitting or Remitting Fever, which is
seldom or never the case in Philadelphia.

THE method of treating this disease by diffusible stimulants and a cordial
diet, recommended by the late Dr. Brown, and by the sweating process,
recommended by Dr. Mosely, in his Treatise on Tropical Diseases, I have seen
prove injurious in several instances, and believe they can seldom or ever
succeed.

Two cases of Peripneumony came under my observation this month. The one was a
man 56 years of age; he was attacked with the disease, a short time after
leaving off a Flannel Shirt, which he had worn all the preceding season. The
other was a delicate woman, the mother of several children, who appeared much
disposed to Phthisis Pulmonalis. The disease was occasioned with her, by
sitting a considerable time in a cool Spring-House, when much heated and
fatigued.

THE man died, owing, I believe, to the delay of his friends in making
application for his relief. His Thorax was opened, and an abscess discovered in
the right Lobe of the Lungs, and marks of Gangrene in the Pleura, in
consequence of the high inflammation with which it had been affected early in
the disease.

THE woman was blooded four times, by which she lost 36 ounces of blood-was put
upon the Antiphlogistic Regimen, purged moderately for two or three days with
Salts and Tartar Emetic; and after the second bleeding, had a large Blister
Plaster applied over the affected part.

IN every case of Pleurisy, the patient should be blooded every day, more or
less, according to the violence of the Pain, Fever and strength of the Pulse,
and where those symptoms are very violent, twice a day (without regard to the
state of the expectoration), as well as freely purged, till the Fever, Pain and
fullness of the Pulse be all considerably reduced. The patient should at the
same time strictly observe the Antiphlogistic Regimen -- Have his chamber
constantly refreshed with cooler air than would be agreeable in time of health,
if the season will admit, and not be oppressed with bedcloaths -- His bed and
body linen daily shifted -- All his drinks should be taken about the
temperature of Spring Water, or at most not warmer than a Toast will make it.

BLISTERING is always found most serviceable after copious bleeding.

When the Pulse is reduced, the Pain and Dyspnea abated, and the Fever
moderate, one of the following Powders, taken in Barley Water or Flaxseed Tea,
acidulated with Lime Juice, and repeated every two or three hours, generally
finishes the cure.

Rs. Pulv. Sal. Nitri vel Crem. Tart, iij. Tart. Emetic, gr. j. m. f. Chart.
no. vj.
IN cases where the Pulse sinks, and considerable prostration of strength comes
on, instead of the above Powders and the cooling drinks, a few grains of
Volatile Alkali and Wine-Whey, or heating Aromatic Teas should be substituted;
and Blisters applied to different parts of the body.

Meteorological Table for SEPTEMBER.
THERMOMETER. BAROMETER. WIND. WEATHER. Days. 7 A. M. 2 P. M. 1st. 63 5 75 9 30
2 S. S. E. S. W. cloudy. 10th. 65 7 8^ 7 30 S. W. foggy, fair. 20th. 54 5 71 4
30 2 N. N. E. fair, cloudy. 30th. 61 9 68 29 11 N. E. W. rainy, cloudy.

RESULT.

Thermom. 11th greatest degrees. of heat, 88 2. 24th least degrees. of do. 45 5.

WIND S. W. and N. W.

"THIS month was dry and cool; the mornings generally foggy. The dews which
fell in the evenings and during the night, were very copious, and in a great
measure made up for the deficiency of rain."

THE frequent changes in the temperature of the air, particularly from extreme
heat to extraordinary cold, gave rise to a great variety of diseases of a very
different nature; but the usual epidemic of the season, the Bilious Remitting
Fever, as it is called, was by far the most common.

I SHALL here take the opportunity of giving a description of the symptoms of
this disease, and of making public the remedies and method of treatment which I
have found most certain and successful.

THE Bilious Remitting Fever, which is more or less epidemic at Philadelphia
every year in Autumn, begins with a sense of general debility; weariness, and
pain in the back and loins; giddiness of the head, loss of appetite;
inclination to Puke; chilliness, succeeded by flushes of heat; distention of
Stomach; some perceptible uneasiness in respiration; quick small irregular
Pulse.

THESE symptoms generally continue three or four days, and sometimes longer,
before the patient is confined to bed. After that, the Feverish symptoms become
considerable in the afternoon, but always remit more or less before morning.
With the remission, the skin, which during the Paroxism was dry and hot,
becomes moist and cooler; but still some quickness and irregularity continue in
the Pulse, some Thirst, and other slight symptoms of Fever.

THE Paroxism returns commonly about noon or soon after, without any chill or
shaking, but is often preceded with a disagreeable and distressing sense of
cold and anxiety about the Precordia, which gradually subside when the Paroxism
is completely formed. While the Paroxism is forming, a distressing and violent
puking often comes on, and sometimes a very weakening Diarrhaea. The matter
evacuated is commonly mixed with bile, and is sometimes very green and
corrosive.

THE Tongue is covered from the beginning with a whitish mucus, which in the
course of the disease, if the symptoms of general debility continue to
increase, and the remissions become more indistinct, as is often the case,
becomes dry and hard, and of a dark brown color -- a dark colored sordes also
gathers about the teeth and gums.

IN this manner the Fever generally continues, with an increase of the symptoms
in the afternoon and great part of the night, with a remission or abatement of
the same in the morning, till in a longer or shorter period, it ends either in
complete and distinct intermissions, or degenerates into a continued form.

WHEN it degenerates into the continued form, it resembles the Typhus or Putrid
Fever in all its symptoms, but differs from it essentially in not being
contagious.

MANY Physicians from having observed the extraordinary quantity of bile
discharged by patients with this Fever, have been led into a notion that a
depraved state of this fluid is the cause of the Fever -- But by whatever means
vomiting is excited, if often repeated with violent strainings, it has a
powerful effect in emulging and emptying the biliary ducts, and commonly forces
out a great deal of bile. This will necessarily be the case in Remitting and
Intermitting Fevers; for in consequence of the debility induced by the remote
causes (which are supposed to be Marsh Miasmata, and a long continued course of
great heat), especially during the cold or forming stage of these Fevers, the
blood is thrown in greater quantity and velocity into the vessels of the
internal Viscera, because it there meets with less resistance than at the
surface of the body, and among the rest into the Vena Portae, in consequence of
which a greater quantity than ordinary of bile is secreted and effused into the
Vessica Fellis, and Duodenum, etc.

REMOTE CAUSES.
FROM the Situation and Season in which this Fever prevails; from the manner in
which it begins; from the subjects most liable to it; from its terminating so
generally in an Intermittent, etc. I am convinced that it is produced by the
very same occasional or exciting cause as the Intermitting Fever, and that this
exciting cause is Marsh Miasmata. The principal difference between
Intermittents and Remittents, appears to consist in the Constitution or
Diathesis present, upon which the occasional cause operates; in other words,
the difference in the symptoms of the Intermitting and the Remitting Fever, is
owing to the difference of Diathesis, tone, and vigor of the Solids,
particularly of the Muscular Fibers of the system. This is analogous to what
happens in other circumstances -- Exposure to cold in Winter, when the
constitution is most firm and vigorous, occasions Rheumatism or Pleurisy -- In
Summer, exposure to cold produces Catarrh or Diarrhaea.

THE circumstances preceding and accompanying Cholera, furnish sufficient proof
that it does not depend upon the same causes as Fever.

THE subjects of this Fever have for the most part been greatly relaxed by the
long protracted heat of the preceding Summer. Every thing else that debilitates
the Nervous System, may be considered as a predisposing cause.

THE observations of Physicians well qualified for the enquiry, made in
different regions of the earth, have proved beyond controversy, that
exhalations issuing from moist and marshy grounds, which are now called
Miasmata, are the principal cause in the production of Intermittents and
Remittents.

THESE appear to operate, by inducing a debility in the nervous system,
diminishing the energy of the brain, and all the functions of the body
depending thereon.

PROXIMATE CAUSE.
THIS appears to be a state of debility more predominant in the Nervous, than
the Vascular system.

THAT such a distinction really exists, is evident from the debility which
prevails in all the functions during the forming stage, even of inflammatory
diseases.

THE Spasm assigned by Dr. Cullen, is now generally known to want support --
Dr. Brown, by making no distinction between the separate conditions and powers
of the human body, and by confounding sensibility with irritability, has been
guilty of a much grosser error, and one which has had pernicious effects in
practice.

Of the Cure of the REMITTING FEVER.
THE indications of cure in this Fever, as well as in every other whose
predominant symptoms flow from a state of Muscular debility, consist simply in
restoring power and energy to the Nervous system.

THIS we are taught by that surest guide, experience, is best accomplished by
the application of certain stimulating and tonic powers, adjusted as near as
possible to the state of debility present: for we know of no antidote to these
Miasmata, which are so poisonous to the source of life.

IF the spontaneous vomiting has not evacuated the stomach sufficiently, from
10 to 30 grains of Ipeca^uana, or a small dose of Tart. Emetic, should be given
in the evening, its operation promoted by warm water or Camomile Tea, and an
Anodyne given after its operation, the feet having been previously bathed in
warm water.

IF called early in the complaint, Blisters should also be applied to the
Wrists as soon as the Anodyne is taken -- By these means an intermission is
very frequently produced; when the exhibition of the Bark in Wi^^, next day,
commonly prevents a return of Fever.

FROM 20 to 30 drops of Laudanum, or from one to two grains of solid Opium, is
the proper quantity to be given at a dose.

WEAK warm Punch, Wine-whey, or Sangree, will be proper after the Anodyne; and,
if the Feverish Symptoms are not high, will be proper through the whole course
of the Disease. Snake-root Tea, has also been found a very useful drink,
particularly during the Paroxism -- In the remission, it answers best when
joined with a Decoction of the Bark, with the addition of more or less Wine,
according as the debility manifest in the several functions may indicate.

IF the Emetic does not also operate by stool, or if symptoms of debility
render the exhibition hazardous, a free evacuation should be procured, by
giving the fourth part of an ounce of Glauber's Salts, dissolved in beverage or
Tamarind-water, every three hours, till it has had the desired effect.

AS soon as this is accomplished, immediate recourse should be had to the
Peruvian Bark, which should be given without reserve, and in as large
quantities as the Stomach will bear, without regard to the presence or absence
of Fever -- except that, during the Paroxism or Exacerbation, it ought to be
given without Wine, provided the Fever does not appear to be assuming a
continued form, or is not strongly marked with general debility.

DURING the remission therefore, let Wine be joined with it, and given
liberally* but during the Paroxism, let it be given, if in substance, with
Snake-root Tea, or any mild Aromatic infusion: if it can not be taken in
substance, let two ounces of it, with half an ounce of Serpentar. Virgin. be
boiled in two pints of water, to one pint. A wine-glass full of the strained
liquor, more or less, according to circumstances, with an equal quantity of
sound old Port, or half as much Madeira Wine, to be given every hour during the
remission, and the same quantity every two hours during the Paroxism without
the Wine, or with a considerably less quantity.

IF it occasions either Puking or Diarrhaea, two or three drops of Laudanum,
and a little Cinnamon, or spirituous Peppermint Water, should be added to every
second or third dose.

WHEN Griping and Sickness are very frequent and distressing, they indicate an
accumulation of bilious or mucous matter in the Primae Viae, and have often
been relieved by a common Glister, or the exhibition of a mild laxative.
Rhubarb and Cream of Tartar answers very well, or a small pill of Calomel or
Aloes, taken at bedtime, or early in the morning, without interrupting the
exhibition of the Cortex, Vinous Drinks, and Cordial Regimen.

BUT a Diarrhaea should always be attended to, and diminished, otherwise the
Patient's strength will be inevitably reduced by it.

IF, as some times happens, an incessant vomiting should come on, heated
substances should be applied to the extremities and surface of the body; hot
spirituous drinks given almost continually, with a few drops of Laudanum and
Lavender Compound; and Blisters applied to the Wrists and Stomach, and
Sinapisms or Rubefacients to the Feet.

IF the Stomach rejects the Laudanum as soon as swallowed, it should be
administered in a Glister of Camomile Tea or Barley water.

DR. BLANE informs us, that he has put a stop to the incessant Puking which
accompanies the yellow Fever of the West Indies, by the application of Blisters
when Opium failed.

TEN grains of Sal. Tart. mixed with 30 grs. of Cream of Tartar, with a few
drops of Laudanum, and a little Essence of Peppermint or Cinnamon, taken in a
draught of warm water in the act of effervescence, has often put a stop to
severe vomiting; but unless it be swallowed while in an effervescing state, it
has no effect. Its good effect therefore seems to depend upon the fixed air
extricated by this process.

THERE is a greater probability of putting a speedy termination to this Fever,
when the Remission is very distinct, though the Paroxism may be very violent,
than when the Remissions are more obscure, and the Feverish Symptoms, during
the Paroxism, are less violent; because the less distinct and perfect the
Remission, the greater is the debility present in the whole system, in the
Vascular, as well as in the Nervous.

DR. CULLEN has ascertained in a very satisfactory manner, that the hot stage
of Fevers, almost always corresponds with the preceding cold stage; and that
when a Fever commences with a sudden and violent cold stage, and is soon after
succeeded by a hot stage, it is a certain proof that the System, and especially
the Heart and Arteries are but little, if any, impaired in respect to vigor
and activity. He has also ascertained, that when the Paroxism of any Fever is
preceded by little, or no cold stage, and the more it resembles the continued
form, the greater the debility.

THE cause of the Remitting Fever, certainly operates more powerfully on the
Nervous System than on the Vascular, otherwise the great activity which is
often observable in the Pulse, during the hot stage, could not take place.

THE advantage of cleanliness and pure air in Fevers, is now too generally
acknowledged to require insisting on here.

WHEN the debility is very great, and the circulation very languid, the
patient's limbs should be wrapped up in heated woollen cloths, occasionally
repeated.

BUT when the skin feels preternaturally hot, and the patient much exhausted,
washing his body with cold Spirits of Wine or Brandy, always affords grateful
refreshment, and renders it cooler.

WHEN this Fever degenerates into a continued form, with great prostration of
strength, foul and parched Tongue, and a collection of filthy, dark-colored
mucus about the Teeth and Gums, and resembles the Typhus, or Putrid and
Contagious Fever (which arises from a vitiated state of human effluvia,) in all
its symptoms -- The same plan of treatment should still be pursued; with only
this difference, that the Bark and Wine must now be given in larger quantity,
and continued day and night.

A BOLUS containing five or six grains of Volatile Salts, may also be given
every two or three hours, and Rubefacients may be frequently applied to the
limbs; but Blisters seldom produce any good effect in the low state of either
this Fever or the Typhus.

DURING the Convalescent State, the patient should guard against exposure to
cold damp air, and should make use of Huxham's Tincture of the Bark, several
times a day, either mixed with Wine or Water, till his digestive powers are
perfectly restored.

THE forming stage of most diseases resemble each other so much in the greatest
number of Symptoms, that it is difficult to distinguish one from another at
their commencement.

I RECOLLECT a case of Hepatitis that occurred this month, which began with
symtoms resembling those of the Remitting Fever.

THE Disease commenced with a distressing sensation of cold, accompanied with
frequent puking and great prostration of strength; these were in a few hours
succeeded by high Fever and pain in the region of the Liver. After opening a
Vein, all the symptoms of debility accompanied with puking again returned.

DETERRED by this circumstance, and by the frequent return of puking from
repeating the Venaesection, the pain increased, and in a few days terminated in
an Abscess. This at length discharged itself gradually by the Intestines; and
though the patient was reduced to the lowest extremity of life, he afterward
recovered, and at present enjoys a good state of health. The quantity of
Laudanum which this patient took after the Abscess began to discharge, in order
to restrain puking, and the quantity of strong Brandy Toddy which he took to
preserve his strength would be scarcely credited if I was to specify it.

DR. WISTER, who was consulted on the case, can bear witness that he took ten
drops of the best Thebaic Tincture four times a day, and from 60 to 80 drops in
the course of the night, for six weeks; great part of which time we expected,
at our morning visits, to find him dead, to such a low ebb and distressing
situation was he reduced: But, contrary to our expectations, his appetite
gradually returned: the evacuation was no more perceived; his Hectic ceased;
and health returned, after five months confinement to bed.

THE reason he was allowed distilled Spirits was, because his Stomach would not
retain Wine: Even distilled Spirits was rejected, except when taken in water
almost scalding hot.

IN the Autumn of 1781 and 1782, I believe, to speak within bounds, more than
one-half of the children, between the age of six and eighteen months, in
Southwark, died of the Cholera Morbus, Diarrhoea, and Remitting Fever.

OF late years, the mortality has not been so great, owing, I presume, to their
being better supplied with clothing and wholesome food, and to the greater
regard which has been by all ranks paid to Cleanliness, in consequence of the
greater prosperity which they have experienced, since the restoration and
increase of Trade; and, in a great measure, to the Physicians of the
Dispensary, who have the charge of all the poorer classes, many hundreds of
which would perish annually for want of adequate assistance, if it was not for
that charitable and very useful Institution. Before that Institution was
established, multitudes fell a sacrifice to the ignorance and villainy of
Quacks and Nostrum-mongers.

THE arching of the Dock, and the cultivation of the Lots around the City,
which were formerly waste Commons, and many of them covered with stagnant
water, has also removed a considerable source of Discase from the City and its
vicinity.

NOR is it unreasonable to suppose, that the improved state of Physic, has had
some share in retarding the progress of Mortality.

IT is to the labors and sagacity of the immortal Cullen, that the world is
indebted for the principal improvements which have been made in the treatment
of Diseases.

FOR although he has dealt rather liberally in Hypothesis, all his practical
Rules are supported by experience.

Meteorological Table for OCTOBER.
THERMOMETER. BAROMETER. WIND. WEATHER. Days. 7 A.M. 2 P.M. 1st. 53 4 68 7 30 2
N.W.W fair, cloudy. 10th. 42 2 43 2 29 11 N. N. E. rain. 20th. 45 9 60 3 30 2
N. N. E. cloudy. 30th. 54 1 60 1 29 1

RESULT.

Thermom. 4th greatest degrees. of heat, 78 1, 27th greatest degrees. of cold, 34 2.

WIND W. and S. W.

THE Weather was dry and cool the greatest part of this Month, as there were
only eight days on which any Rain fell; and that was in small quantities, and
at considerable intervals.

THE changes in the temperature of the air, were often very considerable and
sudden.

FROST, which was first observed in the City and Suburbs on the 24th of
September, became very severe, and rendered Fires constantly agreeable.

DISEASES this Month were similar to those in September, with the addition of
Hepatic Affections.

THESE last generally required and were relieved by bleeding and purging with
Calomel; when obstinate, a repetition of bleeding was often found necessary,
and sometimes the application of a Blister.

GREAT numbers of children were inoculated this month, but in general the
disease was not so favorable as it had been the preceding Spring, owing
perhaps to the relaxed state of the Solids, in consequence of the preceding
heat of the Summer -- With some it became Confluent.

WHEN called to a patient previous to, or at the commencement of the eruption
in the natural way, I always advised him to be kept out of bed in the day time,
and to be covered very lightly in the night, exposing him to a greater degree
of cold than would be safe in a state a state of health, and insisted upon
keeping his Bowels very free with Saline Laxatives, till the end of the sixth
day from the first commencement of the symptoms; after which I directed a mild
Anodyne every night with a Laxative occasionally, if Costive -- By this method
many were apparently preserved from having the disease in a severe manner.

IN cases of Convulsion, I permitted the feet to be bathed in warm-water,
avoided exposure to cold, and gave Laudanum in Glisters when the patient could
not swallow, till the Convulsions ceased, and the Fever began to rise; after
which I gradually admitted exposure to cooler Air, allowed cool Drinks and mild
Laxatives, and if the Fever became very violent, directed the patient to be
carried abroad into the open air, etc.

WHEN the Symptoms of debility were great, the Pustles flat and pale, I always
gave a little Calomel, joined with an Anodyne, at bedtime and a strong
decoction of the Bark and Serpentaria, with Wine, in the daytime.

IN most cases I found the Bark and Wine serviceable from the 11th to the 17th
day.

FOR about the 11th day, even in the Distinct sort, if the Pustles are
numerous, the swelling of the face begins to subside and the strength to
decline.

WHEN the hands and feet were much swelled, I endeavored to promote Urine by
Diuretics, at the same time that I endeavored to support the strength by Wine
and Bark and a Cordial Regimen.

WITHOUT attention is paid to this circumstance, the severish Symptoms
generally become very violent and often fatal.

I have found Nitre dissolved in Beverage, when given in small Doses, answer
very well -- When a Diarrhoea supervened about this this period, and manifestly
weakened the Patient, I always endeavored to check it, by giving three or four
drops of Thebaic Tincture, frequently in a spirituous Julep -- but not
otherwise.

WHEN the Pock is dry, and formed into a crust, a Hectic Fever is often the
consequence, owing to debility, and the obstruction of perspiration: Here small
doses of Volatiles, with the Bark and Serpentaria, the Warm-Bath and Flannel
Cloathings, by restoring strength and perspiration, generally effect a cure.

WHEN a Pregnant Woman takes the Small Pox in the natural way, Abortion is
generally the consequence. The late Dr. Bond used to say, that this was always
the case; but I have, however, seen instances to the contrary. But the
frequency of its occurrence, ought to make us decline inoculating women in that
condition. Does the mother's having the Smallpox when pregnant, prevent her
child from receiving the infection after its birth?

Meteorological Table for NOVEMBER.
THERMOMETER. BAROMETER. WIND. WEATHER. Days. 8 A.M. 2 P.M. 8 A.M. 2 P.M. 1st.
46 58 30 2 W. N. W. foggy, rain. 10th. 37 48 30 W. S. W. fair c. rain. 20th. 41
52 30 3 N. W. fair. 30th. 30 40 W. N. W. fair.

RESULT.

Thermom. 2d Alterations in the height of the Mercury in the Barometer do not
precede, but always succeed, changes in the Weather.
greatest degrees. of heat, 36 5. 26th greatest degrees. of cold, 27 5.

WIND. W. N. W. N. W. W. andN. E.

"MANY days in this month were very pleasant and agreeable; but the greatest
part of the Weather was cold, changeable and wet, with very variable winds --
On the 26th, there was a fall of snow for the first time this month."

DISEASES.

MOST of the Diseases which occurred this month, were of an Inflammatory
nature, owing to the coldness and variableness of the Weather.

RHEUMATIC and Catarrhal affections were the most common; and the generality of
those who had been subject to the Gout, were again visited by that foe to
repose.

AS Rheumatism is a very common and a very distressing compliant in this
country, particularly in Philadelphia, I hope the following description, and
method of treatment, founded on observation and experience, will not be
unacceptable or useless.

THIS Disease is particularly distinguished by Pains affecting the larger
Joints. It begins with the common Symptoms of Fever; and as soon as the Hot
Stage is formed, is generally attended with a strong, full, and hard Pulse.

THE Pain seldom continues long in the same Joint; but shifts in a surprising
manner from one to another -- The Pain and Fever is always worst in the evening
and night, owing in some measure to the heat of the bed and covering.

THIS Disease differs from the generality of Inflammatory Diseases in this,
that it is not apt to terminate in Suppuration, but effusions sometimes are
occasioned by it, of a transparent gelatinous Fluid, into the tendinous Sheaths.

WHILEVER the Disease depends upon an Inflammatory Diathesis, the pained joints
are relieved by exposure to a colder temperature than usual -- When the
Inflammatory Diathesis is removed or exhausted, the pain is always aggravated
by cold, and relieved by heat. By due attention to these circumstances and the
state of the Fever, we may always ascertain when the Disease is in an Acute,
and when in a Chronic State.

THIS Disease is generally occasioned by exposure to cold and damp Air, after
the body has been heated by fatiguing exercise, etc.

THE Proximate cause of this Disease, appears to be an Atony in the extreme
Vessels, particularly of the Joints, while at the same time the rest of the
System is in a state of increased tone and excitement.

I suppose, with Dr. Cullen, that the application of cold, especially when
combined with moisture is the most common occasional or exciting cause of
Rheumatism; and that it produces its sedative and debilitating effects, more
particularly upon the vessels of the Joints, from their being more loosely and
imperfectly covered by a cellular texture, than the intermediate parts of the
Limbs.

THE indications of cure are, to restore a due balance and adjustment between
the affected Vessels and the rest of the System.

CURE.

BLOOD should be drawn every day, in a larger or smaller quantity, proportioned
to the strength and fullness of the Pulse, and the acuteness of the Pain; and
the Bowels kept very Laxative with Saline Purges, till the Pain and Fever are
reduced.

WHEN the acuteness of the Pain renders Purging inconvenient, the following
powder may be used with advantage.

R. Pulv. Nitri iij. Tart. Emet. Gr. I. m. f. chapter n^. vj.
ONE to be taken in Barley-Water, or Beverage, every two hours -- or Rs. Sal.
Tart. 1. Succ. Limon iss.

m. cui. ad. Vin. Antim. ij. aq. com. 4. m. s. Jul. Coch mag. secunda quaq.
hor. sumend.
THE admission of cold Air, and the use of cool subacid liquors are found
beneficial: But every thing heating or stimulating, aggravates the Pain and
Fever -- Even Opium, always aggravates the Disease, while any Inflammatory
Symptoms continue.

IN the Chronic Rheumatism the plan of treatment must be reversed. Here ten
grains of Gum Guiacum, rubbed with a little Cream of Tartar and Loaf Sugar, and
given in any agreeable vehicle, three or four times a day, and a Su^ori^ic
Anodyne at night, generally affords relief. Warm flannel cloth, should be worn
about the affected limbs; and when only weakness remains, they may be rubbed
with the Oil of Amber or Tincture of Cantharides.

THE Cortex and Serpentaria, with the moderate use of Wine, and a Cordial
Regimen, will all be proper to reinstate the Patient's health.

THE application of Blisters to the Joints, have often beneficial effects in
the Acute Rheumatism; but in chronic cases, I have seen better and more
expeditious effects, when the pains were fixed, by rubbing Mercurial Oinment
very liberally upon the affected parts, and giving the simple Mercurial Pill,
agreeable to the advice of Dr. Clark, till the mouth began to be affected. The
application of Vitriolic Ether to swelled Joints, especially when Oedematous,
has also been ^ound serviceable.

THE Cold Bath has also often been employed with advantage under the last
mentioned circumstances.

IT certainly is an invigorating remedy, when the powers of the system are not
too much reduced to admit of re-action.

Meteorological Table for DECEMBER.
THERMOMETER. BAROMETER. WIND. WEATHER. Days. 8 A. M. 2 P. M. clear. 1st. 24 6
35 2 30 5 S. W. cloudy, foggy, rain. 10th. 26 40 1 29 11 N. E. 20th. 22 38 29 6
S. W. cloudy. 30th. 12 21 30 2 N. W. N. clear.

RESULT. The Mercury in the B^r^mer fell with the S. and S. W. Winds, and (...)
with the N. ^^d N. W.


Thermom. 12, greatest degrees. of heat, 43 2 19, least degrees. of heat, 6 5

WIND S. W. N. E.

"THE weather in general this month, was colder, more variable, and more
disagreeable than it had been for several years."

HIGH and boisterous Winds prevailed the greatest part of the month.

ON the 8th, the River Delaware was firmly frozen over; but was opened on the
12th, by a considerable fall of Rain -- It closed again on the 18th, and
continued so the remainder of the month.

THE weather was still more severe at New York and Albany.

AT Albany, the Mercury is said to have been 10 degrees below 0 in the open
Air, which was lower than it had been for four years before.

"AT Hartford in Connecticut, it was 7 degrees below 0 on the 19th."

DISEASES.

ALMOST every kind of Inflammatory Complaint occurred in Philadelphia: But
affections of the Lungs, whether in the slighter form of Catarrh, or more
dangerous one of Peripneumony, were most prevalent.

SEVERAL cases of Cynanche Trachealis, or Hives, also occurred.

Of the CYNANCHE TRACHEALIS, or Suffocating CATARRH, vulgarly called the HIVES.
THE diagnostic Symptoms of this Disease are; a hoarseness, with some
shrillness and ringing sound, both in speaking and coughing. At the same time,
there is a sense of Pain about the Larynx; some difficulty of respiration, with
a whizzing sound in inspiration, as if the passage of the Air was straitened --
The cough, without exception, in all that I have seen, was dry, harsh and
sonorous -- Together with these Symptoms, there is a frequency of Pulse, a
Restlessness, and generally an increase of Heat -- Neither redness nor tumor
are perceptible within the Fauces, nor any alteration in the size of the
Tonsils externally.

WITH the described Symptoms, and particularly with great difficulty of
breathing, and a sense of strangling in the Fauces, the Patient some times
suddenly expires.

THIS Disease attacks infants at the breast less frequently than after they are
weaned. After this period, the younger they are the more they are liable to it:
The frequency of it becomes less as children advance in age and vigor; and
there are no cases recorded of children above twelve years of age being
affected with it. It very frequently occurs in Philadelphia, both in Autumn and
Spring, and even in Winter, among the infants of the Germans who generally sit
in rooms heated by close stoves.

IT often manifestly comes on from exposure to cold and damp Air, after having
been previously heated or thrown into profuse perspiration.

PERHAPS the slavering of Saliva, by wetting and chilling the neck, may favor
the operation of colder Air.

THE frequency of its commencing with the ordinary Symptoms of a Catarrh,
favors this conjecture.

THERE have been many dissections made of infants who have died of this
Disease; and there has almost constantly appeared a preternatural Membrane
lining the whole internal surface of the upper part of the Trachea, and
extending in the same manner downwards into some of its Ramifications. This
preternatural Membrane may be easily separated, and sometimes has been found
separated in part from the subjacent proper Membrane of the Trachea. This last
is commonly found without any appearance of Corrosion or Ulceration; but it
frequently shows the vestiges of Inflammation, and is covered by a matter
resembling Pus.

FROM the remote causes of this Disease; from the Catarrhal Symptoms commonly
attending it; from the Fever constantly present with it; from the same kind of
preternatural Membrane being found in the Trachea when the Cynanche Maligna is
communicated to it: and from the vestiges of Inflammation on the Trachea
discovered upon Dissection, we must conclude, that the Disease consists in an
Inflammatory affection of the Mucous Membrane of the Larynx and Trachea,
producing an Exudation analogous to that found on the surface of inflamed
Viscera, the thinner parts of which evaporating, and being carried off by the
Air in Respiration, leaves the remainder thick, dry, and solid.

THOUGH this Disease manifestly consists in an Inflammatory Affection, it does
not commonly end either in Suppuration or Gangrene.

THE peculiar and troublesome circumstance of the Disease seems to consist in a
Spasm of the Muscles of the Glottis, which by inducing a Suffocation, prevents
the common consequences of Inflammation.

WHEN this Disease terminates in Health, it appears to be by a resolution of
the Inflammation; by a ceasing of the Spasm of the Glottis; by an expectoration
of the Matter exuding from the Trachea, and of the crusts formed there; and
frequently it ends only with an Expectoration, resembling that which attends a
simple Catarrh.

WHEN it ends fatally, it is by a Suffocation, in consequence of a Spasm
affecting the Glottis; but sometimes probably owing to a quantity of Matter
filling the Bronchiae.

As the Disease has been incontrovertibly proved to be an Inflammatory
Affection, the cure at present is generally attempted by the same means as have
been found most successful in other Inflammatory Affections.

BLEEDING,
BOTH general and topical, has often given immediate relief, when employed
early in the Disease; and by being repeated to a second, and even to a third
time, when the difficulty of breathing and heat of the Body were considerable,
has entirely cured the Disease.

VOMITING immediately after bleeding has generally a very good effect -- For
this purpose I prefer a solution of Tartar Emetic, in Honey and Water, of tepid
warmth, in the proportion of three grains to six tea-spoonfuls of the Honey and
Water; of which one tea-spoonful may be given every quarter of an hour, till it
operates, and the operation promoted with Bran, Linseed, Mallows, Balm or Hysop
Tea sweetened with Honey.

IF the principal Symptoms are not manifestly mitigated after a second
bleeding, the operation of an Emetic, and the exhibition of a Laxative Glister,
(if the Emetic has not also proved purgative) a Blister Plaster, guarded with
fine Gauze, should be applied without delay on each side of the Neck, so as to
reach from the root of each Ear to the Trachea, and as soon as they have
produced Vessications, they are to be removed, and the blistered parts dressed
with Basilicum, or perhaps something more stimulating.

WHEN the Disease happens to children debilitated by previous Disease, blood
letting must be employed more sparingly, or perhaps omitted altogether; and our
dependence must be placed on Emetics, Laxative Glisters, or purges of Calomel,
and the application of Blisters; observing at the same time to keep the
Patient's body cooler than would be agreeable if in health, and to enjoin the
strict observance of the Antiphlogistic Regimen; which consists in avoiding
every stimulating impression; such as Heat, Exercise, Impatience, Animal Food,
Spices, Salt, Butter, Sweet Meats, dried and hard Fruits, distilled or
fermented Liquors, etc.

A Decoction of Barley and Raisins, or Oatmeal Gruel, with ripe juicy Fruits,
either raw or baked are the only articles of Diet allowable; and the Liquids
already specified, or those of a similar quality, acidulated with Lime Juice,
are the most suitable drinks.

DR. George Glentworth has done me the honor to inform me, that he lately
cured two children of the Cynanche Trachealis, by putting them into the Warm
Bath, when in danger of suffocating, immediately after one blood-letting, and
the exhibition of a Puke, in the early Stage of the Disease -- The whole of the
Bodies of these Patients was immersed in the Bath, and when taken out, they
were put to bed between blankets, and a copious perspiration promoted by warm
Beverage or Balm Tea.

I HAVE often advised that a vessel of hot Water should be held under the
Patient's chin, for the purpose of breathing the vapor issuing from it, but
never perceived any beneficial effect from it.

PERHAPS when the Disease has been of several days continuance, it may assist
in softening and loosening the preternatural Membrane; but I apprehend that the
heat it occasions must be injurious in the early Stage of the Disease, while
the Inflammatory Symptoms are considerable.

WHEN every other remedy fails, and the Patient is in immediate danger of
suffocation, I think Bronchotomy might be tried with propriety. Perhaps life
might be restored, even after suffocation, if the operation was immediately
performed, and the Lungs inflated with bellows. If Bronchotomy succeeds, it
will be necessary to keep a suitable Canula in the Orifice for the Patient to
breath through till the Disease is removed.

IN order to insure the success of the Puke, it ought to be exhibited every
fourth or sixth hour if the strength will permit.

I HAVE also seen good effects produced by the exhibition of Calomel in large
and repeated Doses; but not so uniformly as from the Emetic Solution.

BILLS OF MORTALITY.
IN Kalm's Travels, Page 57th, is Recorded the following Account of the Numbers
which died Annually in Philadelphia, from the year 1730 to 1750.
Viz. A. D. 1730 222 1738 250 1739 350 1740 290 1741 345 1742 409 1743 425 A.
D. 1744 410 1745 420 1748 627 1749 758 1750 716

From these Bills of Mortality, it appears that the Diseases which were then
most fatal in Philadelphia were Consumptions, Fevers, Pleurisies,
Haemorrhagies, Dropsies, and Convulsions.

"THE number of inhabitants A.D. 1746, were computed to be about 10,000 -- In
the year 1749, the number of houses in Philadelphia, was found to be 2076."

A Register of the Births and Deaths of the various Religious Societies in the
City of Philadelphia, from the first of September 1787, to the first of
September 1788.
Names of the Societies, etc. BIRTHS. DEATHS. TOTAL. Males Females Males
Females Births Deaths Swedish church 4 3 8 7 7 15 Roman Catholic church 145 123
51 39 268 90 Society of Free Quakers 16 12 7 5 28 12 Christ's and St. Peter's
chs. 66 90 71 60 156 131 German Reformed chapter 91 90 37 42 181 79 Second
Presbyterian chapter 23 22 16 18 45 34 Society of Friends 178 164 67 74 342 141 St.
Paul's church 47 40 12 10 87 22 Third Presbyterian chapter 67 54 17 11 121 28
Moravian church 5 2 3 1 7 4 German Lutheran chapter 229 200 99 77 429 176 First
Presbyterian church 56 38 25 15 94 40 Jews Synagogue 3 2 1 1 5 2 Scotch
Presbyterian chapter 17 11 9 6 28 15 Baptist church 17 13 6 6 30 12 Potter's Field,
Whites 125 93 85 39 218 124 Blacks 76 70 46 27 146 73 Total Mumber 1165 1027
560 438 2192 998

The Strangers who have been interred in the Burying Grounds belonging to some
of the abovementioned Societies, are included in the subjoined numbers.

A Register of the Births and Deaths in the various religious Societies in the
City of Philadelphia, from September first, 1788, to September first, 1789.
Names of the Societies, etc. BIRTHS. DEATH. TOTAL. Males. Females. Males.
Females. Births Deaths German Lutheran church 216 197 82 77 413 159 German
Reformed church 64 61 16 14 123 30 Christ's and St. Peter's chs. 81 89 75 79
170 154 St. Paul's church 31 37 14 24 68 38 Society of Friends 151 157 58 83
308 141 Roman Catholic church 114 120 37 28 234 65 First Presbyterian church 27
27 15 20 50 35 Second, ditto 29 26 23 24 55 47 Third, ditto 57 75 29 18 132 87
Scotch, ditto 6 8 8 5 14 13 Society of Free Quakers 11 13 6 5 24 11 Moravian
church 3 1 3 4 4 7 Swedish church 7 6 5 4 13 9 Baptist church 15 14 6 7 29 13
Universal Baptist, ditto 1 2 1 0 3 1 Methodist church 23 22 9 11 45 20 Jews
Synagogue 1 1 0 0 2 0 Potter's Field, Whites 91 96 89 53 187 142 Blacks 69 74
38 26 143 64 Total Number 993 1026 514 482 2019 996

A Register of the Births and Deaths in the various Religious Societies in the
City of Philadelphia, from September first, 1789, to September first, 1790.
Names of the Societies, etc. BIRTHS DEATHS. TOTAL. Males. Females. Males.
Females. Births. Dths. German Lutheran church 219 196 107 96 415 203 German
Reformed church 85 73 48 21 158 69 Christ's and St. Peter's Chs. 79 87 67 69
166 136 St. Paul's church 30 36 16 20 66 36 Society of Friends 153 160 75 79
313 154 Roman Catholic church 127 122 29 38 249 67 First Presbyterian church 27
31 16 19 58 35 Second, ditto 29 38 26 21 67 47 Third, ditto 59 67 12 13 126 25
Scotch, ditto 18 13 3 2 31 5 Society of Free Quakers 9 12 4 3 21 7 Moravian
church 3 4 0 1 7 1 Swedish church 7 8 6 3 15 9 Baptist church 14 16 6 8 30 14
Universal, Ditto 2 2 0 1 4 1 Methodist church 19 21 10 9 40 19 Jews Synagogue 1
2 2 1 3 3 Potter's Field, whites 94 85 87 49 176 136 Blacks 67 79 35 33 146 68
Total Number 1042 1052 549 486 2094 1035

FROM the three preceding Bills of Mortality, it appears that the number of
Births in Philadelphia at present, annually, is only a little more than double
the number of Deaths.

THE numerous Deaths which occur here, appear to be more owing to the sudden
vicissitudes of Weather than to any other cause; for according to the
observations of Professor Kalm, (page 104.) "There is hardly a country on earth
in which the Weather changes so often in a Day as it does here."

IT frequently changes from excessive heat to piercing cold in less than twenty
four hours -- Sometimes it changes five or six times in the same day.

THE following calculations, the result of observations for ten years on the
London Bills of Mortality, by Mr. Simpson, with additional remarks by Dr.
Foulke: extracted from his Oration on Longevity, delivered before the
Philosophical Society at Philadelphia, are inserted to show, that the
probabilities or chances of enjoying health, and prolonging life, is much
greater in the City of Philadelphia, and some other parts of the United States,
than in any other districts of the World, containing a proportionable number of
inhabitants.

BY Mr. Sympson's observations, it appears that not one-half of the Persons
born in London live to be three years old; not onethird to be 25; not
one-fourth to be 38; not one-sixth part to be 49; not one-eighth to be 59; and
not more than one in 500 of them to be 78.

IT appears from the observations of Dr. Price, that instances of Longevity are
not always in proportion to the rareness of deaths in the early periods of life.

"IN Pais de Vaud in Switzerland, he says only one in 45 dies annually." In
London nearly one in 20 and three-fourths dies annually; in Vienna, one in 19
in Holy Cross near Shrewsbury in England, one in 33.

IN Pais de Vaud one half of the inhabitants live to the age of 41. In a
Country Parish in Brandenburgh, where the annual Deaths are in the same
proportion as in Pais de Vaud, one-half the Persons born do not reach their
26th year -- In Holy Cross one half reach their 27th year -- In London and
Berlin, such is the melancholy condition of the Inhabitants, that one-half of
the children are buried before they are two years and three-fourths old.

THE ravage of Mortality is still more excessive at Vienna, where the second is
the last year of life to half the Persons born in that City.

DR. PRICE proceeds to give us the proportion of those who reach 80 years of
age in different places.

WE shall here find apparent contradictions, if we are not prepared to expect
instances of Longevity in the same places, which produce even the largest
proportion of annual Deaths.

FOR instance -- Holy Cross near Shrewsbury, furnishes a larger proportion of
annual Deaths than Pais de Vaud or Brandenburg; but at the last place, one
person in 22 only reaches 80 years of age; and in Pais de Vaud, 1 only in 21
and a half; whilst in Holy Cross, one in 11 is found to reach this venerable
period of existence.

THE difficulty and consequent uncertainty of all political Arithmetic weakens
our confidence in calculations of this nature; but if the most ingenious in
Europe, who have every means of information in their power, are heard with
diffidence, what confidence, can we expect to inspire whose sources of
information are as yet so scanty and imperfect? "We shall, however, venture to
draw some inferences from such documents and data as we do possess.

THE expectation of life to an Infant just born is 18 years even in London,
where early Deaths are more numerous, perhaps, than any where else except in
Vienna.

ON Dr. Price's principles, the number of annual Births, being multiplied into
the expectation of life, should give the number of native Inhabitants; for
instance, it is said the Births in this City (Philadelphia) last year, were
2192, and this number multiplied by 18, the lowest expectation of life for an
infant in Europe, amounts to 39456. But as it has since been found, that the
number of inhabitants residing in the City and suburbs of Philadelphia is
42,400, the inference follows (upon a presumption, that the registry of Births
is accurate) that the expectation for the life of every Infant is more than 18
to 1 here.

IN all European Cities a calculation on these principles gives a result
confessedly short of the real number of inhabitants, and the calculator is
obliged to have recourse to the excess of Burials more than Births to account
for the difference. But in this country, favorable as it is equally to
Population and Longevity, we have even in its largest City an excess of Births
more than of Burials, in the extraordinary proportion of 11 to 5,
notwithstanding strangers who die in Philadelphia are included in the list of
burials.

BY comparing the number of annual Deaths in Philadelphia with the number of
Inhabitants, we shall find that there is not more than one in 40 dies annually;
and if we do not include strangers in the account of the funerals, it will be
found that there is not more than one in 50 that dies here.

FROM a paragraph in the News-paper, under the New Haven Head, we find the
annual Deaths only in the proportion of 1 in 70 of the whole number of the
Inhabitants; a proportion more flattering than any table we have met with,
though the limited scale of this instance, and the corroborating circumstances
cited, leave no room to doubt of its accuracy.

THE learned and ingenious Dr. Samuel Smith of Princetown, (Author of the
Influence of Climate, etc. upon the human body) has favored me with an account
of a number of Families in the Jersey State, by which it appears that of the
living four-fifths of them were above 10 years old; more than one-half upwards
of 20; two-sevenths above 30; one-fifth above 40; one-ninth above 50; and
one-fourteenth had passed, and some very considerably, the period of 60 years.

MR. WM. BARTON's ingenious Letter, presented at the last meeting of the
Society, contains many curious particulars, and seems calculated to supply
American data, the Desideratum of those tables with which other Countries have
been furnished.

IT appears from Mr. Barton's reference to Professor Wigglesworth, that one
Person in eight of those buried in Ipswich Hamlet, in the State of
Massachusetts, arrived to the very uncommon Age (in other Countries) of 80
years. "A proportion which must remain a monument of Longevity in all
probability, only to be paralleled in the future History of our own Country."

D. PERCIVAL says, "in the Pais de Vaud, a district of the Province of Bern in
Switzerland, and in a country Parish in Brandenburgh 1 in 45 of the Inhabitants
die annually; and at Stoke Damarell in Devonshire, 1 in 54; whereas in
Edinburgh and Vienna, the yearly Mortality appears to be 1 in 20; in London 1
in 21; in Rome and Amsterdam, 1 in 22; in Northampton, 1 in 26; and in Holy
Cross, 1 in 33.

IN the Pais de Vaud, the proportion of Inhabitants, who attain the Age of 80,
is 1 in 21 Brandenburgh, 1 in 22 in Norwich, 1 in 27; in Manchester, 1 in 30;
in London, 1 in 40; and in Edinburgh, 1 in 42. These facts afford a striking,
but melancholy, proof of the unfavourable influence of large towns on the
duration of life.

FROM the most accurate computation, London is found to contain 601,750
inhabitants; and from 1759 to 1768, the burials have exceeded the christenings
every year upwards of 7000; which is the recruit the Metropolis requires
annually from the Country to support the present number of its People.

IN 1757, a survey was made of Manchester and Salford. The number of
Inhabitants then amounted to 19839; and the burials, exclusive of those among
the Dissenters, were 778 per annum; but since that time the populousness of
Manchester has considerably increased. Half of all that are born in that town
die under five years of age.

THE Island of Madeira, which is situated between. 32 and 33 degrees N. L. is
so remarkably healthy, that two-thirds of all that are born in it, live to be
married. Autumn is the most healthy; Summer the most sickly season there.

IN Manchester Diseases are most frequent and fatal in the Months of January,
February, and March; and least so in July, August, and September.

"AT Paris, and in Sweden, it has been observed, that Women not only live
longer than Men; but that married Women live longer than single Women."

"AND in Switzerland it appears, particularly from the calculations of M.
Muret, that of equal numbers of single and married Women between the age of 15
and 25, more of the former died than of the latter, in the proportion of two to
one."

IN the Parish of Holy Cross, Salop, and account was taken by the Vicar, A. D.
1760, of the number of Males and Females, of the Age of 70 and upwards; the
latter amounted to 35, the former only to eight. -- See Price on reversionary
payments, and Percival's Essays, Vol. 2d.

FROM a comparison of the Bills of Mortality with the number of Inhabitants in
the Parish of Manchester it appears, that whilst in the town the yearly
Mortality is one to 28, in the Parish only one in 56 dies annually.

SUCH a striking disparity between the healthiness of a large town and the
Country which surrounds it, will scarcely be credited by those who have paid no
attention to such enquiries.

An ACCOUNT of the SITUATION, CLIMATE and DISEASES of the STATE of DELAWARE.
"THIS State, which is only 92 Miles in length and 24 in breadth, is situated
between 38 30m. and 40. North Latitude; and 0 and 1 45m. Longitude, West from
Philadelphia; and bounded North by Pennsylvania; East by the River and Bay of
Delaware; and West by Maryland."

"The East and South parts of this State are low and flat, and a considerable
portion in an uncultivated condition, which occasions the Waters to stagnate;
in consequence of which the Inhabitants are very subject to Intermittents and
Remittents in the latter end of Summer and beginning of Autumn."

IN the Northern parts of the State, the Land is more elevated and dry, the
Soil fertile, and produces Wheat in large quantities, and all the grains and
grasses common to Pennsylvania.

DOVER, the capital of the State, stands on a small creek, a few Miles from the
River Delaware, and contains about 100 dwelling houses.

WILMINGTON, the largest Town in the State, is but 28 Miles from Philadelphia,
situate upon a gentle ascent of an eminence along Christina Creek, about one
and a half Miles from the River Delaware. This Town, and the country to the
North-West of it, is remarkably healthy.

THE difference observed in the vigor, activity, complexions, and aspect of
the People who inhabit the low flat country and those of the high and dry
parts, affords a very strong argument in favor of the opinion of naturalists;
who assert, that the healthiness or unhealthiness of any situation and climate
may be ascertained from an accurate obserance of these circumstances, together
with the knowledge of the diet, drinks, and occupations of the Inhabitants,
with as much certainty as the nature and quality of any Soil may be determined
from a knowledge of the species of timber and other vegetables which grow upon
it spontaneously.

THE influence which particular situations, Climates, exposure to the Sun and
Wind, Abstinence, or the occasional use of only scanty and indigestible
Aliment, with an indolent and slovenly manner of living, is almost incredible:
So much so, that many Philosophers have been induced to think, that the sable
blackness of the Negro, is owing to a combination of those causes. But Anatomy
demonstrates that this depends upon a very different circumstance; upon a
peculiar and original organization and disposition of the r^te mucosum, and is
as much constitutional as the color of the Eye.

DR. JAMES TILTON, a Physician of talents and experience, residing in the Town
of Dover, in a Letter to Dr. Redman, President of the College of Physicians,
dated April 1790, remarks that "However there may be something essential and
immutable in the nature of all Fevers, yet different constitutions of the
Atmosphere may occasion, of necessity, a variety of practice even in Diseases
of the same name.

HE further observes, that, "Before the war, during the winter, or inflammatory
season of the year, they treated the Fevers which occured at that place, by
repeated bleeding, and the general antiphlogistic methods with remarkable
success; but the same method now would be attended with very different effects;
the exceptions at least are so few as hardly to deserve mentioning."

"OPIUM, Wine, Bark, Volatile Salts are the Articles of Materia Medica, we are
obliged chiefly to have recourse to."

So contrary to the Phlogistic, and so favorable to the Typhous Diathesis is
the present constitution of the Atmosphere, that blood-letting is very seldom
used in the cure of Fever.

DR. TILTON also remarks, that the Smallpox, Measles and Influenza, though
from contagion and a cause permanent and immutably the same, yet they have not
lately borne bleeding as they used to do; and very often in the latter Stages
of these Fevers, the Bark, other Tonics and Cordials, become absolutely
necessary.

"THE Fever most prevalent with us this Winter and Spring, has usually attacked
with congestion in the Lungs, resembling a Peripneumony; and yet the whole
train of Symptoms indicative of Typhous weakness, such as Pain of the Head, dry
Tongue, foul Mouth, sick Stomach, attended sometimes with Vomiting and Purging,
so regularly ensued, that this Fever may be denominated Peripneumonia
Typhoides. Although at the beginning of this Fever a fullness of the Pulse,
Pain of the Head, and aching Pains over the whole Body, might induce an
incautious Physician to employ blood-letling; we have learned from repeated
observation to withhold the Lancet, or to use it in the most guarded manner."

COPY of a LETTER from DOCTOR TILTON.
Dover 20, April 1791. SIR,
IMMEDIATELY after writing my former Letter to you, I was seized with an
indisposition that totally disqualified me for writing again so soon as I
intended; and even at this time I cannot attempt more than a very general
account of our Diseases.

THE medical History of Delaware, I apprehend, is peculiar in this
circumstance, that a greater variety of Soil and Climate is comprehended within
a smaller extent of Territory than can be found any where else. Within the
narrow limits of a hundred Miles in length, upon the Delaware River, and the
mean distance of about twenty-four Miles back into the country, we have all the
varieties of Soil and Climate to be found in the middle States of America. That
district of Delaware, which lies above Christiana creek, is perfectly
Mountainous both in Soil and Climate; and these Mountains extend their
influence throughout New Castle county, so as to give a distinction of climate
for every ten miles you descend down the Delaware. From Apoquinimink creek to
the lower end of the state, we have a level country, intersected at regular
distances from five to ten miles, with creeks of tidewater, bordered with
extensive marshes; and these creeks head in immense swamps, on the western
border of the state, from whence the water falls, equivocally, either into the
Delaware or the Chesapeake. Throughout this low and flat district, Marsh
Miasmata and other noxious exhalations, must be a plentiful source of Diseases.
Cape Henlopen, nevertheless, enjoys all the advantages of a perfectly insular
situation; and all the river shore, as well as the sea coast, find great relief
from the sea-breeze; so that it is only the inland part of the country, where
heat and stagnation concur to exalt the noxious exhalations of our low grounds,
that our state can truly be said to be sickly.

FROM this general description of our state, the following account of the
health and diseases of the inhabitants will be readily credited. The hills of
Brandy wine and Christiana, furnish as healthful a district of country as any
in America. The Borrough of Wilmington for health, beauty, and accommodation,
is superior to any town I have seen, between the borders of New England and the
southern boundary of Virginia; and I have examined all the principal towns
within those limits, in a comparative point of view. George-Town, on the
Potowmac, the intended Federal Residence, is more analogous to Wilmington than
any other, but manifestly the inferior of the two.

THE town of New Castle, though surrounded by marshy sprouts from the Delaware,
is nevertheless rendered a healthful residence, by the refreshing breezes from
the river that flow in upon the town as regularly as the tide. All the county
of New Castle, and especially above Apoquinimink, is a delightful district of
country, though the nearer the river the more healthful.

KENT, though blessed with the most fertile soil, is the most sickly of the
three counties of Delaware. Dover, the county town, and Metropolis of the
State, is truly unhealthful. Situated eight miles within land, and shut out
from all water communication by high timbered woods, the air of this district,
in the hot season of the year, suffers exceedingly from stagnation.

SUSSEX county, though as flat and marshy as Kent, is fanned on one side from
the Delaware, and on another from the Atlantic, and the woods being cut down in
less proportion, than in the other counties, the abundance of forest trees,
pour forth a refreshment to the air that contributes, with the sea breezes, to
the health of the inhabitants.

JEWS, the county town of Sussex, stands upon the promontory of Cape-Henlopen,
that stretches in between the Delaware and the Atlantic. This town is
constantly fanned from the Ocean, and is as healthful as Bermudas. This place
has furnished the longest lived inhabitants of our state. Here are the greatest
proportion of old people, and the most numerous swarms of children. Jews is
much resorted to by convalescents from the inland country and neighboring
states, and deserves to be still more frequented. Sickly boys, and others with
swelled Spleens and obstructed Viscera, from repeated and obstinate Fevers, are
quickly restored to health, barely by a residence at Jews. All manner of
nervous weakness is relieved by the salutary Air of our Cape; but Asthmatic and
Hectic Patients should be cautious how they trust themselves there.

FREQUENT and sudden changes in the sensible qualities of our Atmosphere
furnish another fertile source of Diseases. These changes depend solely on the
course of the winds, and happen as often as the winds change. The wind blowing
from between North and East, is generally cold and moist, except from June
until September, when it is generally dry. From East to South comes our sea
breeze, and is more salutary than any other. From South to West, the winds are
hot, all the year round, and constitute our most noxious blasts. From West to
North, the wind is at all seasons cold, dry in winter, and accompanied with
gusts in summer.

THE most healthful season of our year is from the beginning of May, until the
beginning of August. During this period, the weather is less variable than at
other seasons; and I have conceived, that the rapid progress of vegetation,
during the Spring contributes not a little to render the Air salubrious.

IMMEDIATELY after Harvest, our endemical sickness begins. It generally
increases throughout the month of August, and rages at its height during
September.

BILIOUS, Intermitting and Remitting Fevers, differing only in degree and
modification, constitute the principal group of our annual Fall Diseases.
Dysenteries sometimes appear, but not oftener than in other countries; and it
is remarkable, that Diseases of this kind oftener afflict the higher districts
of New Castle, than the flat counties of Kent and Sussex. The Cholera Morbus is
a frequent Disease in the hot months; and the Cholera Infantum, as described by
Dr. Rush, has of late years made great devastation among our children, more
especially in the town of Dover. A swelled Spleen and visceral obstructions,
are no uncommon consequence of Fevers. Scorbutic and other putrid affections
often make their appearance in unhealthful situations: And if our Remitting
Fevers of the Fall are neglected or ill treated, they will often degenerate
into the most perfect Typhus.

WITH the commencement of frost in October, the Fall Sickness abates in
quantity, but wears very much the same type for a month or six weeks longer.
The Bilious and Remitting Fevers of the Fall seem to lay the foundation of our
Winter Fevers: for it is very remarkable, that those who have been the most
harrassed by the Endemical Fall Sickness, are the most liable to the Synochous
and Typhous Fever of the Winter. As to a simply Inflammatory Fever, in which
local Inflammation is solely to be regarded, it is with us a rare occurrence
indeed.

THE proportion of sickness among our inhabitants is as various as the Soil and
Climate. In the highlands of New Castle, a man thinks himself quite unfortunate
to be overtaken by an Epidemic Sickness, even in the fall of the year; whereas
an inhabitant of the inland districts of Kent and Sussex thinks himself lucky
to escape a year or two together.

IN Wilmington and Jews, the countenances of the inhabitants never flag, but
at all seasons witness the most vigorous health.

IN Dover every inhabitant suffers a deminution of health, during the fall
season, and exhibits a more pale and languid face than at other times.

A PREVALENCY of South-West Winds above all things increases and exalts our
Fall Sickness; but when the Easterly Winds prevail, during the sickly season,
or frequent showers happen from the North-West, they afford us great relief.
Those habitations that border on the water, and are openly ex-exposed to the
sea breeze, are every where healthy.

BOMBAYHOOK, though surrounded by immense Marshes, is nevertheless, next to
Jews, distinguished for the health of its Inhabitants. These several facts
taken together, lead us to conjecture, that Marsh Miasmata will not altogether
account for our Fall Sickness, nor the peculiar noxious influence of our
South-West Winds, which injure us as manifestly by the sudden thaws they
occasion in Winter, as by their parching heat in Summer.

IT must be confessed, a great change has taken place in the Diseases of this
part of the Country, as well of the hot as cold season of the year. I can
remember when regular Intermittents chiefly abounded in the Summer and Fall,
and simply Inflammatory Fevers in the Winter. These now give place to severe
Bilious Vomitings, and continued or Remitting Fevers in the Fall, and Synochous
and Typhous Fevers in the Winter. Formerly we used Tartar Emetic more freely
and to greater advantage than we can at present. Then, too, the Antiphlogistic
method of treating Fevers served us well enough; now we have very little use
for the Lancet.

OUR Bilious Vomitings are best treated by washing out the Stomach with warm
demulcent Liquors, then quieting all disturbance with Anodynes, and finishing
the cure with Aromatics, Bark, and other Tonic Medicines.

OUR Bilious and Remitting Fevers require evacuations more or less, have their
exacerbations much relieved by Anodynes, and finally yield to the Bark.

IN the Cholera Infantum every irritating Medicine taken into the Stomach is
injurious. To wash out the Stomach with Chamomile Tea and Chicken Water, is all
the evacuation that can be attempted with advantage. Small doses of Laudanum in
the day and full doses at night, become then the sovereign remedy. Bark and
Camphor are most advantageously applied to the skin: But nothing more than a
palliative cure can be expected, without removing the Patient, from the noxious
Air that first gave the Bilious impression. For otherwise, if not killed
outright, the Patient must languish under the repeated recurrence of the
disorder, with such respites now and then as may be barely termed remissions,
until the cold weather has made an entire change in the Atmosphere. In this
case, therefore, we have recourse to the Bay Shore; and it is surprising the
effects of snuffing the sea breeze for a single day. At Jews I never heard of
the Cholera Infantum; while at Dover it has for years past, swept off our
children in a manner that is scarcely credible elsewhere. This puts the
efficacy of the sea air in a strong point of view; and I mention it that others
may profit by our experience and observation.

THE Fever most prevalent with us in Winter, is precisely that described by D.
Cullen, under the name of Synochus. Its first attack is generally attended with
aching pains all over, and very often with considerable Pulmonic affections.
Another local affection that often attends it is the Enteritis. The Symptoms
that give us the earliest and surest warning of its true Type, are Headache and
sickness at the Stomach. Gentle evacuations of the Stomach and Bowels are
proper in the beginning; but Antimonials are to be used with caution. For the
removal of local affections, we rely chiefly upon Blisters. The Lancet is never
used but upon extraordinary and pressing occasions. Languor and weakness soon
come on, and we watch the first opportunity of giving the Bark. The most free
and liberal use of this important remedy is, at any time or Stage of the
Disorder, warranted by a dry Tongue. Opium, Wine, Camphor, Volatiles, and all
manner of stimulants are often employed in the course of the disorder, as
necessary auxiliaries of the Bark. As soon as the Typhous form is correctly
marked, the most cordial and nourishing diet is always used.

NUMEROUS observations persuade us, that our Typhous Fevers are more contagious
than is generally apprehended. It is remarkable that more or less of a family
will be affected in succession, when a Fever of this sort is introduced among
them, according to the care observed in cleanliness and a free ventilation. The
Typhus, therefore, is peculiarly noxious to negro families. It is so common to
trace infection from one person to another, that the requisite care to guard
the family and visiting friends from contagion, is among the earliest and most
importunate instructions of our Physicians to their Patients.

THE swelling of the Spleen and other visceral obstructions, are best relieved
by aperient Gumous Medicines taken at the same time with Bitters, Aromatics and
Tonics, and continued for a length of time. But a Patient once impressed with
this kind of habit, is only to be secured from repeated relapses, by a change
of Climate.

WE have incidental disorders in common with other people. But I suppose those
only which are special and peculiar to our State to be to your purpose. These I
have endeavored to describe in a cursory way, as well as my time and state of
health will permit.

THE census of the inhabitants of this State, taken for the first time, is not
yet completed; but I have reason to think it will amount to not less than
seventy five thousand. There are no possible means of obtaining (...) register
of annual births and deaths.

YOU will perceive at first sight, that my letter is a hasty performance,
delivered only in general terms, and in that form and order in which the
subject most naturally presented itself to my mind. But although neither the
arrangement, language, or (...) of this discourse should be of any use to you,
the facts may be relied upon.

I am, Sir, With great Respect, Your most Obedient Servant, JAMES TILTON.
Dr. Currie.

An ACCOUNT of the SITUATION, CLIMATE, and DISEASES of MARYLAND.
THIS State is in length 134 Miles, and in breadth 110; is bounded North by
Pennsylvania, East by the Delaware State, South East and South by the Atlantic
Ocean; and by Virginia on the South and West; and is between 37 56 and 39 44
North Latitude, and 4 30 West, Longitude from Philadelphia.

DIVIDED into the Eastern and Western Divisions by the Chesapeake Bay, which
receives a number of the largest Rivers in the United States. The Rivers,
however, which run through this State are commonly small, except the rapid
Susquehanna, and the Patomac; the latter of which is the boundary between it
and Virginia.

EAST of the Blue Ridge of Mountains, which stretches across the Western part
of this State, the Land, like that in all the Southern States, is generally
level and free from Stones; of course the Soil must be similar, as well as the
generality of its natural productions.

THE Houses of the Inhabitants, who reside on Plantations, are often several
Miles distant from each other, hence they appear to live very retired and
unsocial lives; and if we may be allowed to judge of the disposition and
manners of Men from the expression of their countenances, the generality of
them live dissatisfied and disconsolate.

THE behavior of the People remote from towns, excluded from social
intercourse, and the exchange of friendly offices, is expressive of indolence,
and the most consumate absence and indifference.

THOUGH Annapolis is the capital of the State, it is much inferior to Baltimore
in respect to numbers and commercial advantages. The number of Inhabitants in
Annapolis does not exceed 2000; in Baltimore there are above 15000.

DR. NUTTER gives the following account of the Diseases which occur on the
Eastern Shore of Maryland.

"THE Diseases which particularly infest the lower extremity of the Eastern
Shore of Maryland are, in the Winter, the Synochus or the Typhoid Fever of
Doctor Cullen. We have instances of Fevers with genuine Inflammatory Symptoms
in this place, but these are not very common. Practitioners are so well aware
of this, that they seldom use the Lancet freely."

"I HAVE observed that Fevers commencing with Inflammatory Symptoms soon go
off, and leave the Patient in a state of great debility, with other Symptoms
resembling the Typhus. These are observed to be very common in the Month of
February, particularly after a general thaw."

"THE ground is uniformly level and low in most of the Counties on the Eastern
Shore, and consequently in many places covered with stagnant Water, except
where it is intersected with numerous Creeks. Here are also very large tracts
of Marsh in this place, which load the Atmosphere with vapor in the day time,
that falls down again in form of dew in the night in the after part of Summer."

THE vernal and Summer Seasons afford the Inhabitants a respite from Disease.

THE few that do occur at these seasons are similar to those of more Northern
Latitudes, but for the most part milder. The Cholera Morbus and Dysentery,
however, are very prevalent during part of the Summer, especially after
extraordinary hot weather.

THE Inhabitants dread the approach of Autumn; and with reason, because at this
Season Intermittents, Remittents, Diarrhaeas and Dysenteries prevail with
astonishing violence, and frequently extend their ravage far and wide.

"THE ravages of the Influenza in 1789, were particularly observable in
Caroline County, which place is also subject to the Diseases abovementioned in
an extraordinary degree."

BY an account received from a Physician residing at Baltimore, it appears,
that Dysenteries always become epidemical, or very frequent, there in the
Autumnal Season, when cold and wet weather succeeds a long course of that which
has been hot and dry.

"THE Symptoms are generally slightly Inflammatory at the beginning, and yield
to gentle Laxatives and diluting mild aqueous Drinks, and fomentations to the
Abdomen; after which small Doses of Anodynes, combined with Tartar Emetic,
complete the cure; and a relapse is prevented by exhibiting the Bark combined
with a mild Aromatic."

THIS corresponds in a great measure with the observations of Hillary, in his
account of the Diseases of Barbados, who says, in Page 203, Edition 2d. "I
have always found from the best observations that I could make, on the
variations of the Air and Weather in this Island, that if the Months of May,
June, July, and August were very hot and dry, and the following Months of
September, October, and November were accompanied with much Rain, so that the
Air was rendered cool and damp, and if the intermediate days between the rainy
ones were very hot, that Dysenteries were very frequent and Epidemical, and
were generally more or less malignant, as the abovementioned changes of the
Weather were greater or less, more sudden or more gradual, and shorter or of
longer duration.

IT appears from the observations of Hillary, that Dysenteries constantly
return every year in the West Indies with the Periodical Rains; hence it may be
concluded, that cold and moisture operating on the Body in a certain State of
Relaxation, are the principal causes of this Disease. From these and other
circumstances, I am inclined to think the Dysentery is never an infectious
Disease or communicable from one to another, except when combined with the
putrid or Typhous Fever; and that Dr. Cullen has been mistaken in ascribing it
to specific infection; but that it is generally, if not always, owing to the
joint operation of Marsh Miasmata and external cold, or is the effect of human
Contagion operating on the System, when the Intestines are in a relaxed and
Atonic State.

Extract of a Letter from another Correspondent, residing on the Eastern Shore
of Maryland.

OUR Summer and Autumnal Weather of one Year varies so little from that of
another, that the same Distempers return so regularly with the Seasons, that
they may be considered as Endemic. These succeed each other in the following
order.

TOWARD the end of July, young children (which I believe suffer first by
excessive heat or cold in every Climate) are attacked with the Cholera, or a
Bilious Diarrhaea.

IN the following Month, Remittents, along the low moist country, are very
general, and continue to increase daily till after the Autumnal Equinox, when
they are succeeded by Quotidian and a Tertian Agues. Dysenteries sometimes
occur here; but I do not recollect the situations in which they are most
common, neither have I seen a sufficient number of cases to be able to inform
you of the method of treating them which succeeds best -- But this I can say,
that the generality of the Practitioners in the District where I reside, never
puzzle their heads with the investigation of Causes, but depend upon the Store
of Recipes recorded in Brooke's Practice of Physic, or Buchan's Family
Physician. -- If they succeed they are satisfied; if they fail, they console
themselves with the most confident assurance, that every thing has been done
secundum artem.

CHILDREN are often afflicted with a severe kind of Apthae here in the Autumn
and early part of Winter, which often renders them scarcely able to swallow any
kind of sustenance. This appears to be owing to a defective perspiration, and a
relaxed state of the solids. And the remedies which I have found most speedy in
removing it, has been the Warm-bath, Flannel Clothing, and the Cortex in
different forms; and I particularly enjoin removal to the high dry Country, for
the benefit of purer Air.

I have many times seen the Cholera, with regular periods like a Tertian, and
the paroxism of Tertians, attended with a Cholera. In a few Cases I have seen a
Tertian changed into the Dysentery, and Dysenteries into Tertians; and when one
of these diseases has been suppressed, the other has sometimes ensued. I have
also been told by other Practitioners, that it is very common for Dysenteries
to put on the form of Tertians, and for the fits of Tertians to be regularly
accompanied by gripes and stools.

"From the accounts of Sir John Pringle and Dr. Monro, this disease appears to
be contagious in Camps and Hospitals; but I believe there are no proofs of its
being so in private practice."

The following account of the situation and Diseases of George-Town was
communicated by Dr. W. Martin. --

GEORGE-TOWN is situate on the Banks of the River Patowmac, about an hundred
and sixty miles from its entrance into the Chesapeake Bay. The ground on which
it stands is very broken, being a cluster of numberless little hills, and
which, though they at present lie very high above the surface of the River,
have probably at some remote period been overflowed, as at the distance of
eight or ten feet from the surface, marine shells have been found. There are no
Diseases that I can obtain information of, or have met with myself, that can be
considered as peculiar to this place. No Endemics, nor any Epidemics, except
occasionally introduced from other parts and propagated by contagion or
infection. There are no marshy grounds nor stagnant waters near it. The
country, though not in high cultivation, is yet sufficiently cleared to favor
the salutary effects of free ventilation.

THE State of Society here, as it is not favorable to agreeable social
intercourse, so also there are none of those complaints to be met with that
arise from a too free use of the bottle, or excessive eating (I speak of the
better class of people). On the other hand, the meagre Diet, chiefly Indian
bread and salted fish, together with the insatiable desire for Rum, and a want
of cleanliness among the lower ranks, often give rise to Diseases of extreme
Debility; and to a cutaneous disease (which if any disease is endemic from its
general prevalency this is) called the Itch (Psora).

IN short, the state of diseases are so nearly similar to those with you, that
it is scarce necessary to enumerate them. In the Winter and Spring we have
Pneumonia, Rheumatism, Sore-throat (Cynanche Tonsilaris) Catarrh, etc. In the
Summer Cholera and Diarrhoea. In Autumn, now and then a case of Remittent;
Intermittents less frequently.

IN the Cure even of inflammatory Diseases, we find more success in moderate
and frequent than in copious Venaesection. Our greater position to the
Southward than you, the longer continuance of our heat in Summer, as well as of
its greater intenseness, renders the Bodies of the inhabitants more relaxed,
and consequently more disposed to diseases of debility, such as Idiopathic
Fevers and Diarrhoeas, than in more northern latitudes, and certainly occasions
the symptoms in phlogistic cases to be more mild.

UPON the whole, George-Town and its vicinity, may be considered as a healthy
part of America; and in any disputes about the propriety of the seat of the
General Government being fixed here, no objection can be urged against it on
account of its Diseases.

DR. JOHN SHAFF acquaints the Author, that Annapolis the Capital of Maryland
"is probably one of the most salutary situations on the Continent, the number
of inhabitants small, that he rarely meets with any but sporadic Cases of
Typhus, and that their other Fevers are mostly of the Intermitting, Remitting,
and inflammatory Type."

DR. JOHNSTON, of Baltimore, informs that he has met with numerous Cases of
Dysentery in situations out of the reach of Marsh Miasmata.

IN the Diarrhoea of Children he is of opinion, that Dentition, if not the
Cause of the Disease, has a great share in aggravating it, by increasing the
irritability of the System. The Thebaic Tincture in small doses; Alum, Com.
dissolved in spring water, colored with Coccinella so as to give a grain in a
tea spoonful, is the usual dose and manner in which I give that medicine, after
every loose stool, to a child of six or eight months old to a year, and
increase it in proportion to the age. To women with the same complaint, who
give suck, and in many cases of Dysentery, after clearing the Primae Viae with
Ipecacuanha, I give Alum. Com. from five to ten grains, with as many drops of
Thebaic Tincture. I direct infants of all ages to be bathed in cold water, if
the weather is hot, either by a partial application of it to the head and
shoulders, or by immersion; after which they are rubbed dry, and wrapped up in
flannels, to bring a glow of heat to the surface, and promote the good effects
of that reaction, which the sudden application of cold rarely fails to produce.

SOME of our Medical Gentlemen are very fond of the Gum Kino in the Diarrhoea
Infant. I have used it ever since Dr. Fothergill published his opinion of it in
the 1st. Vol. Land. Med. Observations; but I am convinced that the alum is best
by itself, or in red wine more effectually to disguise it.

I REFER you to Vanswieten's Commentaries, Vol. ix. Section 923, for a solution
of your other enquiries, etc.

Extract of a Letter, dated Dorchester, February 18th, 1790.
AFTER giving a similar account of the Diseases more of less epidemic at
particular Seasons with those already inserted, a Physician whose name I have
not permission to mention, informs me, that Dropsical Cases are very frequent
in that part of the country where he practices; and that he has been generally
successful in curing them by the Digitalis in decoction, which he prefers to
the powder. -- For particulars he refers to a paper on the Dropsy by Erasmus
Darwin, published in the Medical Transactions of the London College of
Physicians; of which the following is a copy.

BOIL of the fresh green leaves of the Digitalis Purpurea, or Fox-glove, 40z.
in common water from two pints to one, and add to the strained liquid of vinous
spirit, 20z.

OF this Decoction one large table spoonful is to be given early in the
morning, in every variety of Idiopathic Dropsy, whether in the form of
Hydrocephalus, Hydrothorax, A^cites, or Anasarca; and should be repeated every
hour till the Patient has taken from three to eight or nine spoonfuls, or till
sickness or some other disagreeable sensation is induced.

THE Hydropic fluid generally disappears on the next day, or on the third day,
without any repetition of the medicine, and frequently without any apparently
increased evacuation; at other times, with Vomiting and a large flow of Urine,
and sometimes with purging stools.

To some whose constitutions appeared to be robuster, the dose was increased to
half or a whole spoonful more, if the first two or three single spoonfuls
occasioned no nausea. But as some of these Patients complained of very great
debility during its operation, it was judged more prudent to use rather an
under than an excessive dose. In some, who had been two or three times relieved
by the same method in the space of eight or ten months, a less quantity was
found to succeed: To these, half an ounce of the decoction, mixed with an ounce
of simple Pepperment-water, or with a decoction of Bark and Snake-root, was
given twice or thrice a day, for two or three successive days.

ON the day after the exhibition of the Digitalis, or on the third day, or as
soon as the sickness occasioned by it ceased, an infusion of the stem leaves of
Artichoke, or a strong Decoction of the Bark, with a small quantity of some
Chalybeate Medicine, (of which I give the preference to the Flores Ma^tiales,
from two to six grains, or in lieu of this, the Vitriol Martis, or common
Copperas, as it is improperly called, from one quarter of a grain to two
grains, dissolved in some Aromatic Water, or mixed with Syrup of Ginger) was
generally given twice a day. and one grain of Opium every night, with as much
Rhubarb or Aloes as occasioned a stool next day. This quantity of Opium was
persisted in for some weeks, without increase or diminution, as it seemed to be
particularly serviceable.

THE convalescent Patients were allowed to eat flesh Meats, if their Stomachs
could bear it, twice or thrice a day, and also Shellfish and Eggs, Spiceries
and aromatic Vegetables, particulary Cellery and Watercresses, Peppergrass,
etc. They were also advised to drink half the quantity of any Liquor to which
they had formerly been accustomed, except of distilled Spirits, which was
always prohibited, except where Dypeptic symptoms rendered them really
necessary.

IT is observable, that when a sufficient dose of the Foxglove Decoction is
given at first to produce the effect desired, a much less quantity will have
the same effect afterward. This I suppose is owing to the facility our
Constitutions possess of acquiring habits of action after having been excited
by adapted stimuli.

THUS if ten grains of Aloes be at first exhibited as a Cathartic, the dose may
be gradually decreased to one grain, and it will still produce the same effect,
the constitution having acquired a habit of obeying its stimulus. On the
contrary, if one grain of Aloes be at first exhibited, and does not Purge the
Patient, it may be increased by slow degrees to twenty grains without proving
Cathartic.

HENCE Drunkards who begin with large quantities of strong Liquors, become at
last intoxicated with small ones; while those who do not quite inebriate
themselves daily, will be enabled at length to quaff whole gallons without
intoxication.

I BELIEVE the Hydrocephalus Internus is more frequent with us than with you;
and am of the same opinion with you, that it is often present when the
Patient's eyes are not affected with Strabismus. I believe Whytt and Fothergill
have both given accurate descriptions of the Disease as it frequently appears;
the former having only observed it in a Chronic state, the latter in an Acute
one.

I THINK the inference drawn by Quin from the case he dissected, in which he
found marks of Inflammation instead of Water in the ventricles of the Brain,
should have no weight.

I HAVE seen more than twenty cases of this disease, the greatest part of which
died of it. I have taken particular pains to enquire into the rise and progress
of the symptoms of every one that ever came under my notice, and I have now
been in practice in different parts of Maryland thirty-four years; but have
never met with a single case where the disease was immediately preceded by an
inflammation of the Brain, or its investing Membranes.

BUT whatever be its remote or occasional causes, its proximate cause is are
laxed or atonic state of the Exhalents which terminate, and of the Absorbents
which originate in the ventricles of the Brain.

THIS complaint has often been mistaken for symptoms supposed to be occasioned
by Worms. That Worms may, and sometimes do, occasion Convulsions in very
debilitated and irritable constitutions, by the irritation they are capable of
giving, I have no doubt; but I believe they seldom occasion either Fever or
Delirium; at least, I have never seen a case where, I think, those symptoms
could be fairly ascribed to these reptiles. I have opened several Negro
Children here, who were supposed to have died of what is erroneously called the
Worm Fever; but instead of meeting with any Worms, have frequently found
Tubercles and small Vomicas in their Lungs, of which there was no suspicion
while alive.

OUR Planters, who are generally hard Drinkers, are frequently afflicted with
the Rheumatism as they advance in years. This, though frequently accompanied
with phlogistic Diathesis at first, soon degenerates into the opposite extreme,
and depends upon an atonic state of the Muscular Fibers. Under such
circumstances, the stimulus of external heat, confined by flannel clothing next
to the the skin, a strong decoction of the Cortex and Serpentaria, with the
moderate use of Brandy and Water, and the moderate and regular use of Animal
matter, in form of Soups and Jellies, the occasional use of Opium, to mitigate
Pain, seldom fail to cure the disease; whereas Purging and Abstinence never
fail to prolong it, especially when Chronic and free from Phlogistic Diathesis.

THAT Dysenteries do not always depend upon Contagion, appears from this, that
they often occur here in rainy weather in February, at least we have
Diarrhoeas, accompanied with Tenesmus, and preceded by a cold stage, or
frequent thrilling sensations, and all the other characteristic symptoms
described by Dr. Cullen, which generally yield to the treatment and medicines
he recommends.

WHEN the Gout occurs, I treat it in the very same manner as I do the different
stages of Rheumatism; and am of opinion, that Sydenham's erroneous theory has
retarded our improvement in medicine, particularly in the cure of this disease,
more than all other circumstances put together.

WHERE the pulse, pain and heat indicate, I bleed and purge without reserve,
and enjoin the antiphlogistic regimen; where these symptoms are absent, and
symptoms of debility, and loss of appetite, or sickness at stomach is
distressing, I as freely and without reserve, have recourse to small and
repeated doses of Laudanum, ^ound and pure Wine, Blisters, the Hot-bath and
Flannel Clothing; and when in a convalescent state, Decoctions of Bark,
Snake-root, and the artificially made Mineral Waters, impregnated with fixed
Air, (for which purpose I have provided myself with Nooth's Machine) with
exercise, and regular but not abstemious living.

PEOPLE who declaim against the use of Spirituous Liquors, should always
consider climate and situation. In cold or even temperate climates I believe
they may generally be dispensed with; but that man must be a superficial
observer, who condemns the moderate use of them, when relaxed by the intense
and long continued Summer heats of this climate, or in any climate, when
exhausted by fatiguing exercise.

THEY are particularly necessary to prevent Dyspepsia, where much vegetable and
little animal matter is used.

THE insensibility of the System is astonishing, in many cases of Hydrocephalus
Internus; I have frequently given four grains of the best Calomel for four
successive days, three times a day, to Children of three or four years of age,
without producing any sensible effect; and when it does operate, it is
generally by stool, seldom or ever, except when combined with Opium, upon the
Salivary Glands of young children.

I THINK I have seen five or six marked cases of this Disease cured by
persisting in its use, and supporting the Patient with, Vinous Drink, and a
liquid cordial Diet; Blisters might be applied to the Head or Neck, at the same
time as coinciding with the intention of the other remedies.

WHEN Friction is employed, it ought to be used in four times the quantity that
might be requisite in almost any other Disease, because of the extraordinary
insensibility to its stimulus in this.

AS you have Dobson's communications on this subject, and can see the
sentiments of others in Duncan's Commentaries, I shall trouble you no farther
with my imperfect thoughts on the subject at present; but I cannot prevail on
myself to conclude, without a short animadversion on the new and inconsistent
Doctrine taught and published by the late Dr. Brown of Edinburgh. This man
(whose talents I admire, and if he had employed them in the service of truth, I
should have venerated) has had the presumption to assert, that there is not a
direct Sedative in nature. What then are the contagions which produce different
species of Idiopathic Fever, Dysentery, and Pestilence? If the primary
operation of these is to produce weakness, are they not direct Sedatives in the
strictest sense of the term. Does their operation consist in the privation or
abstraction of Stimuli? (which they ought to do consistent with one of the
fundamental principles of this Doctrine). By no means. -- Do they produce their
effects by their exciting power, wasting the excitability, and producing
weakness of the indirect kind by that means? -- Surely no, for they are
assisted in their effects by Hunger, Cold, Grief, which are privations or
abstractions of stimulant powers. On the contrary, their effects are retarded
or counteracted by Stimulant Powers. These Contagions operate slowly, and the
Patient feels indisposition for several days before he is seized with Fever.

WINE induces indirect weakness, but the System is first excessively stimulated.

BY simply drawing into the Lungs a considerable portion of fixed Air, issuing
from any fermenting liquor, a heathy man is instantly killed, whereas if the
atmosphere, or the dephlogisticated Air, which forms the greatest portion of it
be excluded for several minutes, he is not deprived of life; but if animation
or motion, the effects of animation, be suspended thereby, he may generally be
restored by inflating his Lungs with pure atmospheric Air again.

THIS has been fully proved by the experiments of the late ingenious Dr. Edmond
Goodwin, in his Essay on the Connection of Life with Respiration; from whence
it appears, that the generality of drowned persons may be restored to life by
the application of external heat to the body, gradually applied, till it equals
that of an inflammatory Fever, or 112 degrees of Fahrenheit's Thermometer;
after which, and not before, the Lungs are to be inflated by a pair of bellows,
passed into one of the nostrils, giving five or six blasts successively, and
then intermitting half a minute or more, to observe the effect, etc.

IN order to produce the requisite heat, the Hot-bath is the best means; but
when that cannot be procured, the Patient should be laid on hot salt, or ashes,
which should be convered with a woollen blanket, and himself covered with three
or four others, well-heated. Heated Salt, Ashes, or Sand in Woollen Bags, or
Jugs of boiling Water, especially the latter, being applied to or near his feet
at the same time." Excuse me for transcribing what I am sure you have often
perused in the work at large.

TO conclude, the fair deduction from the Doctrine of Mr. Brown, is, that, as
no Disease can survive its Cause, it must cease of necessity in all Cases where
the excitement is to excess, as soon as that excessive excitement is reduced by
the abstraction of Stimulant Powers to a certain point at which Health is
supposed to rest; and that in all cases of Debility, where the excitement is
below the healthy point of the imaginary Scale, it must also necessarily cease
so soon as a sufficient number of Stimuli have been applied, as the System must
be thereby raised to that point; or if too violent Stimuli be applied, so as to
raise the excitement beyond that point, it will be changed into a Disease of
the opposite nature and form.

AS it is the duty of every one to point out such errors as have a tendency to
mislead, or prove injurious, I hope you will pardon me for digressing so wide
from the object of your enquiries, and believe me to be, etc.

A SKETCH OF THE SITUATION, APPEARANCE, AND CLIMATE OF VIRGINIA.
THIS State is in Length 758 Miles, and in Breath 224; between 36 30, and 40
North Latitude, etc.

BOUNDED East, by the Atlantic Ocean; North by Pennsylvania and the river Ohio;
West by the Missisippi; and South by North Carolina.

EAST of the Blue Ridge of Mountains, the Land is level and low, like that of
Maryland.

THE Mountains in this State commence about 150 Miles from the Seacoast, and
are disposed in Ridges, one behind another, running nearly parallel with the
Sea Coast.

THE Alleghany is the great Ridge which divides the waters of the Atlantic from
those of the Missisippi; its summit is doubtless more elevated above the Ocean
than any other Mountain: But its relative height compared with the base on
which it stands, is not so great as that of some others.

THE Mountains of the Blue Ridge (and of these the Peaks of OTTER, are thought
to be of greater height, measured from their base) are higher than any others
in Virginia, or perhaps in North America. The highest Peak is said to be 4000
feet perpendicular, which is not a fifth part of the height of the In
South-America, the Andes or Cordelleras run from North to South along the Coast
of the Pacific Ocean. These Mountains extend 4300 miles, from the Isthmus of
Darien to the Straits of Magellan. Their height is as remarkable as their
length, the highest being 20,633 feet^ of this about 2,400 from the summit, are
always covered with snow, though in part within the torrid Zone."

Guthrie's General Description of America.


Mountains in South-America, nor one-third of the height which would be
necessary in this latitude to preserve ice unmelted in the open air through the
year. The Ridge of Mountains next beyond the Blue Ridge, (called the North
Mountains) is of the greatest extent.

There are several Medicinal Springs in Virginia. The most efficacious of these
are, two Springs in Augusta, near the first sources of James river, where it is
called Jackson's River.

They rise near the foot of the Ridge of Mountains generally called the Warm
Spring Mountains, but in the Maps, Jackson's Mountains. The one is
distinguished by the name of the Warm Spring, and the other the Hot Spring. The
Warm Spring issues with a very bold stream, sufficient to work a grist-mill,
and to keep the waters of its basin, which is 30 feet in diameter, at the vital
warmth, viz. of 96 degrees. The matter with which these waters are allied is
very volatile; its smell indicates it to be sulphurous, as also does the
circumstance of its turning silver black. It rains here four or five days in
almost every week. The Hot Spring, which is about six miles from the Warm, is
much smaller. It raises the Mercury in Fahrenheit's Thermometer to 112 degrees,
which is fever heat. A fountain of common water issuing within a few inches of
its margin, gives it a singular appearance. Comparing the temperature of these
with that of the hot springs of Camschatka, of which Krachininnikow gives an
account, the difference is very great, the latter raising the Mercury to 200
degrees, which is within 12 of boiling water.

These Springs have been analyzed by James Madison, Esquire. by which it appears
that they have been falsely called sweet, their taste being evidently
acidulous. The experiments also prove, that they contain an acid. Their taste
resembles exactly that of Waters artificially impregnated with fixed air,
extricated from Ch^lk by means of Vitriolic Acid, and is nearly the same with
the true Pyrmont Waters. Other Experiments show, that these Waters contain
neither Sulp^^^nor Iron. Their efficacy is highly extolled, (whether deservedly
or not I cannot resolve), in many Chronic Diseases, and particularly in
Consumptive and Scrophulous Complaints.
There are sweet springs in the County of Boutetourt, at the Eastern Foot of
the Alleghany, about 42 miles from the Warm Springs. These are as cold as
common spring water.

On the Patowmac river, in Berkley County, above the North Mountains, are
Medicinal Springs much more frequented than those of Augusta, though their
waters are much weaker mineralized, and scarcely warm. They are more
frequented, because situated in a fertile, plentiful, and populous country,
better provided with accommodations, always safe from the Indians, and nearer
to more populous States. There is a weak Chalybeate at Richmond, and many
others in various parts of the State, but of too little note to be enumerated
after these already mentioned.

(JEFFERSON.)

CLIMATE.
IN this extensive State it is not to be expected, that the Climate should be
the same in all its parts.

It is remarkable, that proceeding in the same parallel of latitude westwardly,
the Climate becomes colder in like manner, as well as when you proceed
northwardly.

THIS continues to be the case till you attain the summit of the Alleghany,
which is the highest land between the ocean and the Missisippi. From thence
descending in the same latitude to the Missisippi, the change reverses; and if
we may believe travelers, it becomes warmer there than it is in the same
latitude on the Seaside. Their testimony is strengthened by the vegetables and
animals which subsist and multiply there naturally, which do not on the Sea
Coast.

Catalpas grow spontaneously on the Missisippi as far as the latitude of 37,
and Reeds as far as 38. Paroquets, even Winter, in the Scioto in the 39th
degree of latitude.

The difference of temperature in the Air at the Sea Coast, or the
Chesapeake-Bay, and at the Alleghany has not been ascertained; but cotemporary
observations made at Williamsburgh, or in its neighborhood, and at Monticello,
the latter of which is situated nearly central between the Bay and Alleghany,
or between the Southern and Northern Boundaries of the State, may be considered
as furnishing the best average of the temperature of its Climate. These
Observations make the difference between Williamsburgh and Monticello, to be on
an average 6 1/8 degrees of Fahrenheit's Thermometer.

WILLIAMSBURGH is much too near the South-East Corner to give a fair idea of
the general temperature.

BUT a more remarkable difference is in the Winds which prevail in the
different parts of the Country.

FROM Mr. Jefferson's Meteorological Tables it appears, that the South-West
Wind prevails equally at Williamsburg and Monticello; that the North-East is
next to this the principal Wind toward the Seacoast, and the North-West is
the predominant Wind at the Mountains. The difference between these two Winds
to sensation, and in fact, is very great; the North-East is loaded with vapor,
insomuch that the Salt Manufacturers have found that their chrystals would not
shoot while that blows, it occasions a distressing chill, and a heaviness and
oppression of the spirits. The North-West is dry, cooling, elastic, and
animating. The Eastern and South-Eastern breezes come on generally in the
afternoon. They have advanced into the country very sensibly within the memory
of people now living. As the lands become more cleared, it is probable that
they will extend still farther Westward. The farther they extend into the
Country, the less moist they become, as they deposit it in their progress.

The variation in the weight of the Atmosphere, as indicated by the Barometer,
is not equal to two inches of Mercury. During twelve months observation at
Williamsburg, the extremes were 29 and 30.86 inches, the difference being 1.86
of an inch; and in nine months, during which the height of the Mercury was
noted at Monticello, the extremes were 28.48 and 29.69 inches, the variation
being 1.21 of an inch. A Gentleman, says Mr. Jefferson, who has observed his
Barometer many years assures me it has never varied two inches.

Cotemporary Observations, made at Monticello and Williamsburgh, proved the
variation in the weight of the Air, to be simultaneous and corresponding in
these two places If these Observations are accurate, Monticello must be at an
equal height from the level of the Ocean with Williamsburgh, for the Mercury in
the Barometer falls one-tenth of an inch for every 90 feet perpendicular, that
we ascend above that level.


THE changes from Heat to Cold, and Cold to Heat, are very sudden and great.
The Mercury has been known to descend from 92 to 47 in thirteen hours.

THE following Table contains the Result of five years Observations respecting
the average State of the Heat for every Month in the Year, at Williamsburgh,
which is the hottest part of Virginia; viz. from 1772 to 1777.

Least and greatest daily Heat by Farenheit's Thermometer. January 38 to 44
This Table proposes to state only the ordinary Heat and Cold of each Month, and
not those which are extraordinary. February 41 47 March 48 54 ^/^ April 56 62
May 63 70 June 71 ^/^ 78 ^/^ July 77 82 ^/^ August 76 81 September 69 ^/^; 74
October 61 66 November 47 53 ^/^ December 43 48 ^/^ 8 A. M. 4 P. M.

AT Williamsburgh, in August 1777, the Mercury in Farenheit's Thermometer was
at 98, coresponding with 29 of Reaumur. At the same place, in January 1780, it
was 6. corresponding to 11 below o of Reaumur. I believe these may be
considered as the extremes of Heat and Cold in that part of the country. The
latter may most certainly, as at that time York River at Yorktown was frozen
over, so that people walked across it; a circumstance which proves it to have
been colder than the Winter of 1740-1, usually called the hard Winter, when
York River did not freeze over at that place. In the same season of 1780,
Chesapeake-Bay was solid from its head to the mouth of Patowmac.

AT Annapolis where it is 5 miles over between the nearest points of land, the
ice was from five to seven inches thick quite across, so that loaded carriages
went over on it.

THOSE extremes of Heat and Cold, at 6 and 98, Mr. Jefferson observes, were
indeed very distressing, and were thought to put the human constitution to the
extent of trial. Yet, continues the same respectable Author, a Siberian would
have considered them as scarcely a sensible variation.

AT Jenneseitz, in that country, in latitude 58 27, we are told, that the cold
in 1735 sunk the Mercury by Farenheit's Scale to 126 below naught; and the
inhabitants of the same country use stove rooms two or three times a week, in
which they stay two hours at a time, the Atmosphere of which raises the Mercury
to 135 above nothing.

LATE experiments show, that the human body will live in rooms heated to 347
degrees, that is 135. above boiling water.

THE hottest point of the twenty-four hours is about four o'clock, P. M.; and
the dawn of day the coldest.

ON comparing the extremes of Heat and Cold at Williamsburg, with the same at
Paris, it appears they are in greater at Paris.

THE access of Frost in Autumn, and its recess in the Spring, do not seem to
depend merely on the degree of Cold; much less on the Air's being at the
freezing point. That other circumstances must be combined with the Cold to
produce Frost, is evident from this also, that on the higher parts of
Mountains, where it is absolutely colder than in the plains on which they
stand, Frosts do appear so early by a considerable space of time in Autumn, and
go off sooner in the Spring than on the plains In the Summer Season, the
Vapors by the time they attain to to the height of the Mountains become so
attenuated, that they have not sufficient gravity to subside, and form a dew
when the Sun retires.

Vid. Jefferson's Notes on Virginia, page 87.


. This greater privilege against the Frost on Mountains, is undoubtedly
combined with the want of dew there. That the dew is very rare in their higher
parts, I may say with certainty, (says Mr. Jefferson) from twelve years
observations, having scarcely ever seen during that time, an unequivocal proof
of its existence at all on them during Summer.

That unfortunate fluctuation between Heat and Cold, so destructive to Fruit,
prevails less in Virginia than in Pennsylvania in the Spring Season; nor is the
overflowing of the Rivers in Virginia so extensive or so frequent at that
Season, as those of the New England States; -- because the snows in the former
do not lie accumulating all Winter, to be dissolved altogether in the Spring,
as they do in the latter.

IN Virginia below the Mountains, the Snow seldom lies more than a day or two,
and seldom a week; and the large rivers very seldom freeze over. This
fluctuation of weather, however, is sufficient to render the Winters and
Springs very unwholesome, as the inhabitants have to travel in almost perpetual
slop.

Extract of a letter from a Physician at Petersburgh, in Virginia, dated
December 8th, 1790.
IN the Winter and Spring, reckoning from January to the Summer Solstice, our
epidemic Diseases are principally Rheumatisms and Catarrhs; seldom any genuine
Pleurisy, but a spurious and complicated kind is very common, accompanied with
great prostration of strength, Sickness, and Vomiting, Coma or Comatose
Delirium, as well as pain in the Thorax, Cough, and difficulty of Breathing,
and is the most mortal Disease we have, to Adults. The Remedies which the
Physicians of this place have found most successful in this Disease, have been
a repetition of mild Emetics, and the application of Blisters to the Wrists, as
well as to the parts affected, and a few Drops of Laudanum, and Antimonial
Wine, every three or four hours, in a Draught of Barley Gruel, or Tea made of
Linseed and Sage, for the first two or three days after its attack; but if the
debility increases, we find nothing equal to Volatile Alkaline Salts and Wine
Whey. Good effects have also been sometimes produced by a Decoction of the
Seneca Root, given in such Draughts as to create a slight nausea. Bleeding has
been observed to aggravate the Disease so frequently, that the lancet has
almost fallen into discredit. I however, always venture to open a vein when the
pain is acute, and the respiration difficult, and sometimes a repetition, but
am very cautious in the quantity drawn at once. The lowness of our situation,
and the long continued and excessive heats to which we are subject, render us
amazingly infirm, and occasion a Diathesis of so lax a texture, that an
inflammatory affection cannot exist many days without terminating in a
gangrene. I have sometimes had thoughts of trying the effects of Mercurial
Frictions in this Disease, because of the analogy it bears to the Hepatitis
which occurs in hot Climates; but have hitherto been deterred from the attempt,
owing to certain conscientious scruples.

I HAVE sometimes followed the method recommended by Dr. Hamilton, in the
management of Inflammatory Diseases, and have given from one to three grains of
Calomel, and from one-fourth to a grain of Opium, and as much Tartar Emetic, to
which I have sometimes added a few grains of Camphor, made into a Boluss with
conserve of Roses, every six or eight hours, for several days, accompanied with
a Decoction of Seneca, Sarsaparilla, and Liquorice Root, and in some Cases with
immediate and evident advantage; but I must ingenuously confess, that the major
part of the Cases in which I have employed it, as well as every other Remedy,
has hitherto failed with me.

THE extreme weakness and dejection, hinder large and repeated Bleedings, which
are the only things capable of removing genuine Inflammations.

FROM the Summer Solstice till after the middle of September, Choleras and
Diarrhoeas are epidemic here, and are so mortal among Children that it has
given rise to a common, but very erroneous notion, that none born here ever
arrive to Manhood, whereas I am very certain, that more than two-thirds of the
number born here annually, do not die the same year; what proportion arrive to
Manhood, I have not been able to ascertain as yet, but shall set about the
enquiry as soon as I have leisure.

THE Flux commonly occurs about the middle of August, and continues more or
less epidemic till the Frost sets in, which is seldom before the middle of
October.

THIS Disease does not occur every year; is more common in cool and wet Summers
than in warm and dry ones. I am sorry, that it is not in my power to resolve
your question about its being infectious; but from the preprevalency of that
opinion, and from the account given by Lind, in his papers on infection, I am
inclined to think it is.

OUR Plan of Cure in this Disease differs considerably from that recommended by
Dr. Cullen: -- We trust principally to Decoctions of Bark, Snake-root, and
Rhubarb, with the liberal use of Opium, and Vinous, or other Spirituous Drinks;
and when the debility is great, we employ the Hot-bath, and apply Rubefacients
to the Abdomen and Limbs. This treatment perhaps, in a different situation,
would be improper and injurious; but I declare upon my honor, it seldom fails
curing the Disease in this place, where it is punctually adhered to.

OUR Intermitting and Remitting Fevers begin very early in Autumn, and continue
to be more or less epidemic till the middle of Winter, especially the former.

In the Cure of the Remitting Fever, we find the bark by no means effectual,
without the liberal use of Wine; and in very relaxed habits, we find it
necessary to have recourse to Brandy; this last, taken in small quantities, and
repeated every hour, without any addition, has succeeded with us in many Cases
of Remittent, accompanied with great Dejection of Strength and Depression of
Spirits, when the Bark alone has had every apperance of aggravating the
Disease. Huxham's Tincture is considered as a Catholicon.

FROM these circumstances you will be led to think us all Drunkards; this,
however, is by no means the case. We live full, and drink freely, but seldom so
much as to induce intoxication. But the Heat of our Climate, and our confined
situation, (being shut out from the access of the Winds, by high hills on every
side) has such an effect on our Constitutions that they very nearly resemble
those of hard Drinkers; -- hence, we require a considerable quantity of
Stimulating Aliment, and Vinous Drinks, to keep up a balance between the
several functions of the body.

I HAVE never met with any Case of Tetanus, but what arose in consequence of a
lesion of a nervous part; -- and though I have the highest Veneration and
esteem for Dr. Rush, whose experience and ingenuity stand unrivalled in our
Country, I have never yet had the courage to omit the employment of Opium in
large Doses, repeated every 4th, 6th, or 8th hour, while any Spasmodic Symptoms
remained, along with the liberal use of hot Brandy-Tody, and high seasoned
Soup, in which Cayenne Pepper, was a principal Ingredient.

I HAVE read both Sydenham and Brown, and though I think them both eccentric
and erroneous in many things, I am convinced a man of judgment may derive
instruction from them both.

COPY of a LETTER from Dr. JAMES LIONS.
Dear Sir,
I HAD the honor of receiving your favor of March the 6th, which mentions
your having undertaken a Work, the utility of which has been long impressed on
my mind; and the execution of which I once had in contemplation, though on a
scale less extensive than the one you propose. It occurred to me soon after my
return from Europe, that an account of the Climate, modes of Living, and the
Diseases of the lower parts of Virginia, after the ma^^er of Cleghorne's
Minorca, might be of some service in investigating the Causes and improving the
treatment of the Epidemics, and perhaps might induce the Medical Gentlemen
dispersed over other parts of the State, to record and publish their
observations, so as to form altogether, a book of useful practice. The
interruption which would have been given to my business, however, and finding
that more experience and time would be requisite than I could conveniently
spare, prevented my pursuing the idea. From your advantageous situation, and
your endeavors to collect information, there can be no doubt, but the
performance will receive all the advantage which the assistance of able and
experienced Practitioners, united with your own observations, can afford; and I
am sorry that professional engagements, mostly in the country, and the short
notice, will not allow me to answer your queries to my satisfaction.

I AM at present residing in Hanovertown, which is situated nearly at the head
of navigation, on the South side of Pamunkey, the principal Branch of York
River. It contains about one hundred and seventy The County of Hanover, by the
late Census, contains 14,300 Inhabitants.
inhabitants, and is supported chiefly by Merchants, who have placed themselves
here for the convenience of purchasing the best Tobacco in the State, which is
supposed to be brought to the public warehouses at this place.

IT was thriving fast before the seat of government was removed to Richmond;
Richmond, the present Seat of Government in this State, is built upon a
commanding eminence on the North side of James's River, a little way below the
Falls, and ninety miles from its mouth, contains about 360 houses, and 2000
inhabitants. This Town is about sixty miles Westward of Williamsburgh, which
contains about nine hundred inhabitants, and is about twenty-five miles
Northward of Petersburgh. This last is built on the South side of Appomatox
River, in a low situation.
but that city being only twenty miles distant, has considerably altered the
channel of trade and retarded its increase. The town is built on an extensive
plain, and the lands for many miles above and below it, are remarkably level
and fertile, and the country in those directions is generally thought the most
beautiful in Virginia; -- but if its inhabitants possess superior advantages in
the kindness of their soil, they suffer almost a proportional deduction from
their profits and other enjoyments, by being exposed to attacks from the
Intermittent and Remittent Fevers, for two or three months in every year.

THE Country may be divided into low grounds, second low grounds or more
elevated, and the hills, which commence where the latter terminate. The former
which constitute the banks of the river, are subject to frequent inundations in
the Spring and Fall; and many of them retain so much moisture throughout the
year, as only to be fit for pastures, and are never cultivated. You will
readily, therefore, conceive their situation toward the end of Summer, when
the putrid exhalations go on rapidly, and you will also anticipate a
description of those Intermittent and Remittent Fevers which Marsh Miasma so
constantly produces. They are mostly Quotidians or Tertians; Quartans are seen
but seldom, but if not speedily cured, are apt to continue twelve, eighteen
months, or two years, especially with poor people; and I have seen fat and
hearty Children have it for years, without any apparent injury to their health,
excepting for a few hours on the fit-day. Our Winters are commonly mild,
excepting a few weeks about Christmas, and though we may at other times have
severe weather, it seldom continues long. The hard Frosts commence the last of
December, and continue without much interruption all January and part of
February, when there are frequent changes, and often much warm moist weather,
from which time I date the beginning of the Spring Complaints. They are
commonly Pneumonic or Pleuritic attacks, accompanied with chills, nausea, and
bilious vomiting. The pain begins in the side, breast, or shoulder blade, and
not unfrequently changes from one side to the other, or darts through from the
breast to the shoulder. The chill is of short duration, and succeeded by the
Fever, with a pain in the head, back, and large joints. A frequent dry Cough
teazes the Patient, and renders the pain more acute, increases with the
approach of night, and causes that to be very distressing. The pulse varies
from 90 to 120, and at first is generally hard and full. Toward morning the
Fever suffers some remission, but by the middle of the day is higher than
before. The first attack is attended with bilious vomitings, which exceedingly
alarm the sick; but if properly encouraged, relieve the stomach, and are seldom
dangerous unless when injudiciously treated.

OUR most successful Remedies in the Cure of this Compl^int, are Bleeding,
Blisters, Laxatives, mild Diluents, and gentle Sudorifics. Early in the Disease
we take away ten or twelve ounces of Blood, and if the pain is not removed,
Cough continues dry, and pulse hard, the same quantity is drawn before the
Blister is applied, which is probably the same night or the next morning.

THE violence of the Inflammation, age and vigor of the Patient, and the
nature of the Epidemic, govern the Lancet, for we frequently have a species of
Synochus in the Spring especially after a warm Winter, which requires great
caution in Bleeding. I have seen many this year, with acute pains in the Head
and short Ribs, when the Pulse was uncommonly low and soft at the commencement
of the Disease. In such cases, Blisters to the part were the only Remedies to
be relied on, with Wine and Water for constant drink, and the Bark in quantity,
as soon as the pain was removed. An Anodyne at night, after the Inflammation is
abated, quiets the Cough, occasions the Patient to rest well, and with an
Antimonial, disposes to a free perspiration. Since the Influenza prevailed
here, I have learnt to use Opiates more freely in all Complaints attended with
a Cough, after the Inflammation is removed, than I had before ventured to do.
The contest, which has been so warmly supported by the partisans of Cullen and
Brown, must be left to the decision of others; but I am fully persuaded, that
the Doctrines of the latter have tended materially to remove prejudices, and to
introduce more liberally into practice, one of the most valuable assistants to
the healing Art, though I have more than once witnessed the improper use of it
by his pupils; such has been the case with many valuable Medicines, and it was
from Goulard's extravagant recommendations of the Solutions of Lead that we
became acquainted with their real virtues.

THE Blacks are remarkably subject to inflammatory Complaints from their
exposure and deficiency of Clothing; and I have observed that they require the
use of the Lancet with considerably more freedom than the Whites. They are
accustomed to bleed for the most trifling Diseases, and it is often difficult
to persuade them of their recovery from any disorder without opening a vein.
There are but few even of them, however, that would bear the loss of
forty-eight, or fifty-seven ounces, as mentioned by Cleghorn, though our
diseases correspond very much with those described by him; and I conceive, that
half the quantity he took away during the first twenty-four hours, with the
timely application of Blisters, will conquer most Pneumonic attacks with us,
except in very particular constitutions.

SOME Cases of Phthisis Pulmonalis occur generally in the Spring, for which I
have endeavored equally to avoid the weakening antiphlogistic, and the highly
stimulating mode of treatment. It is unnecessary to give a detail of practice
in this Disease; and I shall only observe, that in a few instances,
considerable benefit is supposed to have been received from the use of a Swing,
as recommended by Dr. Smyth, where the Patients were weak and much reduced, it
was suspended in the house, and convenient for use in all weather.

As the Spring advances, various eruptive complaints appear, and among the
Blacks Scrophulous Swellings inflame and suppurate every year. To palliate the
Disease from season to season, and let the Constitution acquire vigor enough
to conquer it, and the dangerous period of life has past, which seldom extends
beyond twenty-five, is all I ever could accomplish, and in some instances, I
have been much perplexed to do that. Of late, the internal use of Blue Vitriol
has been strongly recommended by a famous empirick, and as I have at present
some opportunities of trying it, I shall attend particularly to its
administration and effects.

THE Cynanche Tonsilaris frequently occurs; for which strong mercurial purges,
assisted by Blisters, have succeeded better with me than any other Remedies.
The Cynanche Maligna has also prevailed in some parts of the State, but I think
it fortunate that it has not been my lot to engage it.

THE Measles, last year, added to the list of Epidemics, revived the old
dispute respecting the propriety of Bleeding for it; some cases having
terminated fatally after profuse Bleeding, it was considered by many as a fatal
practice, though I do not recollect my having had cause to repent moderate
Bleeding in any instance, while the advantage in many was very apparent; and in
some, they left so great inflammation on the Lungs, that repeated Venaesection
was necessary.

THE Months of June and July are the most healthy in the year, though they are
often as hot, and sometimes more so, than the succeeding. The Weather is then
dry, and less liable to change than in August and September, when the rain
commences, and sudden variations take place. Intermittents seldom appear till
after the tenth of August, and from that period to the same day in October, all
Families on the Rivers and Creeks, have it constantly among them. The nocturnal
Air at this time is to be cautiously avoided, and the slightest exposure or
irregularity, will endanger an attack by a Quotidian or Tertian. We consider
Madeira, Port Wine, and Porter, as the best preservatives; and it is certain,
that those who make daily use of them in moderation, are not so often sick, and
with such assistance, recover soonest. The Fit, on the first evening of the
attack, is commonly slight, and sometimes with a Chill and Fever hardly
perceptible, and an aching of the Bones, which is taken for Rheumatic. The next
Fit comes on earlier in the day with more violent pains in the Joints,
succeeded by a Chilliness, as if streams of cold Water were running down the
Back; nor can any Warmth be excited until the reaction of the System takes
place. It is a general observation, that the Ague has changed within a few
years from violent Shaking to a smart Chill, and though I can remember to have
seen the Teeth chatter, it is seldom thecase now. As the Fever rises a Glow on
the Surface is visible, the Face begins to flush, and with that a Headache
commences, which increases with the Fever, and continues as long as that lasts.
The Pulse, which during the cold Fit is weak and small, rises gradually to
fullness and quickness; the Drought is considerable, and the Tongue and Mouth
dry and parched. After a few hours a Sweat begins to break out, which gives
much relief, and by the Morning carries off the Fever, leaving the Body weak
and feeble, the Tongue furred, with loss of Appetite, and a bitter Taste in the
Mouth. As the cold Fit goes off, a Vomiting of Bile often takes place, and if
properly encouraged, discharges the Morbid Contents of the Stomach, and removes
the Sickness; for Dr. Moore Medical Sketches
has well observed, that Vomiting is most effectually cured by Vomiting.

THE Paroxysms are nearly the same, whether they are Tertians, Quartans, or
Quotidians, and the same treatment will generally effect the Cure of each.

IF the Headache is violent, with a full and strong Pulse, eight or ten ounces
of Blood are taken away at the Height of the Fever, and an Emetic, composed of
Ipecacuanha and Tartar, is directed to be taken early in the Morning succeeding
the Fit, and if it both vomits and purges well, the Bark is administered
without delay, so as to get six or eight drams down before the next period of
accession. If it does not stop the next Fit, it so weakens it, that another
ounce answers the purpose, and the use of it in smaller quantity for a few days
restores health. If the Bark does not prove laxative, a purge should be
interposed, to prevent the accumulation of Bile in the Primae Viae, which will
either occasion the Bark to be rejected, or occasion violent pain in the
Stomach. In the Cure of Remittents, which are at present more common than
formerly, we seldom wait for the Fever to go entirely off; but if the Bowels
have been properly evacuated, and a general moisture can be accomplished, I
have given the Bark when the Pulse was at 90 or 100, and have found it to
increase the Sweating, and thus have prevented the return of the Fever, which
could not so easily have been done, if that Medicine had been delayed: I am,
however, fully sensible that there are errors committed, in giving it hastily
before the Primae Viae have been sufficiently cleansed; and I have often seen
this done effectually by an Emetic, when repeated Purgatives have failed. I
have known Vomiting objected to by Physicians of reputation, as being an
unnatural operation; but this only applies to Health, for a sick Stomach
voluntarily relieves itself. Among the lower class of people, with whom the
Intermittent often continues twelve or eighteen months, and sometimes for
years, Abdominal Congestions, Ulcerated Legs, and Dropsical Swellings, are not
unfrequently the consequence. As the following case, which I attended last
year, was from this cause, I shall take the liberty of concluding this letter
with it, though it may be thought already too long. Having been often
disappointed in my expectations from Diuretics, the success which attended the
administration of Squills in this instance induced me to recored it.

On the 6th of August, I was desired to visit two Girls, about three miles from
town, whose Parents lived within half a mile of two Mill Ponds. They both
appeared to be in the last stage of the Dropsy, and one of them died a few days
afterward. The death of the oldest, (perhaps she might be about twelve or
thirteen years of age), appeared to be almost as certain, though it might not
be so soon: She had been troubled with an Intermittent for nearly two years,
which had left her about a month before in a state of great debility. A short
time after the Fever ceased, the Swelling of her Abdomen was discovered, and
was soon followed by an Anasarca of all the lower parts of her Body, even as
high as her Breasts. When I was called in, her Legs were hard, tense, and
cracked and ulcerated in several places, so as to make painful sores. Her
Breathing was laborious and difficult, and her Coughing almost constant. Her
Face was also considerably swelled, and for several nights she had been obliged
to sleep in an erect posture. Her Abdomen was greatly distended, and an evident
fluctuation of the water within, was to be felt. If she laid down on her side
for any time, it left the superior parts, and all settled in those that were
lowest.

HER appearance altogether was so unfavourable, that nothing but her youth
afforded any prospect of success; and I undertook to administer Medicines more
for the satisfaction of the Patient, than from any hopes of my own.

AFTER trying several Remedies with little benefit, I was almost persuaded it
would be necessary to evacuate the water from her Abdomen by the Trocar; but
was afraid, that at such an advanced stage of the Disease, the operation might
hasten her exit, instead of preventing it. In this situation I determined make
the last effort, with Squills combined with Nitre, and gave it in the following
manner: Rs. Scill. rad. ex s^^^at. ji. Nitri. j. Syrup. Simp. q. s. Fiant
pilulae xxx. Cap. tres Mane et Vespere.


SHE began the use of them on Friday morning, and I did not see her again until
Monday, when the good effect from them was surprisingly great. She informed me
that she felt herself much better on Saturday, and rested more comfortably that
night than she had for many nights before. On Sunday a considerable increase of
urine was evident, and the Swelling of her Belly began to subside. On Monday, I
found the water almost entirely removed, and her Legs and Thighs so reduced,
that she could walk with ease, which before had been very painful. Her appetite
was much increased, and she expressed by the joy in her countenance, the relief
she had obtained, and the change from misery and despair to ease, and the
pleasing, though unexpected prospect of a speedy recovery of Health. The Squill
Pills were continued for a few days, which entirely carried off the water, and
by the assistance of the Bark, and daily exercise, it was prevented from
collecting again, and I heard no more of her complaint.

I HAD forgot to mention, that her Parents were very poor, and in addition to
the poverty of her Diet, she had been much exposed in all Weather, during the
time of her having the Intermittent. It has been observed by some eminent
Physicians, that the Diuretic effects of Squills are not sensible, unless there
is some operation in the Stomach from them. Dr. Cullen in his last Edition of
his Materia Medica, gives his opinion on the subject in the following words:

THIS perhaps may be founded; but I understand it no otherwise than that some
operation on the Stomach is a test, and a necessary test, of the Squills being
in an active state, in the same manner, as we are only certain of the activity
of Mercurial Preparations when they have shown some effect on the Mouth. In the
present instance I attended particularly to their operation on the Stomach, but
it was so slight, as not to give any uneasiness. There was a little Nausea for
a short time after taking the morning dose, but so inconsiderable as not to be
noticed, until particular enquiries were made on the subject. If their Diuretic
effects had not been so sudden, I should have increased the Dose as far as the
Stomach would have permitted, but from their neither Vomiting or Purging, they
were more powerful Diuretics without weakening the Patient.

IN offering this imperfect answer to your Letter, my being unprepared at the
time, and unable to pay that attention I could wish, must excuse errors and
defects, in which persuasion I have ventured to send it forward.

I am, Your most obedient, And very humble Servant, JAMES LIONS.
HANOVER-TOWN, May 13, 1791. P. S. THERE is a fact so directly in proof of the
pernicious effects of Marsh Miasma, that I must beg leave to mention it; just
above Hanover-Town is an extensive piece of low Ground unreclaimed, and it has
been long remarked, that the Ague and Fever appear soonest, and are most
violent every year, in those families, which occupy the houses nearest to the
Marsh, while others, living only a few hundred yards below, seem to escape with
considerably less sickness. In so small a town it could hardly be supposed that
the difference of situation would be so sensible; but it has been observed so
often, that there can be no doubt of the truth of it.


J. L.


OBSERVATIONS on the Diseases of the Eastern Parts of Virginia, particularly
Norfolk, the most populous Town in Virginia, contains only about 6000
inhabitants.
Norfolk and the neighboring Counties. Communicated by Dr. TAILOR, and Dr.
HANSFORD, of Norfolk, August 10, 1791.
IN the investigation of Endemic Diseases, of their Cause, Progress, and
Termination, it would appear, that an enquiry into the state of the Atmosphere
at various Periods; the Situation of Places; the surrounding Productions of the
Earth; the Rivers, Marshes, Lakes, and even Infects, ought to be added to the
account. If the Limits of the Publication, for which these Pages are intended,
would permit such an Enquiry, we might easily describe every thing but the
Climate, which has been always so irregular, both with respect to Hot and Cold,
Wet and Dry Seasons, that were we to recount the Changes which have come
immediately under our Observation, the Reader would suppose we were speaking of
several Countries situated under different parallels of Latitude. As we cannot
enter fully into the subject, we shall only occasionally mention the Seasons
and Changes of Weather, when they seem to relate to the subject we are treating
of. If we were to attempt to account for the Diseases, and their Varieties,
from the Weather we might perhaps mislead the Reader, as well as deceive
ourselves; -- for the Science of Medicine is so young in this Country, that we
have not the light of former Practitioners to guide us through the dark
Labyrinth; too dark indeed, even where the strongest rays of Human Wisdom are
thrown upon it. The Country we speak of is low Land, mostly within twelve feet
of the level of the Sea, intersected in all directions with Salt-Creeks and
Rivers, the Heads of which form Swamps and Marshes, and Fenny Grounds covered
with Water in wet Seasons. Wherever it is not cultivated, the Land is covered
with large Timber and thick Underwood. The vicinity of the Sea, and the
Salt-Creeks and Rivers, occasion a constant moisture and warmth of the
Atmosphere, insomuch, that although under the same Latitude a hundred miles up
the Country, deep Snows and frozen Rivers are very common during the Winter,
yet here we consider such occurrences as Phenomena; for these Reasons, the
Spring is very early ushered in, sometimes so early, that many Trees are in
Bloom about the latter end of February; from this time, however, till the end
of April we are subject to cold Rains, piercing Winds, and sharp Frosts; it is
at this Period only (if we except the Influenza) that any Inflammatory Diseases
ever appear among us; and these are confined to People who live exposed to
bleak Winds on the Banks of large Rivers, on the Chesapeake, or on the Sea, or
whose Occupations expose them to similar Inconveniences of Situation. We may
comprise the whole of the Inflammatory Diseases known here under the Terms
Pleurisy and Peripneumony; -- when these attack strong Plethoric habits, or
healthy strangers from the North, or from the Uplands, we observe nothing
uncommon in the appearances of the Disease, neither does the mode of treatment
require to be altered from the general Antiphlogistic Plan commonly laid down
for the Cure. But when Persons who have long been Residents in this part of the
Country are the subjects of Pleurisy or Peripneumony, we have always found the
Lancet a very dangerous Remedy, and never use it but with extreme caution; --
after the Emetics or Cathartics, we find it much safer to alleviate the painful
Symptoms by the use of Opium, joined to powerful Diaphoretics, such as Vin.
Antimon. Tart. Emetic, Spt. Minder. Camphor, etc. with Expectorants,
occasionally Blisters, partial application of Warm-baths, and if an irritated
Stomach (a circumstance we have frequently to contend with in many Diseases)
refuses the Opium with Antimonial Preparations or Camphor, we never scruple to
use it alone; and however extraordinary it may appear to some Practitioners, we
never had any cause to suspect it of doing an injury to full and strong habits;
though we confess, with those of the latter description, it does not seem to
produce the desired effect so uniformly as we could wish. These Fevers, like
almost all others in this Climate, uniformly put on the appearance of an
Intermittent after the fifth day, or as soon as the Expectoration is complete;
in many therefore the Bark becomes necessary at the close of the Disease.
Inflammatory Diseases are seldom fatal if thus managed, and scarce ever
terminate in Phthisis Pulmonalis; this latter indeed seldom originates here.

WE have a Root for which we do not remember any Botanical name, distinguished
under the title of Pleurisy Root; this many of our Country Practitioners assert
-- to be of great efficacy in Inflammatory Diseases; and we think it deserves
some attention, and frequently use it joined to Seneka in decoction. Seneka,
either with or without the other, produces a gentle Diarrhoea, which manifestly
relieves the Patient without checking the Expectoration.

ABOUT the middle of May, the Weather becomes sultry, with some cool days,
occasioned by the change of Winds to the North and North-East: At this period
all the Diseases of the Winter begin to decline, and the whole Country is
universally healthy (except here and there a trifling Vernal Intermittent which
scarce requires the application of Medicine) till the middle or latter end of
June, when Diarrhoeas and Dysenteries appear among the Children, mostly with
those under two years old, though not absolutely confined to such.

IN some years the Diarrhoea is almost universal, attended for the most part
with an irritation of the Stomach, and an irregular Fever of the Intermittent
kind: After the proper Evacuations, we apply Bark in large quantities, joined
to the most approved astringents and Anodynes; Gum Kino, Opium, Spec. e Scord.
etc. and when the Stomach will not bear a sufficient quantity of Bark, we throw
it up in Glysters repeatedly, for many days together, and this we have learnt,
by experience, to be the only mode which can be depended on.

THE Diarrhoea of many of these Children resist every medical effort to cure
them; and these Children gradually decline in Flesh, and contract a Chronic
Apthae, which visibly extends throughout the whole Alimentary Canal.

WE have seen the Disease in this State in almost every large town we are
acquainted with; -- nor do we know of any certain Cure; many have recommended
the use of Alum, Spec. e. Scord. with the Gum Kino, and have asserted, that
great relief has been found therefrom: Others have ventured the use of a
Solution of Vitriol. Caerul. but we have never attempted this. It would appear
that a Change of Air to a more Northern and cold Climate, or to Places where
the use of Chalybeate Waters can be had, would be advisable; many have
recovered by such means, but we have also seen many recover, who were reduced
perfectly to Skeletons, without removing at all, or making use of Medicines of
any kind.

DYSENTERIES in Children are not so difficult to cure; the common means, such
as lpecacuan. Vitr. Cerat. Antimon. Ol. Ricin. Rhubarb. Simaroub. etc. seldom
fail to remove the Disease if judiciously administered.

AT some Periods we have a Dysentery among the Adults, which may be called
Epidemic; but as this differs in no degree from those which are common to warm
Climates, it is entirely unnecessary to say more about it, except that in the
cure it does not require those large Evacuations previous to administering
Astringents and Anodynes, which we have seen used by some Practitioners in
other Countries, and it will never admit of the Lancet.

IN July, the Heat of the Weather increases; but during the whole of this Month
and the greatest part of August, there are no Diseases at all, at least none
which can be called Epidemic. On the approach of the Autumnal Months,
Intermittents begin to appear throughout the Country.

IT is not our Province here to recapitulate the several Opinions concerning
the Cause and Nature of those Fevers, nor yet to divide them into numberless
Species and Genera. We have never been able to distinguish any other difference
in the Nature of Intermittents, than that which Constitution, Climate, and
Manner of Living give rise to; those Causes will divide them into Perfect,
Imperfect, or Remittent: The several Terminations of them which we frequently
observe into Continued, Putrid, or Nervous Fevers, will be found to arise from
the same Causes, and under those simple terms we shall proceed to treat of
Intermittents in all their Stages.

THOSE which occur earliest in the Season are uniformly of the mildest kind,
and yield soonest to the proper Medicines. Among the Laboring and Temperate
Class of our Citizens, whose Diet is simple, whose Hours are regular, and whose
use of Spirituous Liquors is sparing, those Fevers are perfect Intermittents,
generally of the Tertian kind, and though not confined particularly to any age
or sex, yet are most frequent among the younger class, the Females and the
Children; they are in wet Seasons almost general among those of the latter
description in country places, and in low fenny ground. They yield immediately
to proper Evacuations, and the use of the Peruvian Bark, and seldom outlast the
Autumnal Months, even without the assistance of any Art: Sometimes, however, in
relaxed Habits, they terminate in Jaundice, enlarged Spleen, Anasarca, and
Death. We shall not be particular upon this sort of Intermittents, because they
are in nothing different from those which prevail in all countries similarly
situated.

AMONG that Class of Citizens, whose hours are more irregular, and whose use of
Wine and luxurious Food is more frequent, those Fevers, though still retaining
the Intermittent, Quotidian, and Tertian Form, are nevertheless imperfectly so;
a great degree of Heat, quickness of Pulse, and Debility remain during the
whole time, which may be called Intermission, with partial or total Loss of
Appetite. Here Intermittents begin to put on an appearance, which we think very
different from those of any other Country; they are preceded by a Chilliness,
which commonly seizes the Patient when he thinks himself in perfect Health.
Headache, great Thirst and Heat soon follow, in many instances Delirium,
Vomiting, Diarrhoea, and large Discharges of Bile; -- about the fifth, seventh,
or twelfth hour the Patient is relieved by prosuse Sweat, which continues with
the aforementioned Heat, Quickness of Pulse, and Debility, till the next
Paroxysm. These are generally of the T^^tian kind, and return regularly if no
Medicine is used, from nine to fourteen days, when they will commonly terminate
altogether, or degenerate into a slight Quotidian, which allows the Patient to
walk about, and when the cold Weather approaches for the most part leave him
altogether.

PEOPLE of the latter description are more rarely the subjects of Intermittent
Fevers than those who live in a plain manner; and if proper Evacuations are
made, and the Bark administered with perseverance, and attention to the Stomach
and first Passages, the Disease may almost certainly be cured after the third
Paroxism, and very often even a second is prevented.

WE have always experienced Cathartics to be the safest and most effectual
Evacuations in those kinds of Fevers; and if the Patient has an irritated
Stomach with Costiveness, Emetics are not only inadequate and unnecessary but
dangerous. We frequently find great difficulty in making the Stomach bear a
sufficient quantity of Cathartic Medicines to procure the desired Evacuations:
when this is the case, Laudanum and Aqua Menthae, or Extract. Thebaic, are
administered an hour or two before the Purge, which generally causes the latter
to remain, and though the Opiate retards the operation, it does not ultimately
prevent it, or render it less powerful. After this we proceed to the use of the
Bark during the Intermissions, and without regard to measure, give ^t as
profusely as the Stomach will permit, and in the most powerful form, beginning
with the Powder, and occasionally using the Decoction, the Extract, and cold
Infusion. It too often happens, that the Stomach will not bear the Medicine at
all, in which case we give large quantities of the Decoction or Infusion by
Clysters; and we can venture to assert, when those Clysters are retained in
sufficient Quantity, the effect is equal to that produced by any other mode of
administering it. During the Paroxysm, we find great Relief procured, by making
the Patient drink plentifully of a strong Infusion of Serpent. Virgin, to
which, when the Symptoms are very painful, we add Laudanum in sufficient
quantity to procure the Patient perfect ease. These last Medicines,
particularly the Serpent, have a visible power of shortening the Paroxysm, and
will rarely disagree with the Stomach. The use of Opium, its safety and
advantage in those cases, we presume to be well known; therefore we shall
decline making any Observations upon it, except that we have not found it (as
^^s been asserted) capable per se, of curing Intermittents. It has been advised
to give it in conjunction with the several Preparations of Bark, where the
irritable state of the Stomach will not bear the Cort. alone. This expedient
will succeed, if the quantity from time to time be increased, and is often used
with success, though it invariably occasions great distress to the Patient when
the Fever leaves him, by inducing an Hysterical or Hypochondriacal sensation,
which if it does not amount to pain, the Patient will tell you his feelings are
far worse than if it did.

THE use of this Medicine to prevent the passage of the Bark by stool is known
to every one; but we think the Gum. Kino for general use much better, and more
permanent in its effects.

AT the accession of those Fevers there is frequently a full hard Pulse,
inflamed Eyes, a sense of fullness in the Breast, and sometimes a sharp Pain in
the Side, resembling that which attends inflammatory Fevers. These
circumstances have often led Practitioners, and others who are unacquainted
with the Climate, to bleed the Patient; an expedient, which if it does not
produce a tendency to Putrefaction, invariably fixes the Fever so firmly, that
the Cure becomes afterward exceedingly difficult.

WHEN no Medicines are given at all, we have observed before, that the Fever
for the most part will decline of itself on the ninth or fourteenth day, or
degenerate into a slight Quotidian, and sometimes a Quartan; this is, however,
not always the case.

IF no Medicine has been given, or if the Disease has been improperly treated
by Bleeding, or by too great Evacuations, otherwise by forbidding the use of
Wine, etc. the Fever sometimes becomes Remittent.

IN the town we have also many of these Fevers, which though clearly belonging
to the Class of Intermittents, are Aborigine Remittents; because, there is an
evident tendency to decline of the Fever at a particular time, once in
twenty-four hours, every other day, or every fourth day, and all the Diagnostic
Symptoms are precisely the same as they are in a distinct Intermittent, making
allowance for Age, Sex, and Constitution; nor do the means of Cure differ,
though variously applied.

THAT Species of Remittent which arises from neglect, or improper treatment of
Intermittents (except that Evacuations should be cautiously repeated) may be
treated in the same manner with those we are about to describe.

IN the Town, throughout the Months of September and October, many of the
Inhabitants are seized with Fevers, which begin by Chilliness, a sense of
fullness in the Stomach, followed by Pains throughout the Limbs, Neck, Back, and
Hips, great Heat and prostration of Strength, which proceed and terminate as
before described, under the Term of imperfect Intermittents. But others who are
attacked in the same manner, particularly Robust and Plethoric Habits, or those
who are accustomed to drink a great deal of Wine, Porter, etc. and take
plentifully of luxurious Food, have a greater sense of Heat, more Pain in the
Limbs, and much more Oppression and Debility -- are extremely restless,
sometimes with Delirium, and great Thirst; and when the Period of Intermission
of the Fever should arrive, viz. the ninth or twelfth hour, are but partially
relieved, that is, the sense of Heat is not so great, the Delirium and
Restlessness are somewhat abated, and there are some few strokes difference in
the Pulse; and when there is Nausea and Vomiting, those likewise partly cease
to torment the Patient, but the prostration of Strength, Pain in the Limbs,
etc. with the dry Skin, still remain: Here the Evacuation by Cathartics should
be attempted without delay, and the Period of the Remission (which though
obscure, lasts several hours) employed in administering Bark in every possible
form, without regard to the Quickness of Pulse and dry Skin; Wine should be
given in large quantities, and on the return of of the Paroxysm, the Patient
should drink profusely of an Infusion of Serpentar. with Wine.

WHEN this Plan is followed with perseverance, the Patient almost always
recovers, though the Paroxysm, or properly speaking, the violent hours of the
Fever, may return once or twice; but if this is neglected, after the second
return, the Fever puts on a malignant and putrid Type, and often ends in Death.

WE have sometimes found it impracticable to make the Patient keep the Bark in
any form, or by any mode of giving it; when this is the case, the Disease is
always dangerous, and the only Expedient we have left is the use of Wine and
Serpentar, and we have so many times experienced the advantage of this last
Medicine, by giving it in large quantity, that we cannot help earnestly
recommending it to the notice of every Practitioner.

IT is a Medicine, though of known efficacy, very much neglected, at least the
proper administration of it; like the Bark, it cannot be given in too large a
quantity, when the Stomach will bear it. The Fevers of the latter description
are less common than the others.

WHEN the Disease begins to yield to the Medicine, a profuse Sweat comes on;
the Pulse grows full, slow, and soft; the sense of Heat and Pain in the Limbs,
Back, Hips, and Neck abate and gradually subside; the Patient has a desire to
eat, and in a few day he feels nothing but a Debility, which is far from being
so great as the violence of the Disease would give cause to suspect, and a very
little time restores him to perfect health and vigor.

WHEN it is about to terminate unfavourably, there is an increased irritation
of the Stomach, with vomiting of Cystic Bile, mixed with tough Mucus, attended
in some cases with Diarrhoea; the Pulse grows smaller, quicker, and intermits,
or rather seems at times to retreat from the Finger while feeling it; the
Countenance falls, the Eyes become glossy, the Tongue black and dry, the Teeth
cemented over with a black mucilaginous substance, cold Extremities, and Death;
the Pulse, however, is never to be depended upon in the termination of those
Fevers; it is sometimes so hard, full, and regular, even at the moment that
every other Symptom evinces the approach of Death, that inexperienced
Practitioners would be often induced to bleed or evacuate when the Patient is
expiring.

WHEN continued Fevers from Intermittents take place, they are generally
confined to relaxed, debilitated, or young habits; they are far from being
common with us, and as in every other Country, they either terminate on the
twenty-first and thirty-first day, or lengthen out into what are called Nervous
Fevers, we shall neither treat of this stage of the Disorder, or pretend to
point out a mode of cure, for what ever may be the predisposing Cause, the
Disease is invariably the same, and requires the same mode of treatment in
every country. We must, however, take notice of one effect which some
Intermittents produce, viz. A Debility or Affection of the Optic Nerve, so as
to render the Patient perfectly blind, till the Bark and other Tonics, have
removed the Fever, when those Patients recover their Sight with Health.

IN the Autumn of Eighty-nine, the Influenza made its appearance here, as it
did throughout the Continent a little before and after that time, We should not
have taken notice of this Disease, which has been at times common to various
parts of the World, if we had not observed something singular in its progress
through this Part of the Country.

DURING the whole month of August in that year, the Weather was remarkably cool
and pleasant, with the Wind from the North-West to the North-East, and
continued so with some little intervals of South Winds and moderate Heat till
the last of September, when the Influenza began to appear, and from the time
these Winds sprung up we had no Intermittents as in former and succeeding years.

THE Influenza though universal, scarce one in a thousand escaping it, was
mild, and attended with a slight Fever, only some few instances excepted where
Pleurisy and Peripneumony took place: two or three only of those Died, more, we
believe, from improper management than from the Malignity of the Disease
itself, most of those to whom it had proved fatal being profusely bled and
evacuated. We only recollect one instance of any person, who, in consequence of
this Disease, afterward died with Phthisis Pulmonalis* a circumstance which
has frequently happened in other parts of Virginia and to the North.
Notwithstanding this Epidemic was visibly of an inflammatory kind, it would
not, with us, admit of what is called the antiphlogistic plan; and we are
authorized to say this, because in pursuing a middle way, that is, by moderate
evacuations and Diaphoretics without bleeding, and afterward a free use of the
Bark, we have lost none of those Patients whom we had the management of from
the beginning. An inflammatory Disorder similar to this, and by some called by
the same name, again appeared, beginning in the Winter 1790. This was generally
attended with Symptoms of Inflammation considerably worse than what we have
been accustomed to call the original Influenza, nevertheless, we could not find
upon trial that any advantage was derived from the Lancet. This complaint was
much more fatal than the former, and often resisted every application for
relief. In the latter end of the Winter 1784, we had a species of Malignant
Angina which was Epidemic and contagious; and although we have never
experienced any thing similar to it since, or any tradition of its having
happened in this Country, yet we think we have both seen and read of the same
Disease elsewhere. If the manner in which we have in several places recommended
the use of the Bark should appear extraordinary, we have only to beg the Reader
to rely upon our words for the success of such Practice, which we assure him a
very long course of Experience taught us not only to be beneficial, but
absolutely free from danger in our Climate at least. We have had reason to
think (though we will not venture to give it as a positive fact), that the
Peruvian Bark is considerably lost active in the Cure of Intermittents, in
Constitutions which have been long accustomed to the free use of Wine, ardent
Spirits, and luxurious food; even where such Constitutions have not been
visibly Impaired, or Debilitated by such habits. If this be true, Wine and
ardent Spirits, as has been observed by many Practitioners, possess a
considerable share of the Specific virtues of Bark. This last, we have pretty
well ascertained, will not prevent what it will Cure; that is, the constant use
of it will not preserve a Person from the attack of an Intermittent, though it
will afterward remove it, but must be taken in much larger Quantities than
would have been necessary if the Habit had not been before accustomed to it;
and if Wine and ardent Spirits possess any of its Specific Virtues, the
habitual application of those to the Constitution may lessen the power of the
Bark, in the same manner as if itself had been constantly taken. We offer this
as a mere matter of opinion, which cannot be thought extraordinary, if we may
reason from Analogy and compare the action of Opium, and many other Medicines,
which gradually lose their power by repeated application.

A SKETCH of the SITUATION, CLIMATE, and DISEASES of NORTH CAROLINA.
THIS State, (bounded North by Virginia, East by the Atlantic Ocean; South by
South Carolina and Georgia; and West by the Missisipi,) is situated between the
34 and 36 30 North Latitude. It is 758 Miles in length, and about 110 in breadth

IT is plentifully supplied with Rivers, Bays, Inlets, Morasses and Swamps; it
is but thinly settled, and indifferently cultivated in proportion to its
extent. There is one Swamp in this State, called the Dismal Swamp, which
extends over a large tract of Country, between Pamlico and Albemarle Sounds;
and another North of Edentown, which lies partly in this State and partly in
Virginia. This last tract of Swamp or Marsh Ground contains upwards of 140,000
Acres.

NEWBERN, the largest Town in this State, contains only about 400 houses, all
built of Wood; and stands on a flat Sandy point of Land formed by the
Confluence of the Rivers Neus and Trent.

NORTH CAROLINA, in its whole breadth for the extent of 60 Miles from the Sea,
is a dead level. A great proportion of this tract is a barren Forest. On the
Banks of some of the Rivers, the land is fertile and good. Interspersed through
the other parts, are glades of rich Swamp, and ridges of Oakland of a black
fertile Soil. The Sea Coast, the Sounds, Inlets, and lower parts of the Rivers,
have uniformly a muddy soft bottom.

About 80 or 90 Miles to the Westward of the Atlantic, this State begins to
swell into Hills which increase in size, and are more mixed with stones, also
of increased magnitude the farther we proceed in that direction. The Soil in
these parts is of reddish Clay and Loam, strong and fertile; the Woods less
intermingled with Pines and more with Oak and Hickory; and the Water is every
where excellent, running in a profusion of clear and refreshing streams.

THE Country and Climate to the Westward is in general healthy, the low Grounds
along the Rivers alone being otherwise, particularly those of the Roanoak,
occasioned by exhalations arising from the damp Soil, stagnated Waters, and by
the putrescent particles with which the Atmosphere is replete, whose free
circulation and purification is prevented in such situations, by lofty thick
Woods, impervious to the Suns rays, under which a dismal Gloom for ever dwells.

IN such situations we find Intermittents and Remittents, the principal
Endemial Diseases of this State, insomuch that even in the Winter Season we
find that most of the Complaints which begin with Inflammatory Symptoms, are
changed in the course of a few days into one or other of these.

THE Winters of this State, are more pleasant and agreeable than can well be
conceived; they are neither so Hot as to incommode, nor so Cold as to be
disagreeable. And for the most part, the Weather is Clear, Bright, and Serene;
and the Ground (where fertile) is covered with delightful verdure. For here all
the Inclemency of the Weather is in the Summer. At this Season, the intense
Heat and the scorching rays of the Sun are almost intolerable; and multitudes
of troublesome Flies, Muskittoes, and other Insects and Reptiles, continually
infest and prey upon every Living Creature in the Fields and Woods, sucking
their Blood, and giving continual torment both Day and Night; so that every
kind of Beast becomes miserably Lean and Weak, while this Season lasts. Even to
Man, with all his resources and advantages, the Heat then becomes intolerable,
nor can he find any shelter or defense against the assaults of these tormenting
Insects, and venomous Reptiles, which infest the Air and Earth.

BOTH Rice and Indigo are cultivated on the low wet Grounds; these increase the
unwholesomeness of the Air, because the Quantity of Water which they require
for their support becomes stagnant in many places. The Indigo requires a great
deal of Water in its Manufacture, and soon becomes putrid in this sultry
Climate; in this condition it becomes extremely offensive and insalubrious; the
rotten Indigo plant is often hawled out, and spread over the Fields to manure
the Grounds, and becomes abominably noisome, rendering the Atmosphere for some
distance absolutely deleterious, and frequently almost pestilential.

DURING the latter part of Summer and the beginning of Autumn, putrid and
noxious effluvia rise in very gross and thick vapors from the valleys, from
stagnant and shallow pools, or fens, especially after heavy showers, and the
lasting and excessive heats which succeeds such rains.

THE dews are likewise near the seacoast very copious in the beginning of
Autumn, in a still evening and in the night, and the whole country is covered
with a thick fog till after seven o'clock in the morning.

ALONG the Sea coast, the East Winds are the coolest in Summer, and the warmest
in Winter." (Winds have a demonstrable influence on the temperature of the
Atmosphere; and since these must, like all the other phenomena of nature, be
governed by fixed and determinate laws, they deserve investigation.) Unusual
cold happens either in the Summer or in the Winter season; the circumstances
which render Summers less warm than usual are pretty obvious; for the
diminution of heat may arise either from a long continuance of Easterly or
Northerly Winds, or from frequent and heavy Rains, which are followed by great
evaporation; or from a long continuance of cloudy weather which intercepts the
Sun's rays, and prevents the Earth from absorbing them.

THE causes of unusual cold in Winter, in this Climate, are of more difficult
investigation. Those best ascertained, are, 1st. Unusual cold in the preceding
Summer: For, as the Winter's heat is in a great measure derived from the Earth,
if this be deprived of its usual store of heat, the want of it must be
perceived the ensuing Winter. 2d. Heavy Rains, followed by Westerly or
Northerly winds; this is owing to the powerful evaporation promoted by these
dry Winds.

DISEASES.
THE Climate of this State so nearly resembles that of South Carolina, that I
shall omit giving any farther description of it here, and shall only enumerate
such Diseases as are most prevalent. Dr. Smith informs me, that, East of the
Mountains, a spurious kind of Pleurisy, accompanied with profuse expectoration
of a thin gleety Mucus, is the most prevalent complaint in the Winter and
Spring seasons; the Pulse, in this Disease, is more frequent, but never so
hard, full, or strong as in the true Pleurisy; the inflammatory symptoms are
observed to subside much earlier, and are very apt to be succeeded by symptoms
resembling those of the Typhus, or rather of the Remitting Fever.

"MODERATE bleeding, at the commencement of the Fever, is generally of service,
but a repetition is seldom found salutary; and copious bleeding has invariably
occasioned such a state of debility in a number of cases in which I have
employed it, misled by servilely copying the practice of Sydenham, and the
Lectures of a celebrated foreign Professor, that I am now always moderate in
the quantity I direct to be taken away." But mild Emetics, and especially
nauseating doses of Antimonials with moderate purging, and the early
application of Blisters to the Thorax, or back, are the remedies which I have
found most generally beneficial.

I HAVE also given Opium, combined with a little Tartar Emetic, or Antimonial
Wine, with great apparent good effect at bedtime, as soon as the Phlogistic
Diathesis had considerably abated.

THESE kind of Pleurisies are commonly brought on by intemperance and imprudent
exposure to the Weather, which is very fluctuating during the Winter, and
especially toward the approach of Spring. Were the Inhabitants more cautious
and attentive to these circumstances, they might in general escape the danger
of this Disease. I have found the use of Flannel next to the skin an excellent
prophylactic against the Diseases of the Winter and Spring season. I believe
the Western and Hilly parts of this State are as healthful as any part of the
world, and I am sure they are as pleasant in respect to Weather -- But in the
flat Country, in many parts of which there are whole Lakes of Stagnant Water
constantly in a state of putrefaction, the inhabitants are sadly afflicted with
Disease; particularly with Intermittent and Remittent Fevers, frequently
accompanied with very extraordinary symptoms of debility, and bilious
discharges, and often with Coma resembling the Apoplexy. Our principal remedies
for these are Bark, Snakeroot, and ardent Spirits diluted with water; and
notwithstanding the many Satires which have of late been written against Rum, I
think it has been the salvation of multitudes in this Climate; an infusion of
Calamus, Aromaticus, Snakeroot, and the bark of our live Oak is a Catholicon
for the Ague among our Rice Planters.

THE countenances of the generality of the natives of this part of the State
where I reside are pale and sallow. This appears to be occasioned by the
excessive secretion of Bile, peculiar to warm Climates, and to Aguish disorders.

IN the language of Armstrong, I may truly say -- Here on a rustic throne of
dewy turf,
With baneful fogs her aching temples bound,
Presides Quotidiana; a sluggish Fiend,
Begot by Eurus, when by brutal force
He embraced the sickly Naiad of the Fens.
From such a mixture sprung, this fitful pest,
With feverish blasts subdues the sickening land;
Cold tremors come, with mighty love of rest,
Convulsive yawnings, lassitude and pains,
That sting the burdened brows, fatigue the loins,
And rack the joints, and every torpid limb;
Then parching heat succeeds, till copious sweats
Overflow: A short relief from former ills.
Beneath repeated shocks the wretches pine,
The vigor sinks, the habit melts away,
The cheerful, pure and animated bloom
Dies from the face, with squalid Atrophy
Devoured, in sallow melancholy clad;
And often the Sorceress, in her sated wrath,
Resigns them to the Furies of her train,
The bloated Hydrops, and the yellow Fiend,
Tinged with her own accumulated gall.


EXTRACT of a LETTER from Dr. JOSEPH MILLER, dated Washington, on Tar River,
August 17th, 1791.
CHILDREN are astonishingly subject to Worms in all the Towns in the low
Country, and as far as I can learn in every Town to the Southward -- The
Hydrocephalus also occurs more frequently than is commonly supposed. I have
never had an opportunity of opening any person who died of this Disease; but
from the best accounts which have been recorded, I am convinced that multitudes
of those who are thought to die of Worm Fevers, die of the Hydrocephalus. I am
so fully persuaded of this, that I make it a rule always to compare the
Diagnostic Symptoms of the one with those of the other before I attempt to
prescribe; but as there are some Symptoms common to both, I am often at a loss
-- When the Patient has a dilatation of the pupil and convulsive motion of the
Eyelids, and squinting without an affection of the limbs, or frothing at the
mouth, there can be little doubt that the Disease depends upon effusion or
collection of Water within the Ventricles of the Brain; and more especially
when the Patient often puts his hand to the head and shrieks out, or complains
of pain there. But as the Patient grinds his teeth, shrieks out, and has a very
irregular Fever in consequence of the irritation occasioned by Worms,
especially when previously reduced by debilitating causes, I think it is a very
difficult point to distinguish one Disease from the other.

THE cases of Hydrocephalus which I have taken particular notice of, began like
irregular Remittents, and generally continued a Week or more before any
Comatose Symptoms, Dilatations of the Pupils, Strabismus, or Spsams, came on;
and before the decease of the Patient, a Paralysis of one side uniformly took
place: The Stomach and Bowels also seemed to lose their sensibility early in
the complaint, which is seldom or never the case from Worms.

AS I have been unlucky in my prescriptions and treatment of the Hydrocephalus,
I will not trouble you with a detail of particulars; but whenever I have been
able to ascertain the presence of Worms, I have seldom failed removing them, by
exhibiting a draught of a strong infusion of the Anthelmia, or Caryophyllum
Indicum, night and morning for three or four days, and afterward a dose of
Mercurius Dulcis and Rubarb, proportionate to the Patients age. If any signs of
Worms still remain, the same remedy ought to be repeated after an interval of
three or four days. The success of this method is almost incredible -- I have
never yet seen an instance where it was not effectual, whether the Patient had
a Fever or not, when the principal Symptoms were manifestly occasioned by
Worms. I generally direct One Dram of the Roots, Stalks and Leaves to be
infused four hours in half a pint of Boiling Water, and as much of it to be
given with the addition of a little Milk and Sugar, as the Patient has been
accustomed to take of Tea or Coffee for Breakfast and Supper. The day the
Mercurial purge is taken, the Patient is Prohibited cold drinks and solid Food.
To confirm the cure, Huxham's Tincture is directed to be taken before Dinner,
and a little Wine and Water made use of for common drink.

I HAVE tried Blisters frequently to the Occiput, Neck, and behind the Ears, in
several cases of Hydrocephalus, and in every stage, and have raised a moderate
Ptyalism, by the application of Mercurial Ointment to the body without success;
and yet I have no doubt of that method, with the addition of a Cordial Regimen,
and the frequent application of hot Pediluvium, being the only one which has
any probability of ever being of real service. This opinion I ground on the
success of others, as well as on the Pathology.

A SKETCH of the SITUATION, CLIMATE, and DISEASES of SOUTH CAROLINA.
[Extract of a Letter from the Honorable DAVID RAMSAY, Esquire. dated Charleston,
March 17, 1791.
I HAVE not leisure sufficient to do justice to the subject you request, but
this will be no disappointment as more has been written toward elucidating the
Medical History of South Carolina, than of almost any other State. I refer
particularly to Dr. Lining's and Dr. Chalmer's Publications. I think the latter
has exaggerated the heat of our Climate, and given a Gloomy representation of
its Diseases, but that his Writings afford and Materials for your Work.] THIS
State is in length about 200 miles, and in breadth 125, situate between 32 and
35 degrees of North Latitude.

BOUNDED East by the Atlantic Ocean, North, by North Carolina, Southwest and
South, by Savannah River, which divides it from Georgia.

THE coast of this Country is so low and flat, that it cannot be seen at the
distance of more than Seven Leagues, but about 60 miles from the Shore, the
land becomes more unequal, and consists of Spacious levels, interterspersed
with easy risings, which gradually, advancing in height toward the West,
terminate in a range of Lofty Mountains, that form, as it were, a chain which
runs throughout the Continent of North America, at the distance of about 300
Miles from the Seacoast.

FROM the East sides of these Mountains, many Rivers arise; and as all the
Waters of the adjacent Lands fall into them, these Rivers are liable to
excessive inundations; swelling sometimes more than 20 feet in height in the
space of 12 hours, particularly in those places where the Channels are narrow,
and the Banks sufficiently high to confine the Waters. But where the Land is
lower, the Waters overflow and spread themselves many miles beyond their
ordinary limits; and thus the low lands often continue deluged for many weeks.

THESE land-floods are owing either to the melting of Snow on the Mountains, or
the falling of heavy Rains in the interior parts of the Country, and they
sometimes happen both in the Spring and Autumn, but most frequently in the
latter Season. Some years, however, (though these are rare) the Rivers do not
swell at all, or in so small a degree as not to occasion any damage.

WHEN such inundations happen in the Spring, the Planters can not sow their
grain; and in Autumn the produce of their lands is either swept away by the
Stream, or so rotted, that little or nothing can be reaped for that year:
However so prolific are those lands, that if one Crop is lost out of three, the
Planters are sufficiently recompensed.

A GREAT part of the Rice Plantations are oceasionally overflowed by art, for
the purpose of promoting the growth of the Rice, which is properly a
Water-plant, at least when of a proper age it thrives best in Water. This has a
salutary effect, as it prevents the generation of putrid exhalations, the
effect of stagnant, confined, and motionless waters when operated on by heat.
In order to prepare such Lands, Dams, Banks and Drains are necessary.

THREE days before, and as many after every change and full of the Moon, the
Sea flowing in with a stronger Current, and rising some feet higher in the
Rivers, so far as the tide flows, checks the course of the Water in them, and
causes them to swell and overflow the Low Lands above.

ALONG the Banks of every River lies much Low Land, which is mostly covered at
High Water so far as the Tide flows. As far as the Sea Water flows these Banks
are covered with an high and strong sedgy sort of Grass, like Wild Oats -- and
at a greater distance from the Sea, where the Waters are always Fresh, such
Swampy Grounds abound with Coarse Grass, Reeds, and a vast variety of other
productions, from the lofty Cypress to the humblest and most diminutive Plant.
Besides these wet Lands, there are several Fresh Water Lakes in the interior
parts of the Country, and great quantities of low level Ground, which after
Heavy Rains, continue long overflowed for want of declivities by which the
Waters might run off. When these Stagnant Waters are nearly or quite expended,
noxious exhalations will abound; for then the Sun's Rays penetrating the Miry
Soil, the corrupt, putrid and mephitic Matter which had lien quiescent is
thereby set at liberty, and mixes with the Air we breathe. The Soil of this
State is very various, being generally light and sandy within 20 miles of the
Sea. This refers only to the more elevated parts, for in many other places the
Mould is rich and deep.

THE quantity of Water which constantly Stagnates in various parts, occasions
innumerable multitudes of Reptiles and Insects that are intollerably
troublesome to the Inhabitants, more especially at night, unless they are
guarded against by Gauze Curtains, or some other contrivance.

EXCEPT in one River, a stone larger than a pebble is not to be found any where
within 20 miles of the Sea, exclusive of what has been brought in as Ballast
for Ships.

WHEN the English first took possession of this Country, excepting Savannahs,
(which are Plains naturally without Trees) and some small openings made by the
Savages, the whole was one continued Forest; and perhaps one 20th part of it is
not yet cleared and cultivated. (Since the above account was published by Dr.
Chalmers, which was about the year 1772, a much greater portion of this State
has been cleared, and a considerable part of it is now (in 1791) in the highest
cultivation.)

FROM the surfaces, therefore, of so many large Rivers, and numerous
collections of standing Waters, such quantities of sunk, fenny, and marshy
Lands, and the vast Atlantic Ocean that borders on our Coast, it may readily be
inferred, that excessive exhalations must be made in this Sultry Climate; to
which may be added, the exuberant transpiration from the Soil, and of
perspiration from Vegetable productions which every where cover the Ground.

THE extraordinary Moisture of this Climate is manifest from the quantity of
Rain which falls at Charlestown, in the course of the year -- This, at a medium
for ten years, viz. from 1750 to 1760, was 42 inches annually, exclusive of the
Moisture that descended in Fogs and Dews.

DEWS that are heavy show an Atmosphere replete with Moisture: These are so
great here in common Seasons, that those who are abroad at night, are presently
wet and chilled by them -- The Fogs are sometimes so great in Winter as to
obscure the Sun for several days together.

DURING this damp Weather, Water may be seen pouring down Looking-Glasses, and
whatever is painted: Candles burn dimly, the flames appearing as if surrounded
with Halos; Marshy Grounds, Ditches, Sinks, and Shallow Standing Waters, emit
an offensive Smell; and all things are rendered so Damp within doors where no
Fires are kept, that on entering a House a musty disagreeable smell is
perceived, like that of the Chambers of those who are sweating in Fevers.

AS we have no Hills nor Mountains near us to collect or to conduct the
Currents of Air, the Wind seldom blows with much force, except in time of a
Hurricane, which happens but seldom, and at no stated periods; nor does such an
outrageous Storm arise at all, unless the Winds have been small and the Weather
very Hot and Dry for a considerable time before: Hence it should seem, that the
Air at last becomes so rarefied as to permit the contiguous Denser Atmosphere
to rush toward ours with great velocity as into an exhausted Receiver, in
order to restore the Equilibrium.

ON these occasions the Storm always proceeds from the Northeast; this being
the opposite point to that from whence the Wind had blown so long before.

NOTWITHSTANDING the damages sustained by Individuals on such occasions, the
want of such tempests for many years together is probably a great misfortune to
us; because the Air does not receive sufficient Ventilation to be conducive to
Health by any other means in this Climate: But till the Land is more cleared
our Atmosphere cannot be wholly renewed even by a Hurricane; because the Wind
cannot penetrate such an extent of close Woods, which are even impervious to
the Sun's Rays, and where the Air contracts a mephitic quality by close
confinement, and the impregnation of the fixed Air, after it has been set at
liberty by the putrefaction of decaying Vegetables, etc. It is therefore
probable that the generality of the Land Winds rather tend to vitiate than to
purify the Air with which they come in contact, and that the Winds which come
from the Sea are the only ones that purify it at present.

OUR Air is liable to as sudden and great changes in its temperature as can
possibly happen in any Country; but fortunately the greatest variations are
from Warm and Moist, to Cold and Clear Weather. These extraordinary
vicissitudes are most frequent in Winter and Spring; though in Autumn the
difference between the Heat of the Day and Night often exceeds 20 Degrees.

FROM the comparatively greater coolness and Moisture of the Air at Night it
probably is, that when the Weather is Calm, during the Autumn, and even later,
the whole Country will be covered with a thick Fog. For as the Earth retains
the Heat it received from the Sun in the Day longer than the Atmosphere does,
it still emits Vapors, which cannot ascend to any considerable height, because
of the Colder Air above; and as the humidity that was before diffused aloft, is
then made to coalesce and fall lower, by its gravity being thus augmented, they
together form those Dense Clouds which hang, as it were, balanced between the
Cooler Medium above and the Warmer one below. But as the Heat of the Soil
abates more the longer the Sun has been absent, these Clouds descend still
lower, till they cover the face of the Earth in such a manner, that in the
Morning the largest objects are intercepted from our view sometimes at the
distance of 20 yards: But even then, should we look out of a Window up two pair
of Stairs, though the Gound below us can not be seen, the Air is perfectly
serene at that height. The surrounding higher prospects then appear Roma^^ic,
and the whole looks like Enchantment. For as only the tops of the Trees and
Houses can be seen* they seem to grow and stand, as it were, in the middle of a
Great Ocean, which the Fog resembles.

THIS scene will continue till the Vapors are exhaled by the Sun, or
dissipated by the Wind, which commonly happens by 10 o'Clock, A. M. or earlier,
and the whole will be dispersed before noon, unless the Weather continues quite
calm.

LIGHTNING and Thunder happen at all Seasons when it Rains immediately after a
shift of Wind; but from April to September we seldom have a Shower without
both, though they are generally most dreadful in June, July, and August.

I CAN not convey a better idea of the Heat we perceive in passing along the
Streets at Noon in the Summer than by comparing it to that glow which strikes
one who looks into a pretty warm oven; for it is so increased by reflection
from the houses and Sandy Streets as sometimes to raise the Mercury to the
130th degree on Farenheit's Thermometer, when the temperature of the shaded Air
may not exceed the 94th.

THE sudden Death and excessive putrefaction of a Dog which was shut up in a
Sugar Baker's Stove, where the Mercury rose to the 146th Degree, led Dr.
Boerhaave into some mistakes with respect to the effects of Heat on living
Animals, which almost every year are contradicted by experience in this
Climate. The Creature which was the subject of this experiment, did not die of
Heat alone, but rather of the rarity of the Air, and the mephitical qualities
it contracted in the Stove for want of the admission of fresh Air.

FOR we are assured, that on several occasions a still greater degree of heat
is sustained by Mankind, and for a longer time together Dr. Zimmerman in his
Geographical History of Man, informs us, that "Man, and Man alone, is formed to
resist the two extremes of Heat and Cold, and that he lives and continues
healthy under all the variations of temperature, from the ^32 of natural Cold,
to the 130th Degree of natural Heat."

SEE also the account of Dr. George Fordyce's Experiments in Duncan's
Commentaries; and the account of the Climate of Russia by Dr. Guthrie, in the
Royal Transactions of Edinburgh, Vol. 2d.

"IN Siberia, A. D. 1772, the Cold was so extreme on the 7th of December, that
the Mercury sunk to 80 below 0, and some days afterward it froze in the Ball,
which according to the best experiments requires 370 below 0, to be completely
congealed."

ON Churchill's River, in Hudson's-Bay, Brandy could not be preserved from
freezing in the closest rooms. In Senegal, which is situated in 17 Degrees N.
L. the Mercury rose to 108 1/^ in the Shade, and near the Coast, to 117 1/^.
The Negroes often sustain a Heat of 120.

Dr. BLAGDEN resisted the Heat when raised to 48 above that of Boiling Water
for the space of 8 minutes.

DUHAMEL and TILLET give an account of some French Girls who supported a Heat
of 175 in an Oven without any injurious effects for more than ten minutes.


without any immediate danger to life.

FEW days pass throughout the year in which we do not see the Sun, and the
Weather for the most p^^t is so moderate in the Winter Season, that Candles
burn steadily in the open Balconies on nights of public rejoicing.

IT seldom freezes more than four or five times in the above Season; but then a
thaw so soon succeeds, that in the space of Ten Years the ice may not be strong
enough to bear a Man's weight. It is unusual to see the Ground covered with
Snow; and when this does happen, it seldom lies more than 24 hours.

HOAR Frosts are, however, frequent in Winter, and Hail with the Summer
Showers, as Halos are at all seasons.

THE lowest station of the Thermometer for the last 10 years has been 18, and
the highest 101.

THE difference in the range of the Barometer, for the space of 15 years, was
not more than 1.22 Inches. Very warm Air, or the flame of a Candle held near
the tube, will cause the Mercury to rise in the Barometer, and East or
Northerly Winds do the same, but it subsides with a South or West Wind. --
"This Instrument seems rather to indicate the density or elasticity of the
Atmosphere than the weight thereof. Of this, many proofs might be given, but
they do not belong to this place."

CHARLESTOWN.
THE Metropolis of South Carolina stands in the Latitude of 32 45, and about 4
West of Philadelphia, and 79 from London, on a W. S. W. Course. This Town is
built on a narrow Peninsula, which is formed by the conflux of Ashley and
Cooper Rivers, which are broad and deep, and discharge their Waters into the
Ocean about six Miles below the Town.

IN these Rivers is a rapid Flood and Ebb, and the Tide in common rises and
falls about five feet, but at New and Full Moon seven Feet. As the Gulf of
Florida runs with a swift Current toward the Northeast, at the distance of
about 15 or 20 Leagues from this Coast, it will be readily understood why a
strong N. E. Wind should always make a High Tide in those Rivers, as by
directly opposing that Stream, it is made to recoil on the Coast of Carolina,
and thus causes the Rivers to Swell.

THREE sides of this Town are washed by the above Rivers; the Ground between
them being so Low and Level, that it is not seven feet, nor is the Country for
20 Miles in circumference 10 feet higher at a Medium, than the surface of full
Sea is at Spring-Tides.

THIS is both a healthy and an agreeable situation in such a Climate, for it
stands, as it were, in a large Plain, having a Sea open to it in front, and
washed by the waters of two spacious Rivers on either side. Some of the Streets
are conveniently wide, but most of them are much too narrow. "NARROW Lanes and
Alleys should be prohibited by the Police in every City, for those confined
situations are the common sources in which the most infectious and malignant
distempers are engendered."
Besides their being a Nursery for various Disorders from their confined
situation, they have been found extremely inconvenient in cases of Fires, the
destructive effects of which have been frequently felt in this City. The
Streets, however, from East to West, extend from River to River, and running in
a straight line, not only open beautiful prospects each way, but afford
excellent opportunities by means of subterranean Drains for removing all
nuisances, and keeping the City clean.

WHEN the South Wind blows, it is always Warm and Moist, because it comes from
the Warmer Latitudes, and sweeps over a great extent of Sea; that which comes
from the Southwest and West is Sultry and Moist in Summer, because it passes
over large spaces of heated, marshy, overflowed, or Wood Lands, and in Winter
it brings Damps or Rain, being fraught with the exhalations that are made from
the above Soils, as well as by those Vapors that are collected and condensed
by the high bleak Mountains that lie behind. On the contrary, the Northwest and
North Winds are Cool and refreshing in the Summer, but Chilling in Winter, and
at all Seasons they dispel Clouds and Fogs by their pure elastic pressure.

IN the Summer Months, a Southeast Wind commonly springs up about 10 o'Clock A.
M. which is called the Sea Breeze; this begins very gently, but gradually
increases in strength, and fans briskly till 6 or 7 in the evening, when it
gradually abates, and ceases before night. About 8 o'Clock at night a small
Westerly Wind arises and continues till the same hour next Morning, and then
ceases likewise -- After a pause of about two hours, the Sea Breeze sets in
again as before, etc.

OF THE WATER.
THE Water in common use for Drinking and Cooking at Charlestown is always
Brackish. Fifty-five cubical Inches of this Water was found to weigh Six Grains
more than an equal Bulk of Rain Water; and when the same weight of Sea Salt was
added to the Rain Water, it precipitated a Solution of Silver when mixed with
Spirits of Nitre, became of a Milky color with Oil of Tartar per deliquium,
and tasted like the Well-Water.

THE manner of living in Charlestown is much after the English fashion; but
either weak and acid Punch, or Rum and Water, is used by many for constant
Drink, and People in easy circumstances make too liberal use of Wine,
particularly at and after Dinner, to the great injury of their Constitutions.

TEA and Coffee are also so cheap, that one or other is used twice a day by
people of all descriptions; for want of Markets in the Country, more Salted and
Smoaked Meats are consumed by the People there than in the Town; they, however,
abound with Poultry, Milk, wholesome bread, made of Maize or Rice, and the most
delicious Fruits.

CHARLESTOWN, increases fast in buildings and People; Dr. CHALMERS account of
Charlestown was published in 1772: Since that time it has increased rapidly;
for by Morse's Geography, it appears that there were in 1786, 1600 Houses in
the City, with 9600 White Inhabitants, and 5400 Negroes, and that upwards of
200 of the White Inhabitants were above 60 years of age.
but at present there are not quite 1200 dwelling houses, with nearly as many
kitchens that are built separate, besides a great number of Warehouses.

THE White Inhabitants of this Town may be about 5500; but the mortality amnog
them cannot be exactly determined at present, no Register thereof having been
kept for several years: Formerly when Bills of Mortality were annually printed,
the Inhabitants then being not quite 4000, it appeared that one in 37 died
annually, or about one in each family in the space of 7 years and an half.

IT must be acknowledged that we are more healthy than formerly, since the
Hurricanes of 1752. Children in particular have escaped better since; for
before that time, almost half the deaths happened amongst those who were under
five years of age.

BIRTHS cannot be ascertained from the Christenings; for Children are not
always Baptized the same year in which they are born; but it is certain, they
far exceed the deaths of the settled Inhabitants.

THE natives, for the most part, rise above the middling stature, and they
attain their full height sooner than people usually do in Colder Climates. In
general they are of a slender make, have pale complexions, thin lank hair,
which seldom curls: Few live 60 years, and the bald, or hoary, and wrinkled
appearances of old age, often show themselves at the age of 30 years, or even
earlier, more especially on those who dwell in the Country.

Dr. CHALMERS Account of the state of the Thermometer in the Shaded Air, at
Charlestown, in the year 1752. FROM Dr. John Lining's Letter to Dr. Robert
Whytt, it appears, that in the beginning of August, of the year 1748, the
weather was warmer at Charlestown than he had ever known it in that month: The
Mercury for some days at 2 o'Clock, rose, in the Shaded Air, to the 96th
Degree, at which time several died of Apoplexies.

THE latter part of August, and the first week in September, were much more
temperate; the weather being then much as usual at that season of the year.

THE second week in September was Cold, the Wind being constantly Easterly, and
the weather cloudy.

IN the latter part of September, and from the 1st to the 18th of October, the
greatest heat at 2 P.M. was 79, and the lowest Degree of heat, during that time
at the same hour, was 52, the greatest nocturnal heat was 71, the least 42.

THE greatest increase of heat in 24 hours, was 17, the greatest decrease of
the same was 22.

IN all the month of September, and in the greatest part of October, the Wind
was Easterly.


THERMOMETER.
Highest. Lowest. January 56 18 February 79 32 March 81 41 April 87 49 May 93
60 June 92 67 July 101 74 August 96 68 September 84 64 October 83 55 November
81 45 December 74 32

State of the Thermometer in the Shaded Air at Charlestown in the year 1759.
THERMOMETER.
Highest. Lowest. January 68 27 February 73 31 March 74 40 April 79 57 May 85
51 June 92 63 July 93 65 August 90 61 September 85 59 October 81 45 November 74
31 December 71 28

THE foregoing tables show a considerable difference in the temperature of our
Air, and this may in part account for the changes that are brought about in our
Constitutions. If the Thermometer, exposed to the Sun during our hottest
weather, was compared with the greatest Winter's Cold, the difference might be
100 degrees.

WHY the method of keeping a Register with two Glasses, the one exposed to the
Sunshine and the other Kept in the shade, is not attended to I know not; for
the mediums of both, taken together, would, in my opinion, (...) the truth
(...) ^^^imating (...) ^ffects of the (...) human body; for it seems clear to
me that ^y keeping a Thermometer in the shade only, we discover no more than
the greatest Coolness in the Air; but it in no wise points out that degree of
heat which those sustain who are obliged to be much abroad in the day, as is
the lot of the greatest part of the people of this State, (particularly of the
Slaves.)

THOUGH much moisture is always present in the Air in this Climate, yet it
increases with heat; for it Rains as much (as appears by Registers which I have
kept of the weather for 10 years) in Summer as in the Winter and Spring taken
together, and still more Rain falls in the Autumn. FROM a comparison of the
Tables of Meteorological observations made at Charlestown with those made at
Jamaica, which is situated between 3 and 4 degrees within the Tropic of Cancer,
the Climate of the latter appears much more salutary as well as more agreeable
than the former. -- "IN the West Indies, during the six months of the year,
when the Sun has passed the Equinoctial line on his annual return to either
Tropic, that Season is called the Summer; so from the 20th of March, when the
Sun passes the Equator into the Northern Hemisphere to visit the tropic of
Cancer, until the 21st of September, when he repasses it into the Southern
Hemisphere to re-visit the tropic of Capricorn, it is considered the Summer
Season in the West Indies, and the remainder of the year is called Winter.
Within the tropics the heat is nearly uniform, seldom varying on any given
spot, either by Day or Night 16 degrees: At a medium, on the Coast, and on
Plains not much elevated above the level of the Sea, the Heat is about 80 of
Farenheit's, or 21 of Reaumer's Thermometer; and the difference between the
Heat of January, the coldest month, and of August the hottest month of the
year, is seldom above 6 degrees; but between the Heat of the Morning and Noon,
the difference is 16. The Rains begin in April or May, and continue 6 or 8
weeks -- and again in September, when they are violent and heavy; but when the
Sun arrives at the tropic of Capricorn, its greatest Southern distance on the
21st of December, the season becomes dry and pleasant, accompanied with Night
Winds from the Land." (Mosely, on Tropical Diseases.


(...) distribution of the months into seasons does not appear suitable for
this Climate. For certain it is, that taking the whole of the month of March
together with respect to the temperature and qualities of the Air, it does not
differ much from some of those that are called Winter Months; it is, however,
retained here in compliance with established custom as belonging to the Spring,
though the medium of the Thermometer be 10 degrees less than it is in April. IN
Muschenbrocks Element's of Natural Philosophy, it is said that in all the
countries within the tropics, the greatest degree of heat rises only to 88 or
90, and the lowest falls to 72 or 70.


THOUGH we might expect the Spring should be the most wholesome season of the
four in this Climate, because the Air is then impregnated with exhilirating and
refreshing exhalations issuing from a boundless variety of Vegetables just
emerging into life; yet we find it is less so than Winter "with his Ruffian
Blasts," owing to the sudden and extreme Vicissitudes of the weather,
especially in the early part of that gay season.

IT is, however, much more wholesome than the latter part of Summer and Autumn,
when the weather becomes not only more variable than it was before, but the
Atmosphere also becomes loaded with exhalations from deciduous and putrefying
Vegetables, as well as from the innumerable bodies of Insects, and other
Animals, which having answered the ends of their generation, are now dying in
all corners, and which as well as the Miasmata exhaled from Marshes and Lakes,
unless dissipated with High Winds, contribute to poison the principle of life.

An Account of the Weather and Diseases which occur in Charlestown at the
different Seasons of the Year.
The DISEASES of MARCH and APRIL.
ALTHOUGH the weather be much Warmer in March than it is in the preceding Month
it is still changeable, as being intermixed with Cold, Windy, and Warm days, in
which the Mercury sometimes rises nearly to the 80th degree, and falls in a few
days to the 40th; the contrary also often happens in a short space of time.

PLEURISIES, Peripneumonies, Quinsies, and Catarrhous Fevers are often epidemic
this month, and often continue throughout the month of April, but with a less
degree of inflammation.

WHEN one person in a family sickens, and the Disease cannot be removed in a
few days, nothing is more common than for some of the attendants to be seized
in the same way. This gives an alarm to their neighbors, who conclude the
Disease to be infectious, than which there is nothing more foreign, (...) it is
owing to the similarity of Constitutions which now prevails, and to greater
exposure than common to the remote causes. For those who depart from their
customary manner of living are most in danger of Diseases at all times. This is
particularly the case of Nurses, who are obliged to go often out of a warm room
into the cold Air at all hours, and are often deprived of their rest, etc.

WHEN the Patient had a Cough and Spitting before he was seized with a
Peripneumony at this time, the expectoration will generally be pretty free on
the 2d or 3d day of the Disease provided care has been taken; and it also will
be more plentiful than it was in the like disorder during the three preceding
months -- The blood too being of a laxer consistence than is commonly observed
when drawn in the month of February, shows signs of less inflammation; for
though a pellicle of Coagulable lymph may still appear, yet this will be
thinner and not so tough as in the preceding month.

YOUTH are observed to be more liable to inflammatory complaints in March and
April than at any other time of the year; and though the Fevers which occur at
this time are mostly attended, and perhaps depend upon catarrhal affections at
first, they generally remit, and frequently become Quotidian Intermittents in a
few days if properly managed; else they may continue till the 7th, or longer,
and a delirium, bleeding from the nose, or both, may be frequent in them.
During these two months the two last mentied symptoms are not uncommon in
Pneumonic affections.

WHEN the weather is warmer at this time, Women, and weakly Men have Fevers,
with some degree of Cough and Pain in the side or breast; but they remit from
the beginning, and in a few days end in Quotidians, in which much Bile is
sometimes discharged upwards at the beginning of the Paroxisms.

THE Gout and Rheumatism, Serous, or inflammatory Quinsies, and the Erisipelas
also appear at this time; the latter in particular oftener than at any other
time of the year. The Essera likewise is not unfrequent, but it happens mostly
in the first attacks of Intermittents -- It also sometimes happens without any
Fever, and is very troublesome.

(ACCORDING to the account of Tourn^ourt, the Cynanche Maligna, which he calls
the Child's Plague, was first imported into Europe from the Levant 60 years
before the period of his observations, which were published 30 or 40 years
ago.) But whether the Scarlatina be the same Disease only rendered different by
the circumstance of climate, situation, modes of living, and constitutions, I
have not yet been able to ascertain; nor do I know whether the same person is
liable to either of them more than once.)

(THE Scarlatina is not entirely confined to Children; for in August, of the
year 1791, I attended a Patient of the name of Miller, who had it in a very
violent manner in the 36th year of his age.)


FORMERLY the Scarlet Fever used to appear amongst our vernal Diseases, but
whether generated, here or brought to us from other parts, I cannot say: But as
it has not occurred in the course of my practice for 18 years past till lately,
I believe it is not a Disease of this Climate.

A COMPLICATED and very acute complaint appeared here in the month of October,
1770, which was said to have passed hither from Georgia, where many people died
of it; besides the common symptoms which appear at the commencement of the
generality of Fevers, a Quinsy generally appeared at the beginning, with great
inflammation of the Velum, Uvula, and Tonsils; and quickly spreading to the
Eustachian tube -- and in those who recovered (as most of them did) the
inflammation extended to the throat, from the throat to the Alae Nasi, which
soon became ulcerated, and a vast discharge issued from the Nostrils, at which
time the voice was hoarse, indistinct, and snuffling.

THE tongue in many was greatly swelled, and extended insomuch as to hang out
of the mouth. After the inflammation had continued a few days, the fauces and
Uvula became ulcerated, and appeared of a brigh^ pearl, or dusky brown color.

THE Gargarisms I used in such cases were decoctions of Peruvian and Oak Bark,
with a small proportion of Serpentaria, to which Red Wine, Tincture of Myrrh,
or Brandy, were added; and they were likewise acidulated with Spirits of
Vitriol or Alum, always in a greater or less proportion as the condition of the
Ulcers appeared to require. Half a spoonful of the same composition was also
directed to be often swallowed both to cleanse the throat, and give tone to the
system.

AT the beginning of this complaint, Blistering across the throat, and the back
part of the neck, and receiving the steams of hot water and Vinegar into the
throat, was of sensible service. As soon as the activity of the Pulse began to
abate, the Bark, in Powder, was exhibited liberally, mixed with the ^bove
decoction, etc.

WHEN the Inflammatory Symptoms appeared considerable, the Lancet was always
employed, and apparently with real benefit.

VERY few who were affected with this species of Quinsy escaped without having
both Scarlet and Miliary eruptions, which generally appeared on the 2d or 3d
day of the Fever. And it is remarkable, that they who had the two latter
complaints in a copious manner, for the most part, suffered less from the
Angina. In those who had frequent Vomitings, and large Watery stools, the
danger was very great. -- These were therefore endeavored to be restrained by
Opiates, Warm Spirituous fomentations, and hot applications to the Body and
Limbs.

OUR Constitutions become so changed toward the end of April, provided the
Season be but regularly Warm, that Fevers prove either Quotidians, or Tertians
at once; and are often times attended with Bilious discharges both ways.

THE long continuance of hot weather never fails to relax and debilitate the
Solids in the same manner as if they had been over distended.

THOSE who have swelled Spleens, or the Jaundice; pale Girls and Women who have
defective Menses, are liable to hemorrhages from the nose or lungs, more
especially during Fevers.

DISEASES of MAY and JUNE.
IT may be observed that those complaints which depend upon a Weakened tone of
the Solids, and a loss of Harmony between the Nervous and Sanguiferous Systems
(which is presumed to be the case in Intermittent, and Remittent Fevers,
Choleras, Dysenteries, etc.) begin to make their appearance here early in the
Summer, when the preceding months have been warm and moist, a state of the
Atmosphere which never fails to induce that state of the System favorable to
the operation of their remote causes.

D. LIND, who had the best opportunities of informing himself, says, in his
Essay on preserving the health of Seamen, 2d Edition, page 49.

A Malignant Fever of the Remitting or Intermitting kind, most frequently a
double tertian is the genuine produce of heat and moisture, is the Autumnal
Fever of all hot countries; and is the Epedemic Disease between the tropics.


DISEASES of JULY, AUGUST and SEPTEMBER. THE excessive heat of the weather in
Carolina, during the growth of the Rice, in the months of July and August, has
sometimes produced a Remitting Fever with malignant Symptoms, similar to that
which in the West Indies goes by the name of the Yellow Fever.

FEVERS with great Languor, profuse Sweats, and other profuse discharges,
particularly with diarrhoeas appear in each of these months. But as in the two
latter months, the winds often shift to the N. or N. E. with an increased
coldness in the Air, after a Thunder Shower, the paleness and shrinking of the
skin, and chilly sensations that always precede an Intermitting Fever, will
then be more sensibly distinguished, but is seldom so perceptible in the
complaints of July.

DISEASES of OCTOBER and NOVEMBER.
DISEASES of a mixed kind, or between the Inflammatory (or rather mild
Inflammatory Diseases which appear in these months soon terminate in Remittents
or Intermittents) and Intermitting are seen in October and November, and also
(as should have been observed before) in March and April; at which time our
Constitutions are as it were in a middling state with regard to tensity and
laxity.

IN Winter again, when the weather is clear and cold, the Solids being then
springy and tense, and the constituent particles of the blood more intimately
united, Intermitting Fevers are seldom seen, having given place to other
Diseases of an opposite nature; unless the weather be unseasonably warm.

HENCE it appears, that the strength or weakness of our bodies keeps pace with
the weather; and that they do not pass to either extreme all at once, but
rather by degrees, or according as the Air changes in its temperature at
different seasons of the year; so that these do not succeed each other
suddenly, but with a gradual progress, our Constitutions conforming thereto,
whether the transition be from cold to hot, or the contrary. The truth of this
reasoning, every observant person may perceive, by an increase or abatement of
his own strength, and the difference that of course happens in the Diseases of
the several seasons.

THOUGH one day of bad weather may produce various complaints, yet before any
(Epidemic, or) popular disease can take place, (setting aside those that are
contagious or infectious, that is, those whose remote cause is a specific
poison received into the body by the Lungs or Absorbent Vessels over the
surface of the body) the air for a considerable continuance of time must have
been of some certain temperature and quality, or nearly so, and then a sudden
change must take place in that temperature before it can produce a morbid
change in the functions of the body. And as these effects are brought about
sooner or later, according as other causes have concurred in rendering one
constitution more infirm or susceptible of impression, or they be more or less
exposed to the weather so changed, they may sicken in great numbers nearly at
the same time, or in a more scattered manner one after another, though then a
strong similarity may, in many respects, be observed in most cases.

WHEN the season is very inconstant, a variety of complaints and confusion in
their symptoms generally ensue, according to the state the body happens to be
in when acted upon by such a shifting mixture of different impressions; and
then the observation of Hippocrates is likely to be verified, "That all
diseases happen at all seasons.

I have remarked that the returns This corresponds with what Dr. Cullen has
observed with respect to the times of accession of the different varieties of
Intermittents. Vol. ^. p. 59.

"Quotidians come on in the morning, Tertians at noon, and Q^artans in the
afternoon."


of periodical disorders, and the symptoms of those that are of the more
continued sort, conform in a good measure in their accession or times of
attacking, with such parts of the 24 hours, as come nearest to the temperature
of those seasons to which these several complaints seem, as it were, properly
to belong. Thus, if the morning be supposed the Spring, noon the Summer,
evening the Autumn, and night the Winter of the day, as the parallel will run
very nearly when the weather is settled; vernal disorders ought to commence or
be increased in the forenoon, and abate toward the evening, or in the forepart
of the night; those of the Summer should invade toward noon and decline in the
evening; but at whatever time they return, their symptoms will certainly be
heightened in the middle of the day. On the other hand, Autumnal disorders
should attack or be aggravated about 4 or 5 o'clock, P. M. And such disorders
as are common to the Winter, either come on or are much increased in violence
at the beginning of the night, and remit or go off toward morning, continuing
more moderate till the next evening, unless the weather be very cold.

THE disorders of the first period, are not so certain in their onsets and
exacerbations; but for the most part a striking agreement will often be
perceived in them.

EXCEPTING the Plica and a few such oddities, the people of South Carolina are
liable to all the disorders that are to be found elsewhere, or which can arise
in constitutions, that are differently modified in the various seasons of the
year. The endemic diseases of this place are common to other warm climates.

THE Tetanus appears here at all seasons, more especially from wounds or ulcers
of the tendinous parts, and to this disease newborn infants are very liable;
nor have I known more than one out of many hundreds of them recovered from it.

EXCEPT during the winter, varieties of the Intermitting Fever are common at
all times; and periodical pains in different parts, particularly in the head;
many persons being daily more or less affected with it, owing to an Atony and
want of a perfect balance between the heart and extreme vessels, the latter
appearing from the paleness and coldness of the skin to be spasmodically
constricted: such people have seldom a natural warmth in their hands, much less
in their legs and feet: Menorrhagiae, Abortion, and Prolapsus Uteri, and other
sexual diseases are very common and generally alarming.

FROM a want of excitement in the nervous system, or from an Atonia of the
sanguiferous vessels, and a diminished momentum of the blood, congestions of
the fluids, or obstructions of the Viscera, especially of the Spleen, are
frequent in the Autumn, as are local and general Dropsies and Hernias, and few
adults have escaped the Piles, some people being daily more or less troubled
with them: The Scurvy in a mild degree is also very common here; the gums first
become spungy, and are soon destroyed, so that the sockets of the teeth being
thereby exposed to the air, they become carious, and not only useless but
painful. The Rheumatism may be deemed one of our periodical diseases; the Gout
too is a frequent and unwelcome guest with the opulent and luxurious.

WHATEVER be the nature of that humor or matter which communicates the Lues
Venerea, the Yaws and the Lame Distemper, or Joint Evil, called in the
West Indies the Cacobia, whose direful effect are to destroy the smaller joints
first, and afterward the larger ones, all seem owing to somewhat, not very
dissimilar; for they all three terminate nearly in the same manner when not
properly managed or when left to take their own course, and appear to be
curable almost in the same manner.

THE Trismus, or Jaw-Lock, is very common among negro infants soon after birth,
and is supposed to be occasioned by the heat and smoke of the cabins in which
they are born, and subsequent exposure to cold and damp air. Children are very
much infested with worms in Charlestown.

BUT as the remedies generally employed are in no respect different from those
employed in other countries, I shall not transcribe them here.

DR. Lining says, "The Yellow Fever has been four times epidemical in
Charlestown, viz. in the Autumn of 1732, -- 39, -- 45, -- 48; and as none of
those were remarkable for extraordinary heat or rainy weather, he concludes
that it did not take its origin from any peculiarity of the climate or soil,
but that it was imported from the West Indies; and even asserts that whenever
the disease appeared, it was easily traced to some person who had lately
arrived from the West India islands, where it was epidemical."

BUT from a comparison of the description which he gives of the symptoms of
this fever, with that given by Dr. Chalmers, and particularly from the more
recent observations of Dr. Hunter in the West Indies, I am inclined to think
Dr. Lining has fallen into a very great error respecting the nature and cause
of this disease.

FOR the greater yellowness of the skin appears to be the only circumstance in
which it differs from the bilious Remittents of hot climates, or very hot
seasons of any climate. Dr. Lining himself, though he considers it as a species
of pestilence, says, the negroes were exempt from it, though exposed as much as
the whites, and that those who were conveyed to the country with it never
communicated it to those with whom they had communication.

THE celebrated Dr. Lind of Haslar Hospital, appears to have fallen into a
similar error, owing to the misrepresentation of facts by Dr. Warren and others.

HE has also recorded an account of the Yellow Fever becoming epidemic in
Philadelphia, in the year 1740, owing to some infected apparel of a gentleman
who had died of it in Barbados. These clothes, says he, being unluckily hung
abroad to be aired, presently diffused the contagion of the same fever over
that part of the town, and destroyed 200 persons.

IT is however at present generally known (for it has been proved by the most
accurate and unexceptionable observations See the papers of the benevolent Mr.
Howard on Lazarettos, p. 36. Mertin's history of the Plague at Moscow, in 1771.
See also the travels of Mr. Bruce, 3d vol. quarto, p. 717 and 18.
) that no infectious disease can be communicated without contact, or the near
approach to the body of an infected person, or to somites or substances imbued
with infectious matter or morbific Miasmata.

EVEN the Pestilence, the most contagious of all diseases, is not communicable
by the air, without contact, or the near approach to an infected person, or to
some substance which has imbibed the infectious matter: And it is more than
probable that the Pestilence is only a more violent degree of the Typhus or
Putrid Fever, modified and rendered more violent by climate, situation, manner
of living, and constitution.

of the SITUATION, CLIMATE, and DISEASES of GEORGIA.
THE following is the substance of accounts received from different
correspondents respecting the Situation, Climate, and Diseases of Georgia.
THE state of Georgia lies between the 31st and 35th degree of north latitude;
computed to be about 600 miles in length, and 250 in breadth. Bounded east by
the Atlantic, west by the Missisippi, north by South Carolina, and south by
Florida.

IT is separated from South Carolina by the river Savannah, and from Florida by
the river St. Mary.

AUGUSTA, the present seat of government, is situated on the Savannah river,
about 135 miles from its entrance into the ocean. The town of Savannah, on the
same river, which is only 17 miles from its mouth, stands upon an elevated
steep bank, and back of it lies an extensive gravelly plain.

THE north side of the river on the Carolina shore is a mere bog, from whence
numerous exhalations constantly rise in warm weather, and by which the
inhabitants of the town often suffer when the wind is north or north-east.

THE town last mentioned contains about 250 families. The number of inhabitants
in the whole state, according to the return presented to Congress, October
28th, 1791, amounted to 82548.

AUGUSTA at present is a very inconsiderable village; but from its favorable
situation at the head of navigation, and the productive quality of the soil of
the adjacent country, it cannot fail of rising into consequence in the course
of a few years.

THE Savannah is fanned every day in Summer by refreshing breezes from the sea;
Augusta is deprived of this advantage by its inland situation.

FROM June to September the mercury commonly fluctuates between 76 and 85 in
the shaded air, but is often as high as 90, and sometimes 100, especially forty
or fifty miles from the sea.

IN winter it sometimes descends below 17, but is very seldom below 32. It
commonly ranges at this season from 40 to 60.

THE most prevailing winds here in Summer are south-west or east, and in Winter
the north-west.

THE east wind is the warmest in Winter, and the coolest in Summer.

THE south, which prevails too frequently for the health of the inhabitants, is
damp, sultry, inelastic and oppressive, at all seasons, but amazingly so in the
Summer and Autumn.

ABOUT a fifth part of this state is as level as a floor, particularly all that
tract which lies between the rivers Savannah and St. Mary, extending 40 miles
west. This tract being intersected with numerous rivers, along the banks of
which is one continued marsh, the cleared ground is converted into Rice and
Indigo plantations. It other respects the country exhibits precisely the same
appearance as South Carolina.

ABOUT 70 or 80 miles to the westward, the land begins to be more or less
uneven, rising from small ridges into hills, and the hills successively
increasing in height till they finally terminate in lofty mountains.

THAT vast chain of mountains which commences with Kattskill, near Hudson's
river in New York, known by the name of the Alleghany and Apalachian mountains,
emphatically styled the Spine of North America, terminates in this state about
60 miles from its southern boundary.

AS this state so nearly resembles South Carolina in situation, soil,
temperature of climate, and almost every other circumstance, I shall not
trouble the reader with particulars.

DR. Ramsay advises strangers who propose to settle in the southern states, to
manage so as to arrive there about the beginning of November, that their
constitutions may have time to become accommodated to the climate before the
commencement of the sickly season. The same learned and judicious writer
remarks, that the sudden deaths of persons unaccustomed to the climate of
South Carolina, are to be referred to an injudicious choice of time in coming
to it, and still more to their own imprudence and irregularities, in
conjunction with the hospitality of the inhabitants.

CONCLUSION.
BY comparing the preceding account of the several climates of the United
States with those of the countries in Europe in the same parallels of latitude,
we learn that there is a very material difference between them.

THIS circumstance is presumed to be owing to the following causes.

1st. To the height of the lands in North America, which are situated between
the 40th and 50th degrees of latitude, and extend between six and seven hundred
miles from north to south. From these the greatest rivers have their source. To
the east of them lie the lakes Superior, Michegan, Huron, Otswego, Erie, etc.
and the intermediate country is covered with impenetrable forests, interspersed
with swamps and morasses; To M. de Mairan we owe the discovery that the rigor
of the Winter's cold is tempered by the heat imparted to the atmosphere by the
earth, and that this heat is always proportioned to the heat absorbed by the
earth in the absence of frost, and that the Winter is more or less severe
according as the heat and dryness of the atmosphere has been more or less
intense during the preceding Summer.

Kirwan's Estimate of Climates.


hence this vast space is incapable of receiving or retaining much heat in
Summer, and consequently one great source of that warmth by which the Winters
in the old continent are moderated, is here considerably diminished.

HENCE also the westerly winds, at least such of them as originate behind these
high lands, deposite their vapors in passing over them, and re-absorb fresh
ones from these numerous lakes and immense forests over which they pass, and
are thereby still more cooled; for air always participates of the temperature
of the substance with which it comes in contact.

FARTHER north, viz. between latitude 52 and 63, lie Hudson's Bay and Straits;
about 50 miles on the south of this bay, from lat. 50 to 58, there runs a ridge
of mountains, which prevents its receiving any heat from that quarter; and
hence the intermediate country is so cold that scarce any animal can live in it.

To the east, this bay is bounded by the barren, mountainous country of
Labrador, and a number of islands that lie at its entrance. The portion of the
Atlantic opposite to the entrance of these streights is surrounded partly by
the continent of America, and partly by Greenland as far down as lat. 59. Both
are mountainous and intersected by a multitude of creeks and inlets, which are
frozen over in Winter, and the ensuing Summer the floating ice is protected by
numerous high islands, and partly carried down the eastern coast as far as lat.
42, whereby the coolness of the atmosphere is increased. Hence the N. W. winds
are the coldest in all these parts of America during the Winter season, and for
reasons which have been explained from page 80 to 96 the north-east as the
coldest in Summer.

THE greatest part of the heat of the atmosphere is certainly derived from its
communication with the land or water over which it passes, and in this way it
receives either heat or cold more readily than any other body of equal bulk,
especially when confined, as in valleys.

AIR incumbent on seas or on large tracts of water, is generally many degrees
warmer in Winter, and cooler in Summer, than air incumbent on land; because
land is more susceptible both of heat and cold than water.

EXPERIMENTS made by Mr. Hales in 1724, prove that the surface of the earth is
much heated during the Summer, but that this heat descends very slowly, a great
part of it being communicated to the air.

THAT during the Winter the earth gives out to the air the heat it had
accumulated during the Summer, and that on this circumstance in a great measure
the temperature of the Winter depends.

Now as the earth must receive more or less heat during the Summer season,
according to the greater or lesser freedom of access which the sun's rays have
to it, and to the longer or shorter duration of their access, it follows that
whatever circumstances have the effect of obstructing or preventing this access
must diminish the grand source which moderates the rigor of the land winds,
which prevail during the Winter season. The principal circumstances which
obstruct the action of the rays of the sun upon the earth, are cloudy and wet
weather, the effects of extraordinary evaporation.

THE evaporation from the lakes, swamps and forests in America is astonishing.

THE evaporation from land covered with living vegetables is much greater than
from that which is bare. The rays of the sun are not only obstructed by the
evaporations from these immense forests, but where the trees are tall and close
together, they are entirely excluded from acting upon the ground at all.

HENCE it may be presumed that the woods, thickets, and height of the lands in
North America are the circumstances which render the climates of the several
states different from, and less agreeable than the countries in the same
latitude in Europe, where the lands are lower, and the country more cleared and
better cultivated.

WE also learn from the account of the diseases contained in the preceding
pages, that the cold of the northern states properly guarded against, produces
but few diseases of a dangerous nature, and that Intermitting, Remitting or
Bilious Fevers, and Fluxes, are scarcely ever known there; but in proceeding to
the southward in Maryland and Virginia, where the heat is more intense and of
longer continuance, and the soil more moist, especially upon lands in an
imperfect state of cultivation, the diseases last mentioned are very prevalent,
and often fatal, especially to foreigners; though the natives who fix their
habitations in dry and elevated situations, and observe a medium between excess
and abstinence, enjoy a tolerable share of health.

IN South Carolina and Georgia, Fevers and Fluxes are still more epidemic,
violent, and obstinate, especially after the Rice harvest in August and
September, when the waters are diminished and permitted to stagnate and
corrupt. The fevers which occur at this season are very anomalous, neither
intermitting nor remitting perfectly, but participating much of the nature of
that commonly called the Yellow Fever, which is often so fatal within the
Tropics.

ALTHOUGH the United States of America cannot boast of the superiority of their
climates over other countries in parallel latitudes, they are exceeded by few
in fertility of soil, and equalled by none in political advantages.

AND, from whatever causes it may proceed, the inhabitants, in the middle and
particularly in the northern states enjoy a greater proportion of health, and
live to a greater age than the inhabitants of Europe. The diseases which do
occur are more simple and uniform; and this country is entirely exempt from
some of the most formidable and destructive which infest the other quarters of
the globe.

THE Spotted Pestilence, the fatal offspring of famine, uncleanliness, and
vitiated air, has never yet reached our favored shores.

THE Smallpox, the Measles, the Malignant Quinsy, the Influenza, and almost
every other contagious disease were foreigners to this continent, till they
were introduced through the medium of commerce from Europe, into which they
were first conveyed from Asia, or the dominions of the despotic Turk, bordering
on that immense continent.

THE Leprosy, the Yaws, the Eliphantiasis, and other loathsome disorders are
endemic to Africa.

WHETHER Africa or South-America gave origin to the Syphilis remains uncertain,
though that dishonor is generally ascribed to the latter.

NOR is North America, like many other countries, subject to earthquakes, the
eruption of volcanoes, hurricanes, periodical deluges, impetuous whirlwinds,
noxious and consuming blasts of wind, or withering and protracted drought.

WHAT does it avail the inhabitants of Asia that many of their provinces are
blessed with the most delightful climate and fertile soil that imagination can
conceive, since they themselves are in subjection to the arbitrary will of a
capricious and despotic tyrant.

ONE half of Africa lies beneath the burning line, and its sable inhabitants
are all immersed in rude and dismal barbarism, entirely unacquainted with the
use of the Plough and the Loom.

EVEN in Europe (the seat of Science and the nurse of Arts) Liberty, "the most
precious gift of heaven to man," is scarcely known, or only enjoyed by the
lucky and the favored few. The rest are greater drudges than the beasts they
own; for there, society is divided into two distinct classes, nobles and
commons, lords and tenants: the former possessing and enjoying every thing; the
latter indigent, oppressed, and almost destitute of the common necessaries of
life.

NORTH AMERICA is the only portion of this spacious globe where man can live
securely, and enjoy all the privileges to which he has a native right.

IN this enviable and favored region there is no proud -- usurping aristocracy
-- no ecclesiastical orders with exclusive privileges -- no kings with
arbitrary power or corrupting influence -- no venal parliaments composed of
different ranks and opposing interests -- no monopolizing confederacies of
opulent and interested traders and manufacturers, to the exclusion of those to
whom chance or fortune has been less liberal.

NOR are the taxes or expenses of government so considerable as to consume the
profits of honest industry, or ever employed to gratify the splendid projects
of mad ambition.

IT is true none of the enervating refinements of luxury or dissipation are to
be found here; but here all the necessaries and conveniences of life abound,
and a pleasing equality and decent competence are every where displayed -- here
the dignity of the human species is restored, and man enjoys all the freedom to
which he is entitled; for here he is a member of the government he obeys, and a
framer of the laws by which he is governed, either in person or by the
representatives of his own choice.

FINIS.
INDEX.
A
ACCOUNT of the diseases which occur at Annapolis 238 Advantages of pure air,
121
B
Bill of mortality for Milford, 12 for Salem, 27 -- 35, etc. for Philadelphia,
from 188 to 192, etc.
Births and deaths, a register of, in Philadelphia, 188, etc. Brown, Dr. his
errors exposed, 252
C
Climate, an account of the New England, 31 New York, 48 New Jersey, 54
Pennsylvania, 72 Delaware, 203 Maryland, 225 Virginia, 262 North Carolina, 326
South Carolina, 344 Georgia, 393
Causes, an explanation of the, which alter the temperature of climates, 80 and
40 Connecticut, its population, and the longevity of its inhabitants, etc. 11
and 12 Carolina, North its situation, 326 South, do. 342
Consumption, method of treating, 124 Cholera, method of treating, 133 Cynanche
Trachealis, or Hives, 178 and 376
D
Diseases, which occur in New England, 1 account of, by Dr. Senter, 7 by Dr.
Holyoke, 13 in New York, 41 Dr. Jones's account of 53 in New Jersey, 56 Dr.
Mashean's letter respecting, 60 in Pennsylvania, 94 catalogue of, 96
observations on, at Philadelphia, for 1790, 125 in Maryland, 227 in Virginia,
271 -- 278 and 300 in North Carolina, 333 in South Carolina, 371 in Georgia. 397
Dispensary, its utility, 162 Dysentery, description and treatment of, 136 --
248, etc. Diarrhoea, description and treatment of, 133 -- 305, etc. Dr.
Johnston's method, 239
Dropsy, cured by the Digitalis, 61 and 241 by Squills, 293
Drowned persons, directions for restoring to life, 254
E
Exercise, its salutary effects, 113 Erysipelas, occasioned by the poison vine,
how cured, 119
F
Fevers, Intermitting, rare in New England, 8 their cause, 121 description and
cure of by Dr. Lions, 289 by Tailor and Hansford, 308 Remitting, description
and treatment, 143 -- 317 Synochus, description and treatment, 221 and 309
Typhus, 120

G
George-Town, its situation and diseases, 235 Gout, method of treating, 249
H
Headache, sick, method of treating, 111 Hydrocephalus Internus, cured by
mercurial friction, 62 by calomel and blisters, 251 observations on, 337
Hepatitis, case of, 160 how cured, 165
Hives, or Cynanche Trachealis, 178
I
Jersey, New, situation of, 56 Influenza, 323 Inoculation, when first
introduced into America, 37
L
Laudanum, relieves the ill effects produced by drinking cold water, 9
M
Meteorological observations made in New England 13, etc. in Boston, 29, etc.
in New York, 45, etc. in Philadelphia, 125 in Virginia, 267 in Charleston, 365
Mineral springs, in Pennsylvania, 69 in Virginia, 259
Maryland, its situation, etc. 225
P
Pennsylvania, situation of, 64 Pleurisy, description and treatment of, 141 --
283 -- 303
Q
Quinsy, how treated by Dr. Lions, 288
R
Rheumatism, description and treatment, 170
S
Smallpox, description and treatment, 165 Snakes, the effects of their bites,
how cured, 105
T
Tea, a narcotic, 43
V
Virginia, situation of, etc. 257
W
Water, the quality of, at New York, 44 at Philadelphia, 67 at Charleston, 361
Worms, how destroyed by Dr. Miller, 329
Y
York, New, situation of, 41

