(...) LIFE OF VOLTAIRE, BY THE MARQUIS DE CONDORCET. TO WHICH ARE ADDED
MEMOIRS OF VOLTAIRE, WRITTEN BY HIMSELF.

TRANSLATED FROM THE FRENCH.

IN TWO VOLUMES.

VOL. I.

PHILADELPHIA, PRINTED BY AND FOR W. SPOTSWOOD. M,DCC,XCII.

THE LIFE OF VOLTAIRE.
THE life of Voltaire should necessarily be the history of the progress of the
arts as promoted by his genius, of the power which he exercised over the
opinions of his age, and of the long war which in his youth he declared against
prejudice, and which he maintained to the day of his death.

When the influence of a philosopher extends itself to the multitude, when it
is sudden and felt at each instant of his life, he is indebted for this
influence to his character, to his mode of observation, and to his conduct, as
much as to his works. Every circumstance relating to such a man promotes the
study of the human mind; with which we cannot hope to become acquainted, if we
do not observe its properties as they exist in those to whom Nature has been
prodigal of her riches and her power, and if we do not seek in such minds what
they possess in common with others, and in what they are distinguished. Man is
in general indebted for his opinions, and even for his passions, and his
character, to those by whom he is surrounded; he derives them from the laws,
the prejudices of his country, as the plant receives nutriment from the soil
and the elements. When we contemplate the vulgar mind, we discover the power to
which we are subject by nature, (or habit;) but not the secret of internal
strength, nor the laws of the human understanding.

Francois Marie Arouet, who by assuming the name of Voltaire has rendered it so
famous, was born at Chatenay, on the 20th of February, 1694, and was baptized
at Paris, in the church of St. Andre-des-Ares, on the 22d of November in the
same year. His excessive weakness was the cause of this delay, which, during
life, occasioned doubts concerning the place and time of his birth. Fontenelle,
in like manner, was obliged to be privately baptized, because his life was
despaired of, from the feebleness of his infancy. It is somewhat singular that
these two men, both so famous in this age, whose lives and understandings were
each of such long duration, should mutually be born languid and feeble.

The father of M. de Voltaire exercised the office of treasurer to the chamber
of accounts; his mother, Marguerite d'Aumart, was of a noble family of Poitou.
Their son has been reproached for having taken the name of Voltaire: that is,
for having followed a custom at that time generally practiced by the rich
citizens and younger sons, who, leaving the family name to the heir, assumed
that of a fieif, or perhaps of a country house. His birth was questioned in
numerous libels. His enemies, among men of literature, seemed to fear that the
fashionable world would too readily sacrifice its prejudices to the pleasure
found in his society, and the admiration his talents inspired, and that a man
of letters should be treated with too much equality. Such reproaches did him
honor; malignity does not attack the birth of a man of literature, but from a
secret consciousness, which it cannot stifle, that it is wholly unable to
diminish his personal fame.

The fortune which M. Arouet the father enjoyed was doubly advantageous to his
son; it procured him the advantages of education, without which genius never
attains those heights to which it might otherwise arive. If we examine modern
history, we shall find that all men of the first order, all those whose works
have approached perfection, had not to repair the defects of education.

Nor was the advantage of being born to an independent fortune less
inestimable. M. de Voltaire never felt the misery of being obliged to abandon
his liberty that he might procure subsistence; to subject his genius to labor,
which the necessity of living enforced; nor to flatter the prejudices, or the
passions, of a patron. His mind was not enslaved by such habitual fears, which
not only impede invention, but impress the character of incertitude and
feebleness on every effort of the imagination. His youth, undisturbed by the
doubts and fears of poverty, did not expose him to the danger of contracting
that servile timidity which inspires the weak mind with habitual dependence; or
that acrid, restless, and suspicious irritability which is an infallible
consequence to the man of genius, when contending between that dependence to
which he is by necessity subjected, and that freedom which the sublime thoughts
by which he is occupied demand.

The young Arouet was sent to the Jesuists' college, where the sons of the
first nobility, except those of the Jansenists, receive their education. The
Jansenists, who were hated at court, were seldom seen among men who, being at
that time obliged by custom to choose a religion which they did not understand,
naturally adopted that which best could promote their temporal interest. The
professors of rhetoric, under whom he was placed, were Father Poree and Father
Jay: the first, being a man of understanding, and of a good heart, discovered
the seeds of a future greatness in his scholar; and the latter, struck with the
boldness of his opinions and the independence of his mind, predicted that he
would become the apostle of deism in France; both of which prophecies were
verified by time.

When he left college, he again found the Abbe de Chateauneuf, his godfather
and the friend of his mother, an intimate at home. The Abbe was one of those
men who, having entered into the ecclesiastic estate from complaisance, or from
momentary ambition not native to their mind, afterward sacrifice fortune and
sacerdotal dignities to the love of living at large, being unable continually
to wear the musk of hypocrisy.

The Abbe de Chateauneuf was intimate with Ninon de l'Enclos, whom, for her
probity, her understanding, and her freedom of thought, he long had pardoned in
despite of the somewhat notorious adventures her youth. The fashionable world
were pleased that she had refused the invitation of her former friend, Madame
de Maintenon, who had offered to invite her to court, on condition that she
would become a devotee. The Abbe de Chateauneuf had presented Voltaire to
Ninon. Though but a boy, he already was a poet; already began to teize his
Jansenist brother by his trifling epigrams, and to please himself with reciting
the Moisade of Rousseau.

Ninon had taken delight in the pupil of her friend, and had left him by will
2000 livres (about 80 guineas) to purchase books. Thus was he taught, by
fortunate circumstances, even in infancy and before his understanding was
formed, to regard study and labors of the mind as pleasing and honorable
employments; thus did he learn, by the society of people superior to vulgar
opinions, that the mind of man is born free, and that he has a right to judge
whatever he can comprehend; while, by a cowardly condescension to prejudice,
the common course of education presents nothing to childhood but the
disgraceful marks of servitude.

Hypocrisy and intolerance were predominant at the court of Louis the XIVth.
which was much more seriously occupied in affecting the ruin of Jansenism than
in relieving the sufferings of the people. The report of his incredulity had
occasioned Catinat to lose the confidence which was due to his virtues and his
abilities for war. De Vendome was reproached with occasionally neglecting mass;
and the success of the heretic Marlborough, and the infidel Eugene, was
attributed to his want of devotion. This hypocrisy had disgusted those whom it
could not corrupt; and, in aversion to the austerities of Versailles, the most
fashionable societies of Paris affected to carry their liberty and the love of
pleasure even to licentiousness.

The Abbe de Chateauneuf introduced the young Voltaire to these societies, and
particularly to the company of the Duke de Sully, the Marquis de la Fare, the
Abbe Servien, the Abbe de Chaulieu, and the Abbe Courtin; who were often joined
by the Prince de Conti, and the grand Prior de Vendome.

M. Arouet imagined his son was ruined, when he was told that he wrote poetry
and frequented the society of people of fashion. He wished to make him a judge,
and saw him employed on a tragedy. This family quarrel ended by sending the
young Voltaire to the Marquis de Chauteauneuf, the French ambassador in Holland.

His exile was not of long duration. Madame du Noyer, who had fled thither with
her two daughters rather to avoid her husband than from zeal for the protestant
religion, was then at the Hague, where she lived by intrigues and libels, and
proved from her conduct that she did not go thither in search of liberty of
conscience.

M. de Voltaire became enamoured of one of her daughters; and the mother,
finding that the only advantage she could gain from his attachment was that of
making it public, carried her complaints to the ambassador, who forbade his
young dependent to continue his visits to Mademoiselle du Noyer; and sent him
back to his family for having disobeyed his orders.

Madame du Noyer failed not to print this story with the Letters of the young
Arouet to her daughter, hoping that this already well known name would promote
the sale of her book; and vaunted of her maternal severity and delicacy in the
very libel in which she proclaimed her daughter's dishonor.

The fine feelings of the author of Zaire and Tancrede are not discoverable in
these letters. The sensations of impassioned youth are strong, but their
gradations it is unable to distinguish; it neither can select those strong and
rapid traits which characterize passion, nor find terms which paint its
feelings to the imagination, and infuse them into the soul of the reader; while
devoured by love, the most sincere and the most ardent, it is apparently dull,
cold, or extravagant. The talent of painting the passions for the theater
appears to be one of the last which discovers itself in poets. Racine had given
no tokens of it either in Les Frere^ Ennemis, or in Alexandre; and Brutus
preceded Zaire. Not only, must the passions have been felt before they can be
described, but their emotions and effects must have been remarked when they
have ceased to lord it over the mind, and when they exist only in the
recollection. The heart is sufficient to make us sensible of their existence;
but, to express them with energy and truth, the soul must have long been under
their influence, and experience must have been improved by reflection.

The youth, when returned to Paris, soon forgot his love; but he did not forget
to use every effortt hat he might wrest a young and estimable woman, who was
natively virtuous, from a corrupt and intriguing mother. He employed the zeal
of Proselytism Il employa le zele du Proselitisme; the meaning. I imagine, is,
that he made her a convert from the protestant to the catholic faith.
. He was aided by several bishops, and even jesuits. The project failed, but
Voltaire had afterward the good fortune to be of service to Mademoiselle du
Noyer, when she had married the Baron de Vinterfeld.

His father, however, finding him persist in writing poetry, and living at
large, forbade him his house. The most submissive letters made no impression on
him; the son even asked permission to go to America, provided that before his
departure he might but be permitted to kneel at his feet; but there was no
choice, he must determine not to depart for America, but to bind himself to an
attorney. He did not here remain long; M. de Caumartin, the friend of M.
Arouet, pitied the fate of his son, and requested permission to take him to St.
Ange; where, removed from those societies which alarmed paternal affection, he
might reflect on, and make choice of a profession. Here he met with Caumartin,
the elder, a respectable old man, who was passionately fond of Henry the IVth,
and Sully, at that time too much forgotten by the nation. Caumartin had been
intimate with the best informed men of the reign of Louis the XIVth, and was
acquainted with the most secret anecdotes, such as they really happened. These
he took a pleasure to recount, and Voltaire returned from St. Ange, occupied by
the project of writing an epic poem, of which Henry the IVth, should be the
hero, and ardently desirous of studying the History of France. To this journey
are we indebted for the Henriade, and the age of Louis XIV.

The death of this monarch was recent; the people, of whom he long had been the
idol, the very people who had pardoned his profusion, his wars, and his
despotism, and had applauded his persecution of the protestants, insulted his
memory by testifying indecent joy. A bull, obtained from Rome against a book of
devotion, had occasioned the Parisians to forget that glory of which they so
long had been enamoured. Satires on the memory of Louis the Great were as
numerous as eulogies had been during his life. Voltaire being accused of having
written one of these satires, was sent to the bastile. The poem ended with the
following line: J'ai vu c^s maux, et je n'ai pas vingt ans These evils have I
seen, yet have not reached my twentieth year.
. Voltaire was then upwards of two and twenty, and the police took his
conformity of age to be proof sufficient to deprive him of his liberty.

It was in the bastile that the young poet sketched his poem of the League,
corrected his tragedy of Oedipus, which he had begun long before, and wrote
some merry verses on the misfortune of being there a prisoner. The regent Duke
of Orleans, being informed of his innocence, restored him to freedom, and
granted him a recompense.

"I thank your royal highness," said Voltaire, "for having provided me with
food; but I hope you will not, hereafter, trouble yourself concerning my
lodging."

The tragedy of Oedipus was performed in 1718. The author had hitherto been
known only by his fugitive pieces, by some epistles which breathed the spirit
of Chaulieu, but written more correctly, and by an ode which had vainly
contended for the prize bestowed by the French academy; to this a ridiculous
piece written by the Abbe du Jarri had been preferred. The theme proposed by
the academy was the decoration of the altar of Notre Dame; for Louis the XIVth,
after having reigned seventy years, recollected it was time to perform the
promise of Louis the XIIIth. Thus was the subject of the first serious poem,
written by Voltaire, devotion. Possessed of native and unerring taste, he would
not mingle the passion of love with a tale so horrid as that of Oedipus; and
had been daring enough to present his piece to the theater without having paid
this tribute to custom. But it was rejected. The assembled comedians took it
amiss that the author should dare to dispute their judgment. "The young man
well deserves," said Dufresne, "as a punishment for his pride, that his tragedy
should be played with the long vile scene which he has translated from
Sophocles."

Voltaire was obliged to cede, and to insert a whole episode of love. The piece
was applauded, though in despite of the episode; and the long vile scene from
Sophocles insured its success. La Motto, who was at that time the first among
men of letters, said in his approbation that his tragedy gave promise of a
worthy sucessor to Corneille and Racine; and the homage thus rendered by a
rival, whose fame was established, and who had reason to fear he might see
himself surpassed, must forever do honor to the character of La Motte.

But Voltaire, proclaimed a man of genius and a philosopher to a crowd of
inferior authors and fanatics of all sects, even then gained a combination of
enemies, whom the rising generations of sixty years have continued to supply,
and who often have molested his long and glorious career. The following
celebrated lines -- Nos Pretres ne sont pas ce qu'un vain peuple pense;
Notre Credulite fait toute leur Science Our priests are not what the foolish
people suppose; their whole knowledge is derived from our credulity.
.
were the first signal of a war, which not even the death of Voltaire could
extinguish.

At one of the representations of Oedipus, Voltaire appeared on the stage,
bearing up the train of the high priest. The Marchioness de Villars asked who
was that young man who wished the piece might be condemned; she was told it was
the author. This thoughtless act, which spoke a man so superior to the trifling
anxieties of self-love, made the marchioness desirous of his acquaintance.
Voltaire, being admitted her visitor, conceived a passion for her, the first,
and the most serious he ever felt, He was unsuccessful; and was for a
considerable time diverted from study, which had already become necessary to
his existence. He never, afterward, mentioned this subject but with a
sensation of regret, and almost of remorse.

Having freed himself from his passion, he continued the Henriade; and wrote
the tragedy of Artemire. An actress, whom he had formed, and who was at once
his mistress and his pupil, played the principal character. The public, who had
done justice to Oedipus, was (to say the least) severe to Artemire. This is a
common consequence of success; nor is secret aversion for acknowledged
superiority the only cause, though this aversion has the art to profit by a
natural feeling which renders us more difficult to be pleased in proportion as
we have more to hope.

This tragedy was of no other value to Voltaire than that of obtaining
permission for him to return to Paris, whence he had been banished by his
intimacy with the enemies of the regent, and among others with the Duke de
Richelieu and the famous Baron de Gortz. Thus did this ambitious man, whose
vast projects included all Europe, and threatened to overturn its governments,
choose a young poet for his friend and almost for his confident. Men of genius
seek for, and at once know each other; they have a common language, which they
alone can speak and understand.

In 1722, Voltaire accompanied Madame de Rupelmonde into Holland. He was
desirous, at Brussels, of being acquainted with Rousseau, whose misfortunes he
pitied, and whose poetic talent he esteemed. The love of his art was too
powerful for that just contempt which he ought to have conceived for the
character of Rousseau. Voltaire consulted him on his Poem on the League; and
read his Epistle to Urania to him, written for Madame de Rupelmonde. This poem
was the first monument of his freedom of thinking, and of his talent of
treating on moral and metaphysical subjects in verse, and of rendering them
popular.

Rousseau, on his part, read an Ode addressed to Posterity, which Voltaire, as
it is pretended, then told him would never arrive at the place to which it was
addressed. He likewise read the Judgment of Pluto, which was as quickly
forgotten as the ode. The two poets parted irreconcilable foes. Rousseau
violently attacked Voltaire, who continued patiently to suffer during fifteen
years. It is astonishing to think that the author of so many licentious
epigrams, in which the clergy were continually made the subject of ridicule and
opprobium, should seriously assign the thoughtless behavior of Voltaire during
mass and his Epistle to Urania as the cause of his hatred. But Rousseau had
assumed the mask of devotion, which was then an honorable asylum for such as
had suffered in the world's opinion: a safe and commodious asylum which
philosophy, among the other evils of which it is accused, has unfortunately,
for hypocrites, eternally closed.

In 1724, Voltaire presented the world with Mariamne, which was but Artemire
under new names, but with a less complicated and less romantic fable. It was
written in the very style of Racine, and was forty times performed. In his
preface, the author opposed the opinion of La Motte, who, possessed of much
understanding and reason, but little sensible of the charms of harmony,
discovered no other merit in versification than that of difficulties overcome;
nor any thing more than a formal custom, in poetry, invented to ease the
memory, and to which habit alone had attributed charms. In his letters, printed
at the end of Oedipus, he had before combated the opinions of the same poet,
who regarded the observance of the three Unities as another prejudice.

We ought to think ourselves obliged to those who, like La Motte, dare to
oppose common and received opinions. In order to defend ancient rules, they
must necessarily be examined; and if received opinions, on examination, be
found true, we enjoy the advantage of believing that from reason to which we
had previously given our assent from habit; if false, the world is then freed
from an error.

It is no uncommon thing, however, for men to be angry at those who oblige them
to scrutinize what had been admitted upon trust. The minds, which like that of
Montaigne, quietly slumber on the pillow of skepticism, are not common; and
still less common are those who are tormented by the desire of discovering
truth. The vulgar love to believe without proof; and to cherish their security
in blind faith, as a thing necessary to their ease and safety.

About the same time, the Henriade appeared under the name of the League: an
imperfect copy, stolen from the author, was clandestinely printed, in which
there were not only parts omitted, but some vacancies were supplied.

Thus France was at last possessed of an Epic Poem. It must be regretted, no
doubt, that Voltaire, the fables of whose tragedies are so full of action, who
has made the passions speak a language so natural and so true, and who could
paint them so effectually as well by analizing their sentiments as by their
sudden ebullitions, should not have displayed in the Henriade those talents
which never before were combined in the same man to so great a degree. Yet, a
subject so well known and so recent gave but little room for the imagination of
the poet. The gloomy and persecuting spirit of fanaticism, exercising itself on
subaltern characters, could excite little more than horror. The chiefs of the
league were animated by an ambition which hypocrisy debased. The hero of the
poem, gallant, brave, and humane, but continually subject to misfortune which
alighted on him alone, could interest only by his courage and his clemency. Nor
was it possible that the unnatural conversion of Henry the IVth should form an
heroic catastrophe.

But though the Henriade in pathos, variety, and action, be inferior to those
epic poems which were then in possession of universal admiration, yet by how
many new beauties was this inferiority compensated? Never was philosophy, so
profound and so true, embellished by verses more sublime or more affecting.
What other poem presents to us characters drawn with greater strength and
dignity, and without offense to historical facts? What other contains morality
more pure, humanity more enlightened, or is more free from the errors of
prejudice and vulgar passion? Whether the poet causes his characters to act or
speak, whether he paints the crimes of fanaticism, or the charms and the
dangers of love, whether he transports his hearer to the field of battle, or
into that heaven which he himself created, he is every where a philosopher, and
is every where deeply intent on promoting the true interests of the human race.
In the very palace of fiction, we behold truth sublimely rise, and always
painted in the most splendid and purest colors.

Of all epic poems the Henriade alone has a moral purport; not that it can be
said to be the devellopement of one single truth, which is a pedantic idea and
to which a poet cannot subject himself, but because it breathes throughout a
detestation of war and fanaticism, and a spirit of toleration and humanity.
Each poem necessarily wears the complexion of the age in which it took birth;
and the birth of the Henriade was in the age of reason. Hence, the greater the
progress of reason among mankind the greater will be their admiration of this
poem.

The Henriade may be compared to the Aeneid: both bear the stamp of genius in
whatever depended on the poet, and the defects of both are in the choice of the
subject, which was mutually dictated by a national spirit. Virgil, however,
intended only to flatter Roman pride; but Voltaire had the more noble motive of
preserving the French from fanaticism, by a recapitulation of the crimes into
which their ancestors had been hurried.

The Henriade, Oedipus, and Mariamne had placed Voltaire much above his
cotemporaries; and seemed to secure a life of fame, when his repose was
troubled by a fatal accident. He had returned a satirical answer to some
contemptuous words which had been spoken by a courtier, who revenged himself by
causing Voltaire to be insulted by his servants without endangering his
personal safety. The outrage was committed at the gate of the Hotel de Sully,
where he had dined; nor did the Duke de Sully deign to show any resentment;
being, no doubt, persuaded that the descendants of the Franks had preserved the
right of life and death over the Gauls. Justice remained mute; the parliament
of Paris, which had caused far less misdemeanors to be punished when committed
against one of its own subalterns, imagined nothing was due to an undignified
citizen, although the greatest man of literature the nation possessed, and kept
silence.

Voltaire was desirous of taking those means to revenge offended honor which
the manners of modern nations have authorized, but which their laws have
proscribed. The Bastile, and, at the end of six months, an order to quit Paris
were the punishment of his first step. The Cardinal de Fleury had not so much
policy as even to denote the slightest mark of dissatisfaction against the
aggressor. Thus when men are unprotected by the laws they are punished by
arbitrary power for seeking that revenge, which the want of protection renders
legal, and which is prescribed as necessary to the principles of honor. We
venture to believe that the rights of man will be more respected in our times,
that the laws will not remain impotent from any ridiculous prejudice of birth,
and that when any quarrel shall happen between two citizens no minister will
deprive him who received the first offense of his freedom.

Voltaire made a secret journey to Paris, but to no effect. He there met with
more than one adversary, who disposed at pleasure of judicial power and
ministerial authority, and who could safely effect his ruin. He buried himself
in retirement, and disdained longer to seek revenge; or, rather, revenged
himself by overwhelming his enemy with the weight of his increasing fame, and
forcing him to hear the name which he wished to degrade incessantly repeated
with acclamation throughout all Europe.

England was his place of refuge. Newton was no more; but his spirit was
infused into his countrymen, whom he had taught to trust to experiment, and
calculation only in the study of nature. Lock, whose death was likewise
recent, had been the first to give the theory of the human understanding
founded on expeence, and to show the path which may safely be followed in
metaphysical pursuits. The philosophy of Shaftesbury, commented on by
Bolingbroke, and embellished by the versification of Pope, had given birth in
England to that deism which announced morality, founded on motives such as
might affect great minds without offense to reason.

In France, mean time, the men of most understanding were laboring to
substitute in our schools the hypothesis of Des Carts, for the absurdities of
scholastic philosophy. Any thesis, in which either the system of Copernicus or
that of the Vortices was maintained, was a victory over prejudice. Innate
ideas, in the eyes of the devout, were become almost an article of faith;
though they had at first been supposed heretical. Malebranche, whom men
imagined they understood, was the philosopher in fashion. He was supposed a
free-thinker, who allowed himself to regard the existence of the five
propositions, in the unintelligible book of Jansenius, as a thing in which the
happiness of the human race was not concerned, or who had the temerity to read
Bail without the permission of a doctor in divinity.

This contrast could not but excite the enthusiasm of a man, who, like
Voltaire, had from his infancy shaken off prejudice. The example of England
showed him that truth was not formed to remain in secret among a few
philosophers, and men of the world, the pupils of these philosophers; who
laughed with them at those errors of which the people are the victims, but
became themselves the defenders of error, when their office or their rank made
it their interest, supposed or real, and were ready to proscribe or even to
persecute their preceptors, should they venture to speak what they themselves
privately believed.

From this moment, Voltaire felt himself called to be the destroyer of
prejudice of every kind, of which his country was the slave. He felt the
possibility of succeeding by a happy mixture of boldness and pliabilty, by
knowing when to recede and when to advance, by artfully and alternately
employing reason, ridicule, the charms of poetry, and theatrical effect, and by
simplifying truth so as to render it popular, amiable, and fashionable, without
offense to frivolity. This good project, of rendering himself, by the force of
his own genius, the benefactor of a whole nation, whence he meant to banish
error, sired the mind of Voltaire, and inspired him with fortitude. He swore to
this to consecrate his life; and he kept his vow. The tragedy of Brutus was the
first fruits of his journey to England.

The French theater had not, since Cinna, breathed the haughty accents of
freedom; and they had, there, been smothered by those of revenge. In Brutus,
the strength of Corneille was discovered with additional pomp and splendour,
combined with that simplicity which Corneille wanted, and the uniform elegance
of Racine. Never were the rights of an oppressed people displayed with greater
power, eloquence and even precision, than in the second scene of Brutus. The
fifth act is equally remarkable for its pathos. The poet has been reproached
for having made love a part of a subject so awful and terrible, and
particularly love, which is deficient in interest; but, had the motive of Titus
been any other than love, he would have been debased, the severity of Brutus
would not then have rent the hearts of the spectators; and, had love been
rendered too pathetic, it would have been to be feared that love would have
destroyed the cause of liberty. It was after this piece had been acted that
Fontenelle told Voltaire "He did not think his genius proper for tragedy, and
that his style was too bold, pompous, and splendid." -- "If so," replied
Voltaire, "I will go and read your pastorals."

He supposed, at this time, he might aspire to a place in the French academy;
and he might well have been thought modest to have waited so long. But he had
not so much as the honor of dividing the votes of the academicians. The fat De
Bose pronounced in a dictatorial tone, that Voltaire should never be one of
their dignified members.

This De Bose, whose name is now forgotten, was one of these men, who, with
little mind, and not too much knowledge, obtain admission among men of rank and
power, and succeed precisely because they have neither the wit to inspire fear,
nor to humble the self-love of those who seek the reputation of patronising men
of letters. De Bose was become a person of importance. He exercised the office
of inspector of new publications; which is an usurpation on the part of the
magistrate, over men of letters, to whom the avidity of the rich and the
powerful have left no employments but those whose execution requires the
exertion of knowledge and talents.

After Brutus, Voltaire wrote the Death of Caesar; a subject which had
previously been chosen by Shakspere, some scenes of whom he imitated and
embellished. The tragedy was not played till several years had elapsed, and
then in a college; he durst not risk a piece on the stage, destitute of love
and of women, and which was likewise a tragedy in three acts: for it is not the
most trifling innovations which excite the least clamor among the enemies of
novelty; little things necessarily impress themselves on little minds. Still,
however, a bold, noble, and figurative, yet natural, style, sentiments worthy
of the conqueror of the freest people on earth, and that force and grandeur of
character, and deep thought which pervade the language of these last Romans,
could not but be felt by spectators capable of discovering such merit, and men
whose hearts and minds were related to these great personages, as well as by
those who might love history, and such young minds as, in the course of
education, had lately been occupied by similar objects.

Historical tragedies, such as Cinna, the death of Pompey, Brutus, Rome
Preserved, and the Triumvirate, of Voltaire, cannot be equally interesting with
the Cid, Iphigene, Zaire, or Merope. The mild and tender passions cannot
display themselves in conformity with historical fact; incidents cannot be so
selected and disposed as to produce theatrical effect with equal success; the
poet has not the same power over the characters; the general interest, which is
that of a people, or of a state rather than of an individual, is rendered less
forcible, because it is dependent on sentiments less energetic.

But, far from stigmatising this species of writing, as the coldest and most
unfavourable to dramatic genius, it ought to be encouraged; because it opens a
vast field for the poet, in which he may unfold all the sublime truths of
politics; because it displays grand historical pictures; and because, by these
means, the soul may most effectually be formed and elevated. We, doubtless,
ought to place these among the first of poems, which, like Mahomet and Alzire,
are at once extensive, and abounding with pathos and terror. But these are
uncommon subjects, and require the exertion of talents, which no poet but
Voltaire has hitherto possessed.

The Death of Caesar was not allowed to be printed: the republican sentiments
it contained were attributed as crimes to the author. This was a ridiculous
imputation; each character spoke its own language; and Brutus was not more the
hero than Caesar; the poet, treating an historical subject, drew his portraits
after history, with strict impartiality. But, under the government of the
Cardinal de Fleury, which was at once tyrannical and pusillanimous, the
language of slavery alone could appear to be innocent.

Who could, at present, suppose that the eulogy on the death of Mademoiselle le
Couvreur could have been made a subject of serious persecution, and have
obliged Voltaire to quit the metropolis, where he knew that absence would
fortunately cause all things to be forgotten, and even the frenzy of
persecution?

The theater is truly a useful institution, at which even indolent and
frivolous youth preserve something of the habit of feeling and of thinking,
while moral ideas are not totally lost to their minds, and the pleasures of the
imagination are still felt to exist. The sensations which the representation of
a tragedy excite, purify the soul, and raise it from that apathy and egotism
which are the maladies to which the dissipated are, in the nature of things,
condemned. Such exhibitions form a kind of connection between the two classes of
men who do, and men who do not, think. They soften the austerity of the one;
and, in the other, temper that want of feeling which is the child of
thoughtlessness and pride. It is a singular fatality that in a country, in
which the dramatic art has been carried to the highest degree of perfection,
the actors, to whom the public are indebted for the noblest of their pleasures,
should be condemned by religion, and shunned from the most ridiculous of
prejudices.

These prejudices Voltaire hardily opposed. Indignant to behold an actress, who
had long been the object of enthusiastic applause, after being carried off by a
sudden and cruel death deprived of the rites of burial, because in a state of
excommunication, he loudly reproached a frivolous nation which with cowardice
bent the neck under so shameful a yoke, and the pusillanimity of those people
in power who peaceably suffered the memory of her whom they had so much admired
to be thus insulted. Though nations are slow to correct themselves, they still
suffer themselves to be told of their faults with patience. But the priests,
whom the parliaments would suffer to excommunicate none but wizards and
players, were irritated to see a poet dare to dispute the half of their empire,
and the people in power could not pardon him for having proclaimed their
unworthy cowardice.

Voltaire felt that some great theatrical success could alone secure him the
hearts of the public, and shield him from the attacks of fanatacism. I^ a
country, in which no popular power exists, each class has some point at which
to rally and form itself into a species of power. A dramatic author is under
the protection of those societies who resort to the theater for amusement. The
public, by applauding allusions, flatter or offend the vanity of men in office,
discourage or re-animate their opponents, and cannot for this reason be openly
defied. Voltaire, therefore, presented his Euriphile, which did not effect his
purpose; but, far from being discouraged by want of success, and delighted with
the subject of Zaire, he finished that tragedy in eighteen days, and it made
its appearance on the stage four months after Euriphile.

Its success surpassed his hopes. This was the first piece in which, forsaking
the tract of Corneille and Racine, he discovered art, style, and talents
entirely his own. Never did love more true or more impassioned draw tears more
sweet; never did poet before so depict the fury of jealousy in a mind so
simple, so affectionate, and so generous. We love Orosmanes at the very moment
he makes us shudder. He sacrifices Zaire, the affecting, the lovely, the
virtuous Zaire, yet we cannot hate him. And even, were it possible to forget
Orosmanes and Zaire, how awful is irreligion in the person of the aged
Lusignan? How noble is the spirit of fanaticism, which the reproaches of
Narestam breathe? With what art has the poet painted the Christians whose
interference disturb so sweet an union, a feeling and pious woman who has
sacrificed her life and her love to her God, while the man who believes not in
Christianity weeps for Zaire, whose mind is distracted by filial affection, and
who is the willing victim of a superstitious prejudice, which forbids her to
love a man of a different sect. This is a masterpiece of art. Whoever does not
believe in the Old Testament, discovers in Athalia nothing but the school of
bigotry, falsehood, and murder; but to all sects, and in all countries, Zaire
is the tragedy of the feeling and the innocent heart.

This tragedy was followed by that of Adelaide de Guesclin, which had likewise
love for its subject, and in which, as in Zaire, French heroes and French
history were recited in beautiful poetry: so as to increase the interest. But
it was the patriotism of a citizen who delighted in the recollection of
respected names and great events, and not the patriotism of the antichamber,
which has since been so applauded on the French theater.

Adelaide failed of success. A wit, when Mariamne was acting, prevented it
being heard to the end, by calling from the pit, The queen drinks. Another
occasioned Adelaide to be condemned by answering Coussi, coussi So, so.
, to the noble and affecting question of Vendome, Es tu content Couci Art thou
satisfied, Couci?
?

This same piece was again acted under the title of the Duke de Foix, after
having been corrected, not in conformity to the judgment of the author but of
his critics, and was more successful. But when, long after, the philosopher's
three blows of the hammer had unknowingly taught the audience not to hiss when
the cannon was fired The text is, "Lorsque les trois coups de marteau du
philosophe, sans le savoir, eurent appris qu'on ne sifflerait plus le coup de
canon d' Adelaide. etc." The translator imagines there is an illusion here to
some (perhaps well known) passage or incident, of which he thinks it his duty
ingenuously to confess his ignorance.
in Adelaide, at a time when the play was again acted in despite of Voltaire,
who had less recollection of the beauties of his piece than of the wounds which
criticism had inflicted, it met with the most unbounded applause. The character
of Vendome, as amorous as that of Orosmanes, was then felt in all its force.
The one, jealous in consequence of an imperious temper, the other, from an
excess of love; the first, tyrannical from native impetuosity and pride, and
the second, from the unfortunate habits attending on despotic power. Tender and
disinterested in his affection, Orosmanes renders himself guilty during that
momentary frenzy into which he is hurried by excusable error, and punishes by
sacrificing himself. Vendome, more personal and rather the slave of his passion
than of his mistress, protects his crime with a more tranquil fury, but
expiates it by his remorse and the sacrifice of his love. The one exhibits
those excesses and sufferings into which the violence of despair plunges the
generous soul; and the other, the power of repentant virtue over the strong
mind, which had previously abandoned itself to passion.

It is said that the success of Adelaide was injured by the Temple of Taste, in
which charming work Voltaire had passed sentence on the writers of the past
age, and even on some of his cotemporaries. Time has confirmed all his
decisions, which each then appeared sacrilegious. In observing such literary
intolerance, the necessity, under which every writer labors who wishes to live
in peace, of respecting opinions already formed of the merit of an orator or a
poet, and the fury with which the public pursues those who dare, even on the
most indifferent subjects, to think differently from themselves, we should be
tempted to imagine that man is intolerant by Nature. Wit, reason, and genius
cannot always guard us against this misfortune. There are few men who have not
some secret idols, the worship of which they cannot calmly see destroyed.

Pride and envy is frequently the origin of this sensation. The writer who,
criticizing those whom we admire, assumes an air of superiority over them and
consequently over ourselves, we regard as one that affects an offensive
pre-eminence. We fear, while pulling down the statue of the man who is no more,
he means to substitute that of a living favorite, whose fame fails not to
afflict mediocrity. But when strong minds yield to this kind of intolerance,
this temporary and excusable weakness, the offspring of indolence and habit,
they soon again cede to the force of truth, and are neither guilty of injustice
nor persecution.

Voltaire had, in his retirement, conceived the happy plan of bringing his
nation acquainted with the philosophy, the literature, the opinions, and the
sects of England; to effect which, he wrote his Letters on the English Nation.
Newton, whose philosophic opinions, whose system of the earth, and whose
optical experiments were scarcely known in France; Lock whose Essay on the
Human Understanding, translated into French, had only been read by a few
philosophers; Bacon, the extent of whose fame was that he had been lord
chancellor; Shakspere whose genius and gross errors form a phenomenon in the
history of literature; Congreve, Wicherly, Addison, and Pope, whose names were
almost unknown even by our men of letters; the bigoted Quakers, who, without
being persecutors, were fanatics in their devotion, yet the most rational of
Christians in their creed and in their morals, ridiculous in the eyes of the
world, for having carried two virtues to excess, the love of peace and the love
of equality; the other sects by which England was divided; the influence which
a general spirit of freedom had there obtained over literature, philosophy,
arts, opinions, and manners; and the practice of inoculation which had been
examined without prejudice, and met with few impediments, notwithstanding the
singularity and the innovation of the practice: such were the principal
subjects of his work.

Fontenelle was the first who made reason and philosophy speak an agreeable and
inviting language: he had the art to mingle reflections, sage, delicate, and
frequently profound, with the sciences. In the Letters of Voltaire we discover
the merit of Fontenelle, with more taste, simplicity, boldness, and gaiety. No
rooted attachment to the errors of Des Carts interfered, to spread a shadow
over, and to disfigure, truth. He possessed the logic and pleasantry of the
Lettres Provinciales By Pascal.
, but exercised them on greater subjects; nor were they injured by a varnish of
monkish devotion.

This work was the era of a revolution in France; it gave rise to a taste for
philosophy, and English literature; it interested us in the manners, policy,
and commercial knowledge of that nation; and it brought us acquainted with the
English language. A puerile partiality afterward took place of former
indifference; and, by a remarkable singularity, Voltaire had the glory of
combating it, and of diminishing its influence. He had taught us to feel the
merit of Shakspere, and to regard his works as a mine, whence treasures might
be dug by our poets; and, when a ridiculous enthusiasm presented this eloquent,
but wild and capricious poet, as a model to a nation possessed of Racine and
Voltaire, and wished us to consider his canvass, overcharged with absurdity and
gross caricature, as the energetic and true pictures of nature, Voltaire
defended the cause of taste and reason. He had first exclaimed against the too
great timitidy of our theater, and was afterward obliged to exclaim against our
inclination to imitate the licentious barbarity of the English stage.

The publication of these letters excited persecution, the bitterness of which,
to read them at present, could scarcely be conceived: but innate ideas were
opposed in them, and our doctors of that day believed, if there were no innate
ideas, there would be no sufficiently marked characters to distinguish between
the souls of men and of brutes. Besides, it was there maintained, after Lock,
that there was no strict proof that God had not the power, if he had the will,
to impart to matter the faculty of thinking. This was to infringe on the
privilege of the divines, who pretended to know accurately and exactly, they
and they alone, all that God has thought, and all that he could do, or has
done, since, and even before, the beginning of the world.

In fine, Voltaire criticized some passages of the thoughts of Pascal: a work
which the Jesuits, in their own despite, were obliged to respect as much as the
works of St. Augustine. It gave scandalous offense to see a poet, nay more, a
layman, dare to sit in judgment on Pascal. It appeared to be an attack on the
only defender of the Christian religion, who, among the fashionable world, had
the reputation of being a great man. It was to attack religion itself: and how
much would the proofs of religion be weakened, should the mathematician,
Pascal, who had openly devoted himself to its defense, be convicted of having
often reasoned ill.

The clergy demanded that the Letters on the English Nation should be
suppressed; and they were so, by an arret of council. These arrets were given,
without examination, as a kind of retribution, for the subsidy which government
obtained from the assemblies of the clergy; and as a reward for the facility
with which they were granted. Ministers forgot that the interest of the secular
power was not to support, but to suffer the progress of reason to destroy, that
empire of the priesthood which has been so long and so barbarously abused; and
that it is not good policy to purchase peace of an enemy, by sacrificing our
defenders.

The parliament burnt the book, according to a custom formerly invented by
Tiberius, and rendered ridiculous since the invention of printing. But there
are certain people for whom the experience of three ages are necessary, before
they can begin to perceive absurdity.

So much persecution, exercised at the very time when the miracles of the Abbe
Paris and those of Father Girard were acting, loaded the two persecuting
parties with ridicule and opprobrium. It was natural that they should unite
against a man who daringly preached reason; and they went so far as to order
informations to be issued against the author of the Letters. The keeper of the
seals banished Voltaire, who, being at that time absent, received early
information, and avoided the people sent to conduct him to the place of his
exile; rather choosing to combat at a distance, and where he could be in
safety. His friends proved that he had not forfeited his promise, not to
publish his Letters in France; and that they had made their appearance from the
treachery of a book-binder. Fortunately, the keeper of the seals had more zeal
for his authority than for religion, and was much more of a minister than of a
devotee. The storm was hushed, and Voltaire had permission to r^turn to Paris.

This calm was but of momentary duration. The epistle to Urania, which, till
then, had been kept in secret, was printed; and Voltaire, to escape a new
persecution, was obliged to disavow and attribute it to the Abbe de Chaulieu,
who had been dead several years. The imputation did the abbe honor as a poet,
without injuring his fame as a Christian.

The necessity of falsehood, in disavowing a work, is an act of extremity,
alike repugnant to conscience and to dignity of character; but the crime is in
the injustice of those men who render such a disavowal necessary for the safety
of the author. If that which is in itself innocent be made a crime, if absurd
or arbitrary laws have infringed on the natural right, which all men possess,
of not only having but publishing their opinions, we then deservedly lose the
other right of always hearing the truth, which is solely founded on freedom. We
are forbidden to deceive, because to deceive any man is to commit an injury on
him, or to expose him to commit one himself. But injury supposes a right; and
no one has the right to seek for and secure to himself the means of doing
injustice.

We do not disculpate Voltaire, for having attributed his work to the Abbe de
Chaulieu, but such an imputation is in itself indifferent, and a mere act of
pleasantry; it is affording an excuse to people in power, who are disposed to
be indulgent, without daring to confess themselves so, by the aid of which they
may repel such persecutors as are over serious in their zeal.

The indiscretion, with which some of the friends of Voltaire, repeated
fragments from his Maid of Orleans, was the cause of a new persecution. The
keeper of the s^^^ threatened to confine the poet in the worst and deepest of
dungeons, if any part of the poem made its appearance. Remembering the long
space of time during which such subaltern tyrants, included by momentary power,
have dated to hold similar language to men who have been the glory of their
country and their age^ the sensations of contempt rise in us and smother those
of indignation. The oppressor and the oppressed are now both in the grave; but
the name of the oppressed will he borne, on the wings of fame, to future ages,
and singly preserved from oblivion; while eternal shame will pursue the memory
of his cowardly persecutors.

It was in these tempestuous times that the lieutenant, of the police, Hernalt,
one day said to Voltaire: -- "Write what you will, you never can overturn the
Christian religion." -- "We shall see that" -- replied the poet See, in the
general correspondence of D' Alembert, the letter of the 20th of June, 1760.
.

At a time when there was much conversation concerning a man who had been
arrested by a supposed forged lettre de cachet, Voltaire asked the, same
magistrate what punishment would be inflicted on those who should fabricate
false lettres de cachet. -- "They will be hanged." -- "That will be but doing
right: let us hope the time will come when those who sign the true, will be
served in the same way."

Wearied by so much persecution, Voltaire thought it necessary to change his
mode of life, to effect which, fortune secured him the means. Ancient
philosophers have vaunted of poverty as the safeguard of independence:
Voltaire, that he might be independent, wished to become rich; and he was
equally to be commended. The ancients were unacquainted with that secret wealth
which may at once be dispersed and secured, in various countries, beyond the
reach of power. Confiscation and its abuses, amongst them, rendered wealth as
dangerous as fame, or popular favor. The extent of the Roman empire, and the
smallness of the Grecian republics, alike prevented men from the concealment of
their riches, or their persons. The difference of manners among neighboring
nations, the almost general ignorance of foreign languages, and a less degree
of intercourse throughout the world, were then so many impediments to a change
of country.

The ancients likewise knew less of the conveniences of life, which among us
are become necessary to all who are not born in poverty. Their climate
subjected them to less numerous real wants; and the wealthy were more addicted
to magnificence, refinement in debauchery, excess, and caprice, than to
habitual and daily convenience. Thus, as it was more easy for them to be poor,
and more difficult to be rich without danger, riches were not among them, as
among us, the means of escaping from unjust oppression.

Let us not blame a philosopher for having, in order to secure his
independence, preferred such resources as the manners of his age supplied to
those which belong to other manners and to other times.

The fortune which descended to Voltaire from his father and his brother was
ample, and had been increased by the London edition of the Henriade, and
fortunate speculations in the public funds. Thus, to the advantage of
possessing wealth, which ascertained independence, he added that of being
indebted for it to himself. The use he made of riches might prevail on envy
itself to pardon him their acquirement.

Much of his wealth was expended in aiding men of letters, and in encouraging
such youth as he thought discovered the seeds of genius. This, in particular,
was the application he made of the trifling profits he derived from his works
and his theatrical productions, when he did not make a free gift of the latter
to the comedians. Yet never was author more cruelly accused of injuries done to
his booksellers; but the whole sw^rm of literary insects were at their command,
and were themselves anxious to decry the conduct of a man whose works they were
conscious they could not bring into disrepute. The pride of mediocrity, the
vanity of men, even of merit, wounded by a too incontestible superiority, the
busy world ever anxious to degrade knowledge and talents which are the objects
of their secret envy, and fanatics who were interested to calumniate Voltaire,
that they might have the less to fear, all conspired to increase the detraction
of booksellers and hyper-critics. But proofs of the falsehood of these
imputations, as well as the favors heaped by Voltaire on some of his
detractors, still subsist; nor can we remember these proofs without a sigh, at
the misfortune of genius thus condemned to suffer, and at that shameful
facility men have to credit whatever can relieve them from the nenessity of
admiring. Such sighs are the melancholy retribution of same.

Having no more need, for the security of his fortune, to court patronage,
solicit places, or to traffic with booksellers, Voltaire renounced all
residence at the capital. Previous to the administration of Cardinal de Fleury,
and his journey to England, his intercourse had been among people of the first
fashion. Princes and nobles, those who were at the head of affairs, people of
fashion and women most in vogue, were courted by him and were equally desirous
of his company. He was every where received with pleasure and welcome, but he
every where inspired envy and fear. Superior, in genius, he was even more so,
in the wit of conversation, into which he infused whatever can render frivolity
amiable, and at the same time interspersed traits of a more elevated nature.
Born with the talent of humor, his repartees were often repeated; nor was
there any want of an application of the word malignant, to what was no more
than the decision of the understanding, rendered acute by native wit.

On his return from England, he felt that in society, where men assemble from
motives of vanity and self-love, he should meet but with few friends. He
therefore, though he did not quarrel with such societies, frequented them less.
The taste he had acquired for magnificence, grandeur, and whatever is uncommon
and splendid, had become habitual, and he preserved it even in retirement. By
this taste, his works were often embellished, and it occasionally influenced
his judgment. On his return to his country, he confined himself to live
familiarly with only a few friends. He had lost M. de Genonville and M. de
Maisons, whose death he lamented in such affecting verse, which remains a
monument of that true and deep sensibility which nature had bestowed, and
genius disseminated through his works, and which was the fortunate origin of
his ardent zeal for the happiness of mankind, which was the sublime and
continued passion of his old age. He still possessed M. d'Argental, who, during
his long life, preserved sensations of affection and admiration for Voltaire,
and who was rewarded by his friendship and his confidence. Madame Forment and
Madame Cideville were likewise his friends, and the considants of his works and
his projects.

But about the time when he suffered such various persecution, friendship,
still more tender, afforded him consolation and increased his love of
retirement. The Marchioness du Chatelet was, like him, passionately enamoured
of study and fame, as well as of philosophy; but it was of that kind of
philosophy which springs up in the strong and free mind. She had studied
metaphysics and geometry sufficiently to analize Leibnitz, and translate
Newton. She cultivated the arts; but not undistinguishingly, nor so as to
prefer them to the knowledge of nature and man. Superior to prejudice, as well
from strength of character as from reason, she had not the weakness to conceal
how much prejudice was despised by her. Indulging in the trifling amusements of
her sex, rank, and age, she yet could contemn and abandon them without regret
in favor of retirement, labor, and friendship. Her superiority excited the
jealousy of women and even of most of the men, with whom she necessarily
associated. Yet she could pardon their envy without an effort. Such was the
friend that Voltaire selected with whom to pass his days; days which were ever
consecrated to works of genius, and embellished by mutual friendship.

Weary of literary disputes, disgusted to see the league which inferior writers
had formed against him, and who were secretly supported by men, whose merit
should have preserved them from such unworthy associates; finding likewise,
that since he had dared to speak truth, his accusers were as numerous as his
critics, and perceiving that they incessantly armed religion and government
against him, because he was a good poet, he sought employment more peaceful in
the study of the sciences.

He determined to publish an elementary Treatise of the Discoveries of Newton,
relative to the system of the earth and of light, that he might render them
f^miliar to all who had the slightest knowledge of mathematics; and that he
might make known, at the same time, the philosophic opinions of Newton, and his
ideas of ancient chronology.

At the time that these Elements appeared, the Cartesian system prevailed even
in the Academy of Sciences, at Paris. A few young geometricians only had the
courage to forsake it; nor did any work exist in the French language from which
an idea could be formed of the grand discoveries which had, for half a century,
been rendered public in England.

The author, however, was refused a privilege for publication. The Chancellor
d'Aguesseau was a Cartesian in his youth, because the system was then
fashionable among such as pique themselves on rising superior to vulgar
prejudice; and, to these his philosophical opinions, were added (...) his
political and religious sentiments against Newton. He discovered that a
chancellor of France ought not to suffer an English philosopher, who scarcely
was a Christian, to rise victorious over a supposed orthodox Frenchman.
D'Ageusseau had a prodigious memory, and continued study had rendered him
deeply learned in various species of erudition; but his mind, wearied by being
made the receptacle of the opinions of others, had neither strength sufficient
to combine his own ideas, nor to form fixed and definite principles. His
superstition, his timidity, his respect for ancient customs, and his want of
resolution, narrowed his views relative to a reformation of the laws and
impeded his activity. He died, after having been long a minister, and left
France to regret that his great virtues had slumbered in inutility, and that
his rare qualities had been lost to the world.

His severity respecting the Elements of the Newtonian Philosophy was not the
only mark of littleness he showed during his censorship of the press. He would
not give privileges for the printing of novels; nor would he suffer the novel
of Cleveland to be published, but on condition that the hero should change his
religion.

Voltaire, at the same time, pursued the study of experimental philosophy, sent
queries of every kind to the learned, and repeated their experiments, or made
new ones in their stead.

He was a candidate for the prize, given by the Academy of Sciences, on the
nature and propagation of fire; and assumed the following motto, which, for
precision and energy, is not unworthy of the author of the Henriade:

Ignis ubique latet naturam amplectitur omnem,
Cuncta parit, renovat, dividit, unit, alit.
The prize was given to the illustrious Eular, by whom, in scientific contest,
no man need blush at being vanquished. Madame du Chalelet, as well as her
friend, was likewise a candidate, and both pieces were mentioned in very
honorable terms.

The dispute on the measure of forces at that time occupied mathematicians.
Voltaire, in a memorial presented to and approved by the Academy, took the part
of Des Carts and Newton against Leibnitz and the two Bernouilli's; nay even
against Madame du Chatelet, who was become the partisan of Leibnitz.

We are far from pretending that these works are any addition to the same of
Voltaire, or even that they deserve a place among the learned, but the merit of
having made the French, who are not mathematicians, acquainted with Newton, the
true system of the earth, and the principal phenomena of optics, deserves
notice in the life of a philosopher.

It is good to disseminate truth relative to objects of science, whether it
relate to the great laws of nature and the order of the world, or to those
common facts which fall under every man's observation. Absolute ignorance is
ever accompanied by error; and error in physics often is the support of
prejudices of a more dangerous kind. The philosophic knowledge of Voltaire was
further useful to him as a poet; we do not, here, entirely refer to those
pieces in which he had the rare merit of expressing truth in verse with
precision without disfiguring it, or ceasing to be a poet, or of addressing the
imagination while he delighted the ear. The study of the sciences enlarges the
sphere of poetic ideas, and enriches verse with new images. Without this
resource, poetry, necessarily limited by too confined a circle, would be no
more than the art of re-producing, in harmonious language, common thoughts and
exhausted pictures.

Be the subject what it may, he who possesses extensive and profound knowledge
will ever possesses an immense advantage. The poetic genius of Voltaire would
have been the same, but he would not have been so great a poet, had he not
studied philosophy and history. Nor is it solely in augmenting the number of
our ideas that such extraneous studies are useful; they add to the perfection
of the mind, by exercising its various faculties in a more equal manner.

After having applied some years to experimental philosophy, Voltaire consulted
Clairaut relative to his progress, who had the frankness to answer that after
obstinate labor he would never arise above mediocrity in the sciences, and
that he would vainly loose that time which same required he should dedicate to
poetry and ethics. Voltaire listened patiently and yielded to that natural
inclination which incessantly led him to the Belles Letrres and to the wishes
of his friends, who were unable to accompany him in his new career.

He was not therefore entirely absorbed in the sciences during his residence at
Cirey. He there wrote Alzire, Zulime, Mahomet, the History of Charles XII.
finished his Discourses on Man, prepared the age of Louis XIV. and collected
materials for his Essay on the Manners and Spirit of Nations, from Charlemagne
to the present age.

Alzire and Mahomet are immortal monuments of the height to which the human
genius, poetry and philosophy can raise the tragic art. This art is not in
these pieces confined to the pourtraying the passions, awakening their power
over the soul, and making the sweet tears of love and of pity flow; it becomes
the tutor of mankind, whom it inclines to virtue; indolent citizens, who bring
with them to the theater the weariness of having spent an useless day, are
there called on to discuss the first grand interest of the human race.

In Alzire, we behold the noble but wild and impetuous virtues of the man of
nature, combatting the vices of society corrupted by ^anaticism and ambition,
and, ceding to virtue, made perfect by reason in the soul of Alzares, or in the
dying and disabused Gusman. Here, we at once are taught how society corrupts
man by making prejudice the substitute of ignorance, and how it improves him
when error is banished by truth.

But the most fatal of prejudices is that of fanaticism. Voltaire was
determined the monster should become the victim of the stage; and that he might
expel it from every heart, he employed these terrible effects which tragedy
alone can afford. It, no doubt, was easy to render a fanatic odious, but that
this fanatic should be a great man, and that while abhorring, we should of
necessity admire him, that he should descend to mean artifice without
degradation, that, while occupied in propagating a religion and raising an
empire, he should be in love without being ridiculous, that while committing
every crime he should not inspire that painful horror which accompanies the
acts of villains, that in the tone of a prophet he should speak the language of
genius, that he should be superior to the bigotry with which he intoxicated his
ignorant and intrepid disciples yet be above the baseness of hypocrisy, that
his crimes should be successful, that he should triumph, yet should appear
sufficiently punished by remorse, all this could only be effected by the
dramatic art, when employed by the true poet.

Mahomet was first acted at Lisle, in l741. During the representation, a letter
from the king of Prussia was delivered to Voltaire, which informed him of the
victory of Molwitz. He stopped the piece to read the letter to the auditors.
You will see, said he, to his surrounding friends, this tragedy of Molwitz will
make mine successful. They ventured to play it at Paris; but the bigots by
their exclamations, availing themselves of the weakness of the Cardinal de
Fleury, prevailed on him to sorbid the representation. Voltaire thought proper
to send it to Benedict XIV. with two Latin verses for his portrait. The Pontiff
Lambertini, a tolerant and easy prince, but a man of much understanding, sent
him a kind answer, accompanied by some medals.

Crebillon was more scrupulous than the pope. He never would consent that a
piece should be played, which, by proving that tragic terror may be increased
to the utmost excess without sacrificing the pathos or revolting the mind, was
a satire on that species of writing, of which he proudly believed himself to be
the creator and the model. It was not till the year 1751 that M. D'Alembert,
being appointed by M. D'Argenson to examine Mahomet, had the courage to approve
it, and thus to expose himself to the mutual hatred of the men of letters
leauged against Voltaire, and of the devotees. His fortitude was the more
deserving of respect, because the approver of a work docs not participate in
its fame, and because he could find no recompense for the danger to which he
exposed himself, except the pleasure of having served his friend, and aided the
triumph of reason.

Zulima failed of success; nor were the efforts of the author to correct and
palliate its faults effectual. A tragedy is an experiment on the human heart,
and an experiment which does not always succeed, even in the most able hands.
Zulima, however, is the first woman presented on the stage, who, hurried by
passion into criminal acts, still preserved all the generosity and
disinterestedness of love. This character, so natural, so violent, and so
tender, might perhaps have deserved indulgence from the audience, and the
critics of the theater, in favor of the new beauties of this part, might have
pardoned the weakness of the 'others, which the author himself condemned with
equal frankness and severity.

The Discourses on Man are one of the finest monuments of French poetry. The
plan of them may not be so regular as that of the epistles of Pope, but they
possess the advantage of philosophy more true, mild, and general. All the
variety of harmony, a kind of carelessness, soothing sensibility, an enthusiasm
ever noble and ever real, impart a charm to them, which alternately delights
the mind, the imagination, and the heart; a charm, the use of which was known
only to Voltaire, and which was that of pleasing, moving, and instructing,
without ever fatiguing the reader, and of writing to all understandings and to
all ages. Flashes of true philosophy frequently break forth, and are generally
addressed so to the feelings or to the fancy as to appear natural, and to
become popular. This talent is as beneficial and as rare as that of giving a
profound appearance to false and trivial ideas is common and dangerous.

Quitting the company of Pope, we admire his genius, and the address with which
he defends his system, but the soul is unmoved, and the mind presently finds
that its objections have rather been eluded than answered. But we cannot leave
Voltaire without encouragement or consolation; and, while we have a melancholy
prospect of the evils to which nature has condemned man, we are likewise
acquainted with their antidotes.

The life of Charles XII. was the first of the historical publications of
Voltaire. The style, as rapid as the exploits of the hero, hurries on the
reader to an uninterrupted train of splendid expeditions, singular anecdotes,
and romantic events, which give curiosity and feeling no repose. The narrative
is rarely interrupted by reflections. The author forgot himself that he might
give place to his characters. He seems to relate what he has just heard
concerning his hero. The single subject is battles and military enterprise;
yet, the spirit of a philosopher and the soul of a defender of the human race
are present every where.

Voltaire wrote from original memorials, furnished by those who were witnesses
of the events; and his historical truth is warranted by the respectable
testimony of Stanislaus, the friend, the companion, and the victim of Charles
XII.

The history was, notwithstanding, accused of being a novel, because it had all
the interest of one. Though no man, perhaps, ever excited so much enthusiasm,
neither was any man ever treated with less indulgence than Voltaire. As a
reputation for wit is in France the thing most envied, and as it was impossible
for his superiority in wit to remain unacknowledged, he was most vehemently
denied every other merit; and, the pretended claims to wit being as restless in
every class of mankind as in that of men of letters, the number of those who
envied him was almost equal to that of his readers.

In vain had Voltaire imagined that the retreat of Cirey would hide him from
hatred; he had concealed his person only, his fame still offended his enemies.
A libel, which was a malignant attack on his whole life, appeared to the
disturbance of his repose. He was treated like a prince, or a minister, because
he excited equal envy. The Abbe Desfontaines, who was indebted to Voltaire for
liberty and perhaps for life, was the author of this lible. Accused of a
shameful vice, which superstition has classed among crimes, he had been
imprisoned at a time when, from attrocious and ridiculous policy, it was
thought proper to burn a few men, in order to make another man conceive disgust
fur this vice, to which they falsely supposed him inclined.

Voltaire, being informed of the misfortune of the Abbe Desfontaines, who was
personally unknown to him, and whose only recommendation was that he was a man
of letters, hastened to Fontainbleau in search of Madame de Pry, then all
puissant, from whom he obtained the prisoner's liberty, on condition that be
should not appear at Paris. Voltaire further procured him a place of retirement
at the seat of a lady of his acquaintance. Here Desfontaines wrote a libel
against his benefactor; this he was obliged to throw into the fire, but he
never could pardon Voltaire the act of saving his life. He eagerly took every
opportunity the periodical publications afforded, of attacking him; and it was
he who, by the mouth of a priest ^ ^etre de seminaire.
, informed the world that Votaire was the author of Le Mondain, an ingenious
poem, the intent of which was to show that luxury, by polishing man's manners
and encouraging industry, obviates a part of those ills which take birth in the
inequality of, and insensibility attendant on, riches.

He was thus exposed to the danger of new banishment, because, to the reproach
of having preached up pleasure, a great one in the eyes of those who need the
cloak of austerity to conceal vice more real, was added the additional crime of
having ridiculed the amusements of our first parents.

In sine, the journalists published the Voltairomanie; and then it was that
Voltaire, who so long had silently suffered under the slanders of Desfontaines
and Rousseau, abandoned himself to emotions of anger, of which his enemies were
little worthy.

Not satisfied with avenging himself by delivering up his adversaries to public
contempt, and imprinting on them marks which no time can efface, he prosecuted
Desfontaines who escaped by disavowing the libel, and who immediately wrote
others to console himself for the misfortune. Thus, at the age of forty-four,
after having been patient during twenty years, Voltaire, for the first time,
forgot that moderation which it were highly to be wished men of letters never
should forget. Though they have received from nature the formidable gift of
devoting their foes to ridicule and shame, they ought to disdain the use of
this dangerous weapon in avenging their own quarrels, and employ it only
against the performers of truth, and the enemies of the rights of mankind.

The friendship, which, about the same time was formed between Voltaire and the
prince royal of Prussia, was one of the first causes of the excessive anger of
his enemies. The young Frederic had received from his father the education of a
soldier only, but nature formed him for a man of an amiable, extensive, and
elevated mind, as well as for a great general. He was sent to Rhinesberg by
his father, who, having conceived the project of beheading him as a deserter,
because he had attempted to travel without permission, yielded to the
remonstrances of the imperial ambassador, and satisfied himself with causing
the prince to be present at the execution of one of his traveling companions.

In this state of retirement, Frederic, who was enamoured with the French
language, poetry, and philosophy, chose Voltaire for his confident and guide.
They mutually sent each other their works; the prince consulted the philosopher
concerning his studies, and requested lessons and advice. They discussed the
most curious as the most difficult metaphysical questions. The prince, at that
time, studied the works of Wolf, whose systems and unintelligible language he
soon abjured for philosophy more simple and more true. He also employed himself
in a refutation of Machiavel: that is, in proving that the most certain policy
of a sovereign is to make moral rules his guide, and that his personal interest
does not necessarily render him the enemy of his subject and his neighbors, as
Machiavel had supposed, either from a love of hypothesis or to disgust his
countrymen with a monarchical government, toward which they seemed to be
inclined by their weariness of a republican system ever tempestuous and often
cruel.

In the preceding century, Tycho-Brahe, Des Carts, and Leibnitz, had enjoyed
the society of monarchs, by whom they had been loaded with marks of esteem? but
confidence and freedom did not preside in this too unequal intercourse* Of
these Frederic gave the first example, in which, unfortunately for his fame, he
forgot to persist. He sent his friend, the Baron de Keyserling, to visit the
Deities of Cirey, and to bear his protrait and manuscripts to Voltaire. The
philosopher was moved, perhaps flattered, by this homage; but his greatest
pleasure was the prospect of a prince destined to reign, who loved literature,
and was the friend of philosophy and the foe of superstition. He hoped the
author of the Anti-Machiavel would be a pacific monarch, and he took serious
delight in secretly printing the book which he believed must bind the prince to
virtue from the fear of betraying his own principles, and of reading his
condemnation in the work he himself had written.

When Frederic ascended the throne, he testified no change, but remained the
friend of Voltaire. The cares of government did not enfeeble his love of
poetry, nor his avidity to possess the unpublished writings of Voltaire, which
were read by scarcely any except himself and Madame du Chatelet. Yet, one of
his first steps was to suspend the publication of the Anti-Machiavel. Voltaire
obeyed, and the corrections which he had made with regret were rendered
fruitless.

His desire that his disciple, now a king, should enter into a public
engagement, which should secure his adherence to philosophic maxims, was
increased. He went to meet him at Wezel, and was astonished to see a young
monarch in a uniform, on a camp-bed, shivering with a fever. But his fever did
not prevent him from profiting by his neighborhood to the principality of
Liege, and enforcing the payment of a forgotten debt, from the bishop. Voltaire
wrote the memorial, which was supported by the bayonet, and he returned to
Paris well satisfied to have found his hero an amiable man. But he refused the
offers of the king, who wished to draw him to Prussia, and preferred the
friendship of Madame du Chatelet to the favor of a monarch whom he admired.

The king of Prussia declared war against the daughter of Charles VI. and took
advantage of her weakness to render some old pretensions on Silesia valid. Two
battles secured him the possession of the province. Cardinal de Fleury, who had
undertaken the war in his own despite, continued his secret negociations. The
empress perceived her interest was not to treat with France, against whom she
hoped for useful allies, who would themselves support the burden of the war;
whereas, if she had none but the Prussian monarch to combat, she must be left
to herself, and must behold the wishes and secret aid of those very powers on
the side of her foe. She rather chose therefore to stifle her resentment,
informed Frederic of the propositions of the cardinal, induced him to make
peace by this confidence, and purchase by the sacrifice of Silesia, the
neutrality of the enemy whom she had most to fear.

The war had not interrupted the correspondence between the king and Voltaire*
Frederic sent poety from the field, while preparing for battle, or amid the
tumult of victory; and Voltaire, continuing to praise his military fame, never
ceased to preach humanity and peace.

The Cardinal de Fleury died. Voltaire had been intimate with him, because he
was desirous of learning the anecdotes of the reign of Louis XIV; and Fleury,
who loved to relate them, dwelt on those which regarded himself, not doubting
that Voltaire would eagerly insert them in his history. But the hatred of
Fleury, and of all feeble men, for one who rose superior to common powers, was
greater than his love of taste, and eve^ than his vanity.

Fleury endeavored to in p^d^ freedom of speech, and even of thought, in
France, that he might govern with the greater ease. During his whole life, he
had maintained a warfare of opinions in the kingdom, by his very endeavors to
smother those opinions, and prevent them from troubling the public repose. He
was terrified by the daringness of Voltaire; equally afraid of exposing
himself, should he defend the poet, or his trifling claims to renown, should he
abandon him with too much cowardice, Voltaire found him rather a clandestine
persecutor than a patron; but one who was retained by his respect for public
opinion and his own fame.

Voltaire was designed to be his successor in the French academy: he had lately
acquired new claims which must have silenced envy, had she been capable of a
blush. He had enriched the stage by another masterpiece: by Merope, the only
tragedy in which tears freely and sweetly flow, without the aid of the
misfortunes of love. The author of Zaire had before opposed the maxim of
Boileau, De cette passion la sensible peinture
Est, pour aller au coeur, la route, la plus sure. A pathetic picture of love,
is the surest road to the heart.

He had affirmed that nature was capable of producing more feeling and more
heart-rending effects on the stage; and in Merope, he proved his assertion.

If however Boileau, by surest, understood the least difficult, facts are in
his favor. Various poets have written affecting tragedies founded on love;
Merope stands alone.

Hurried on by the interest of the situations, a rapidity of dialogue till then
unknown to the stage, and by the talent of an actress who had caught the
empassioned tones of nature, the pit was agitated with unexampled enthusiasm.
Voltaire, who was concealed in a corner of the house, was obliged to appear
before the spectators. He came into the box of the lady of Marshal de Villars.
The house called on the young duchess of Villars to kiss the author of Merope;
and she was under the necessity of obeying the imperious will of the public,
intoxicated with admiration and pleasure.

This was the first time that the pit called for the author of a piece; but
what was then no more than homage, rendered to genius, degenerated afterward
into custom, and is now a ridiculous and humiliating ceremony, to which
authors, who respect themselves, refuse to submit.

To this new claim, which even devotion was obliged to respect, was added the
support of Madame de Chateauroux, then governed by the Duke de Richelieu; an
extraordinary man, who at the age of twenty, had twice been in the Bastile, for
the rashness of his gallantries; who, by the rumor and the number of his
adventures, had made himself so fashionable, among women, as for it to be
almost regarded as an honor to be dishonored by him; and who, among his
imitators, had formed a kind of gallantry in which love was no longer the
inclination to pleasure, but the vanity of seduction. This same man afterward
contributed to the fame of the victory of Fontenoy, supported the revolution of
Genoa, took port Mahon, and obliged an English army to lay down its arms; and
when that army had broken the treaty, when it threatened his dispersed and
feeble quarters, he stopped its progress by his activity and boldness. After
which he sunk into the intrigues of the court, and lost, in the maneuvres of a
tyrannical and corrupt administration, that fame which might have obliterated
his early errors.

The Duke de Richelieu had from his infancy been the friend of Voltaire; and,
though Voltaire had often cause of complaint against him, yet he preserved that
remembrance of youthful affection which time cannot eradicate, and a kind of
confidence which was rather maintained by habit than by conviction. The duke
continued faithful to his old friend, as much as the levity of his character,
his caprice, his petty despotism at the theaters, his contempt for every man
who was not a courtier, his weakness toward people in power, and his
insensibility for all that was noble, or useful, would permit.

At this period he promoted the interest of Voltaire with Madame de
Chateauroux. But M. de Maurepas did not love Voltaire. The Abbe de Chaulieu had
written an epigram against Oedipus, because he was offended to see a young man,
who had become his rival in sugitive poetry, into which philosophy and
voluptuousness were infused, acquire the additional fame of succeeding at the
theater; and M. de Maurepas, whose vanity was to be the man of most wit at
table, could not pardon Voltaire for so evidently robbing him of this
advantage, with which it was not too ridiculous, at that time, for a minister
of state to be flattered.

Voltaire attempted to disarm his anger by an epistle, in which he bestowed
such praise as might appear most natural to the mind and character of M. de
Maurepas. This epistle, which contained as much instruction as eulogium,
effected no change in the sentiments of the minister; who, that he might
prevent Voltaire from gaining a place in the academy, combined with the priest
Boyer, whom Fleury had preferred, as the tutor of the dauphin, to Massillon,
whose talents and virtue he scared; and which Boyer he, on his death-bead,
recommended to the king to the charge of bestowing ecclesiastical benefices,
apparently from the hope that his memory might be regretted by the Jansenists,
M. de Maurepas was likewise glad to have an opportunity of secretly
counteracting Madame de Chateauroux, with whose hatred for him he was well
acquainted. Voltaire, being informed of his intention, went to to him and
asked, if Madame de Chateauroux should support him in the election, whether he
would oppose him. I will, answered the minister, and will crush you In order to
be just, it is here necessary to relate that having, after the death of
Voltaire, mentioned this anecdote to the count de Maurepas, to whose character
such an answer does not seem natural, he, laughing, answered that it was the
king himself who would not suffer Voltaire to succeed the Cardinal de Fleury,
in his place of academician. His majesty thought there was too marked a
distance, between the men, to put the eulogium of the one, in the mouth of the
other, and afford laughter to the public by such an association.

M. de Maurepas further added, that he had long known Voltaire had written the
anecdote of "I will crush you." But this trifling act of injustice, from a man
so celebrated, had not prevented him from soliciting and obtaining leave, from
the present king, that the poet, who had been so great an honor to his age and
nation, might return to Paris, at the close of his life, there to enjoy the
fruits of his fame.

This is the note of the general correspondent of the literary typographical
society.


.

He knew how easy this would be to a minister; and that, under a feeble
government, the influence of a mistress must yield to that of intriguing
fanatic priests, who were more despicable than a prostitute, in the eyes of
reason, though more respected by the populace. Boyer was triumphant.

The minister soon after perceived how necessary the alliance of the king of
Prussia was to France. But this monarch feared to engage anew with a power
whose timid and wavering policy could not inspire confidence. Voltaire, it was
supposed, might induce him to change his opinion, and was secretly charged with
this negotiation. It was agreed that the persecution of Boyer should be the
pretext of his journey into Prussia. He thus obtained the liberty to ridicule
the poor priest, who went to complain to the king that Voltaire made him appear
a fool in foreign courts. The king answered -- "It was a settled point."

Voltaire departed, and Piron, at the head of his enemies, wrote abundance of
epigrams and songs on his pretended disgrace. Piron was in the habit of
insulting all celebrated men who underwent persecution. His works abound with
proofs of this mean malice; yet he had the character of a good natured man,
because he was indolent; and, not having any native dignity of mind, he did not
offend the vanity of others.

After having passed some time with the King of Prussia, who constantly refused
all negotiation with France, Voltaire had the address to divine the true motive
of his refusal. It was the weakness that France had persisted in not to declare
war against the English, and by this conduct to appear to entreat for peace,
when she had a right to dictate its conditions.

He returned to Paris and gave an account of his journey. The following spring
the King of Prussia again declared war against the Queen of Hungary, by which
useful diversion he obliged her troops to evacuate Alsatia. This important
service, with that of having penetrated, as he passed through the Hague, into
the views of the Dutch who apparently were in a state of uncertainty, did not
procure Voltaire any of those marks of respect from which he wished to raise a
rampart against his literary enemies.

The Marquis D'Argenson was called to the ministry. He was a man who deserves
to be ranked among those few people in power who have really loved philosophy,
and the public good. His taste for literature had connected him with Voltaire,
whom he more than once employed to write manifestos, declarations, and
dispatches, the style of which was required to be correct, dignified, and well
adapted.

Such was the manifesto which was to have been published by the Pretender, on
his descent into Scotland with a sin all French army, which the Duke de
Richelieu was to have commanded. Voltaire had then an opportunity of laboring
in conjunction with Count Lally, a zealous Jacobite, and the determined enemy
of the English; whose memory Voltaire afterward defended with so much
fortitude when an unjust sentence, executed with barbarity, sacrificed him to
the resentment of some of the servants of the East India Company.

But he had, at the same time, a support more potent in the Marchioness de
Pompadour, with whom he had been intimate while her name was d'Etiole. She
committed the writing of a piece to him, for the first marriage of the Dauphin.
The place of gentleman of the chamber, the title of historiographer of France,
and in fine the protection of the court, which was necessary to oppose the
faction of devotees who excluded him the French academy, were the recompense he
received. It was on this occasion that he wrote the following verses: Mon Henri
quatre et ma Zaire,
Et mon Americaine Alzire,
Ne m'ont valu jamais un seul regard du Roi;
J'eus beaucoup d'ennemis, avee tres-peu de gloire;
Les honneurs et les biens pleuvent enfin sur moi,
Pour une farce de la foire. The Henriade, Zaire, and my American Alzire, never
obtained me a look from majesty: I had many enemies and little fame; but
honors at length are showered on me, for having written a farce.



This was passing rather too severe a judgment on the Princess of Navarre,
which is a work full of noble and affecting gallantry.

The favor of the court however was insufficient to open the doors of the
academy. He was obliged, in order to disarm the devotees, to write a letter to
Father la Tour, in which he made protestation of his respect for religion, and,
which was more necessary, of his attachment to the Jesuits. In despite of the
address with which he manages his language in that letter, it were better he
had renounced the academy than have had the weakness to write it. This weakness
would have been inexcusable had it been the sacrifice of vanity, in order to
obtain a title which had long been incapable of adding honor to the name of
Voltaire. But he supposed it his shield; he imagined he should find support
against persecution from the academy. He presumed too favorably of the
fortitude and justice of his associates.

In his discourse to the academy, he first threw off the yoke of custom, by
which these discourses seemed rather condemned to be a string of compliments
than of true praise. Voltaire boldly spoke of literature and of taste, and his
example is in some manner become a law, against which the academicians, who are
man of letters, rarely venture to err. But he did not go so far as to suppress
their reiterated praise of Richelieu, Seguier, and Louis XIV. which has
hitherto been done only by two or three of the boldest academicians. He
mentioned Crebillon, in his discourses, with the noble generosity of a man who
fears not to honor the talents of a rival, or to afford arms to his own
antagonists.

A new torrent of libels was poured upon him, which he had not the fortitude to
despise. The police was, at that time, committed to a man who had passed some
months in the country with Madame de Pompadour. A wretched musician, of the
opera band, was arrested, wnose name was Travenol, and who, with the advocate
Rigoley de Juvigny, privately sold these libels. The father of Travenol, an old
man of eighty, went to Voltaire, and demanded pardon for his guilty son; and
the anger of the poet was hushed by the first cry of humanity. He wept with,
embraced, and consoled the old man; and hastened away with him, to obtain the
liberty of his son.

Voltaire was not long in favor. Madame de Pompadour caused those honors to
be conferred on Crebillon, which he had been refused. Voltaire had constantly
done justice to the author of Rhadamistus, but he could not be so humble as to
suppose him superior to the author of Alzire, Mahomet, and Merope. In such
exaggerated enthusiasm for Crebillon, he discovered nothing but a secret desire
that he himself should be humbled: nor was he deceived.

The wit and the poet might have preserved powerful friends; but these titles
in Voltaire concealed a philosopher, a man more earnest for the progress of
reason, the acquirement of personal fame.

His character, naturally proud and independent, yielded to ingenuous
adulation; he was prodigal of praise, but he preserved his feelings and his
opinions, and the freedom of discovering them. Strong or affecting lessons rose
out of panegyric: that manner of praising, which might succeed at the court of
Frederic, could not but offend at any other court.

He therefore returned to Cirey, and soon afterward to the court of
Stanislaus. This prince, twice elected king of Poland, once by the will of
Charles XII. and once by the desire of the nation, never possessed more than
the title of sovereign. Having retired into Lorraine with this title, he there
repaired, by his beneficent acts, the ills which the French adminstration had
committed: the paternal government of Leopold corrected an age of devastation
and misfortune. His devotion had neither deprived him of the love of pleasure
nor of an affection for men of wit. His house was that of a wealthy private
person: his manners those of native candor; of a man who had never been
unhappy, except because others had determined to make him a king; nor ever
dazzled by a title, from which he had derived nothing but danger. He wished to
see Madame du Chatelet and Voltaire at his court, or rather living as his
inmates. The author of the Seasons St. Lambert.
, the only French poet, who, like Voltaire, has united philosophy and wit, then
lived at Luneville, where he was only known as an amiable young officer; but
his first poetical productions, full of reason, wit, and taste, even then
bespoke a man born to be an honor to his age.

At Luneville, where Voltaire lived a life of occupation and mild tranquillity,
he had the misfortune to lose his friend. Madame du Charelet died, at the
moment when she had finished her translation of Newton; the labor of which had
shortened her days. King Stanislaus went to console and weep with Voltaire in
his chamber.

Having returned to Paris, the poet betook himself to his labors, a means of
dissipating grief, which nature has imparted but to few. Such a power over our
thoughts, and such force of mind, which affliction cannot vanquish, are
precious gifts, which must not be depreciated by confounding them with want of
feeling. Sensibility is not weakness; it is a capability of grief, without
being overwhelmed by it: the soul is not the less affectionate, nor has sorrow
been less sincere, because opposed with fortitude; or because conquered by
extraordinary powers.

Voltaire was weary of hearing the fashionable world, and most men of letters,
prefer Crebillon to himself; which they did less from opinion than to punish
him for the universality of his talents. Men are ever more indulgent to
circumscribed genius, which exerted on one object appears to be a kind of
instinct, because it offends not so many species of self-love, and humbles
their pride less.

This opinion of the superiority of Crebillon was maintained with so much
passion, that, in the preliminary discourse to the Encyclopedia, M. D'Alembert
had need of fortitude to grant equality to the author of Alzire and Merope, and
durst not extend justice further. Voltaire at length determined to avenge
himself, and oblige the public to give him his true rank, by writing Semiramis,
Orestes, and Rome Preserved; which three subjects had before been treated by
Crebillon. Every cabal that had been formed against Voltaire had united, to
obtain momentary success for the Cataline of his rival; a piece, the conduct of
which is absurd and the style barbarous; in which Cicero proposes that his
daughter should seduce Cataline, and a high priest appoints a rendezvous for
the lovers in a temple, where he introduces a courtezan in men's clothes, and
afterward treats the senate as impious, because it there discussed on state
affairs.

On the contrary, Rome Preserved is the masterpiece of style and of reason, in
which Cicero appears with all his dignity and eloquence; in which Caesar speaks
and acts like a man born to reduce Rome to subjection, to overwhelm his
opponents by his glory, and obtain pardon for tyranny by the force of his
talents and virtues; and in which Cataline is a villain, but one who endeavors
to excuse his vices from example, and his crimes from necessity. Republican
energy and Roman feelings entirely possess the poet.

Voltaire had a small theater on which he acted his pieces, and where he often
played the part of Cicero. Never, it is said, was illusion more complete: while
he recited he appeared to create his character; and when, in the fifth act,
Cicero again appeared before the senate, when he excused his love of fame by
reciting the following beautiful lines. Romans, j'aime la gloire, et ne veux
point m'en taire;
Des travaux des humains c'est le digne salaire,
Senate, en vous servant il la faut acheter:
Qui n'ose la vouloir, la n'ose meriter Romans, I frankly own my thirst for
fame,
The rich reward of peril, pain, and care;
Most nobly purchased in our country's cause!
Who dare not hope for, cannot merit fame.

.
the character and the poet were one, and the auditor imagined he heard Cicero,
or Voltaire, avow and excuse this weakness of great minds.

There is only one good part in the Electra of Crebillon, and this is a
subaltern character. Orestes, who knows not that he is Orestes, is in love with
the daughter Aegysthus, who has the misfortune to be called Iphianassa. The
implacable Electra is enamoured with the son of Aegysthus, and these insipid
amors occupy the scene, while the furies are leading a bewildered son to the
commission of parricide; being condemned by the gods to take this horrible
revenge.

Voltaire felt that Clytemnestra should be rendered interesting by her remorse,
by being characterised as rather feeble than guilty, and overawed by the cruel
Aegysthus, but a shamed of having loved him, and sensible of the weight of her
chains and of her crimes. If we compare this with the other tragedies of
Voltaire, we shall, no doubt, find it much inferior to his best works; but if
we contrast it with Sophocles, whom he meant to follow, that he might teach the
French the character and tragic conceptions of that poet, we shall perceive he
had the art to preserve his beauties, imitate his style, correct his defects,
and render Clytemnestra more pathetic, and Electra less barbarous. For which
reason, when, in despite of cabal, the permanent beauties of the Greek poet
were transmitted to the French stage, by a man worthy of becoming the
interpreter of the most eloquent of the ancient tragic writers, and there
enforce applause, Voltaire, more ardent in the interest of good taste than in
behalf of his own fame, could not forbear calling from the pit, in a momentary
effusion of rapture, "Go on Athenians, it is Sophocles."

The Semiramis of Crebillon was no sooner produced than forgotten, That of
Voltaire is the same subject which, fifteen years before, he had treated under
the name of Eryphile, and which he withdrew from the stage, though the piece
was highly applauded. During its representations, he more perfectly felt all
the difficulties of the fable. He perceived that, to render a woman who had
destroyed her husband, that she might reign herself, interesting, it was
necessary that the splendor of her reign, her conquests, her virtues, and the
extent of her empire should force respect, and seize on the mind of the
spectators; that the criminal queen should be the mistress of the world, and
possess the virtues of a great monarch. He felt that, while exhibiting the
prodigies of a foreign religion on the stage, it would be necessary, by
magnificence and an elevated and religious style, not to suffer the imagination
to cool, to make the gods interfere on all occasions, and to conceal the
absurdity of a miracle by incessantly presenting the consolatory idea of a
Divine Power, exercising a slow but inevitable vengeance on the secret crimes
of kings.

Love, offensive in Orestes, was necessary in Semiramis. Ninyas must have a
mistress, that he might feel a tenderness for Semiramis, be sensible of her
kindness, and that she might facinate him by her charms before he knew her to
be his mother; otherwise the horror which incest inspires would have been
injurious to that character which was to interest the audience. The style of
Semiramis, the majesty of the subject, the pomp of the exhibition, and the
peculiar pathos of some of the scenes, were triumphant over envy and faction.
But it was long before equal justice, was rendered to Orestes, and Rome
Preserved.

Complete justice, perhaps, has not yet been done; nor can we be surprised at
this, when we recollect that all colleges and all the houses in which the
teachers of youth are themselves educated are devoted to fanaticism, and that
children in general are educated in prejudices against Voltaire.

These three pieces he wrote at Sceaux, the seat of the Duchess du Maine, who
delighted in poetry, gallantry, and the arts; and who, in her palace, presented
a picture of those ingenious and splendid pleasures which had embellished the
court of Lewis the XIVth, and dignified his follies. She delighted in Cicero,
and prevailed on Voltaire to write his Rome Preserved to avenge the outrage
committed on the orator by Crebillon. Mahomet was sent to the pope, and
Semiramis dedicated to a cardinal. He took a secret pleasure in convincing the
French fanatics that the ecclesiastical princes knew how to combine the love of
genius with religious zeal, and that they did not think they promoted
Christianity by treating these men as its enemies who by their powers of mind
were the formidable rulers of public opinion.

It was at this period that he, at length, yielded to the invitations of the
king of Prussia, and accepted the title of Chamberlain, the the grand cross of
the order of merit, and a pension of 20,000 livres. In his own country, he saw
himself the object of envy and hatred to men of letters, although he never had
been their opponent in soliciting for places and pensions, never had humbled
them by his criticisms, nor ever had interfered in literary cabals, but had
obliged all who needed his services, had endeavored to gain their affection by
praising them and taking every opportunity of winning the friendship of those
whom self-love had rendered unjust.

The priests, who forgot not the Letters on the English Nation and Mahomet,
while they were waiting occasion to persecute him, endeavored to decry him and
his works, and employed their whole ascendancy over youth against him,
especially that which, as spiritual directors, they preserved over private
families and the devotees of the court. Absolute silence only could preserve
him from calumny. He could publish no work without being certain that malignity
would endeavor thence to accuse him of being impious, or to render him
suspected by government. Madame de Pompadour, elevated to a situation in which
she wished to be surrounded by none but slaves, forgot their former intimacy.
She could not pardon his not having suffered with sufficient patience the
preference granted to Crebillon. Louis the XVth had a kind of dislike to
Voltaire, although he had flattered that prince to the injury of his own fame:
but kings are, by habit, rendered almost insensible to public adulation; the
m^tfu^ praise of the courtiers, who, seizing every trifling occasion, repeat
their panegyric continually and at the luckiest moments, is alone seducing.
This flattery consists less in direct praise, than in an adroit approbation of
the passions, inclinations, acts, and sentiments of the monarch; half a word, a
motion, a general maxim which excuses their follies or their faults, produce
greater effects than poetry which is worthy of posterity. The eulogies of
genius soothe only those kings who have an actual love of fame.

It is said that Voltaire, approaching Louis XV. after the representation of
the Temple of Fame, in which Trajan after his victories accords peace to the
world, and receives the crown which had been refused to conquerors and reserved
for the man who was the friend of humanity, thus addressed the monarch --
Trajan est-il content Is Trajan satisfied?
? and that the king was less flattered by the comparison than offended by the
familiarity.

M. d'Argenson refused to support Voltaire as a candidate for the title of Free
Associate of the Academy of Sciences, and for obtaining a seat in the Academy
of Belles Lettres, of which place he was at that time ambitious, as a refuge
against the army of periodical critics who were obliged by the police to treat
literary bodies with respect, except when other bodies or powerful individuals
thought it their interest to humble them by abandoning them to the attacks of
these contemptible enemies.

Voltaire, therefore, went to Berlin, and the very monarch, who had disdained
him, and the court, in which he had been treated with disrespect, were offended
at his departure. The loss of a man who honored France, and the disgrace of
having obliged him to seek an asylum in another country, were then only
remembered. In the palace of the king of Prussia, he found peace and even the
semblance of freedom; feeling at first no kind of subjection, except that of
passing some hours with the king to correct his works, and to teach him the art
of writing. He usually supped with his majesty; and these suppers, at which
there was freedom in excess, where every question of metaphysics and morals was
discussed without restraint, where the most unbounded pleasantry enlivened, or
cut serious argument short, and where the king generally disappeared to give
place to the man of wit, were moments of agreeable relaxation to Voltaire. The
remainder of his time was consecrated to study.

Here he improved some of his tragedies, finished his Age of Louis the XIVth,
corrected his poem of the Maid of Orleans, wrote part of his Essay on the
Manners and Spirit of Nations, and composed a poem on Natural Law; while
Frederic governed his states without a minister, inspected and improved his
army, composed poetry and music, and wrote philosophy and history.

The royal family encouraged Voltaire in his pursuits; he addressed verses to
the princesses, acted tragedy with the brothers and sisters of the king, and
while he taught then to declaim, led them to feel the beauties of French
poetry: for poetry ought to be spoken aloud; nor can it be understood, in a
foreign tongue, by those who are not in the habit of hearing it recited by
speakers, who can give it that accent and force which are its characteristics.

This Voltaire called the palace of Alcina; but the enchantment was of too
short duration. The men of literature, who had been longer at Berlin than
himself, were jealous of preference which was too conspicuous, especially of
that kind of independence which he preserved, that familiarity which the charms
and brilliancy of his wit gave him, and that art of mingling truth with
panegyric and of imparting to flattery the tone of jocular ease.

La Metrie told Voltaire that the king, to whom he was one day mentioning those
marks of kindness he discovered for his chamberlain, replied, "I want him at
present to revise my works; but having sucked the orange, we throw away the
rind." When Voltaire heard this, the encantation was over; and his mind felt
that kind of suspicion which never suffered him to lose sight of his project
for escaping.

In the mean time the king was informed that Voltaire, being pressed by general
Manstein to revise his memoirs, had answered, "The king has sent me his dirty
linen to wash, yours must wait;" and that, another time, he had said, in a fit
of ill humor, pointing to some poetical papers of the king, lying on the
table, "That man is Caesar and the Abbe Cottin."

Mutual inclination, however, acted on the monarch and the philosopher.
Frederic said, long after their separation, that he had never met with so
amiable a man as Voltaire; and Voltaire, notwithstanding his resentment, which
never was entirely effaced, confessed, that when Frederic thought proper, he
was the most pleasing of mankind. They likewise united in their open contempt
for prejudice and superstition; the pleasure they look in making them the
eternal objects of their jests, their common love for that philosophy which is
cheerful and inviting, and their mutual disposition to search and to seize on
the ridiculous in whatever pretended to superior gravity, wire the same. Hence
it should have seemed that the storm must have ended in a calm, and that
interest and pleasure must have continued them in friendship: but the jealousy
of Maupertuis rendered them irreconcilable.

Maupertuis, a man of much wit, but not of too much learning, and of still less
philosophy, was tormented by that desire of fame which makes us choose trifling
means when the great are wanting, utter paradoxes when we are unable to
discover truths, generalise formula when we cannot invent them, and accumulate
incongruities when we are deficient in new ideas. In Paris, he had been seen to
leave the company, or hide himself behind a screen, when he could not continue
the principal speaker; and in like manner at Berlin, whether at the academy of
sciences or the table of the king, he would be the first. He was indebted to
Voltaire for a great part of his reputation, as well as for the honor of being
perpetual president of the academy of Berlin, and of exercising authority there
in his majesty's name.

Some jests which Voltaire had indulged in, when Maupertuis, following the king
to the army, was taken prisoner at the battle of Molwitz, had angered him, and
he vented his complaints with ill humor. Voltaire returned a friendly answer,
and appeased him by writing four lines for his portrait. Maupertuis, some years
afterward, took it much amiss that Voltaire had not mentioned him in his
discourse, when elected to the French academy; and the arrival of Voltaire at
Berlin completed his disgust. He saw him the friend of the sovereign, in whose
presence he himself was but a courtier; and beheld him giving lessons to the
man from whom he received orders.

Surrounded by enemies, and diffident of the continuance of royal friendship,
Voltaire secretly regretted, and endeavored to recover, his lost independence.
He thought proper to employ a Jew to transfer a part of his property out of
Prussia. The Jew betrayed his trust; and, to revenge himself on Voltaire, who,
having detected him, would not suffer himself to be robbed, he brought an
absurd action, knowing that hatred is not difficult in admitting evidence. The
king, to punish his friend for having attempted to preserve his liberty and
property, pretended to believe him guilty, to deliver him up to justice, and
even to exclude him his presence till the cause should be determined.

Voltaire addressed himself to Maupertuis, who had not yet openly testified his
sentiments, and requested his interference with the chief judge. Maupertuis
returned a haughty refusal, and Voltaire perceived he had another enemy. This
ridiculous suit, at length, ended as it should do; the Jew was condemned, and
pardoned by Voltaire. The king then admitted Voltaire once more, and added new
marks of respect to former kindness, by bestowing on him a house near Potsdam.

The eyes of hatred, however, are always open and watchful of opportunity. La
Beaumelle, a protestant, and native of Languedoc, first an apprentice to a
gospel minister at Geneva, and afterward acting the French wit in Denmark,
being soon dismissed from Copenhagen, came to seek his fortune at Berlin;
having no other title to fame than that of having lately published a libel. He
went to Voltaire, and presented the book to him, in which Voltaire himself was
ill treated, and in which the men of wit, who had been invited into Prussia,
among whom he was come to solicit a place, was compared to apes or those dwarfs
who had formerly been maintained at certain courts. Such a ridiculous oversight
was the momentary object of pleasantry at the king's supper; but the jests were
reported to La Beaumelle by Maupertuis, who, charging them all to the account
of Voltaire, made La Beaumelle his irreconcilable foe, and secured to himself a
tool, who aided his malice by shameful libels, without bringing the character
of the president of the academy in question.

Maupertuis wanted assistance; he had lately advanced the least possible
action, as a new mechanical principle, which was much controverted, though the
illustrious Euler did it the honor of defending it, and at the same time
instructed its author in its full extent and true use. Koenig not only opposed
it, but asserted it was not new, and quoted the fragment of a letter from
Leibnitz, in which it was contained. Maupertuis, having learnt from Koenig
himself that he had only a copy of the letter from Leibnitz, thought proper
formally to summons him before the academy of Berlin, to produce the original.
Koenig answered that he obtained his copy from the unfortunate Hienzi, who had
long since been beheaded, for having attempted to deliver the people of the
Canton of Bern from the tyranny of the senate. The original was not to be found
among the remaining papers of Hienzi, and the academy, from motives partly of
fear and partly of meanness, declared Koenig unworthy of the title of
academician, and struck him from their list. Maupertuis seemed not to have
known that the general voice of the learned only could bestow, or take from
him, the honor of making a discovery, that this opinion must be free and
voluntary, and that any formal act, by rendering it suspicious, would but
diminish its authority.

Voltaire had been acquainted with Koenig at Cirey, where he came to give
lessons in the doctrines of Leibnitz to Madame du Chatelet. He had preserved a
degree of friendship for him, though he had sometimes indulged himself in jests
to his disadvantage, during his residence in France. He did not love
Maupertuis, and hated persecution, whatever form it might assume to torment
mankind; he therefore openly took the the part of Koenig, and published some
writings, in which reason and justice were seasoned by delicate and poignant
wit. Maupertuis engaged the vanity of the king in behalf of the honor of his
academy, and prevailed on him to exact a promise from Voltaire to ridicule
neither it nor its president. The promise was given, but unfortunately the
king, who had commanded silence, imagined he himself might speak. He wrote
several humourous pieces, which, but with some little inequality, were partly
against Maupertuis, and partly against Voltaire. The latter imagined that the
king, by this conduct, had released him from his promise, and that the
privilege of being the only one who should laugh was not included in the royal
prerogative. He, therefore, profited by a general permission which he had
formerly obtained, and sent his Akakia to the press, in which Maupertuis was
devoted to eternal ridicule.

The king laughed. He had little affection, and less esteem for Maupertuis;
yet, jealous of his own authority, he caused this piece of humor to be burnt
by the hangman. This is a mode of vengeance which it is rather singular that a
philosophic king should borrow from the inquisition.

The insulted Voltaire sent the monarch his cross, his key, and the patent for
his pension, with the four following lines --

Je les recn avec tendresse,
Je les renvoie avec douleur;
Comme un amant, dans sa jalouse ardeur,
Rend le portrait de sa mai^resse These gifts I took, with joy of heart,
From them with grief, as great, I part;
The jealous lover, thus, returns
Her gifts, for whom his bosom burns.

.
He sighed for freedom, but he could not obtain this by sending back wh^t he at
first had called splendid baubles, but which he ever afterward named marks of
slavery. He wrote from Berlin, where he was ill, for permission to depart. The
king, who wished to humble but not to lose him, sent him some bark, but no
permission. He again wrote that it was necessary he should go and drink the
waters of Plombiers; he was answered, those of Silesia were equally salutary.

Voltaire, at length, thought proper to ask to see his majesty, flattering
himself that by his presence he could awaken sentiments which were rather
wounded than extinct.

The baubles that he had formerly possessed were returned to him. He hastened
to Potsdam, saw the king, and a few moments produced a total change.
Familiarity revived, former cheerfulness was recovered even at the expense of
Maupertuis, and Voltaire obtained permission to go to Plombiers, on giving his
promise to return. This promise was not, perhaps, very sincere, but it was less
obligatory than one given between equals; the hundred and fifty thousand men,
who guarded the Prussian frontiers would not suffer it to be considered as
given with entire freedom.

Voltaire hastened to Leipsic, where he made some stay, to recover his
strength, which had been exhausted by this long persecution. Maupertuis sent
him a ridiculous challenge, the only effect of which was, that it opened a new
source to his inexhaustible pleasantry. From Leipsic he went to visit the
Duchess of Saxe-Gotha, a princess, who cultivated letters, loved philosophy,
and was superior to prejudice. At her request he there began his Annals of the
Empire.

From Gotha, he departed for Plombiers; and took the road to Frankfort.
Maupertuis was determined on revenge; his challenge had been unsuccessful, and
the libels of La Beaumelle he thought insufficient. This his contemptible
second had been obliged to quit Berlin, after a ridiculous adventure and some
weeks imprisonment. He had fled to Gotha with a chambermaid, who had robbed
the mistress she had left; his libels had driven him from Frankfort; and he had
scarcely arrived at Paris before he was thrown into the Bastile. The president
of the academy at Berlin had therefore to seek another avenger. He embittered
the ill humor of the king. The slowness with which Voltaire travel^ed, his
stay at Gotha, and a considerable annuity for the lives of himself and his
niece Madame Dennis purchased of the Duke of Wirtemberg, all spoke his
determination of never returning to Prussia, and he had taken with him a copy
of the poetical works of the king, which were then only known to the wits of
the court.

A fear was excited in Frederic's mind that a species of vengeance, terrible
even to a royal poet, would be taken. It was possible, at least, that Voltaire
should imagine he had a right to reclaim the verses he had given, and to
specify those he had corrected. The king gave a knave, whom he kept in his pay
at F^^nkfort to purchase or kidnap men for him, an order to arrest Voltaire,
and not to release him till he should have yielded up his cross, his key, and
the grant of his pension, together with the poems which Freitag called "the
work of Poeshys of the king my master." These volumes had unfortunately been
left at Leipsic, and Voltaire was kept in close confinement for three weeks.
Madame Dennis his niece, who had come to meet him, was treated with like
rigor. Guards were placed at the door, and soldier continued in each of their
chambers who never suffered them to leave his sight, such fears were
entertained lest the work of Poeshys should escape. This precious pledge was at
length restored to Freitag, and Voltaire was released; but not however till he
had been obliged to bestow money on certain adventurers who took that
opportunity to commence litigious suits: having escaped from Frankfort he went
to Colmar.

The king of Prussia, ashamed of his ridiculous anger, disavowed the
proceedings of Freitag, but he had so much morality as not to punish him for
having obeyed. It is strange that a city, calling itself free, should suffer a
foreign power to commit such vexations within its walls; but freedom and
independence are to the feeble mere words. During the period of his friendship
for Voltaire, Frederic, in the transports of enthusiasm, has often kissed his
hands* and Voltaire, after his imprisonment, comparing the (...) w^ periods,
said to his friends -- "He has a hundred times kissed the hand he so lately
manacled."

The only work he published at Berlin was the age of Louis XIV. which is the
sole history of that reign, which can be read. On the authority of the the old
courtiers of Louis XIV. or of those who had lived in intimacy with them, he
there relates a small number of anecdotes selected with discernment, and such
as serve to paint the spirit and character of the persons of the age. Political
and military events are given in a rapid, interesting manner; the picture
abounds with bold strokes. In some chapters, he recounts the attempts which
Louis XIV. made for the improvement of the laws and finances, and for the
encouragement of trade and industry; and we ought to pardon Voltaire for
having, on this occasion, followed the opinions of the most enlighted men of
his own times, instead of that knowledge which did not then exist.

His chapters on Calvinism, Jansenism, Qu^etism, and the dispute on the Chinese
ceremonies, are models of the manner in which a prudent friend of truth ought
to treat these maladies so disgraceful to man, when the number or the power of
the diseased is such as to make it necessary gently to raise the veil which
conceals their deformity. We have only to reproach him with too much severity
against the Calvinists, whose enormities proceeded from self-defence, and whose
crimes were but a kind of reprisal of juridical murders committed on them in
certain provinces.

The discoveries made in the sciences, and the progress of the arts, Voltaire
related with clearness, precision, and impartiality; and his decisions
continually appeared dictated by a free and sound mind, and a mild indulgent
philosophy.

The catalogue of the writers of the age of Louis XIV. was an original thought.
It had never before entered the imagination, thus, by a trait or a few lines,
to paint men of literature, philosophers and poets, without dryness or
affectation, with taste seldom mistaken, and accuracy ever poignant.

The work brought foreign nations aquainted with Louis XIV. among whom he had
been disfigured by a multitude of libels, and taught them to respect a people
whom they had previously viewed through the false medium of prejudice,
jealousy, and hatred. The countrymen of Voltaire were less indulgent. Such as
were slaves from condition or character were highly offended that a Frenchman
should dare to discover follies in Louis XIV. Prejudiced people were angry at
the freedom with which he treated the mistakes of generals, and the defects of
great writers; and others, who in some respects were more just, reproached him
with too much indulgence or enthusiasm. But history is never impartially judged
in the country to which it relates, the decisions of whose inhabitants are
continually perverted by jarring interests and pre-conceived false ideas.

Voltaire passed near two years in Alsatia, during which he published his
Annals of the Empire, the only chronologic abridgment which can be read without
weariness, because it is written in a rapid style and abounds with philosophic
deductions, expressed with energy. Thus Voltaire has given a model of that kind
of writing, the merit and utility of which his friendship for the President
Henault induced him to exaggerate.

He thought, at first, of settling in Alsatia; but, unfortunately, the Jesuits
attempted to convert him, and, not succeeding, began to disseminate
calumniating rumors which bespoke persecution. Voltaire endeavored to obtain
not permission to return to Paris, for this he had never been forbidden, but an
assurance that he should not be disagreeable to the court. He knew Fance too
well not to be sensible that, odious as he was by his love of truth to all
powerful bodies, he must soon become the object of their persecution, would the
court suffer him to be oppressed.

The answer was not to his satisfaction. Voltaire found himself unprotected in
his own country, though his name supported its honor, at that time degraded
throughout Europe by ridiculous quarrels concerning Billets of Confession; and
at the very moment when, by his publication of the Age of Louis XV. he had
erected a monument to its glory. He determined to go and drink the waters of
Aix, in Savoy. Passing through Lions, Cardinal de Tencin, famous for the
conversion of Lass and the council of Embrun, informed him he could not invite
him to dinner, because Voltaire was out of favor at court. But the inhabitants
of that opulent city, in which the spirit of trade has not effaced the love of
letters, recompensed him for the politic incivility of their archbishop. He
there received those honors which public enthusiasm pays to genius. His pieces
were played before him, amid the loud acclamations of a people, inebriated with
the joy* of possessing the man to whom they were indebted for such dignified
pleasures. But he durst not fix his abode at Lions; the conduct of the Cardinal
informed him he was not far enough from his enemies.

Passing through Geneva, to consult with Tronchin, the beauty of the country,
the equality which appeared to prevail there, the advantage of being out of
France, and in a city where French was the language of the people, the freedom
of thought which was greater than in a monarchical or catholic country, and the
liberty of the press, founded indeed less on the laws than on the interests of
trade, all determined him to fix his retreat in that place.

But he soon perceived that a city in which the pedantic and austere spirit of
Calvin had taken deep root, where the vanity of imitating ancient republics,
and the jealousy of the poor against the rich had established sumptuary laws,
where theatrical exhibitions offended both Calvinistic fanaticism, and
republican rigor, would to him neither be a safe nor an agreeable residence.
He determined to procure a place of refuge in the territories of Geneva against
Catholic persecution, and a retreat in France against puritanical gloom, and
accordingly to live alternately at Tourney, since called Ferney, in France, and
the Delices at the gates of Geneva.

Here he fixed his abode with Madame Dennis his niece; who, being a widow
without children, was free to indulge her friendship for her uncle, and to
acknowledge the kindness with which he had rendered her circumstances easy. She
took on herself the charge of his domestic affairs; and, to increase his
tranquillity, by relieving him from such fatiguing trifles. This was the only
aid he received; labor was to him an inexhaustible source of enjoyment; and
freedom was all he wanted to render his moments happy.

Hitherto, we have written the tempestuous life of a philosophic poet, whose
love for truth, and whose independence of character had occasioned him more
enemies than friends, who gave no reply to their malice except by epigrams
which were either witty or dreadfully severe, and whose conduct had more
frequently been guided by the sensations of the moment than the result of any
plan which reason had formed.

In his present retirement, removed from illusion and whatever could excite
momentary or personal passion, we shall see him yield entirely to his
prevailing and incessant love of fame, to the still more potent necessity his
mind felt of being productive, and to his zeal for the destruction of
prejudice, which was indeed the most powerful and active of all the sensations
he felt. This peaceful life, seldom disturbed, and then by the threats of
persecution, rather than persecution itself, we shall see adorned not only,
like his youth, by the exercise of private benevolence, a quality common to all
men whose hearts have hot been hardened and minds corrupted by misfortune or
vanity, but by those acts of enlightened and bold benevolence, which, while
they relieve the sufferings of certain individuals, are of service to the whole
human race.

And hence it was that, indignant to behold a corrupt minister pursue the
unfortunate Byng to death that he might conceal his own errors and flatter the
pride of the English populace, Voltaire, in order to rescue this innocent
victim from the Machiavelian arts of Pit, employed every means which genius
and compassion could inspire, and singly raised his voice against injustice;
while astonished Europe in silence saw such an example of atrocity wor^ of the
most barbarous times, which England dared to give in this age of humanity and
knowledge.

The first work he sent from his retreat was the Orphan of China, a tragedy
written during his residence in Alsatia, at a time when he hoped he might have
been allowed to live at Paris, and was desirous of theatrical success to secure
his friends and impose silence on his foes.

In the commencement of the tragic art, poets were certain of astonishing the
mind by giving to the characters sentiments contrary to nature, and by
sacrificing the true feelings of the heart to the more uncommon love of fame,
exaggerated patriotism, and devotedness to princes.

As reason, at such a period, is ev^^ inferior to taste, vulgar opinion seconds
such as employ those means, or are seduced by them. Leontine necessarily
inspires admiration; and the haughtiness of his character induces an audience,
who idolize their king, to pardon him the sacrifice of his son. But when means
like these, of producing effects by a departure from nature, begin to be
exhausted, and when art improves, the poet is then obliged to write more
conformably to reason, and seek resources in nature herself. Yet, such is the
force of habit, the sacrifice of Zamti, founded indeed on more dignified and
powerful motives ^^an that of Leontine, expiated by tears and (...) seduced the
spectators.

Astonishment only was excited at the first representation of the Orphan, by
the following truly philosophic lines: La Nature et l'Hymen, voila les lois
premieres,
Les devoirs, les liens des nations entieres;
Ces lois viennent des dieux, le rest est des humains Nature and Hymen first
gave laws to earth;
Their origin divine, the rest is human all.

.
The audience hesitated, and the voice of nature needed the aid of reflection in
order to be heard. Thus can a great poet sometimes decide the mind between
ancient errors and truths, which to vanquish wavering yet still opposing
prejudice, is obliged so wait for new support. Men often dare not confess to
themselves that slow progress which reason makes in their minds; but they are
ready to follow her when, appearing in a strong and effective manner, they are
obliged to acknowledge her presence. Thus, these same verses have since been
continually heard with transport, and Voltaire enjoyed the pleasure of having
avenged nature.

This play is the triumph of virtue over power, and of the laws over arms. Till
then, Mahomet excepted, no poet had successfully made one of these men, whose
fame appears awful, and whose characters present the picture of extraordinary
strength of soul, in love without degradation. Voltaire, a second time
conquered this difficulty; the love of Gengis Khan is interesting in despite of
the violence and ferocity of his character, because it is true and impassioned,
because it wrests from him a confession of the vacancy his heart felt amid all
his power, and because he at last sacrificed his love to fame, and his thirst
of conquest to the charms, before unknown to him, of pacific virtues.

The repose of Voltaire was soon disturbed by the publication of the Maid of
Orleans. This poem, in which licentiousness and philosophy are combined, and
truth assumes the mask of satiric and voluptuous humor, was begun about the
year 1730, but had never been finished. The author had entrusted what he had
written of it only to a few of his friends, and to some princes. The rumor of
its existence had brought down menace on him; and, by not finishing it, he took
the surest means to avoid the dangerous temptation of making it public. Copies
unfortunately got abroad, one of which fell into inimical and selfish hands,
and the work appeared not only with such defects as the author had left; but
with lines added by the editors full of grossness and ill taste, and with
satiric traits which might endanger the safety of Voltaire. The desire of gain,
the pleasure of attributing their own wretched verses to a great poet, and the
more malignant pleasure of exposing him to persecution, were the motives of
this act of infidelity, the honor of which was divided between la Beaumelle
and the Ex Capuchin Maubert.

They succeeded only so far as to trouble that repose for a moment which they
wished to destroy. His friends evaded the persecution, by proving the work to
be spurious, and the hatred of the editors served him whom it meant to wound.

This, however, obliged Voltaire to finish the poem, and present a work to the
world, at which the author of Mahomet and the age of Louis XIV. need not blush.
The work excited lively feelings of enthusiasm in a numerous class of readers,
while the foes of Voltaire affected to decry it as unworthy of a philosopher,
and almost as a blemish on the writings and the life of a poet.

But, if it be useful to render superstition ridiculous in the eyes of men
addicted to voluptuousness, and by the very weakness which hurries them into
dissipation destined some time to become the unfortunate victims or the
dangerous tools of this vile tyrant of men, if affectation of austerity in
manners, if the excessive value attached to their purity, be serviceable only
to hypocrites who, wearing the mask of chastity, may neglect every other
virtue, and cast a sacred veil over the most pernicious vices of society, such
as intolerance and persecution, if accustoming the world to regard those errors
from which men of honor and conscience are not exempt as crimes, the power of
that dangerous sect, who govern and disturb the world be extended over the
purest minds by their having exclusively rendered themselves the interpreters
of celestial justice, we shall then only behold in the author of the Maid of
Orleans the foe of hypocrisy and superstition.

Voltaire himself, when speaking of la Fontaine, has well remarked that works,
in which voluptuousness and humor are mingled, amuse without heating or
seducing the imagination. And if such works be sources of pleasure to the
fancy, which lighten the uneasy moments of life, diminish the misfortunes of
privation, unbend a mind fatigued by labor, and fill up moments in which the
weary and sunken soul can neither act nor meditate with effect, wherefore rob
men of an aid which nature presents? What will be the effect of such reading?
No other than that of disposing men to more mildness and indulgence. It was not
such books that Gerard or Clement read; or that the scouts of Cromwell carried
in the pommels of their saddles.

Two works very different in themselves appeared at the same epoch: the poem on
Natural Law, and the poem of the Destruction of Lisbon. To display morals, the
principles of which reason teaches all men which are sanctioned by their
hearts, and which remorse informs them it is their duty to practice; to show
that these are the principles which God, the common father of men, alone could
impart, since they alone are uniform; to prove that the duty of individuals is
mutually to pardon their mistakes, and that of sovereigns to prevent the
pernicious tendency of those vain opinions which fanaticism and hypocrisy
support, by wisely treating them all with indifference; such is the purport of
the poem on Natural Law.

This work, the finest which man ever consecrated to the Deity, excited the
anger of the devotees, who called it the poem of Natural Religion; though
Religion is only mentioned in order to oppose intolerance, and though there is
no such a thing as natural religion. It was burnt by the parliament of Paris,
which began to be terrified as well at the progress of reason as at that of
Molinism. Under the conduct, at this period, of men who were either blinded by
pride or false policy, it imagined it would be more easy to impede the
advancement of knowledge than to merit the applause of the enlightened. It felt
not the want itself had of the good opinion of the public; it misconstrued
those who were to be its guides, and declared itself the enemy of men of
letters, at that precise moment when the suffrage of these men in France, and
even over all Europe, began to acquire influence.

However the poem of Voltaire, which has since been commented on in various
celebrated books, is still that in which the connection between morality and the
being of a God is most clearly demonstrated. Thirty years later and the book
which was burnt as impious, would almost have appeared a work of religion.

In the poem on the Destruction of Lisbon, Voltaire indulged those sentiments
of terror and melancholy which this dreadful accident inspired. He led the
tranquil sect of Optimists amid these fearful ruins, combated their cold and
puerile doctrine with the indignation of a philosopher deeply sensible of the
sufferings of mankind, exposed the difficulties on the origin of evil in their
full force, and avowed it is impossible for them to be solved by man.

This poem, in which at the age of more than sixty the mind of Voltaire, warmed
by a love of humanity, displays all the strength and fire of youth, was not the
only work in which he opposed Optimism. He published Candide, the first of
philosophic romances; which species of writing he brought from England, and
added to its perfection. It is a kind of composition which appears easy of
execution, but it requires an uncommon talent; that of expressing by a jest, a
flight of the fancy, or by the incidents of the romance, the result of profound
philosophy, without ceasing to be natural, pleasing, and accurate. Hence it is
necessary to select such effects as need neither developement nor proof, and at
once to avoid common place unworthy of repetition, and abstraction which is too
deep or too new, and which is not adapted to the multitude: that is, it is
necessary to be, without appearing to be, a philosopher.

We may add, few books of philosophy are more useful. Such romances are read by
frivolous men, whom the very name of philosopher disgusts or renders gloomy,
and who, however, it is requisite should be freed from prejudice, and made the
opponents of the herd who are interested in its defense. The human race would
be condemned to eternal error if, to free them from it, it were necessary to
study and understand the proofs of truth. Fortunately the native intelligence
of the mind is sufficient for the comprehending of those simple truths which
are the most essential. It is therefore sufficient to discover some means of
fixing the attention of the indolent, and of engraving these truths in their
memory; and this is the great use of philosophic romances, and the merit of
those in which Voltaire has alike surpassed his imitators and his models.

Candide was soon followed by a free translation of the book of Ecclesiastes,
and a part of the song of Solomon.

Madame de Pompadour had been persuaded that it would be profoundly politic for
her to assume the mask of devotion, by which she might shield herself from the
scruples and inconstancy of the king, and at the same time calm the hatred of
the people. She wished to make Voltaire an actor in this farce. The duke de la
Valiere proposed to him to translate the Psalms, the book of Proverbs,
Solomon's song, and the Ecclesiastes. The edition was to have been printed at
the Louvre, and the author to have returned to Paris under the protection of
the religious favorite. But Voltaire could not act the hypocrite, not even to
be made a cardinal, some hopes of which were given him about this time. Such
proposals generally come too late; and were they made in time, the policy of
them would not be very certain. He who must be a dangerous enemy might become a
still more dangerous ally. Let us suppose Calvin or Luther called to the
purple, when they might have accepted the dignity without disgrace, and let us
imagine what would have been the consequence. The baubles of vanity do not
satiate souls impelled by the ambition of reigning over the minds of men; they
do but supply new arms.

Voltaire, however, was tempted to make essays in translation; not to recover
his religious repute, but to exercise himself in another species of
composition. When they appeared, the devout imagined he only had intended to
parody that which he had translated, and exclaimed it was shameful. They did
not imagine that Voltaire had softened and purified the text; that his
Ecclesiastes had less of the doctrine of materialism than the original; and
that his song of songs was less indecent than the sacred text. These works were
therefore once more burnt, for which Voltaire avenged himself by a satiric and
humuorous letter, in which he mocked at the hypocrisy of morals, the peculiar
vice of the modern nations of Europe, which has contributed more than is
imagined to destroy that energy of character by which the ancients were
distinguished.

In 1757, the first edition of his works, actually made under his own
inspection, was printed. He revised it with rigorous attention, selected some
of his numerous fugitive pieces with severity, but with judgment, and added his
immortal Essay on the Manners and Spirit of Nations.

Voltaire had long complained that among the moderns especially, the history of
a country was that of its kings, or its chiefs; that it spoke only of wars,
treaties, and civil commotions; and that the history of morals, arts, sciences,
legislation, and political government, had been almost forgotten. Those very
ancients in whose writings we find most of morals, and internal politics, have
only in general added, to the history of wars, that of popular factions. We
imagine, while we read such historians, that the human race was created only to
exhibit the political or military talents of a few individuals; and that the
object of society is not the happiness of the species, but the pleasure of
having revolutions to read, or to relate.

Voltaire formed the plan of a history which should contain all that was most
important for men to know: such as the effects produced on the peace and
happiness of nations, their prejudices, knowledge, virtues, and vices, and the
customs and the arts of different ages.

He chose the period from Charlemagne to the present century; but, not
confining himself solely to European nations, he interested and instructed the
reader by an abridged retrospect of the state of the other parts of the globe;
the revolutions they had undergone, and the opinions by which they had been
governed.

It was to reconcile Madame du Chatelet to the study of history, that he had
undertaken this immense labor, which obliged him to read books of erudition,
such as would have been supposed incompatible with the liveliness of his fancy,
and the activity of his mind. The supposition that he should serve the human
race supported him, and erudition was not dull to a man who, having the
sagacity to detect and amuse himself with the ridiculous, found an
inexhaustible source of this in the speculative or practical doctrines of our
ancestors; and in the follies of those who have transmitted or commented on
them, while admiring them either with sincerity or hypocrisy equally laughable.

Such a work could please none but philosophers. It was accused of being
frivolous, because it was clear, and read without labor; and of being
inaccurate, because there are some errors of names and dates discoverable in
it, which in themselves are things absolutely indifferent. Yet it has been
proved, by the very reproaches of his bitterest critics, that, in a history so
extensive, no writer was ever more exact. He was often taxed with partiality,
because he exclaimed against those prejudices which pusillanimity or meanness
had too long respected; and it is easy to show that, far from exaggerating the
crimes of sacerdotal despotism, he has rather diminished their number, and
softened their atrocity. In fine, it was taken amiss that, in a picture of the
wickedness and folly of man, he has sometimes indulged in strokes of
pleasantry; and that he has not always spoken seriously of human extravagance;
as if that which is often dangerous ceased therefore to be absurd.

These prejudices, which it was the interest of powerful bodies to disseminate,
are not yet eradicated* The habit of generally seeing dullness and precision
combined, and, by the side of critical dicision of finding the insipid
scaffolding on which it was reared, has given birth to the other habit of
thinking nothing accurate which is not pedantic. We are accustomed to see
gloomy stupidity accompany historical precision; as we see men of certain
professions always clothed in black. But men of genius derive no satisfaction
from a merit which fools can claim as easily as themselves; and this merit they
are supposed not to possess, because they alone forbear to vaunt of it. The
Travels of the young Anacharsis will perhaps efface this too commonly received
opinion.

But the essay of Voltaire will ever remain, to men of reason, a work
delightful by the choice of its materials, by the rapidity of its style, by
that love of truth and humanity which is conspicuous in every page, and by the
art of presenting contrasted pictures, and unexpected similarities, without
ceasing to be easy and natural; as well as by deducing, in language ever
simple, grand consequences, and making profound reflections The author has not
given the history of ages, but that which we wish to remember of history; that
which the mind delights to recollect.

Few books would be more useful, in a rational plan of education. While we read
the the facts, we here are taught the art of judging them truly, of exercising
the native independence of the mind, without which man is but the servile
instrument of prejudice, and of contemning superstition, fearing fanaticism,
detesting intolerance, and hating tyranny, without ceasing to love peace, and
that mildness of manners which is as necessary to the happiness of mankind as
is the wisdom of legislation itself.

Hitherto, in private or public education, which alike are guided by prejudice,
youth have studied history as disfigured by vile or superstitious compilers;
and though, since the publication of the essay of Voltaire, two men, the Abbe
de Condillac and the Abbe Millot, have merited not to be numbered in this
class, yet, restrained by their situation, they have left the reader too much
to divine: in order to understand them, we ought not to have any need of their
instruction.

This work placed Voltaire in the class of original historians; and he has the
honor of having effected a revolution in the manner of writing history, by
which England indeed has hitherto only profited. Hume, Robertson, Gibbon, and
Watson, may, in some respects, be considered as his scholars. The history of
Voltaire has another advantage: which is, that it may be taught in England as
well as in Russia, and in Virginia as consistently as at Bern or Venice. He has
inserted none but such truths as every species of government may adopt. He only
requires that human reason should have the right of improving itself; that the
citizen should enjoy his natural freedom; and that the laws should be mild and
the religion tolerant. He addresses himself to all mankind, and says nothing
which nay not enlighten them all, without offense to any of those opinions
which are so connected with the constitution and individual interest of a
country as not to yield to reason, till such, time as the destruction of more
general error shall have rendered the approach of truth less difficult.

In this edition, Voltaire had prefixed to his f^gitive pieces of poetry an
epistle addressed to his house of the Delices; or, rather, it was an ode to
liberty, and sufficed to answer those who, in the height of their aristocratic
zeal, had accused him of being the enemy of liberty. In these pieces, in which
refined gaiety, delicate feeling, and gallantry successively appear, Voltaire
sought not to be a poet; yet every species of poetic beauty flowed from his pen
when he thought not of them; he did not endeavor to display philosophy, yet
throughout the whole is to be found whatever is suited to the subject, to the
situation, and the characters. In such poetic effusions, as in romances, the
philosophy of the work should appear less extensive than the philosophy of the
author. It is with these writings as with elementary books which cannot be well
written if the author's knowledge does not embrace more than that which they
contain; and therefore, although these works are regarded as frivolous, those
of them which stand in the first rank are produced only by men of superior
minds.

This same year was the epoch of a reconciliation between Voltaire and his
royal disciple; the Austrians, already in the heart of Silesia, were on the
point of completing the conquest of it; a French army was on the frontiers of
Brandenbourgh: the Russians, masters of Prussia, threatened to overrun
Pomerania and the Marches. The Prussian monarchy seemed to be annihilated; and
the prince, who had been the author of its splendor, appeared to have no other
resource than to inter himself beneath its ruins, and to preserve his glory by
perishing in the moment of a victory.

The Margravess of Bareith tenderly loved her brother, the destruction of her
house afflicted her, she saw how greatly France opposed her own interests while
she lavished her blood and treasures to secure the sovereignty of Germany to
the house of Austria; but the French minister had suffered from a verse of the
King of Prussia, nor could the Marchioness de Pompadour pardon his having
feigned an ignorance of her political existence, and care had been taken to
send to her also some verses which had fallen into the hand of the minister of
the Elector of Saxony, through the treachery of a person employed to copy them.
However there was a necessity of negociating with enemies, imbitt^red by
personal insults, and at the very moment in which they thought themselves
secure of an easy victory. The Margravess had recourse to Voltaire, who
addressed himself to the Cardinal de Tencin, knowing that this minister,
forgotten since the death of Fleury who employed while he despised him, had
preserved a private correspondence with the king. Tencin wrote; but the only
answer he receieved was the order of the minister for foreign affairs to reject
the negotiation by a letter, of which they had even sent him a copy. The aged
politician, who would not formerly invite Voltaire to his table in deference to
the court, could not banish his chagrin when he found that he had offended the
court by his complaisance to Voltaire; and it shortened his days. In his youth,
more perilous adventures had only served to animate his talent for intrigue,
because then hope sustained him, and he was among the number of men who find in
power and rank a consolation for shame; but, in this affair, he beheld the last
thread destroyed which connected him with royal power.

Voltaire commenced another negotiation, through the medium of the Marechal de
Richelieu, but it was equally fruitless. A third, some years later, was so far
successful as to obtain the consent of M. de Choiseul to receive a secret envoy
from the King of Prussia. This envoy was discovered by the agents of the
empress queen, and either through the inconstancy of the French minister, or
that M. de Choiseul had acted without consulting Madame de Pompadour, he was
arrested and his papers searched: a violation of the law of nations which is
forgotten in the multitude of inferior crimes which politicians commit without
remorse.

During this period, so dangerous and so glorious to the King of Prussia,
Voltaire appeared at one time to reassume his former influence over the
monarch, at another to preserve nothing but the remembrance of the affair of
Frankfort; and it was then that he wrote those remarkable memoirs We have added
them as an appendix to this life.
in which neither good humor nor justice are lost in the lively recollection
of a just resentment. Voltaire had nobly condemned them to oblivion: chance
preserved them to avenge genius for the outrages of power.

The Margravess of Bareith died in the midst of the war. The King of Prussia
wrote to Voltaire, and requested him to confer an immortality on the name of
his sister, of which her mild and amiable virtues, her soul equally superior to
prejudices, to grandeur, and misfortune, had rendered her worthy. The ode,
which Voltaire consecrated to her memory, breathes a soft sensibility, and a
simple interesting philosophy. This species of composition is one of those in
which he was the least successful, because it requires a degree of perfection
which he could never resolve to aim at in trifling works, and because his
reason could not yield at pleasure to that enthusiasm which is said to be the
characteristic of the ode. The odes of Voltaire are only fugitive pieces, in
which we find the great and philosophic poet, but in which we perceive him
embarassed and constrained by a form which ill agreed with the fire of his
genius. However, it must be owned that his verses addressed to a p^^ncess on
gaming, and, still more, the charming stanzas on old age: Si vous voulez que
j'aime encore, etc If you wish that I still should love you, etc.
. are Anacreontic odes, much superior to those of Horace, who nevertheless has,
at least in the opinion of people of a somewhat modern taste, surpassed his
model.

France, so superior to other nations in tragedy and comedy, has not been
equally happy in lyric poets. The odes of Rousseau scarcely present us with any
thing more than a seductive and harmonious poetry, which is void of idea or
filled with false thoughts. La Motte, more ingenious, was yet a stranger to the
harmony and the graces of style; and we scarcely cite the verses of any other
poet.

Voltaire was still at Berlin when Diderot an^ d'Alembert formed the design of
writing the Encyclopedia, and published the first volume of it. A work whose
object it was to include the truths of all the sciences, and to trace the lines
of communication between them, under taken by two men who joined much wit and a
free daring philosophy to extensive and profound knowledge, appeared to the
penetrating eye of Voltaire the most formidable strok^ that could be aimed at
ignorance and prejudice. The En^yclopedia became the book o^ all men who wished
to instruct themselves, bu^ particularly of those who, without being habitually
employed in cultivating their minds yet are desirous of the power of acquiring
a ready information on every object which excites in them either a transient or
durable interest. It was a mass to which those, who ha^ not time to form ideas
for themselves, might have recourse for the ideas of the most enlightened and
celebrated writers; in which, in short, the errors, that are respected by
prejudice, would either be betrayed by the weakness of their proofs, or shaken
by the near neighborhood of truths which sap their foundations.

Voltaire, having retired to Ferney, gave a small number of literary articles
to the Encyclopedia; he prepared some of those on philosophic subjects, but
with less zeal, because he felt that the editors had less need of his
assistance there, and because that, in general, though his great works in verse
had been formed to constitute his glory, he had scarcely ever written in prose
but with views of universal utility. Mean while, the same reasons which
interested Voltaire for the progress of the Encyclopedia raised that work
innumerable enemies. Composed or applauded by the greatest men of the nation,
it became a species of line which separated the most distinguished literati,
and those who had the honor of being their disciples or their friends, from
that crowd of obscure and jealous writers, who, in the sorrowful incapacity of
giving either new truths or new pleasures to the world, hate and calumniate men
to whom nature has been more bountiful.

A work in which it was necessary to treat freely and boldly of divinity, of
morality, of jurisprudence, of legislation, and of public economy, could not
but terrify all religious or political parties, and all the subordinate powers
which feared to see their pretensions and utility discussed. The insurrection
was general, The journal of Trevoux, the ecclesiastic gazette, the satiric
journals, the Jesuists and Jansenists, the clergy, the parliaments, all,
without ceasing to hate or oppose each other, united against the Encyclopedia,
and it fell. The editors were obliged to finish and to print, in secret this
work, to whose perfection liberty and publicity were so essential; and one of
the noblest undertakings which the human mind has ever conceived, would have
remained unfinished but for the courage of Diderot, and the zeal of a great
number of men of distinguished learning, whom persecution could not deter.

Happily, the honor of having given the Encyclopedia to Europe, compensated
France for the shame of having opposed its progress. It was, with justice,
regarded as the work of the nation, and its persecution as that of a policy and
jealousy equally despicable.

But the contests which the Encyclopedia had occasioned did not cease with the
proscription of that work. Its principal authors and their friends, marked by
the name of philosophers and Encyclopedists, which was designed as an
opprobrium by the enemies of reason, were compelled to unite even by this very
persecution, and Voltaire naturally became their leader by his age, his
celebrity, his zeal, and his genius. He had long before enjoyed some friends
and a great number of admirers; at that period, he had a party. The persecution
rallied, under his standard all the men of merit, whom, perhaps, his
superiority would have kept at a distance from him, as it had banished their
predecessors; and enthusiasm took the place of former injustice.

It was in the year 1760 that this literary war was most violent. Le Franc de
Pompignan, an estimable man of letters but an indifferent poet, of whose works
there remain a fine stanza, and a feeble tragedy in which the combined genius
of Virgil and Metastasio could not yield him sufficient support, was elected
one of the French academy. Clothed with the honors of magistracy, he thought
that his dignity, as well as his works, exempted him from all gratitude; in the
discourse, which he delivered at his admission, he permitted himself to insult
the men whose names did the greatest honor to the society that condescended to
receive him; and, clearly pointing out Voltaire accused him of infidelity and
falsehood. Soon after, Palissot, the venal instrument of the rancour of a
woman, exhibited the philosophers on the stage. The laws, which prohibit the
ridiculing individuals at the theater, were silent. The magistrates betrayed
their duty, and saw, with a malignant joy, men, whose knowledge and influence
on public opinion they dreaded, immolated in the scene, without recollecting
that while they opened the way to satire they exposed themselves to its shafts.
Crebillon disgraced his old age, by approving the piece. The Duke de Choiseul,
then the favorite minister, countenanced this indignity, through a weak
complaisance to the same woman, of whose resentment Palissot was the
instrument. The journals repeated the insults of the theater. Still Voltaire
combated all. The Poor Devil, the Russian at Paris, Vanity, a crowd of
humourous pieces in prose succeeded each other with astonishing rapidity.

Le Franc de Pompignan complained to the king, and to the academy, and beheld,
with an impotent grief, that his own name was obscured by the splendor of that
of Voltaire. Each step he took did but increase the satire, which every tongue
repeated, and the verses in which he is consigned to eternal ridicule. He made
a formal proposal to an august patron, to break a promise which he had made to
this patron himself, by returning to the academy, to vote for a man. in whose
behalf the prince was interested. He received, in return for this sacrifice, a
polite refusal, and had the mortification to hear his patron himself repeat, as
he withdrew, the lines so terrible to him: Et IN ami Pompignan pense etre
quelque chose! What, does friend Pompignan think himself somebody!
: and he retired to bury his humbled pride and deceived ambition in the
country: a fearful, but salutary, example of the power of genius and the
dangers of literary hypocrisy.

Freron, an ex-jesuit as well as Desfontains, had succeeded the latter in the
trade of flattering, by periodical satires, the jealousy of the enemies of
virtue, of reason, and of talents. He distinguished himself in the war against
the philosophers. Voltaire, who had long supported his outrages, at length did
justice, and avenged his friends. In the comedy of l' Ecossaise (the
Scotch-woman) he introduced a depraved journalist, whose character was formed
of venality and rancour. The pit, in the character, recognized Freron, who,
delivered over to public disdain in a piece which could not fail to be
preserved to the theater by interesting scenes, and the original and forcible
character of the worthy blunt Freeport, was condemned to bear, during the
remainder of his life, a ridiculous and disgraced name. Freron, in applauding
the insult offered to the philosophers, had forfeited his right of complaining;
and his protectors chose rather to abandon him than to avow a partiality which
might have involved their own discredit.

Other enemies, less virulent, had been either corrected or punished; and
Voltaire, triumphing in the midst of these victims sacrificed to reason and to
his glory, sent to the theater, at the age of sixty-six, the chef-d'oeuvre of
Tancred. That tragedy was dedicated to the Marchioness de Pompadour. It was the
fruit of the address with which Voltaire could, without wounding the Duke de
Choiseul, support the cause of the philosophers, whose adversaries had obtained
a flight protection from that minister. This dedication taught his enemies that
their calumnies were not more injurious to his security than their criticisms
to his fame: it completed his vengeance.

In this same year he learned that a young niece of Corneille languished in a
condition unworthy of his name; "It is the duty of a soldier" he cried, "to
succor the niece of his general." Mademoiselle Corneille was invited to
Ferney; and she there received an education suitable to the rank that her birth
had marked for her in society. Voltaire even carried his delicacy so far as not
to suffer the establishment of Mademoiselle Corneille to appear as his
benefaction. He wished that she should owe that to the works of her uncle, and
he undertook to publish an edition of them with notes. The creator of the
French Theater commented on by the writer who had conducted that theater to
it is perfection, a man of genius, born at a time when taste was not yet formed,
judged by a rival who joined to genius the gift, almost as rare, of a taste
that was penetrating without severity, delicate without timidity, and
enlightened by a long and happy experience of the art, these are the beauties
presented in that work. Voltaire speaks in it of Corneille's defects with
frankness, of his beauties with enthusiasm. Never has Corneille been examined
with such rigor, never has he been praised with a feeling more profound and
true. Resolved to instruct both the French youth and the youth of other
countries who cultivate the French literature, he did not pardon the vices of
language, the extravagance, nor the offenses committed against delicacy and
good taste, which are found in Corneille; but, at the same time, he taught them
to know the progress which the art owes to that writer, the uncommon elevation
of his mind, the almost inimitable beauty of his poetry in the morsels dictated
by his genius, and those vast, sublime, words which spring suddenly from the
necessity of the occasion, and paint great characters with a single stroke.

The herd of writers reproached him, nevertheless, with a design of degrading
Corneille, from motives of mean jealousy; whereas, throughout the whole of his
commentary, he seizes, he even seems to seek, occasion to proclaim his
admiration of Racine; a more dangerous rival, whom he has surpassed only in
some parts of the tragic art, and whose prodigious excellence he might well
envy in the height of his glory.

Voltaire, tranquil in his retreat, employed in continuing the happy war which
he had declared against prejudice, saw the arrival of an unfortunate family,
the father of which had been conducted to the wheel by fanatic judges; the
instruments of the ferocious passions of a superstitious people. He learnt that
Calas, an infirm old man, had been accused of having hanged his young and
vigorous son, in the midst of his family, and in the presence of a catholic
servant; that he had been urged to commit this crime by the fear of seeing this
son embrace the catholic religion, this son who spent his life in dissipation,
and of whom no one in the midst of the universal effervescence could ever cite
a single word, or point to a single action which announced such a design, while
another son of Calas, already converted to the catholic faith, enjoyed a
pension from the bounty this father, who was far from possessing affluence.
Never, in an event of such a nature, had circumstances so concurred to banish
the suspicion of a crime in the father, or to strengthen the reasons to ascribe
suicide to the son. The young man's conduct, his character, the kind of reading
in which he indulged, all confirmed this idea. Yet a magistrate, whose weak
mind was intoxicated with superstition, and whose hatred to the protestants did
not hesitate to impute crimes to them, caused the whole family to be
imprisoned. The catholic populace became enflamed, and the young man was
declared a martyr. The fraternity of the penitents, which, to the disgrace of
the nation, still exists at Thoulouse, performed a solemn mass for him, during
which they bore his effigies, holding the palm of martyrdom in one hand, and in
the other the pen with which he was to have signed his abjuration.

It was soon reported that the protestant religion commanded fathers to
assassinate their children, when they designed to abjure it; and that, for
greater security, they elected, in their secret assemblies the butcher of the
sect. The inferior tribunal, led by the furious M. David, pronounced the
unfortunate Calas guilty; and the parliament confirmed the sentence by that
very small majority which is unhappily regarded as sufficient by our absurd
jurisprudence. Condemned to the torture and the wheel, this miserable father
died protesting his innocence; and the judges absolved his family, the
necessary accomplices of the guilt, or the innocence of its head.

This family, ruined and stained by prejudice, went to seek, among men of their
own persuasion, a retreat, assistance, but, above all, consolation. They took
up their residence near Geneva. Voltaire, whose compassion was moved, and whose
indignation was roused, informed himself of the horrible particulars; and,
assured of the innocence of the unfortunate Calas, he dared to conceive the
hope of obtaining justice. The zeal of the advocates was excited, and their
courage sustained by his letters. He interested, in the cause of humanity, the
naturally susceptible mind of the Duke de Choiseul. The reputation of Tronchin
had brought to Geneva the Duchess d' Enville, the great granddaughter of the
author of the Maxims. Superior to superstition, both by her native feelings and
by her acquired knowledge, informed how to produce the welfare of mankind by
equal activity and courage, and embellishing by a genuine modesty the energy of
her virtues, her hatred of fanaticism and oppression insured to Calas a
protectress, whose zeal could not be abated by obstacles or delays. The process
was commenced. To the memorials of the advocates, too profuse and declamatory,
Voltaire added more nervous writings, the style of which was seductive, and
calculated in some places to excite pity, and in others to awaken the public
indignation, so prone to sleep among a people, at that time, too much a
stranger to their own interests. Pleading for Calas, he supported the cause of
toleration; which word it was then daring to pronounce, and which is even now
rejected with contempt by men who recognize the right of enslaving thought and
conscience. Letters, abounding with that subtle praise which he could
distribute with such delicacy, animated the zeal of the defenders of the cause,
of its protectors, and of the judges. It was, while he promised immortality,
that he demanded justice.

The sentence of Thoulouse was annulled. The Duke de Choiseul had the wisdom
and the courage to order a tribunal of Masters of Requests to revise this
cause, in defending which the parliaments were all interested, whose prejudices
and spirit of mutual defense left little hope of an equitable decision. In
fine, Calas was declared innocent; dishonor was removed from his memory; and a
generous minister caused the public treasury to repair the wrongs that the
injustice of the judges had done to the fortune of this family, which was as
respectable as it was unhappy. But he did not proceed so far as to compel the
parliament of Languedoc to acknowledge the arret which overturned an act of its
injustice. That tribunal preferred the miserable vanity of persevering in its
error, to the honor of lamenting, and repairing, the injury.

Mean while, the applauses of France and of Europe were heard at Thoulouse, and
the unhappy M. David, sinking beneath the weight of remorse and of shame, soon
lost his reason and his life. This affair, so great in itself, so important in
its consequences, since it turned the attention not only of France but of other
nations to the crimes of intolerance and the necessity of preventing them, this
affair occupied the soul of Voltaire, during more than three years. -- "In all
this time," said he, "a smile has not escaped me, for which I have not
reproached myself, as for a crime." His name, which had long been dear to the
enlightened friends of humanity as that of its most zealous, most indefatigable
defender, this name was then blessed by that multitude of citizens who, devoted
to persecution during eighty years, at length heard a voice raised in their
defense. Having returned to Paris in 1778, one day that the people surrounded
him on the Pont Royal, a poor woman was asked who that man was who thus drew
the crowd after him -- "Know you not," said she, "that he is the savior of
Calas?" He was informed of this answer, and, surrounded as he was by the marks
of admiration which were lavished on him, it was this by which he was most
sensibly affected.

Shortly after the unfortunate death of Calas, a young woman of the same
province, who, according to a barbarous custom, had been taken from her parents
and shut up in a convent with a design of aiding saying grace by human means,
wearied of the ill treatment that she endured, escaped, and her body was
discovered in a well. The priest who had solicited the Lettre de Cachet, the
sisterhood who had used with barbarity the power which it gave them over this
unfortunate young woman, doubtless merited punishment; but it was on the family
of this victim that fanaticism wished punishment to fall. The injurious
reproach which had conducted Calas to the wheel was revived with a new fury.
Sirven, fortunately, had time to fly; and, condemned to death for contumacy, he
sought an assylum with the protector of Calas. But his wife, who accompanied
him, fell a prey to her grief and to the fatigue of a journey, undertaken on
foot, over tracts of snow.

Judicial forms required Sirven to present himself before the same parliament
who had shed the blood of Calas. Voltaire endeavored to obtain other judges.
The Duke de Choiseul at that time thought it necessary to respect the opinion
of the parliaments who, after the decay of his influence over the Marchioness
de Pompadour, and again after her death, were become useful to him, at times to
free him from an enemy, and at others to afford the means of rendering himself
necessary by the art with which he could appease their commotions, which he
himself frequently excited.

Sirven, then, was compelled to yield to necessity, and to appear before the
tribunal of Thoulouse; but Voltaire knew how to provide for his security, and
to prepare for his success. He had disciples in the parliament; some able
advocates of Thoulouse wished to partake of the glory which those of Paris had
acquired by defending Calas; the friends of toleration were become powerful
even in this very city: within a few years Voltaire's works had changed the
minds of men; they had only pitied Calas with a silent horror, Sirven found
declared protectors, for which he was indebted to the eloquence of Voltaire, to
the talent of opportunely infusing truth, mingled with approbation, into the
feelings of those whom he designed to work his purposes. The friends of truth
triumphed over the abettors of the penitents, and Sirven was saved.

The Jesuits had usurped the possessions of a well descended family, who, by
their poverty, were prevented from recovering their rights. Voltaire gave them
the means of accomplishing that; and oppressors of every kind, who, long had
feared his writings, now learnt to dread his activity, his generosity, and his
courage.

This last event almost immediately preceded the destruction of the Jesuits.
Voltaire, educated among them, had maintained a correspondence with his former
masters. While they were living they restrained the fury of the fraternity from
any open attack, and Voltaire was respectful to the Jesuits, both in deference
to the connexions of his youth, and also to preserve allies in the party which
at that time governed the devotees, But, after the death of these friends,
wearied by the clamours of the Journal de Trevoux, which, by unceasing
accusations of impiety seemed to call down persecutions on his head, he no
longer preserved the same respect for the Jesuits, nor did his zeal for the
defense of the oppressed extend to them, when they, in their turn, became
oppressed.

He exulted in the destruction of an order, the friend of letters but the enemy
of reason, which was desirous of destroying all talents or of drawing them into
its bosom, to corrupt them, by employing them to serve its designs, and to hold
the human race in infancy, in order to govern them. Yet he pitied individuals
treated with barbarity by the hatred of the Jansenists; and he gave an assylum,
in his own house, to a Jesuit, to point out to the devotees that true humanity
knows only misfortune and forgets opinions. Father Adam, to whom a sort of
celebrity was given by his abode at Ferney, was not absolutely useless to his
host. He played with him at chess, and he played the game with sufficient
address sometimes to conceal his superiority. He also spared Voltaire labor in
his learned researches; he even served him as an almoner, for Voltaire wished
to oppose his fidelity in fulfilling the exterior duties of the Romish religion
to the accusation, which were brought against him, of impiety.

At this period a great revolution was engendering in the human mind. Since the
revival of philosophy, religion, exclusively established throughout Europe, had
been attacked only in England. Leibnitz, Fontenelle, and other less celebrated
philosophers, accused of free thinking, had respected religion in their
writings. Bail, himself, by a precaution that was necessary to his safety,
while he indulged himself in all objections, assumed the air of wishing to
prove that revelation alone could resolve them, and of having formed the
project of exalting faith by humiliating reason. In England, these attacks had
little success or effect. The most powerful party in that nation judged it
useful to themselves to leave the people in darkness, probably because the
habit of adoring the mysteries of the Bible strengthened their faith in those
of the constitution; and they honored the established religion as a species of
social advantage. Besides, in a country where the House of Commons alone led to
fortune, and where the members of that house were tumultuously elected by the
people, an apparent respect for their opinions must necessarily be erected into
a virtue by all the ambitious.

In France, there had appeared some bold writers, but the blows which they
aimed were still indirect. Even the work of Helvetius de l' Esprit (on the
understanding) was only an attack on religious principles in general; it
questioned the foundations of all religions, and left the reader to draw
consequences and make applications. Emilius appeared; the Savoyard vicar's
Profession of Faith contained nothing relative to the utility, toward morals,
of the belief of a God, and the inutility of revelation, which is not to be
found in the poem of Natural Law; but the attack was open and the persons
attacked were brought upon the stage under their proper name and character, and
not under that of the priests of India or of Thibet. This boldness astonished
Voltaire and excited his emulation. The success of Emilius encouraged him, nor
was he terrified by the fear of persecution. Rousseau had not been persecuted
at Paris had he not put his name to the work, nor at Geneva had he not
maintained in another part of Emilius that the people possessed not the power
of renouncing the right of reforming a depraved government. This doctrine
authorized the citizens of that republic to overthrow the aristocracy which its
magistrates had established, and which secured an hereditary authority to
certain rich families.

Voltaire believed that he could securely shun persecution by concealing his
name; and, by a deference to government while he directed all his force against
religion, could interest even the civil power to weaken its empire. A
multiplicity of works, in which he successively employed argument and humor,
were dispersed throughout Europe, under the various forms which could be
invented by the necessity of veiling truth, or of rendering it engaging. His
zeal against religion, which he viewed as the cause of the fanatacism that had
desolated Europe from the moment of its birth, the cause of the superstition
that had degraded it, and as the source of the evils, which the enemies of men
still continued to inflict on them, seemed to increase his activity and his
powers. "I am wearied," said he one day, "of hearing it repeated that twelve
men were sufficient to establish Christianity, and I wish to prove there needs
but one to destroy it."

An examination of works, which Christians regarded as proceeding from
inspiration, the analyzation of dogmas, which have been successively introduced
since the origin of that religion, the history of the ridiculous or bloody
quarrels which have been excited by those, the miracles, prophecies, tales
scattered through legends and ecclesiastical histories, the religious wars, the
massacres ordained in the name of God, the butchers and scaffolds which, at the
voice of priests covered Europe, the blood of kings flowing from the steel of
assassins, and the fanaticism which unpeopled America, all these were
incessantly repeated in his works under a thousand varied forms. He excited
indignation, he wrung tears from the heart, he exhausted the springs of
ridicule. Men trembled at an attrocious action, they laughed at an absurdity.
Voltaire did not fear frequently to place the same objects before his readers,
to urge the same reasonings to them. "They tell me that I repeat the same
things," he said in one of his writings, "true: I shall repeat them till I see
men reformed."

These works, rigorously prohibited in France, in Italy, at Vienna, in
Portugal, and in Spain, could not be speedily circulated; all of them could not
reach every reader; but there was not an obscure corner in the provinces, there
was not any nation in foreign countries, suffering under the yoke of
intolerance, which did not feel the influence of some of these writings.

Men of liberal minds, who existed before only in some cities where science was
cultivated, or among the learned and the great, were, by his voice, multiplied
in all classes of society as well as in all countries. Soon perceiving their
number and their strength they ventured to show themselves, and Europe was
astonished to find itself a country of Deists.

The zeal of Voltaire created him enemies in all those who had obtained, and
all who expected to obtain, affluence or even subsistence from religion. Yet
that party no longer possessed such men as Bossuet, Arnaud, and Nicole; those
who replaced them by their talents and their acquaintance with philosophy and
letters had ranged themselves with the contrary party; and the members of the
clergy who approached nearest to them in ability, yielding to the desire of not
debasing themselves in the opinion of enlightened men, stood aloof, or
contented themselves with maintaining the politcal use of a belief which they
would have blushed to have partaken with the people, and substituted for the
credulous superstition of their predecessors a species of religious
Machiavelism.

Defamatory writings and attacks sprung up profusely; but Voltaire, by
answering alone, preserved the name of these works, which were read by none but
those to whom they were useless, and who were unwilling or unable to understand
either the objections or the answers.

To the clamours of fanaticism, Voltaire opposed the protection of monarchs.
The Empress of Russia, the Kings of Poland, Denmark, Sweden, and Prussia,
interested themselves in his labors, perused his works, sought to deserve his
approbation, and sometimes seconded his zeal for the welfare of mankind. In
every country the powerful, and such ministers as sought reputation and were
intent on spreading their fame through Europe, were ambitious to enjoy the
suffrage of the philosopher of Ferney, confided to him their hopes and fears
for the progress of reason, and their projects for the increase of knowledge
and the ruin of fanaticism. He had formed a league which included all the great
men of Europe, of which he was the soul, and whose cry was, "Reason and
toleration." Did any striking injustice arise in a nation, did Voltaire hear of
any act of bigotry, any insult offered to human nature, his pen exposed the
guilty to Europe: and who knows how often the fear of this sure and terrible
vengeance has withheld the oppressor's arm?

But it was in France, more especially, that he exercised this dominion of
reason. Since the affair of Calas, every victim, unjustly sacrificed or pursued
by the sword of the law, found in him a protector, or an avenger.

The execution of the Count de Lally excited his indignation. The lawyers of
Paris, sitting in judgment on the conduct of a general in India, a sentence of
death passed without proof of a single determinate crime, nay mere suspicion
produced as the gra^est accusation, a judgment pronounced on the testimony of
declared enemies, on the memorial of a Jesuit who had composed two of them
contradictory to each other, uncertain whether he should accuse the general or
his enemies, not knowing which he hated most, or which it would be most
convenient to ruin; such proceedings and such a sentence could not but rouse
the feelings of every friend of justice, although the calumnies heaped on the
head of the unfortunate general, and the horrid barbarity of dragging him to
death with a gag in his mouth, should not have shaken every fiber in every
heart which the habit of disposing of the lives of men had not turned to stone.

Yet, Voltaire during a long time spoke singly against this enormity. The vast
number of persons employed by the East India company who were interested in
throwing the fatal consequences of their conduct on a man who no longer
existed, the powerful tribunal which had condemned the general, all those whom
that body included in its suite whose voice was sold to it, the other corpse,
who, united with that by the same name, by common functions and like interests,
regarded its cause as their own, in fine, the administration, ashamed of the
weakness or the cruel policy which sacrificed the Count de Lally to the hope of
concealing in his tomb the faults which had lost India, all seemed to oppose a
tardy justice. But Voltaire, by reiterated attacks on the same object,
triumphed over prejudice and the interests of such as are attentive to preserve
and extend its empire. Just minds needed only to be informed of the
circumstances; others, he hurried along with him; and when the son of the Count
de Lally, since so celebrated by his eloquence and courage, had attained an age
at which he could demand justice, the minds of men were prepared to applaud the
attempt and to solicit its execution. Voltaire was dying, when, twelve years
afterward, this unjust sentence was reversed; he heard the intelligence; his
powers sprang back to life, and he wrote -- "I die content; I see the king
loves justice." The last words which were traced by that hand which had so long
maintained the cause of humanity and justice.

In the same year, 1766, another arret astonished Europe; which, while it read
the works of our philosophers, concluded that knowledge was disseminated
through France, or at least through those classes of society whose particular
duty it was to inform themselves; and thought that, after a period of near
fifteen years, the brethren of Montesquieu might have had time to comprehend
his principles.

The Crucifix of wood, placed on the Bridge of Abbeville, was insulted, during
the night. The indignation of the people was heightened and kept in action by
the ridiculous ceremony of doing penance. The bishop of Amiens, governed in his
old age by fanatics, and no longer capable of foreseeing the consequences of
this religions farce, added to its solemnity by his presence. Mean time, the
malice of a townsman of Abbeville directed the suspicions of the people to the
Chevalier de la Bar, a young officer whose relations were of the long robe
and members of the chief magistracy, and who at that time lived with his
kinswoman the Abbess de Villancourt, near the gates of Abbeville. A process was
commenced, and the judges of Abbeville condemned to tortures, whose horror
would dismay the imagination of a canibal, the Chevalier de la Bar and d'
Etallonde his friend, who had taken the precaution to fly. The Chevalier de la
Bar had awaited the issue of the trial; he had more to lose than the other by
quitting France; and relied on the protection of his relations who filled the
first employments in the parliaments and in the council. His hopes were
deceived; the family feared to attract the police of the public toward his
prosecution, instead of endeavoring to ^e^k support from the general opinion;
and, at the age of nearly seventeen, the Chevalier de la Bar was condemned,
by a majority of two votes, to be beheaded, after having his tongue cut out,
and having undergone the torture.

This horrible sentence was executed and yet the accusations were as ridiculous
as the punishment was attrocious. He was only vehemently suspected to have
taken a part in the adventure of the crucifix; but he was declared to be
convicted of having sung, ^n parties of conviviality, some of those songs which
are half obscene, half religious, and which notwithstanding their grossness
amuse the imagination in the first years of youth, by the contra^^ which they
form, with the scrupulous respect which education inspires toward the same
objects: of having recited an ode whose author was perfectly known and at that
time enjoyed a pension from the king's privy purse: of having made some
genuslexions to certain libertine works which were written to the taste of a
time in which men, led astray by religious austerity, could not distinguish
between pleasure and debauchery; and in sine, he was reproached with having
spoken in a language worthy of those songs and those books.

These accusations were all supported by the testimony of low people who had
served these young men in their parties of pleasure, and by the Tourrieres Old
women* who are entrusted to be door-keepers.
of convents, who easily find cause of offense.

This sentence revolted the minds of all men; no law existed which ordained
sentence of death either for the breaking of imag^s or for that species of
blasphemy of which the Chevalier de la Bar had been accused; thus the judges
had exceeded even the penalties decreed by laws, which no enlightened man can
still see sullying our criminal code without horror. There was no father of a
family who had not reason to tremble, since there are few young men who escape
such like indiscretions; and the judges had condemned the unfortunate victim to
a cruel death for language, in which the greatest part of them had indulged, in
their youth, in which, perhaps, they still indulged, and whose children were as
culpable as he whom they had condemned.

While Voltaire's indignation was reused, his apprehensions were strongly
excited. The Philosophical Dictionary had been artfully placed among the number
of books before which it was said the Chevalier de la Bar had prostrated
himself. His enemies wished it to be understood that the reading of Voltaire's
works had been the cause of these indiscretions, which had been construed into
acts of impiety. Still the danger did not prevent Voltaire from undertaking the
defense of these victims of fanaticism. D'Ettallonde, then a refugee at Wezel,
obtained, through his recommendation, a commission in a Prussian regiment. The
circumstances of the affair of Abbeville were unfolded to Europe in several
publications; and the judges trembled, on their very seats, at the terrible
judgment which they had passed, and which dragged them from their obscurity to
devote them to a disgraceful immortality.

The reporting judge of Count de Lally's trial, accused of having contributed
to the death of the Chevalier de la Bar, compelled to acknowledge the
influence of that power which is independent of rank or situation, and which
nature has given to genius for the consolation and defense of the human race,
wrote a letter in which, actuated alternately by shame and pride, he attempted
to excuse himself and suffer menaces to escape him. Voltaire replied by the
following historical trait: -- "I forbid you," said an Emperor of China to the
chief mandarin of the historians, "to mention me, henceforward, in your works."
The mandarin, on this, took up his pen. "What do you now?" said the Emperor: "I
write the order which your majesty has just given me."

During twelve years, that Voltaire survived this act of inju^tice, he never
lost sight of the hope of obtaining reparation for it, but he had not the
consolation of success. The fear of offending the parliament of Paris still
bore down the love of justice; and, at a time when the leaders of
administration had a contrary interest, they were restrained by the fear of
displeasing the clergy. Governments do not sufficiently know how much real
importance they acquire, how with the people whom they govern and with foreign
nations, by such illustrious acts of individual justice, and how much more sure
the support of public opinion is than the deference paid them by certain bodies
of men, rarely capable of gratitude, and part of whose authority over the
vulgar mind it would be more politic to take away by these great examples than
to augment, by proving, in the respect which they themselves pay to them, the
fears which such bodies inspire.

Voltaire did not, meantime, neglect the means of avoiding the storm; he
diminished his domestic establishment; and secured some property which he could
dispose of at pleasure, with which he might procure a new place of refuge. Such
had ever been his secret design, in all the arrangements which he had made of
his fortune, and it would have required a league among the powers of Europe, to
have deprived him of independence, and to have reduced him to want. Princes and
nobles were among his debtors, who do not indeed pay with much punctuality, but
he had calculated the degrees of human corruption, and he knew that these same
men, though they act with little delicacy in such affairs, would find means to
reimburse him during the moment of persecution, when their negligence would
otherwise render them the objects of the horror and disdain of Europe,
indignant to behold such a man oppressed.

This persecution appeared for a time ready to burst forth. Ferney is situated
in the dioces of Geneva, the titular bishop of which resides in the small town
of Annecy. Francois de Salles, who has been raised to the rank of Saints,
having formerly been the bishop, in order that the heretics might not find
cause of scandal in their own metropolis, it had been thought most proper to
confide this see to none but a man who would not incur the reproach of pride,
luxury, and effeminacy, of which the catholic prelates are accused by the
protestants.

But it had long been difficult to discover saints, who, possessing
understanding or birth, would condescend to accept so small a diocese. He who
filled the sea of Annecy, in 1767, was a man of low extraction, educated in a
seminary at Paris, where he was no otherwise distinguished than by austere
manners, trifling devotion, and ignorant fanaticism. He wrote to the Count de
St. Florentine, to induce him to banish Voltaire out of his diocese, and
consequently out of the kingdom, though the poet had then built a church at his
own expense, and spread abundance through a country which the persecutions
against the protestants had laid waste. But the bishop pretended that the Lord
of Ferney had given a moral exhortation against theft in the church after mass,
and that the workmen who were employed by him in erecting this church had not
removed an old cross with sufficient veneration; these indeed were grave
inducements to drive from his country an old man who was the glory of that
country, and to rob him of an asylum to which the kingdoms of Europe hastened
to bear him the tribute of admiration. The mister, had it been only from
motives of policy, could not be tempted to gratify the bishop; he therefore
advised Voltaire to guard against these accusations, which the union of the
bishop of Annecy with the French prelates who possessed more influence might
render dangerous.

It was at this time that he conceived the idea of solemnly receiving the
sacrament, which was followed by a public declaration of his respect for the
church, and his disdain of his detractors; a fruitless step, which spoke
weakness rather than policy, and which the pleasure of compelling his pastor to
administer the communion through fear of the secular judges, and of legally
insulting the bishop of Annecy, could not excuse in the eyes of the free and
intrepid man who appreciates coolly the rights of truth, and perceives that
which prudence requires when laws contrary to natural justice render truth
dangerous and prudence necessary.

The priest suffered the small advantage to escape which they might have drawn
from this singular scene, by falsifying the declaration which Voltaire had made.

He had no longer a retreat near Geneva. He had connected himself, on his
arrival there, with the families whose education, opinions, inclinations, and
fortune, were most congenial to his own; and these families had at that time
formed the design of establishing a species of aristocracy. In a city which
pos^^ssed no territory, where the strength of the citizens could be united with
as much facility and promptitude as that of the government, such a project
would have been absurd had not the rich citizens entertained the hope of
engaging a foreign influence in their favor.

The cabinets of Versailles and Turin were easily seduced. The senate of Berne,
whose interest it was to banish the picture of republican equality from the
eyes of their subjects, made it their constant policy to protect every
enterprizing aristocracy around them: and, throughout the whole of Switzerland,
such magistrates as became tyrants were sure of finding, at Bern, an ardent and
faithful protector. Thus the wretched pride of obtaining an odious authority in
a small city, and of being hated without being respected, deprived the citizens
of Geneva of their liberty, and the republic of its independence. The chiefs of
the popular party employed the weapons of fanaticism, for they had read enough
to know the influence which religion had formerly obtained in political
dissensions, but they did not sufficiently understand the spirit of their own
age to feel how much reason, aided by ridicule, had weakened this formerly so
dangerous weapon.

It was proposed, therefore, to put in force the laws which prohibited
catholics from possessing property in the territory of Geneva. The magistrates
were censured for their connections with Voltaire, who had dared to raise his
voice against the barbarous assassination of Servet, which had been commanded
by Calvin in the name of God to the cowardly and superstitious senators of
Geneva. Voltaire was obliged to renounce his house of the Delices.

Soon after, Rousseau advanced, in his Emilius, principles which developed to
the citizens of Geneva all the extent of their rights, and which founded these
rights on simple truths that all men could feel and all must adopt. The
aristocracy wished to punish him for the publication, but it was necessary they
should have a pretext; they took that of religion, and united themselves with
the priests, who, in every country, indifferent to the form of its constitution
and the liberty of man, promise the assistance of Heaven to the party which
most favors intolerance, and who become, as their interest directs, sometimes
the support of the tyranny of a bigoted prince or of a superstitious senate,
sometimes the defenders of the liberty of a fanatic people.

Alternately exposed to the attacks of the two parties, Voltaire observed a
neutrality, but he remained faithful to his detestation of oppressors. He
favored the cause of the citizens against the magistrates, and that of the
common people who possessed no privileges against the citizens; for these
people, condemned ^o be ever excluded from the rights of the citizens, found
themselves more oppressed since the latter, better informed of the privileges
which are granted by the present system of polity, but less enlightened
respecting the natural rights of man, considering themselves as sovereigns, of
whom the people were no more than subjects, and whom they thought they had
authority to reduce to subjection, by the same arbitrary power, for assuming
which they deemed their magistrates so culpable.

Voltaire, therefore, wrote a poem, every part of which was impregnated with
satire, and on which was no reproach can be laid, except that of containing
some verses against Rousseau, which were dictated by a degree of anger, whose
excess and expressions could not be excused by the justice of the motives which
inspired them. But when, in a tumult, the citizens had slain some of the
people, he was eager to receive at Ferney the families which these troubles
compelled to abandon Geneva; and, in the very instant in which the bankruptcy
of the Abbe Terrai, which had not even the excuse of necessity, but was
occasioned only by shameful expenses, had deprived him of part of his fortune,
he was seen to give assistance to those who had no property left; and to build
houses which he sold to others at a low price to be paid him in annuities;
while he solicited the good offices of the government in their behalf, and
employed his influence with sovereigns, ministers, and the leading men of all
nations, to procure a sale for the clocks and watches of this infant
manufactory, which soon became famous throughout Europe.

In the mean time, the government was employed in opening an asylum for the
Genevese at Versoy, on the borders of the lake. There it was designed to have
established a city, in which industry and commerce would have been free, and in
which a protestant temple would have risen by the side of a catholic church.
Voltaire had caused this plan to be adopted, but the minister did not possess
sufficient credit to obtain a law for the protection of religious liberty, a
secret toleration, limited to the time of his own administration, was all that
he could offer, and with that Versoy could not exist.

The year 1771 was one of the most embarrassing periods of Voltaire's life. The
chancellor Maupeou and the Duke d'Aiguillon saw themselves obliged to attack
the parliaments, to whom they both were objects of hatred; that they might not
become their victims. The one could not obtain a part in the administration,
nor the other preserve himself in the office which he held there, without
procuring the disgrace of the Duke de Choiseul. Acting in concert with Madame
du Barry, whom that minister had been imprudent enough to make his
irreconcilable enemy, they persuaded the king that his contemned authority
could never be restored to its vigor, that the state, incessantly agitated
since the peace by parliamentary contentions, could not regain its tranquillity,
if he did not by an act of vigor place limits to the pretensions of the
judicial bodies, which they would not venture to infringe, and if a term was
not fixed beyond which they would not dare longer to oppose resistance to the
royal will.

The Duke de Choiseul could not adopt this project without offending the public
opinion, which had a long time been inimicable to him, but which was then his
sole support; while his forced submission to the will of the people had removed
him still further from the confidence of the monarch, whose affections were
alienated from him. It was probable, then, that his connexions with the
parliaments would complete his disgrace, and that it would be easy to persuade
the monarch either that his remaining in power would be the greatest obstacle
to the success of the new measures of the government, or that he would
endeavor to involve the nation in war, to preserve his situation in despite
of the kings pleasure.

The attack made on the parliaments was directed with equal address. Whatever
could alarm the nation was carefully avoided. The king appeared only to
vindicate the plenitude of the legislative power, a power which would be
transferred not to the nation but to the parliaments, by admitting the doctrine
that the parliaments had the right of registering edicts according to their
pleasure. It was easily perceived that this power, united to the most extensive
judicial authority, which was divided among the twelve perpetual tribunals,
would tend to establish a tyranic aristocracy in France, more dangerous, than
monarchy, to the security, the liberty, and the property of the citizens. The
enemies of those tribunals might therefore rely on the suffrages of enlightened
minds, and on that of men of letters, whom the parliament of Paris had wounded
by its insolence and persecution, by its attachment to prejudices, and by its
pertinacity in rejecting every improvement calculated for the happiness of men.

But is less difficult to form a political intrigue w^^h address, than to
execute with wisdom a plan of reform. The more alarming to liberty are the
principles which the governing power would establish, the more necessary is it
to display gentleness and indulgence to individuals. Yet, at that time, rigor
was, in the minutest circumstances, carried to a puerile refinement. A monarch
appears cruel, who, in the punishments which he inflicts, does not scrupulously
respect, consistently with that punishment, whatever can be injurious to the
health, the convenience, or even the natural feelings of those whom he
punishes, or those who are connected with them; but, on this occasion, all
these considerations were disregarded. They refused permission to a son to
embrace his dying father; they confined a man in an unhealthful place, where
his family could not approach him without being exposed to partake of his
dangers, and a sick person could scarcely obtain leave to seek in the capital
the assistance which that alone could give him. When an absolute government
betrays fear, it proclaims either distrust of its strength, the indecision of
the monarch, or the instability of the administration, and this gives
encouragement to resistance; but this fear was displayed in making the recall of
some exiles depend on a consent useless even in the opinion of those who
demanded that consent.

A salutary operation does not change its nature though it be executed with
wanton severity; but then the feeling and enlightened man who approves, does
not defend it, should he think his duty calls on him to give the measure his
support, without regret; his disgusted mind no longer acts with either zeal or
affection for a cause which is dishonored by its leaders.

Those whose minds are uninformed pass from a hatred of the minister to
aversion to measures which he maintains by oppression; and the public voice
condemns that which, left to itself, it had perhaps approved.

The great number of magistrates who were by this revolution deprived of their
offices, the merit and virtues of some of them, the crowd of subordinate
ministers of justice who were connected with their fate by honor and by
interest, that natural propensity which leads men to join the cause of those
who suffer, the hatred of power not less natural, all necessarily co-operated
to render the measures of the minister odious, and to place obstacles in his
way when, compelled to replace the tribunals which he wished to destroy, force
became useless and confidence necessary.

However, the barbarity of the criminal law, the disgusting defects of the
civil jurisprudence, presented to the authors of the revolution sure means to
regain the public opinion, and to give those who should consent to replace the
former parliaments an excuse which honor and patriotism might have been proud
to avow. Ministers disdained these means. The parliament had rendered itself
obnoxious to all enlightened men by the obstacles which it opposed to the
liberty of the press, and by its fanaticism, of which the recent execution of
the Chevalier de la Bar had give an example to all Europe. Yet, irritated by
libels published against himself, alarmed by works in which his principles had
been attacked, and, in short, desirous of gaining a support in the clergy, the
chancellor thought proper to lay new restrictions on the press. The stain was
not removed from the memory of the Chevalier de la Bar, nor could Voltaire
obtain a revision of the sentence which would have covered those with disgrace
whom it was so particularly the interest of the chancellor to deprive of the
public favor. The criminal code existed in all its horror, although ^^ght days
would have sufficed to have formed a ^aw which would have suppressed the
punishment of death so wantonly inflicted, would have abolished every species
of torture, and would have prohibited excess in corporal punishment; which
would have granted the accused the assistance of a counsel, would have
permitted him to make a certain number of challenges without alleging his
motives, would have given him the right to present evidence and to display
facts in his favor, and would have made a very considerable majority of the
judges necessary to his condemnation; which, in fine, would have insured him
the power of knowing and examining all the proceedings. The nation, all Europe
would have applauded the reform; the displaced magistrates would alone have
been the enemies of these salutary innovations; and their fall the epoch, in
which the sovereign had recovered the liberty of yielding to his just and
humane purposes.

In truth the sale of judicial offices was suppressed; yet, the judges being
still named by the court, nothing was seen in this change but the facility of
placing on the seat of justice men without fortune and more easy to be seduced.

The bounds of the most extensive jurisdictions were circumscribed, but the new
courts were not erected into parliaments; they were not permitted to register
atrets, and this difference between those and the former tribunals was the sure
presage of their destruction. In fine, the fees of the judges were abolished
and replaced by stated salaries; and this regulation, among all that were
adopted, was the only one which reason could entirely approve.

The authors of this revolution at length beheld its accomplishment,
notwithstanding an almost universal discontent. The Duke de Choiseul, accused
of secretly fomenting the resistance, unsteady as it was, of the parliament of
Paris, and of having retarded the conclusion of peace between England and
Spain, was exiled to his estates. The parliament, whose gratitude obliged them
to assume firmness, was soon dispersed. The Duke d'Aiguillon became minister,
and the parliament was succeeded by a new tribunal. In some of the provinces
the parliaments experienced the fate of that of Paris, while others consented
to remain and sacrifice several of their members. All was silent before
authority; and nothing was wanting to the success of the ministers but the
approbation of the public whom they scorned, and who, some years after, wrought
their disgrace.

Voltaire despised the parliament of Paris, and loved the Duke de Choiseul; he
beheld in one an ancient persecutor who had not been disarmed but further
incensed by his fame, in the other a friend and a protector. He was constant in
his gratitude and immovable in his principles. All his letters expressed his
regard for the Duke de Choiseul with freedom and energy, and he was not
ignorant that his letters, in consequence of the infamous custom of violating
public faith, were read by the enemies of the exiled minister. A pleasant tale,
entitled Barmecide The letter of Benaldaki to Caramusti. Volume of Letters.
, which he wrote, is the only durable monument of the concern which this
disgrace had excited. The injustice with which the friends and partisans of the
Duke de Choiseul accused Voltaire of ingratitude was, therefore, one of the
severest afflictions which he had ever endured; and it was the more poignant as
the Duke himself partook of the injustice. Ineffectually did Voltaire endeavor
to undeceive him, ineffectually did he appeal to the proofs he had given of his
attachment and his sorrow: Je l'ai dit a la terre, au ciel, a Gusman meme To
earth, to heaven, to Gusman's self the tale I told.
: he wrote in his grief, but he was not understood.

The great and people in office have interests, but rarely opinions. To oppose
those who agree with their present designs is, in their eyes, to declare
themselves. That attachment of truth which is one of the strongest passions of
exalted and independent minds, appears romantic to them. They suppose that a
philosopher has, like themselves, no opinions but those of the moment, and
consequently that he must change his professions according to the temporary
interests of their friends or patrons. They consider him as a man made to
defend the cause which they have embraced and not to support his own
principles; to serve under them and not to examine the justice of the war. Thus
the Duke de Choiseul appeared to imagine that Voltaire, in deference to him,
ought either to have betrayed or concealed his opinions on questions of public
right. An important anecdote, which proves how easily the pride of power and
birth destroys the recollection of the natural independence of the human soul,
and which displays the inequality of men's minds, which is much more real than
that of their rank or situation.

Voltaire beheld, with pleasure, the practice of selling judicial offices
abolished, the fees of the judges suppressed, and the immense jurisdiction of
the parliament of Paris contracted within narrower limits: abuses which he had
combated, for more than forty years, with the weapons of reason and ridicule.
He preferred a single master to many; a sovereign whose prejudices are alone to
be feared to a troop of despots whose prejudices are greater but whose partial
interests and little passions are more fatal to mankind, and who, more
formidable to the unprotected, are especially so to men whose knowledge alarms
them and whose glory irritates them. He was wont to say: "I have a stubborn
back; I can make a single how well enough, but a hundred bows in succession are
too fatiguing."

He therefore applauded the regulations which had been adopted, and, among men
of congenial minds, he expressed his approbation. Doubtless, he perceived with
what contracted views this happy opportunity of reforming the legislation, of
unshackling the mind and restoring to man the rights of men, of at once
proscribing intolerance and barbarity, and, in fine, of dating from this
moment, the epoch of a revolution propitious to the nation, glorious to the
prince and his ministers, had been neglected and lost. But Voltaire had also
too much penetration not to feel that though the laws were the same the
magistrates were changed; that if even these should inherit the spirit of their
predecessors neither their credit not their insolence could descend to them,
that the innovation, by depriving them of the blind respect which the vulgar
entertained for all that bears the rust of antiquity, had deprived them of much
of their power, that the public voice could alone restore their influence, and
to obtain its suffrage there remained no other means than that of listening to
reason and of uniting themselves to the enemies of prejudice, and to the
friends of the human race.

The approbation which Voltaire gave to the measures of the Chancellor Maupeou,
was at least serviceable to the oppressed. Though he could not procure justice
to be done to the memory of the unfortunate la Bar, though he could not
restore the young d'Etallonde to his country, though the ministers
pusillanimous respect for the clergy concealed from him the true interest of
his glory, still Voltaire had the happiness to save the wife of Mountbailli.
This unhappy man, accused of parricide, had perished on the wheel; his wife was
also condemned to death; but she was supposed to be pregnant, and was fortunate
enough to obtain a respite.

The tribunals had just rejected a provident law which, placing an interval
between judgment and execution in which the truth might be discovered and
innocence displayed, would have prevented almost all their unjust decisions;
and they had refused it with an intemperance which sufficed to prove its
necessity. It is but justice to observe that all the magistrates did not
entertain this high idea of their rights, and this love of power. One of them
has merited the esteem and veneration of every citizen, by speaking, in the
parliament of Paris, these remarkable words: "The citizens alone have right;
the magistrates, as magistrates, have only duties."
Women alone, by declaring themselves pregnant, could escape the danger of
these precipitate executions. In the space of less than twenty years the lives
of three innocent persons, who had attracted the public curiosity by some
particular circumstances, had been saved by this privilege; another proof of
the utility of that law which was opposed only by a barbarous pride, and which
ought to exist till experience shall have proved that the new legislation
(which doubtless will soon replace the old code) no longer exposes innocence to
any danger.

The trial of the wife of Mountbailli was revised; the council of Artois, by
which she had been condemned, declared her innocence; and, more noble or less
presumptuous than the parliament of Thoulouse, they lamented the irreparable
misfortune of having caused an innocent person to perish, and they imposed on
themselves the duty of providing for the remaining days of the unfortunate
woman whose happiness they had destroyed.

Had Voltaire expressed his zeal against such acts of injustice only as were
connected with public events or the cause of toleration, he might have been
accused of vanity; but this zeal was equally ardent in that obscure cause, to
which his name alone has given celebrity.

We have since seen, in like manner, a magistrate M. Dupati.
, too soon snatched away from his friends and the unfortunate, interest Europe
in the cause of three peasants of Champagne; and obtained, by his eloquence and
perseverance, a splendid and lasting fame, the reward of zeal which humanity
and the love of justice alone had inspired. Men incapable of these actions
never fail to attribute them to a desire of renown; they know not what anguish
the spectacle of an unjust act inflicts on a noble and feeling mind, to what
degree it torments memory and thought, and how greatly it causes the imperious
desire of preventing or repairing a crime to be felt; they are ignorant of that
emotion, that involuntary horror, which is excited in all the senses by the
sight, even by the mere idea, of an oppressor escaping with triumph or
impunity; and we must pity those who could think that the author of Alzier and
Brutus needed the glory attendant on a good action, to incite him to defend
innocence and to rise up against tyranny.

A new occasion of avenging insulted humanity was presented to Voltaire.
Vassalage solemnity abolished in France by Louis Hutin (the boisterous,) again
existed under Louis XV. in many provinces. In vain had a project of abolishing
it been more than once formed. Avarice and pride had silenced justice, by a
resistance which had fatigued the indolence of government; and the superior
tribunals, composed of nobles, had favored the pretensions of the proprietors
of these seignories.

This enormity tyrannised over Franche Comte, and particularly over the
territories of St. Claude, the secular monks of which, in 1742, owned the
greatest part of their lands, held in Mort-Main, to nothing better than false
titles; and exercised their rights with a rigor which reduced to misery an
uninformed but good and industrious people. At the death of each possessor, if
his children had not constantly inhabited the paternal house, the fruit of his
labors appertained to the monks; the widow and her offspring, without
furniture, without clothes, and without dwelling, passed from the competence
procured by labor, to all the horrors of want. Should a stranger die after
having dwelt a year on this species of land, stricken with the feudal anathema,
his property also became that of the monks; nor did a son succeed to the
inheritance of his father, if it could be proved that he passed the night of
his nuptials out of the paternal house.

These people suffer without daring to complain, and beheld, with mute grief,
the fruits of their economy, which should have furnished useful capitals to
industry and the culture of the land, become the prey of the monks. Happily,
the construction of a great road opened a communication between them and the
neighboring cantons. They learnt that, at the foot of mount Jura, there
existed a man whose intrepid voice had more than once caused the very palaces
of kings to resound with the complaints of the oppressed, and at whose name
sacerdotal tyranny turned pale. To him they related their griefs, and in him
they found a protector.

These usurpations, this inexhorable cruelty of hypocritical priests, who dared
to call themselves the disciples of an humble master yet wished to hold men in
slavery, were proclaimed, not only to France but to all Europe. Yet, after
soliciting relief for many years, nothing could be obtained from the timid
successor of M. de Maupeau, except an arret of council, which forbade this base
violation of the rights of mankind. His fear of disobliging the parliament of
Besancon would not permit him to withdraw, from its jurisdiction, a cause which
could not be regarded as an ordinary suit without shamefully acknowledging the
legitimacy of the feudal slavery. The vassals of St. Claude were sent back to a
tribunal, whose members, the lords of the lands subject to this tyranny, took a
barbarous pleasure in riveting the chains of those poor people; who still
continue enslaved.

All they have obtained was the liberty, granted them in 1778, of abandoning
their home and their country to escape from the dominion of the monks; but
another article of that same law more than ^t balanced this benefaction, so
ineffectual to unfortunate men, whom poverty rather than the law has confined
to the spot of their birth. In this very edict the sovereign has, for the first
time, given the name and sacred character of property to the detestable rights
which, even in the midst of the ignorance and barbarity of the thirteenth
century, were considered as usurpations which neither time nor titles can
render legitimate; and an hypocritical minister has made the liberty of the
peasant depend, not on the justice of laws, but on the will of his tyrants.

Who that reads these details would suppose that he reads the life of a great
poet, of a prolisic and indefatigable writer? We forget his literary fame, as
he himself lost sight of it. He seemed no longer to pursue any object of fame,
but that of avenging the human race, and of snatching victims from oppression.

His genius, however, incapable of inactivity, cultivated every species of
literature on which it had ev^r exercised its powers, and even dared to essay
new subjects. He published some tragedies, which we may doubtless reproach with
feebleness, and which could no longer force the applauses of an audience whom
he himself had rendered difficult, but in which the man of letters may gratify
his taste by beautiful verses, and his judgment by profound, enlightened ideas,
while he who is ambitious to write for the theater may in them study the
secrets of his art; he wrote tales, in which that species of composition, till
then employed only to reflect pleasing and voluptious images, which amuse the
imagination or awaken gaiety, assumed a more philosophic character, and became,
like the apologue, a school of morality and reason, he wrote epistles, which if
compared with his first works, will be found less correct, less uniformly
animated, and less poetical; but, in return, possessed of more simplicity and
variety, a more general and free spirit of philosophy, and a greater number of
those accute and deep remarks which are the product of experience. To these he
added satires, in which prejudice and its patrons are ridiculed under a
thousand varying forms.

About the same time, in his Philosophy of History, he gave lessons to
historians, while he provoked the enmity of pedants, by unvei^ing their
dullness, credulity and invidious admiration of antiquity; he finished his Essay
on the Manners and Spirit of Nations, his Age of Louis XIV. to which he added
the Age of Louis XV. an incomplete but faithful history, the only one by which
we can form an adequ^te idea of the events of that reign, and in which we find
all the truth that can be expected in a cotemporary history, which is neither a
libel nor an eulogium.

New romances, works sometimes serious and sometimes humorous, and dictated by
circumstances, did not add to his reputation, but they continued to render it
ever present with the public, to sustain the interest of his partisans, and to
humiliate that herd of secret enemies, who assumed the mask of austerity, that
the might withhold that admiration which the example of Europe commanded them
to give.

In sine, he und^rtook to assemble, in the form of a dictionary, all the ideas
which presented themselves to his mind on the various objects of his
reflections; that is to say, on almost all that is comprised in the circle of
human knowledge. In this collection, modestly entitled, Questions to the Lovers
of Science respecting the Encyclopedia, he treats successively of theology,
grammar, natural philosophy, and literature. At one time, he discusses the
subjects of antiquity; at others, questions of policy, legislation, and public
economy. His style ever animated and seductive, clothed these various objects
with a charm hitherto known to himself only; and which chiefly springs from the
license with which, yielding to his successive emotions, adapting his style
less to his subject than to the momentary disposition of his mind, sometimes he
spreads ridicule on objects which seem capable of inspiring only horror, and,
almost instantaneously hurried away by the energy and sensibility of his soul,
he vehemently and eloquently exclaims against abuses which he has just before
treated with mockery. His anger is excited by false taste; he quickly perceives
that his indignation ought to be reserved for interests which are more
important; and he finishes by laughing in his usual way. Sometimes, he abruptly
leaves a moral or political discussion for a literary criticism; and, in the
midst of a lesson on taste, he pronounces abstract maxims of the profoundest
philosophy, or makes a sudden and terrible attack on fanaticism and tyranny.

The constant interest which Voltaire took in the success of Russia against the
Turks deserves to be noticed. Highly distinguished by the favors of the
empress, doubtless gratitude animated his zeal; but we should be deceived did
we imagine his zeal had no other cause. Superior to those politics of the
counting house, which take the interest of merchants known to financiers for
the interests of commerce, and the interests of commerce for that of the human
race, not less superior to those vain ideas of the balance of Europe so
valuable to political compilers, he beheld, in the destruction of the Ottoman
empire, millions of men at least assured of shunning under the despotism of a
sovereign the intolerable despotism of a whole people; he hoped to see the
imperious manners of the East which condemned women to a disgraceful slavery
banished into the unhappy climates that gave them birth. Immence countries
situated under a propitious heaven, destined by nature to be clothed with all
the productions most useful to mankind, would have been restored to the
industry of their inhabitants; these countries, the first in which man
discovered genius, would have beheld, again springing up in their bosom, the
arts of which they gave the most perfect models, and the sciences, whose
foundations were laid by them.

The usual speculations of some merchants would without doubt have been
deranged, and their profits diminished; but the real welfare of all people
would have been augmented, because it is not possible to extend the space on
the globe in which agriculture flourishes, commerce is secure, and industry
active, without increasing for the use of all men the mass of enjoyments and
resourses. Can it be desirable that a philosopher should prefer the riches of
some nations to the liberty of an entire people, and the commerce of a few
cities to the progress of agriculture and of the arts in a great empire? Far
from us be those despicable reasoners who would still hold Greece in in Turkish
chains, in order that they may seize on the persons of men, sell them as herds
of cattle, compel them, by the dread of punishment, to furnish food for their
insatiable avarice; and who gravely calculate the pretended wealth which it
produced, by these outrages on nature.

That men should every where be free, and that each country should enjoy the
advantages given it by nature, would be the common interests of all people, as
well of those who have reassumed their rights as of those in which certain
individuals, and not the community, have been benefited by the distress of
others. Opposed to objects so grand and to that eternal good which would arise
out of a revolution so vast, of what importance would the ruin of a few
avaricious men be; and of men too, whose wealth originated in the tears and the
blood of their fellow citizens!

Thus thought M. Turgot; and thus Voltaire could not but think.

Men have declaimed against the injustice of a war against the Turks: can we be
unjust toward a hoard of robbers, who hold a people in slavery, and whose
avidious ferocity overwhelms these people with outrages? Let them return to
those deserts which the imbecility of Europe permitted them to quit, since, in
their brutal pride, they have continued to produce a race of tyrants! At
length, let the country of those to whom we owe our knowledge, our arts, and
even our virtues, cease to be dishonored by the presence of a people who unite
the despicable vices of effeminacy to the ferocity of savages!

Fears are entertained for the balance of Europe, as though such conquests
would not diminish, instead of increasing the power of the conquerors; as
though Asia must not long offer an easy prey to the ambitious, which would give
them a distaste for the hazardous conquests which might be obtained in Europe.
It is not the policy of princes, it is the wisdom of a civilized people, which
must forever preserve the peace of Europe; and the more civilization shall
extend over the earth, the more shall we behold war and conquests, as well as
slavery and misery, disappear.

Louis the XVth died. This prince, who had long in his conduct contemned the
precepts of the moral christian, was not, however, superior to superstitious
terrors. The menaces of religion assumed new vigor to terrify him on the
appearance of the least danger; but he imagined that a promise of continence so
easily made on a deathbed, and certain words from the mouth of a priest, could
expiate the errors of a reign of sixty years. Even more timid than
superstitious, accustomed by the Cardinal de Fleury to consider liberty of
thought as a cause of disorder in states, or at least of embarrassment to
governments, it was nevertheless in despite of himself that under his reign
human reason made a rapid progress in France. He who labored for its
advancement with most success and splendor was become the object of his
hatred. Yet he respected in Voltaire the glory of France; and could not view,
without pride, the admiration of Europe place one of his subjects in the first
rank of illustrious characters.

His death made no change in Voltaire's situation. To the prejudices of
Cardinal de Fleury, M. Maurepas joined a still more implacable hatred of all
those who rose superior to the ordinary class of men.

Voltaire had been profuse of his exaggerated praise of Louis XV. till the time
of his visit to the court of Prussia, but without being able to disarm the
king's unjust dislike of him. He had observed an almost absolute silence from
the period in which the errors and misfortunes of this reign would have
rendered eulogy abject. But after the death of that monarch he dared to be just
to his memory, at the instant in which nearly the whole nation seemed happy in
wounding his name. It has been remarked that the philosophers, whom Louis XV.
did not patronize, were at that time the only persons who observed some
impartiality; while the priests, laden with his benefactions, insulted his
weakness.

The new reign soon presented to Voltaire hopes which he had not dared to form.
M. Turgot was called to the administration. Voltaire knew him to be a man of
profound genius, who, in every species of science, had created sure and
determinate principles on which he had founded all his opinions, and according
to which he directed the whole of his conduct; a glory that no other statesman
has been worthy of partaking with him. He knew that, to a soul zealous for the
truth and for the happiness of man, M. Turgot united fortitude that was above
all fear, and grandeur of character superior to all dissimulation; that in his
eyes the most important situation was but the means of executing his salutary
views; and appeared to him no more than a vile slavery when that hope should be
lost. In fine, Voltaire knew that, free from all prejudices and detesting, in
those prejudices, the most dangerous enemies of the human race, M. Turgot
regarded the liberty of thought and of the press as the right of each citizen,
and the right of entire nations, whose happiness the progress of reason alone
can establish on an immovable basis.

In the nomination of M. Turgot, Voltaire saw the dawn of the reign of reason;
so long disavowed and much longer persecuted; he dared to look for the rapid
fall of prejudices, and for the destruction of that cowardly and tyrannic
policy which, to flatter the pride or indolence of men in place, had condemned
the people to humiliation and misery.

Yet his attempts in favor of the vassals of Mount Jura were ineffectual; and
in vain he endeavored to obtain for d'Etallonde, and for the memory of the
Chevalier de la Bar, that distinguished justice which humanity and the
national honor equally required. These objects were foreign to the department
of the finances; and that superiority of information, of character, and of
virtue, which M. Turgot could not conceal, had created him, in the other
ministers and in the intriguing subalterns of office, too many enemies; who,
finding neither ambition nor personal projects to oppose in him, bent
themselves against all that they believed consonant with his just and
beneficent designs

Beside, liberty could not be restored to the vassals of mount Jura without
offending the parliament of Befancon; the revision of the process of Abbeville
had humiliated that of Paris; and an unwise policy had re-established the
parliaments without taking advantage of their temporary overthrow, and the
little credit of those who had replaced them, to introduce into the laws and
tribunals an entire reform, the necessity of which was felt by all enlightened
men. But an administration which was feeble, and the enemy of reformation, did
not dare or did not wish to seize this occasion, in which the public good had
found still less obstacles than in the instance which was so shamefully
neglected by the Chancellor Maupeou.

Thus also, through complaisance to the prejudices of the parliaments,
ministers suffered the advantages for the reform of education to be lost, which
was offered to them by the destruction of the Jesuits. They did not even, in
1774, take any precaution to prevent the renewal of the contentions which, in
1770, had led to the ruin of the magistracy. They had pursued but a single
object, the advantage of securing a personal gratitude, which gave to the
authors of the change a means of employing a credit of the corpse, whose
re-establishment was their work, with success against the rivals of their power.

Hence the only advantage which Voltaire could obtain, from the administration
of M. Turgot, was to withdraw the little country of Gex from the tyranny of the
farms. Separated from France by mountains, having an easy communication with
Geneva and Switzerland, this unfortunate country could not be subjected to the
revenue laws without becoming the theater of perpetual war between the servants
of the revenue and the inhabitants, nor without paying expenses for the
collection still more burdensome than the imposts themselves. The little
importance of this regulation should have rendered it easy; yet, it was long
solicited, in vain, by M. de Voltaire.

Part of the provinces of France have, through various causes escaped the yoke
of the Farm-general, or have only borne half of its weight; but the
farmers-general have incessantly increased their limits, and envelloped in
their chains detached cantons which had long been protected by feudal
privileges. They believed that their God Terminus, like that of the Romans,
ought never to recede; and that the first step he should retreat would be the
presage of destruction to the empire. Their opposition, however, could not
induce M. Turgot to abandon a just and beneficent operation, which without
injury to the revenue, would lessen the burden of the inhabitants, diminish the
burden of crimes and oppressions, and restore prosperity and peace to a
district pillaged by despotism.

The country of Gex, then, was delivered from the yoke, on condition of raising
thirty thousand livres; and Voltaire had the pleasure of writing to his
friends, in a parody of a verse of Mithridates; Et mes derniers regards ont vu
fuir les commis And at length, I Have seen the excisemen fly.
.

Voltaire's respect for M. Turgot would have been augmented by the edicts of
1776 had not he already known that minister's genius, and comprehended his
views. This great statesman had perceived that, placed at the head of the
finances at a moment in which he was embarrassed by the mass of the public
debt, and by obstacles which the courtiers and the first minister opposed to
every great reform in administration and to all important economy, he could not
diminish the imposts; but he wished, at least, to give some consolation to the
people, and some indemnity to the proprietors of lands by restoring to them
rights of which they had been deprived by oppressive regulations.

The remains of feudal slavery which spread desolation through the country,
which compelled the poor to labor without hire, and deprived agriculture of
the husbandmen's cattle, were changed into an impost, paid only by the
proprietors of land. Through all the cities, ridiculous corporations obliged a
part of the inhabitants to purchase the right of laboring; those who subsisted
by commerce or their own industry were compelled to live under the vassalage of
a certain number of privileged people, or to pay a tribute to these bodies;
this absurd institution disappeared, and the right of freely employing their
time and strength was restored to the citizens.

The proprietors of grain and of wine, the first harrassed by popular
prejudices, the other by despotic privileges, which had been extorted by
particular cities, were relieved from those oppressions; and these wise laws
could not fall to accelerate the progress of agriculture, and multiply the
national wealth, by insuring the subsistence of the people.

But these beneficent edicts were the signal of that minister's fall who had
the boldness to conceive them. They excited the opposition of the parliaments
who were interested in supporting the Jurandes The wardenship of the different
companies of tradesmen.
the fertile source of lucrative law suits, who were not less attached to the
old regulations which furnished them with the means of acting on the minds of
the people, who were irritated to see the burden of making roads laid on the
oppulent owners of land, and were without any hope that an unworthy
condescension would continue to lighten the weight of their individual taxes,
but who were more particularly alarmed at the influence which seemed to be
acquired by a minister whose benevolent spirit menaced the overthrow of their
power.

The intrigues of the enemies of M. Turgot were strengthened by this league of
the parliaments; and it was then perceived how serviceable to their secret and
pernicious designs was the manner in which the tribunals had been
re-established; it was then seen how dangerous it is to a minister to design
the welfare of the people; and, perhaps, were we to mount up to the cause of
events, we should find that the fall even of vicious ministers has originated
in the good which they wished to do, and not in the evil which they have
produced.

In the calamities of France, Voltaire beheld the destruction of hopes which he
had entertained for the advancement of the human mind. He had imagined that
intolerance, superstition, and the monsterous prejudices which infected every
branch of legislation, every department of power, and all conditions of
society, would have fled before a minister who was the friend of justice, of
liberty and reason. Such as have accused Voltaire of base adulation, such as
have bitterly reproached him with the use which he made of praise, perhaps too
fr^quently, to influence the minds of powered men and to compel them to be just
and humane, may compare those praises to his eulogy of M. Turgot, and to his
Epistle to a Man which he addressed to that minister at the moment of his
disgrace. They will then distinguish the admiration which is the result of
feeling, from a compliment; and the esteem which arises in the soul, from the
play of imagination; and they will perceive that Voltaire committed no other
crime than that of treating courtiers as women: nearly the same protestations
are bestowed on the whole sex, and it is the tone alone that distinguishes the
praise which is felt from that which is given to politeness.

Voltaire, offering incense to the kings and ministers to engage them on the
side of truth, and Voltaire, celebrating genious and virtue, speaks not the
same language. Did he wish only to flatter, he was prodigal of the charms of
his brilliant imagination, he multiplied these ingenious ideas which were ever
ready at his call; but did he wish to render an homage acknowledged by his
heart, it was his soul which escaped him, it was his reason which spoke. During
his visit to Paris his admiration of M. Turgot was infused through all his
discourse. M. Turgot was the man whom he opposed to all who complained of the
depravity of our age; and to him his mind gave his entire approbation. I have
seen him take his hands, bathe them with his tears, kiss them in despite of M.
Turgot's resistance, and cry with a voice interrupted by sobs: "Let me kiss the
hand which would seal the happiness of the people."

Voltaire had long desired to revisit his country, and to enjoy his reputation
in the midst of the same people who had been the witness of his first success
and too often the accomplice of his enemies. M. de Villette had lately, at
Fern, espoused Mademoiselle de Varicour, a lady descended from a noble family
in the country of Gex, whom her relations had confided to the care of Madame
Denis. Voltaire accompanied them to Paris, partly led by the desire of seeing
the representation of the tragedy of Irene, which he had shortly before
finished. It had been kept a profound secret; and malice had not time to
prepare her poison, nor would the public enthusiasm have permitted its
operation. A crowd of men and women of every rank and condition, from whom his
verses had drawn the tears of humanity, who had so frequently admired his
genius at the theater and in reading his works, who were indebted to him for
their improvement, whole prejudices he had destroyed, and to whom he had
imparted a spark of that zeal against fanaticism by whose flame he was
devoured, were eager to behold him. Jealousy was silent before a glory which it
was impossible to extinguish, before the benefit which he had conferred on
mankind. Ministers, and proud prelates, were obliged to respect the idol of the
nation. This enthusiasm was even spread through the common ranks of the people;
they crowded round his windows, and passed whole hours there with the hope of
seeing him for one moment. His carriage, which could scarcely proceed along the
streets, was surrounded by a numerous multitude, who blessed him and celebrated
his works.

The French academy, which had not adopted him till the age of fifty-two,
lavished honors on him, and received him rather as sovereign of the empire of
letters than as an equal. The children of those haughty courtiers, whose pride
had been wounded to see him live in their society without meanness, and who had
wished to humiliate in his person the superiority of genius and talents,
contended for the honor of being presented to him, and of an opportunity to
boast that they had seen Voltaire.

But it was at the theater, where he had so long reigned, that he had the
greatest honors to expect. He went to the third representation of Irene; which
was, indeed, but a feeble tragedy; which, however, possessed many beauties, and
in which the wrinkles of age could not conceal the sacred impression of genius.
He alone drew the attention of a people, eager to distinguish his features, to
observe his gestures, to pursue the direction of his eyes. His bust was crowned
on the stage in the midst of applause, cries of joy, and tears of enthusiasm.
To quit the theater he must pass through the multitude that crowded round him;
feeble, scarce able to support himself, the guards, which were designed to
protect him from the eagerness of zeal, became useless at his approach, each
retired with a respectful attention, or disputed the honor of supporting him a
moment on the stares; each step offered him new aid, nor was any one permitted
to arrogate too long the right of giving him assistance.

The spectators followed him to his apartment, and the air was filled with the
cries of "Long live Voltaire! Long live the Henriade! Long live Mahomet!"
numbers fell at his feet, and numbers kissed his garment. Never has man been
received with more interesting marks of admiration and of public affection, nor
ever has genius been honored by a more flattering homage; and this homage was
addressed, not to his power, but to the happiness which he had conferred on
man. An illustrious poet would have been received only with plaudits: tears
flowed before the philosopher, who had destroyed the fetters of reason, and
avenged the cause of humanity.

The sublime and impassioned soul of Voltaire was moved with these tributes of
respect and zeal: "They wished me to die with pleasure," he said; but it was
the voice of sensibility, and not the artifice of self-love. In the midst of
the honors paid him by the French academy, he was particularly struck by the
possibility of introducing into that place a more daring philosophy: "They
treat me with more attention than I merit," he said to me, one day; "do you
know that I do not despair of causing the eulogium of Coligny to be spoken
there?"

During the run of Irene, he was employed in revising his essay on the Manners
and the spirit of Nations; and to give, in that world some new wounds to
fanaticism. He had with secret pleasure observed, at the theater, that the
lines which were received with the greatest acclamations were those in which he
attacked superstition and the names the had long rendered sacred; and it was to
this object to ascribed all the glory he had acquired. He beheld, in that
general admiration, the empire which he had exercised over the mind, and the
destruction of prejudices which he had accomplished.

At this same time, Paris boasted, also, the presence of the celebrated
Franklin, who, in another hemisphere, had been the apostle of philosophy and
toleration. Like Voltaire, he had often employed the weapon of humor which
corrects the absurdities of men, and had displayed their perverseness as a
folly more fatal, but also worthy of pity. He had joined to the science of
metaphysics the genius of practical philosophy; as Voltaire, that of poetry.
Franklin had delivered the vast countries of America from the yoke of Europe;
and Voltaire had freed Europe from the yoke of the ancient theocracy of Asia.
Franklin was eager to see a man whose reputation had long been spread over both
worlds; Voltaire, although he had lost the habit of speaking English,
endeavored to support the conversation in that language; and, afterward
reassuming the French, he said: "Je n'ai pu resister au desit de parler un
moment la langue de M. Franklin I could not resist the desire of speaking the
language of Mr. Franklin for a moment.
."

The American philosopher presented his grandson to Voltaire, with a request
that he would give him his benediction. "God and liberty!" said Voltaire: "it
is the only benediction which can be given to the grandson of Franklin." They
went together to a public assembly of the academy of sciences, and the public
at the same time beheld with emotion these two men, born in different quarters
of the globe, respectable by their years, their glory, the employment of their
lives, and both enjoyed the influence which they had exercised over the age in
which they lived. They embraced each other in the midst of public acclamations,
and it was said to be Solon who embraced Sophocles. But the French Sophocles
had trampled on error and advanced the reign of reason; and the Solon of
Philadelphia, having placed the constitution of his country on the immovable
foundation of the rights of men, had no fear of seeing his uncertain laws, even
during his own life, open the way to tyranny and prepare fetters for his
country.

Age had not enfeebled the activity of Voltaire, and the transports with which
he was received by his fellow citizens seemed to renew his vigor. He formed
the design of refuting whatever the Duke de St. Simon, in his memoirs, then
unpublished, had written under the influence of hatred and prejudice, lest
these memoirs, which might derive some authority from the known probity of the
author and from his rank and title of cotemporary, should appear at a time in
which men would be too far removed from the events of which he speaks, to
detect error and defend the truth.

He had also induced the French academy to adopt the design of forming its
dictionary on a new plan. They were to have deduced the history of each word
from the period in which it had appeared in the language, to give the various
meanings which it assumed in different ages, and the various acceptations it
had received, and to employ, in order to display these varied shades, not
capricious phrases, but examples selected from authors of the greatest
authority. Then would have been seen the true literary and grammatical
dictionary of the language, and not only foreigners but even Frenchmen might,
in that work, have acquired a knowledge of all its delicacy.

This dictionary would have presented instructive pages to men of letters,
would have contributed to form the national taste, and arrested the progress of
corruption. Each academician was to have explained a letter of the alphabet.
Voltaire undertook the letter A; and, to excite the industry of his brethren,
and to banish the difficulty of executing this plan, he was desirous to finish,
within a few months, that part of the work which he had assumed.

His strength was wasted by such excessive application; and he had been much
reduced by a spitting of blood, caused by his efforts during the representation
of Irene. Yet, the activity of his mind subdued all; and concealed from him the
real weakness of his constitution. At length, deprived of sleep by an
irritation produced by too intense labor, he wished to procure some hours
repose, that he might be in a condition to lead the academy irrevocably to
engage in the new dictionary, against which some objections had arisen; and he
resolved to take opium. His imagination possessed all its vivacity, his soul
was equally restless and impetuous, his character abated not of its gaiety and
vigor, when he took the opiate which he judged to be necessary. During the
same evening, his friends had heard him express his detestation of prejudices
with his usual eloquence; and soon after beheld him viewing them only on the
ridiculous side, and deriding them with that peculiar grace and aptness which
characterised his sallies of wit. But he took the opiate at several doses, and
was deceived as to the quantity, probably in the species of intoxication which
the first had produced. The same accident happened to him about thirty before,
and then placed his life in danger. Unhappily, this time, his wasted powers
were unable to contend with the poison. He had long been subject to a complaint
in the bladder, and in the general decay of his organs, that soon contracted an
incurable disease.

Scarcely could he, during the long interval between this fatal accident and
his death, preserve his recollection for a few successive moments, or disengage
himself from the lethargy in which he was plunged. To the young Count de Lalli,
however, who was even then celebrated for his courage, and who has since
deserved celebrity by his eloquence and patriotism, he wrote, in one of these
intervals, those lines, the last which were traced by his hand, in which he
applauds the royal authority whose justice had lately annulled one of the
attrocious acts of parliamentary despotism. At length he expired on the 30th of
May, 1778.

The arrival of Voltaire at Paris had re-kindled the fury of the fanatics, and
wounded the pride of the chiefs of the hierarchy; but it had also inspired some
priests with an idea of building their reputation and their fortune on the
conversion of this illustrious enemy. Certainly, they could not flatter
themselves with the hope of subduing him, but they did not despair of inducing
him to dissemble. Voltaire, who wished to remain at Paris without being
tormented by sacerdotal accusations, and who, from a habit acquired in his
youth, thought it beneficial to the interests even of the friends of reason,
that certain scenes of intolerance should not succeed his last moments, had
sent in the beginning of his malady for an almoner of the incurables, and who
had boasted of having restored to the bosom of the church the Abbe de
L'Attaignant, known by offenses of another kind.

The Abbe Gauthier confessed Voltaire, and received a profession of faith from
him, by which he declared that he died in the catholic religion, in which he
was born.

When this circumstance was known, which offended enlightened men rather more
than it edified the devotees, the curate of Saint Sulpice ran to his
parishoner, who received him with politeness, and gave him according to usage a
handsome offering for his poor people. But, mortified that the Abbe Gauthier
had anticipated him, he discovered that the almoner of the incurables had been
too easily satisfied with his penitent, and that he ought to have required a
more particular profession faith, and an express disavowal of all the
doctrines, contrary to orthodoxy, which Voltaire tad been accused of
maitaining. The Abbe Gauthiers pretended that, by requiring every thing, all
would have been lost. During this dispute, Voltaire recovered, Irene was
played, and the conversion was forgotten. But, in the moment of the relapse,
the curate returned to Voltaire, absolutely resolved not to inter him, if he
could not obtain the desired recantation of his errors.

This curate was among those men who are a mixture of hypocrisy and imbecility;
he spoke with the obstinate persuasion of a maniac, and acted with the
flexibility of a jesuit; he was humble in his manners even to baseness,
arrogant in his sacerdotal pretensions, fawning with the great, and charitable
to the populace who are governed by the priests that distribute alms to them,
and, in fine, he harrassed the simple citizens, by his imperious fanaticism. He
earnestly wished to compel Voltaire at least to acknowledge the divine nature
of Jesus Christ; to which he was more attached than any other dogma. He, one
day, drew Voltaire from his lethargy, by shouting in his ear: "Do you believe
the Divinity of Jesus Christ?" "In the name of God, sir," replied Voltaire,
"speak to me no more of that man; but let me die in peace."

The priest then declared he was compelled to refuse him burial; but he was not
authorized in this refusal; for, according to the laws, it ought to have been
preceded by a sentence of excommunication, or a secular judgment; and even an
appeal might have been made against an excommunication, as a matter of abuse.
Voltaire's family, by complaining to the parliament, would have obtained
justice; but they feared the fanaticism of that body and the hatred of its
members to Voltaire, who had so often combated its pretensions and exerted his
powers against its injustice. They did not perceive that the parliament could
not, without disgrace to itself, depart from the principles on which it had
acted in favor of the Jansenist; they did not know that a great number of the
young magistrates waited only for an occasion of effacing, by some splendid
act, the reproach of fanaticism by which they were degraded, of dignifying
themselves, by ordaining a mark of respect to the memory of a man of genius
whom they had been unfortunate enough to number among their enemies, and of
showing that they chose rather to atone for their injustice, than to yield to
any incitements of vengeance. The friends of Voltaire did not observe how much
power they had acquired by that enthusiasm which his name had excited; an
enthusiasm which had gained every class in the nation, and which no authority
would venture openly to insult.

They chose rather to negociate with government. Daring neither to offend
public opinion by gratifying the vengeance of the clergy, nor to displease the
priests by compelling them to obey the laws, fearing to mortify sacerdotal
pride, should they erect a public monument to a great man whose ashes were
basely disturbed by priests, or should they indemnify his memory for the loss
of ecclesiastic honors, to which he had so little claim, by civic honors due
to his genius and the services be had done the nation, ministers approved a
proposal which was made of removing Voltaire's body to the church of a
monastery, of which his, nephew was abbe. It was accordingly conducted to
Scellieres, and the priests agreed not to interrupt the execution of this
design. However, two ladies, of distinguished rank and very great devotees,
wrote to the bishop of Troyes to engage him, in quality, of diocean bishop, to
oppose the burial. But, fortunately for the honor of the bishop, these letters
arrived too late, and Voltaire was interred.

The French academy had observed a custom of saying mass at the church of the
Cordeliers for each of their deceased members. The archbishop of Paris,
Beaumont, so well known by his ignorance and fanaticism, prohibited the
performance of the ceremony. The Cordeliers obeyed with regret; but they knew
that the confessors of the archbishop would pardon his spirit of revenge, and
would forbear to recommend justice to him. The academy, therefore, resolved to
suspend the practice of this ceremony till the insult offered to the most
illustrious of its members should be repaired. Thus Beaumont became, ^o
despite of himself, the instrument of d^^^^o^ing a ridiculous superstition.

Mean while the King of Prussia commanded a solemn mass to be said for Voltaire
in the catholic church of Berlins and the academy of Prussia was invited to
attend. But that which was more glorious to Voltaire, was, that the king in the
field of battle, where, at the head of an hundred and fifty thousand men, he
defended the rights of the princes of the empire, and imposed laws on the
Austrian power, wrote the eulogium of that illustrious man, whose disciple and
friend he had been, and who, perhaps, had never pardoned him the unworthy and
disgraceful violence which he had endured at Franckfort, but toward whom the
monarch was incessantly and involuntarily led by his natural taste and his
admiration of genius. This eulogium nobly compensated for the mean vengeance of
the priests.

Of all the enormities which, in the times of ignorance and superstition, the
priests have obtained the power of committing against human nature with
impunity, that which is exercised on the bodies of the deceased is
unquestionably the least prejudicial; and, in the eyes of enlightened men,
those outrages can appear no other than a title of renown. Yet, respect for the
remains of men who have been dear to us is no prejudice; it is an affection
inspired by nature herself, who has placed, in the recesses of our hearts, a
veneration for every thing that can recall to our remembrance beings whom
friendship or gratitude have rendered sacred to our feelings. The liberty of
offering a sorrowful homage to their ashes is then a precious right to delicate
minds, and the power of choosing that which their sensations shall dictate,
cannot, without injustice, be taken away; still less may this consolation be
forbidden at the will of an intolerant sect, who have usurped, with an audacity
too long endured, the right of controuling the thoughts of men, or of
inflicting punishment for them.

Beside, the empire of prejudice over the minds of the populace is not yet
destroyed; a Christian deprived of burial, is still in the eyes of inferior
people, the object of horror and disdain; and this injustice is extended even
to his family. If, indeed, the hatred of priests would pursue none but men who
are immortalized by their works and whose glory embraces all ages, we might
pardon their despicable efforts; but their hatred may be attached to victims
less illustrious; and all men have the same rights.

Government, in some degree ashamed of its feeble conduct, hoped to escape
public contempt by prohibiting the name of Voltaire in any writings, or in
those places where the police was accustomed to violate the freedom of speech,
under the pretense of preserving order, which it too often confounded with a
respect paid to established and protected follies.

The public papers were forbidden to speak of his death; and the comedians had
orders to perform none of his pieces. Ministers did not discover that means
like these, of preventing the anger of the nation against their weakness would
only serve more fully to provoke it; and to demonstrate that they had neither
courage to merit the approbation nor to support the blame of the public.

This simple recital of the incidents of the life of Voltaire has sufficiently
developed his character and his mind; the principal features of which were
benevolence, indulgence for human foibles, and a hatred of injustice and
oppression. He may be numbered among the very few men in whom the love of
humanity was a real passion; which the noblest of all passions, was known only
to modern times, and took rise from the progess of knowledge. Its very
existence is sufficient to confound the blind partisans of antiquity, and those
who calumniate philosophy.

But the happy qualities of Voltaire were often perverted by his natural
restlessness, which the writing of tragedy had but increased. In an instant he
would change from anger to affection, from indignation to a jest. Born with
violent passions, they often hurried him too far; and his restlessness deprived
him of the advantages which usually accompany such minds; particularly of that
fortitude to which fear is no obsticle, when action becomes a duty, and which
is not shaken by the presence of danger foreseen. Often would Voltaire expose
himself to the storm with rashness, but rarely did he brave it with constancy;
and these intervals, of temerity and weakness, have frequently afflicted his
friends, and afforded unworthy cause of triumph to his cowardly foes.

His affections were permanent, and his friendship for Genonville, the
president de Maisons, Formont, Cideville, the Marchioness du Chalelet,
d'Argental, and d'Alembert, seldom obscured by passing clouds, ended only with
his life. From his works we discover that few men of feeling have so long
preserved the remembrance of friends lost in early youth.

He has been reproached with his numerous disputes, but in none of these he was
the aggressor. His enemies, those at least to whom he was irreconcilable, and
whom he devoted to the world's contempt, did not confine themselves to personal
attacks; they were his accusers to the fanatics, and wished to bring down the
sword of persecution on his head. It is no doubt afflicting to be obliged to
place in this list men of real merit; men like the poet Rosseau the two
Pompignans One of them has lately, by his noble and patriotic conduct, effaced
the spots which his episcopal accusations had fixed upon his reputation. He is
at present seen to adopt the same principles of freedom, with fortitude, for
which in his works he bitterly reproached philosophers, and against which he
invoked the vengeance of despotism. It would be wrong to accuse him of wilful
tergiversation: nothing is more common that men who, to a worthy mind and
integrity of understanding, join timidity; and dare not examine certain
principles, nor think for themselves on certain subjects, till first supported
by public opinion.
, Larcher, and even Rosseau of Geneva. But it is not more excusable to carry
vengeance too far, in self-defence, and to be unjust in the indulgence of
anger, the first motive of which is founded in rectitude, than to violate the
rights of man, by endangering the freedom and safety of a citizen, to gratify
pride, the aims of hypocrisy, or an obstinate attachment to opinion?

Voltaire has been censured, for his attacks on Maupertuis; but were not these
attacks confined to the mere act of rendering a man eternally ridiculous, who,
by base intrigues, had endeavored to dishonor and ruin him; and who, to
revenge so^^ l^sts, had called the power of a king, irritated by his insidious
arts, to his aid?

Voltaire, it is said, was envious; which has been answered by the following
line, from Tancred: De qui dans l'univers peut-il etre jalouse Does the world
contain a man whom he might envy
?

Yes, he was envious of Buffon. What! could the man whose mighty arm had shaken
the antique pillars of the temple of superstition, and who aspired to
metamorphose the vile herd which so long had groaned under the sacerdotal rod
into men, could be envious of the lucky and splendid description of the manners
of a few animals or the more or less fortunate combination of some systems, the
falsity of which is proved by facts?

He was envious of J. J. Rousseau. The boldness of Rousseau did indeed excite
that of Voltaire: but was the philosopher who beheld the progress of knowledge,
polishing, emancipating, and perfecting the human species, and who enjoyed the
revolution as his proper work, was he jealous of the eloquent writer who wished
to condemn the mind of man to eternal ignorance; Could the enemy of bigotry be
jealous of him who, not finding sufficient fame in the destruction of its
altars, vainly endeavored to rebuild them?

Voltaire did not do justice to the genius of Rousseau, because his mind being
equitable, and void of affectation, felt an involuntary repugnance, to
exaggeration; because a tone of austerity presented to his fancy a tincture of
hypocrisy, the smallest shade of which could not but disgust his frank and
independent soul; and because, being accustomed himself to treat all subjects
with humor, gravity in the little details of passion, or of human life, always
appeared to him to partake of the ridiculous. He was unjust, because Rousseau
had angered him, by returning injury to offers of service; had accused him of
persecution, when he was employed in his defense, and had himself directed the
hand of persecution toward Voltaire.

He was jealous of Montesquieu. He had cause to complain of the author of the
spirit of laws, who affected to treat him with indifference, and almost with
contempt; partly from foolish pride, and partly from timid policy. Yet the
celebrated saying of Voltaire, that, "Humanity had lost its charms, and that
Montesquieu found and restored them," is the best eulogium ever pronounced on
the spirit of laws, and even exceeds the limits of justice. It is only true
relatively to France; since, without mentioning the works of Althusius A German
lawyer, of the XVI. century, who maintained at that time that all power
originated in the people.
and some others, the rights of man were reclaimed with more energy and candor
in the works of Lock and Sidney, than in those of Montesquieu.

Voltaire often criticized the spirit of laws, but usually with justice. The
proof that he was right, in attacking Montesquieu, is that we now perceive the
most absurd and fatal prejudices finding support by quoting works of that
celebrated man; which, had not the progress of knowledge at length broken the
fetters forged by the dogmas of authority, concerning questions which ought
only to be submitted to the test of reason, would in the present day have done
more mischief to France, than they had done good to Europe. The enthusiastic
partisans of Montesquieu have affirmed that Voltaire was incapable either of
judging or of understanding his works. Irritated by such assertions, he well
might mingle a little ill humor with just remark; in which he would be
sanctioned by haughtiness so ridiculous.

The fashion of taxing Voltaire with envy was so prevalent, that to this
passion have been attributed his sage observations on the work of Helvetius;
which, from respect to a persecuted philosopher, he had the delicacy not to
publish during the life of that writer. Nay, his very anger at the short lived
success of some ill wri^ten tragedies was called envy; as if anger could not be
felt, except relatively to self, at seeing fame usurped, which is so often
fatal to the progress of philosophy and the arts. How much has the praise so
prodigally bestowed on Richelieu, Colbert, and other ministers, impeded the
advancement of reason, in the science of politics!

While we read the works of Voltaire, we perceive no man perhaps ever possessed
accuracy of understanding in a Superior degree. This he preserved in the
enthusiasm of poetry, as well as in the exuberance of humor; this was ever the
guide of his taste and of his opinions, and is one of the principal reasons of
the inexpressible charms which are discovered, in the perusal of his works. No
mind perhaps ever combined more ideas at a time, decided with more rapid
sagacity, or displayed more depth, in what ever required a laborious analysis
or continued meditation. The strength of his eagle-eye often has astonished
even those who were indebted to similar means for ideas the most profound, and
combinations the most extensive and precise. In conversation he has often been
known to select the best of a multitude of ideas, to arrange them in the most
perspicacious and effectual manner, and to clothe them in the most happy and
brilliant language.

Hence the inestimable advantage of being ever clear and unaffected without
insipidity and of being read with equal pleasure by the most ignorant, as well
as by the most enlightened. Reading his works with reflection, we find in them a
multitude of profoundly philosophic and true maxims; which escaped superficial
readers, because they do not enforce attention, nor require any effort to be
understood.

If we consider him as a poet, we shall find that, of the various species which
he attempted, the ode and comedy were the only ones in which he did not deserve
the highest rank. He failed in comedy because, as it has previously been
remarked, he had the gift of seizing the ridiculous of opinion, but not of
character, such as could be put in action, and which alone is proper for
comedy. Not that, in a country where the mind of man should have freed itself
from all its bonds, and in which philosophy should have become popular, absurd
and dangerous opinions might not be successfully exhibited on the stage: but
this kind of freedom is at present no where to be found.

To him poetry is indebted for the liberty of exercising itself in a field more
vast. He has shown how it may be united with philosophy; so that poetry,
without being deprived of any of its charms, rises to new beauties; and
philosophy, without being dry or inflated, preserves its accuracy and depth.

We cannot read his theatrical writings, without observing that to him the
tragic art is indebted, for the whole progress which it has made since Racine:
nor can ev^n those who refuse him superiority, or equality, of poetical
talents, without stupidiy or injustice, deny this progress. His latter
tragedies prove, that he was far from supposing he had carried this so
difficult art to its utmost extent; he was sensible that tragedy might still
approach more nearly to nature, without being deprived of its pomp and dignity;
that it still addicted itself too much to local manners; that the love of women
was a too frequent subject; that their passions ought to be represented on the
stage as they exist in life, and their affection first discovered only by the
efforts made to conceal it, and not publicly avowed, unless in those moments
when excess of danger, or of misfortune, no longer admit of disguise. He
thought too that characters void of affectation, great by nature, and strangers
to interest and ambition, might afford a source of new beauties, and impart to
tragedy more variety and truth. But he became too feeble to execute his own
conception^* and, if we except the father of Irene, we shall find his latter
tragedies rather lessons than models.

If, therefore, especially in the arts, the man of genius be he who by
enriching them has most extended their limits, who has merited this title more
than Voltaire? yet has it been refused him by writers, most of whom were,
indeed, too destitute of genius themselves to feel its true characteristics.

To Voltaire we are indebted for having taken a more extensive and useful view
of history than the ancients. It has in his writings become, not a narrative of
events, not the picture of the revolutions of a nation, but that of human
nature, painted from the life, and the philosophic result of the experience of
all people, and of all ages. He first introduced true criticism into history;
first showed that the natural probability of accidents ought to be admitted, as
proofs for or against historical authenticity; and that the philosophic
historian ought, not only to reject miracles, but scrupulously to examine the
motives for crediting those facts which depart from the common order of nature.

Perhaps he may occasionally have forgotten the sage rule which he himself
invented, and which, rigorously adhered to, may demonstate truth. Still to him
we are indebted for having freed history from that crowd of extraordinary
incidents, adopted without proof, which, making the greatest impression on the
mind, blinded men to the most natural and the best demonstrated facts. Before
his time men knew little of history, except the fables by which it was
disfigured. He showed that the absurdities of politheism had never been the
religion of any but the vulgar, among the greatest nations; and that the belief
of one God, common to all people, had no need of being revealed by supernatural
means. He proved that all nations have practiced the grand principles of
morality, and with increasing purity in proportion as they were more civilized,
and better informed. He taught us that the influence of religion has often
corrupted, but never improved morality.

As a philosopher, he was the first to afford an example of a private citizen,
who, by his wishes and endeavors, embraced the general history of man in every
country and in every age, opposing error and oppression of every kind, and
defending and promulgating every useful truth.

The history of whatever has been done in Europe, in favor of reason and
humanity, is the history of his labors and beneficient acts. If the absurd and
dangerous custom of interring the dead within the walls of cities, and even in
churches, has been abolished in some countries: if, on the continent of Europe,
men, by means of innoculation, have, in part, escaped a disease which
threatened life, and often was destructive of happiness; if the catholic clergy
have lost their dangerous power, and will soon be deprived of their scandalous
wealth; if the liberty of the press be increased; if Sweden, Russia, Poland,
Prussia, and the dominions of the house of Austria have beheld the tyranny of
intolerance vanish; if even in France, and some of the provinces of Italy, it
has suffered attacks; if the shameful remains of feudal vassalage has been
shaken in Russia, Denmark, Bohemia, and France; if Poland now feels its
injustice and danger; if absurd and barbarous laws have been generally
abolished, or are threatened with approaching destruction; if the necessity of
reforming the administration of public justice be every where felt; if the
continent of Europe has been taught that men possess a right to the use of
reason; if religious prejudices have been eradicated from the higher classes of
society, and in part effaced from the hearts of the common people; if their
defenders have been reduced to the shameful necessity of maintaining their
political utility; if the love of humanity be now the common language of all
governments; if wars should become less frequent, and if the pride of kings, or
claims which the rust of time has concealed, be no longer alleged as the
pretense for their commencement; if we have beheld the mask stripped from the
face of religious sectaries, who were privileged in imposing on the world; and
if reason for the first time has begun to shed its clear and uniform light over
all Europe; we shall every where discover, in the history of the changes that
have been effected, the name of Voltaire; and shall every where find him
beginning the battle or deciding the victory.

But generally obliged to conceal his intentions, and mask his attacks, though
his works are in every hand, the principles of his philosophy are but little
known.

Ignorance and error are the sole cause of the misery of man; and the errors of
superstition are the most fatal, because they corrupt every source of reason;
and their destructive enthusiasm teaches their adherents to commit crimes
without remorse. That mildness of manners which is compatible with every form
of government diminishes evils, the cure of which reason must one day effect,
and impedes their progress. Oppression itself, in a humane nation, assumes the
character of the people; and is rarely guilty of great barbarity, in a country
where arts, and especially literature, are beloved. Freedom of thinking is
tolerated out of respect to them, though men want the fortitude to love it for
its own sake.

Our endeavors, therefore, should be to inspire the mild and consolatory
virtues, which lead to reason, which all men may practice, which agree with
every polished age, and which may teach hypocrisy itself some good. They should
particularly be preferred to these austere morals which seldom exist, in common
minds, without a mixture of unfeeling severity; which are to hypocrisy at once
so easy and so dangerous; which often terrify tyrants, but seldom console
mankind; and the necessity of which proves the misfortune of those nations
whose history they adorn.

By informing mankind, and by rendering them more humane, we best may hope to
lead them the surest and easiest road to freedom. But we neither can hope to
spread kn^wledge nor soften the manners of nations, if frequent wars accustom
them to the shedding of blood without remorse, and to contemn the fame which
awaits on the arts of peace; or if, occupied in oppression or in self-defence,
men should continue to estimate their virtue by the ill they have been able to
do, and imagine the art of killing to be the art of most utility.

The more men are enlightened the more they will be free, and the less
difficult will be the attainment of freedom. But let us not teach oppressors to
form a league against reason; let us conceal from them the necessary and firm
union which exists between knowledge and liberty; and let us not too soon
inform them that a nation without prejudice must instantly be free.

If we except theocracies, it is the immediate interest of all governments that
the people should be humane and enlightened. Let us not teach them that their
most distant interest is to leave men in a state of ignorance. Let us not
oblige them to choose between the interest of pride and that of repose and
fame. To induce them to love reason, she must always appear in a gentle and
peaceful form; and, far from terrifying them by imprudent threats, while she
asks their support must offer her own. If we attack oppressors before we have
taught the oppressed, we shall risk the loss of liberty and the death of
reason. History affords proofs of this truth. How often, in despite of the
generous efforts of the friends of freedom, has a single battle reduced nations
to the slavery of ages!

And what is the kind of liberty enjoyed by those nations which have recovered
it by force of arms, and not by the force of reason? It has been temporary
freedom, and so disturbed by storms that it remained doubtful whether it were
or were not an advantage. Have not most of them confounded the forms of
republicanism with the enjoyment of right, and the despotism of numbers with
freedom. How many unjust laws, contrary to the rights of nature, have
dishonored the code of all nations which have recovered their liberty, during
those ages in which reason was still in its childhood!

Why not profit by this fatal experience, and wisely wait the progress of
knowledge, in order to obtain freedom more effectual more substantial, and more
peaceful? Why purchase it by torrents of blood, and inevitable confusion, and
give that to chance which time must certainly and without bloodshed bestow? In
order to be more free and to be ever so, we should wait the time when men,
released from their prejudices and guided by reason, will be worthy of freedom,
because they will know what are its true claims.

What therefore is the duty of a philosopher? To attack superstition; to point
out peace, wealth, and power to governments, as the infallible rewards of those
laws which secure religious liberty; and to teach them how much they have to
fear from priests, whose secret influence will ever m^^ace the repose of
nations in which the lib^^ty of the press is under the least restraint, For,
previous to the invention of the art of printing, it was impossible to shake
off this shameful and fatal yoke: and till sacerdotal authority shall be
entirely annihilated by reason, there will be no medium between absolute
ignorance and dangerous commotion.

The philosopher will show that, without freedom of thought, the spirit of the
clergy must again produce assassination, tortures, proscriptions, and civil
wars; and that, by enlightening the people only can nations, and kings, be
secured from such sacred crimes. He will prove that men who wish for absolute
power over the mind, will employ force instead of reason, will oblige
conscience to cede to their dogmas, and far from affording morality a more
solid basis by combining it with religious notions, will corrupt and destroy
it; while they seek not to promulgate virtue, but, to make their adherents the
blind instruments of their ambition and avarice. Should he be asked what is to
be the sustitute of the prejudices thus destroyed, he would answer -- "I have
delivered you from a wild beast, which was devouring you, and you ask for a
substitute."

Were he to be reproached with repeating the same theme too often, and with too
obstinately attacking errors in themselves beneath contempt, he will reply --
They are not contemptible while credited by the vulgar. And, though it be less
glorious to combat vulgar error than to teach new truths to sages, it is
necessary, in order to break the bonds of reason and to open a free road to
truth, to prefer utility to fame.

Instead of proving that superstition is the support of despotism, if he write
to people under an arbitrary government, he will prove that it is the enemy of
kings; and of these two truths he will purposely dwell upon that which may aid
the cause of humanity; and not on that by which it may be injured; because
liable to be misunderstood.

Instead of declaring war against despotism, before reason should have
assembled sufficient powers, and calling nations to the banners of freedom, who
neither love it nor understand what freedom is, he will enumerate to them and
their governors the various oppressions which are common to them all, and which
it is as well the interest of those who command as those who obey to root out.
To simplify and humanize the laws, to counteract the oppression of subordinate
tyranny, to break off the shackles with which false policy may have encumbered
the industry and liberty of trade, in order that freedom may be the only
happiness wanting to mankind, and that nations worthy of freedom may be
presented to her, such will be his efforts, such his theme.

Such is the result of the philosophy of Voltaire, and such the spirit which
pervades his works.

Let men, who, if he had not written, would still have been the slaves of
prejudice, or would have trembled to confess they had shaken off its yoke,
accuse Voltaire of having betrayed the interests of freedom, because he
defended it without fanaticism and imprudence; let them judge him by those
enlightened principles which were ten years posterior to his death and half a
century to his philosophy, and which, but for him, had ever remained the secret
opinions of sages; let them condemn him for having distinguished between the
good, which may exist without liberty, and the happiness to which liberty only
gives birth; let them forbear to perceive that had Voltaire infused into his
first writings the principles of freedom of the elder Brutus, or in other words
of American independence, neither Montesquieu nor Rousseau would have written
as they have done; that if, like the author of the Systeme de la Nature, he had
invited the kings of Europe to support the power of the priests The translator
speaks from memory, but he believes himself justified in saying that this
accusation of the author of the Systeme de la Nature is false, whose doctrine,
if he does not grossly mistake, was, that the despotic power of the kings and
priests was founded in reciprocal support, and that despotism of every kind was
equally hateful and destructive.
, Europe would still have been superstitious, and would long have remained in
bondages; and let them forget that in books, as in behavior, we ought to
display the courage only which the occasion requires; their injustice will but
little injure the glory of Voltaire. Men of genius must be his judges, men who
can discover, in a succession of various works, as well from their form and
style as from their principles, the secret plan of a philosopher, who in waging
continual but bold and artful war on prejudice; rather intent on conquest than
renown; too great to be vain of his opinions, and too much the friend of the
human race not to make their utility the grand object of his pursuits.

Voltaire has been accused of partiality to monarchical government, but this
accusation only can impose on such as have not read his works. It is true he
hated, beyond even monarchical power, aristocratic despotism, which unites
rigor to hypocrisy and tyranny more austere to morals more perverse; nor was
he ever the dupe of the parliaments of France, or the nobles of Sweden and
Poland, who give the name of freedom to the chains with which they would load
their vassals. In this opinion, Voltaire has been joined by all philosophers
who have sought the definition of a free state in the nature and mind of man,
and not, like the pedant Mably, in examples, drawn from the tyrannical
anarchies of Italy and Greece.

He has been blamed for having bestowed too much praise on the pomp of the
court of Louis XIV. and accusation was in this instance well founded; it was
the only prejudice of his youth which he never shook off, and there are few men
who can hope they have vanquished all their errors. It has been asserted, that
he supposed celebrated artists, orators, and poets, were all that were
necessary to render a people happy, but never could he entertain such a
thought. He supposed indeed, that arts and literature polished the manners of
men, and made the road of reason smooth and safe, and that the love of them
rendered those who governed beneficent of heart, often prevented them from
committing acts of violence and injustice, and that, under equal circumstances,
the most ingenious and polished people would always be the least wretched.

His pious enemies have taxed him with hating assaulted, by wilful
misquotation, the religion of his country, and extending incredulity even to
atheism; both of which charges are equally false. Among a multitude of
objections, founded on proofs and on passages cited from books, supposed to
have been inspired by God himself, a very small number of errors only can be
discovered; and those cannot be imputed to him as wilful mistakes, because,
comparing them to the numerous accurate quotations and facts related with
precision, it is evident that nothing could have been of less use to his cause.
When contending with his adversaries, his maxim continually was, nothing ought
to be credited which is not proved, and every thing should be rejected which is
offensive to reason and probability; and the answer he has continually received
was, whatever cannot be demonstrated an impossibility ought to be adopted and
adored.

He constantly appeared to be persuaded of the existance of a Supreme Being,
but without remaining blind to the strength of the objections opposed to that
opinion. While he thought he beheld the regular order of nature, he could not
but perceive those striking irregularities which he was unable to explain.

This was his persuasion, though it was far from that absolute certainty in the
presence of which all difficulties vanish: the work entitled, Il faut prendre
un parti, ou le principe d'action Decide we must, or the principle of action.
, perhaps contains the strongest proofs of the existance of a Supreme Being,
which men have yet been able to collect.

He believed as much of free will as a rational man can believe; that is, he
believed man has the power to resist inclination, and to weigh the motives of
action.

His incertitude respecting spirit was almost absolute, and even concerning the
existence of the soul after the decease of the body; but as he imagined this
opinion, as well as that of the existance of a God, was beneficial, he rarely
allowed himself to mention his doubts, and generally dwelt rather on the proofs
than on the objections.

Such was the philosophy of Voltaire; and we, perhaps, shall find, while we
read his life, that he has been more admired than known; that though gaul
abounds in some few of his polemical writings, his predominant sensation was
active benevolence; that his affection for the unfortunate exceeded his hatred
of his enemies; and that the passion of fame in him was ever subordinate to the
more noble love of humanity. Superior to the ostentation of virtue, or to the
concealment of his foibles, which he would sometimes heartily confess, though
not proudly proclaim, few men ever existed whose lives have been more honored
by acts of great worth or less sullied by hypocrisy. In fine, let it be
remembered that when, on the pinnacle of fame, after having rendered the French
stage illustrious by his genius, and while throughout Europe he exercised a
degree of power over the minds of men hitherto unparalleled, the following
pathetic line, J'ai fait un peu de bien, c'est mon meilleur ouvrage The little
good I Have done, that is my best of works!
was the unaffected expression of that habitual benevolence, which had taken
possession of his soul.

END OF THE LIFE OF VOLTAIRE.
THE LIFE OF VOLTAIRE, BY THE MARQUIS DE CONDORCET. TO WHICH ARE ADDED MEMOIRS
OF VOLTAIRE, WRITTEN BY HIMSELF.

TRANSLATED FROM THE FRENCH.

IN TWO VOLUMES.

VOL. II.

PHILADELPHIA: PRINTED BY AND FOR W. SPOTSWOOD.

ADVERTISEMENT.
WE have here subjoined several Letters, which will better serve to display the
character of M. de Voltaire, and that of hit enemies.

A tribute of admiration paid, by a prince of the blood, to a young man whose
rank in life placed him at a distance from that personage, and whose same had
not then lessened the distance between them, has appeared to us to merit
preservation.

The Note sent by the celebrated Le Kain cannot fail to interest men of
letters; in it, that great actor ingenuously paints Voltaire's enthusiasm for
the dramatic art, and for the talent of acting; and, at the same time, the zeal
with which he endeavored, notwithstanding his love of the art, and his desire
to find actors worthy of his pieces, to dissuade that young man from the
pursuit of a profession too much degraded by prejudice, while he added to his
advice the means of entering into some other situation. This anecdote is one of
those which prove that benevolence was the ruling passion of Voltaire's soul.

Thus, with still greater interestedness, he prevailed on Mademoiselle Clairon,
in 1765, to renounce the stage; although the powers of this sublime actress
were in all their vigor, and became daily more necessary to the poet, whose
dramatic genius began to decline by age and intense application.

His counsels to D'Alembert and Diderot, when they were persecuted for
publishing the Encyclopedia, and many circumstances of the same nature, will
further prove that the love of justice rose, in his mind, superior to every
other consideration.

A SELECTION OF JUSTIFICATORY PIECES.
VERSE The intention of Justificatory Pieces is such as to require a more
faithful and literal translation than perhaps can be given in verse, which
should preserve the true spirit of poetry. For which reason the originals of
the few poetical pieces which are here contained, are inserted, and rendered in
prose in the notes.
DE S. A. S. LE PRINCE DE CONTI, A M. DE VOLTAIRE. 1718.
PLUTON Pluto having chosen a youthful virgin, being desirous to afford the
beauty a proof of his love, gave commands that a magnificent and gallant
festival should dissipate the horrors of his gloomy abode. For this purpose, he
invited to his court all those whose good taste and delicacy could contribute
to the pompous spectacle, which he was preparing for his mistress. From among
these so famous men he selected all whose genius had been any where signalised
in the sublime art of poetry. Each did his best to succeed. Corneille and
Racine united their talents divine to bear away the prize; each in vain
contended, and wished to gain the suffrage of the God, who had issued his
commands; for though victorious over all competitors no one yet knew which of
them might claim precedence. The day at length arrived, when the whole assembly
of wits hoped to obtain the high renown which public applause had to bestow
While all were thus busied in contention, Racine and Corneille sat tranquilly
in the Elysian groves, recalling to mind the history of times past, when they
were the living ornaments of France. From ghosts newly arrived they had heard
of the fatal decay of poetry, in France; and that the auditors of Melpomene,
difficult to please, had, since their decease, found nothing worthy of the
stage. Their grief at this intelligence was extreme; they knew how much their
countrymen were delighted with the pleasures the theater can bestow; and that,
forsaken by the muse poets no longer possessed those noble flights which so
much grace the scene. Since their descent to these abodes, they had become
acquainted with a spirit, inexperienced, but whose active and graceful wit
surpassed the most aged in genius and in science. To repair the wrongs of the
suffering stage, they chose this spirit, prevailed on him to assume a human
form, and, having instructed him perfectly in their art, sent him to the banks
of the Seine, where he took the name of Arouet. Having drunken of the waters of
Aganippe, the first subject he chose was Oedipus; and, old though the sable
was, its new and youthful beauties were so numerous that it was imagined Racine
had returned from the shades, or that Corneille had corrected the defects of
his verse These lines do as much honor to the Prince of Conti as the
approbation of Oedipus did to la Motte. The prince and la Motte mutually
announced a worthy successor of Corneille and Racine; and never was prophecy
more fully accomplished.
.
ayant fait choix d'une jeune pucelle,
Et voulant donner a sa belle
Une marque de son amor,
Commanda qu'une fete et surpebe et galante
Reparat les horreurs de son triste sejour.
Pour satisfaire son attente,
Il fait assembler a sa cour
Tous ceux don't le bon gout et la delicatesse
Pouvaient contribuer au spectacle pompeux
Qu'il preparait a sa maitresse.
Parmi tous ces hommes fameux,
Il choisit ceux don't le genie
S'etait signale dans tous lieux
Par la plus noble poesy.
Chachun a reussir travailla de son mieux.
Ponr remporter le prix et Corneille et Racine
Unirent leur vein divine:
Chaque auteur en vain disputa,
Et voulut gagner le suffrage
Du Dieu qui demandait l'ouvrage;
Bien que des deux esprits la piece l'emport^t,
L'on ignorait encor qu'elle eut cu l'avantage.
Enfin le jour venu de cet evenement,
De tant d'auteurs la cohorte nombreuse
Recherchait la gloire slatteuse
De remporter l' honneur de l'applaudissement.
Tandis qu'a saire cette brigue,
Toute la troop se fatigue,
Sans se donner du mouvement,
Racine avec Corneille, au sein de l'Elysee,
Rappelaient l'histoire passee,
Du temps ou de la France ils etaient l'ornement.
Il avaient su par deux qui venaient de la Terre,
Du theater francais le funeste abandon,
Que de puis leur deces le delicat parterre
Ne pouvait rien trouver de bon.
Ce malheur leur causait une tristesse extreme.
^^lls connaissaient que dans Paris l'on aim
D'un spectacle nouveau les doux amusemens;
Qu'abandonnes par Melpomene,
Les auteurs a'avaient plus ces nobles sentimens
Qui font la grace de la scene.
Depuis leur sejour en ces lieux,
Ils avaient fait la connaissance
D'un demon sans experience,
Mais don't l'esprit vif, gracieux,
Surpassait deja les plus vieux
Par ses talens et sa science.
Pour reparer les maux du theater obscurci,
Ce demon fut par eux choisi.
Ils lui font prendre form human;
Des regles de leur art a fond l'ayant instruit,
Sur les bords fameux de la Seine
Sous le nom d'Arouet cet esprit fut conduit.
Ayant puise ses verse aux eaux de l'Aganipe,
Pour son premier projet il fait le choix d'Oedipe
Et quoique des long-temps ce sujet fut connu,
Par un style plus beau cette piece changee,
Fit croire des Enfers Racine revenu,
On que Corneille avait la sienne corrigee.
LETTER FROM THE ABBE DESFONTAINES, TO M. DE VOLTAIRE.
May 31, 1724.
I SHALL never forget, sir, the infinite obligations I owe to you. The goodness
of your heart is superior even to your understanding; and you are the truest of
friends. The zeal with which you have served me does me, indeed, more honor,
than malice and baseness of my enemies does me injustice, by the unworthy
treatment which they have brought upon me. It is necessary that I should not
publicly appear for some time. Fallax infamia terret.

I have received a letter de cachet which exiles me to the distance of thirty
leagues from Paris. I depart with pleasure in search of solitude; but I am much
mortified that this retreat should be enjoined me. It is some degree of triumph
for the wretched authors of my disgrace. I am exceedingly willing to go into
the country; but endeavor, sir, to procure the king's order to be superceded
by another letter de cachet, in this form:

The King, informed of the falsehood of the accusation brought against the
Sieur Abbe Desfotaines, consents that he should remain at Paris.

Should you obtain this order from M. de Maurepas, it would be an essential
point; and I promise M. de Maurepas, on my honor, to depart immediately, and
not to return to Paris, till I shall have demanded secret permission of him.

This, my dear friend, is what, at present, I have to beg you to obtain for me.
You will confer yet another infinite obligation on me, by this new service. It
is, in my mind, the simplest means that can be taken to repair the scandal and
injustice which I have endured, till I can do better, and can procure the
necessary information to discover the hidden springs of the horrible intrigue
of my enemies. Notwithstanding the atrocious nature of the accusation, and the
readiness of the public to believe the accused guilty, I have the satisfaction
of seeing those who are even unknown to me take my part. Such men as Nadal,
Danchet, de Pons, and Freret, are the only persons, I am told, who treat my
name as, through my life, I shall treat their infamous work and their unworthy
characters. Genus irritabile vatum.

I have formed a plan for my defense, which will be excellent and curious, and
I shall finish it in the country. I am too publicly known to remain silent
after such an execrable insult, and I shall compose my apology in such a manner
that I shall have the honor of presenting it to M. de Maurepas, and shall
beseech him to permit its publication. In this, will be seen all the
misfortunes which have be fallen me, and these misfortunes ever caused by men
of letters; but it will particularly contain the history of my quitting the
Jesuits.

Adieu, my dear friend; let me beg of you to think of me.

DESFONTAINES.

LETTER FROM THE SIEUR DEMOULIN TO M. DE VOLTAIRE.
Paris, August 12. 1738. SIR,
WE thank you most humbly for all your goodness, and for the indulgence you
have granted to enable us to repay you. We shall ever preserve a faithful
remembrance of it, and, on every occasion, shall express our lively gratitude.
Your security is perfectly good; and we beg you to be persuaded we shall
discharge the debt as speedily as we possibly can. I am in advance for several
good speculations; and our zeal to serve others has added to our embarrassment.

You do me justice, sir, in believing me incapable of any ill design; I venture
even to declare to you that I never have entertained any, and that never had a
lover a more tender attachment to his mistress than I to you, notwithstanding
all that has happened. I have inconsiderate moments, it is true; you have often
reproved me for them, with reason; but I will yield to no one in integrity of
mind, purity of intentions, or zealous activity, when there arises an
opportunity of doing good.

I know that I have been greatly calumniated; and I know also that those who
exclaimed most against me, quitted you to come to me with a design of
exasperating my mind against you. Since that time, I have rendered some
considerable services to one of those persons; and should occasions present
themselves of obliging the others, I shall willingly embrace them. It is the
only vengeance which I profess to take.

If you think I can be useful to you in any way, and indeed in affairs that may
require discretion, honor me with your commands; and I beseech you to be
assured of an active and secret service.

My wife begs her most humble respects. I have the honor to be, with profound
esteem,

SIR, Your most humble servant, DEMOULIN.
Acknowledgment of the same.
I, the undersigned, acknowledge that M. de Voltaire, having lent my wife and
me the sum of twenty-seven thousands livres, and in consequence of the deranged
situation of our affairs, having consented to take the sum of three thousand
livres secured by an obligatory writing, executed in the presence of the notary
Ballot, on the 12th June, 1736, has now forgiven seven hundred and fifty livres
which remained to be paid of the three thousand, and has given me an entire and
full release for the same. Jan. 19, 1743.

DEMOULIN.



LETTERS FROM THE BOOKSELLER JORE TO M. DE VOLTAIRE.
LETTER I.
Paris, December 20, 1738. Sir,
I ENTREAT you, in consideration of the embarrassed state of my affairs and the
detention of my papers, to pardon my delaying till now to acknowledge the
wicked proceedings of those who have availed themselves of my misfortunes to
oblige me to commence an unjust suit against you, and to suffer an infamous
factum (declaration) to be printed. I altogether retract them both. The malice
of your enemies has served to no other purpose than to display the goodness of
your character to me; for you have the generosity to pardon the fault I have
committed in listening to bad counsel. I assure you I repented even in the
moment in which I was so unhappy as to act against you. I, at length, perfectly
perceive how I was led into the error. The jealousy of men of letters is not
unknown to you, and, in this, you see to what excess it has been carried. They
have inflamed my mind, and have made me the means of injuring you; which has so
displeased me that I promise you never again to see those who induced me to
forget my duty to you in this instance, and I will atone for the extreme
injustice of it, by the constant attachment which I vow to preserve through
life to your interests.

I beseech you, sir, to restore your friendship to me, and believe that my
heart never took any part in the malice of your enemies, and that it is my
heart alone which leads me to make this declaration.

I have the honor to be, with respect, SIR, Your most humble servant, JORE.

LETTER II.
Paris, Dec. 28, 1738. SIR,
I HAD the honor of writing to you, on the 20th of this month, in the
bitterness of my heart, to entreat your forgiveness, and to assure you of the
sincere repentance under which I suffer for the unjust suit which I was induced
by your enemy (you know to whom I allude) to commence against you. I told you
of my remorse and the horror which I felt at my cruel attack of him who was my
benefactor; I informed you that I had discovered the error into which I had
been led; and I begged you, sir, to believe that my affliction is equal to my
fault. Deign, sir, to extend your generosity to the granting me the pardon I
venture to demand. I retract the unjust and calumnious factum which was made in
my name, and which I had the unhappiness to sign. I was blind, and your enemies
seduced me. Again, I repeat to you that I am in the deepest affliction, and my
remorse has brought sickness upon me. There is nothing I would not do, during
the remainder of my life, to atone for my fault. In short, sir, were you a
witness to the distress I feel at being deceived by ill counsel, you would pity
my condition. Be so good, at least, to give orders that I may be informed that
you have the clemency to pardon me, if you do not deign to write to me
yourself. I engage to pay all the expense of the process if I have money
sufficient; nor is there any thing I should not be willing to do through the
remaining days of my life to testify to you individually and to the public my
repentance, my admiration of your character, and the very profound respect with
which I am,

Sir, Your most humble servant, JORE.

LETTER III.
Paris, June 3, 1742.
I HAVE received, sir, the three hundred livres that you have after all had the
goodness to give me. This new manner of avenging yourself of an unfortunate
man, whose greatest unhappiness has been to forget what was due to you, and who
has so long been gireved for his error, shall ever be present with my heart.
Your generous actions to me, augment my sincere repentance; and inspire me with
the tenderest respect and affection for you. Those who deceived me must indeed
have been monsters; nor could they know your real character as I do. My life
ought to be employed in proving my devotion to you. I cannot find terms to
express the feelings you have excited in my heart. Permit me only to present
myself before you, permit me to come and thank you; it is a favor I beseech
you to add to all your other goodness.

I am, with respect and the most lively gratitude,

Sir, Your most humble servant, JORE.

LETTER IV.
Milan, October 20, 1768. SIR,
THE pension you have the goodness to allow me, and some scholars whom I
assisted in perfecting themselves in the French language, but who,
unfortunately for me, are quitting this city to travel, have enabled me to
subsist at Milan. Great God! in what a situation shall I be placed, deprived of
these succors! I have been formerly useful to you in being your amanuensis;
can I no longer be of any service to you? If Milan were a place in which works
were published in French, I could employ myself in correcting the press, and
thus avoid the wretchedness which threatens me, and from which you, sir, can
relieve me, by giving me an asylum in your house, where I am persuaded you must
have some-one who is less useful to you than I might be.

I hope, sir, that when you consider my present condition, and how different it
is from that in which you have formerly seen me, you will be induced to soften
its severity; and so much the more readily as this change in my circumstances
has not arisen either from my dissipation or imprudence.

When M. de Cideville procured me the honor of being known to you, he, as well
as myself regarded that honor as the means of augmenting my fortune; how could
he foresee the injustice that would be done me, and that my total ruin would be
the result?

I flatter myself that, moved by my unhappy situation, you will honor me with
an answer which will dissipate the frightful apprehension. which I have of the
future and which I cannot shun without your kind assistance. With this hope,
permit me to subscribe myself, respectfully,

Sir, Your most humble servant, JORE.

LETTER V.
Milan, April 23, 1769 SIR,
ON my return from the isles of Bormio, where his excellency Count Frederic was
so good as to keep me three weeks for the benefit of the air, and to reinstate
my health after the sickness I have had, Messieurs Origoni and Parraviccini
remitted me from Florence, by your order, five and twenty sequins, for which I
have given them a receipt in the name of Messieurs Francis and Louis Bontemps
of Geneva.

I cannot sufficiently testify my gratitude to you, nor could you, sir, have
sent me this assistance more opportunely; as I wanted both linen and clothes.
Although your generosity extended the order to remit me what I should have
occasion for without limiting the sum, I thought it my duty not to abuse your
kindness; and without delay I employed the twenty five sequins in the purchase
of some clothes which fortunately fitted me, and in four shirts which I have
ordered to be made; and these will at least place me in a condition to appear
decently in the houses of such people of rank as have the goodness to admit me.
In these families I have spoken of your goodness, and I was commended for
having requested no more than this sum, although your liberality had not
restricted me.

With what tranquillity shall I pass the remainder of my life, should I have the
misfortune to survive you, were you to settle on me the means of supporting the
distressing situation of my affairs, a situation which I have so little
merited. I venture, sir, to hope this from your goodness. I shall then have
nothing further to desire than an opportunity of expressing the greatness of my
gratitude to you. I look for that happy day with impatience; and beg you to be
persuaded of the respectful attachment with which I have the honor to be,

Sir, Your most humble servant, JORE.

LETTER VI.
Milan, September 25, 1773. SIR,
STRONGLY penetrated with gratitude and transported with joy, I thank you for
your consoling promise of extricating me from my distress, and for the eight
Louis d'ors which you sent me. They could not have arrived more fortunately to
relieve me from the greatest embarrassment. Fearing I should offend you, I
forbear to say all that passes in my mind. I flatter myself that your ideas of
me are changed to my advantage, and I assure you that I deserve they should be
so by the sentiments of gratitude with which I have the honor, respectfully,
to be,

SIR, Your most humble servant, JORE.

LETTER FROM M. DE SAINT-HYACINTH, TO M. DE BURIGNY.
Belleville, May 2, 1739
I RETURN you, sir, the manuscript which you did me the honor to confide to
me. You will probably imagine that I have read it with pleasure, and you are
not mistaken; but should you conclude that I felt myself satisfied when I had
finished, you will be deceived. Charmed with what I have already seen, I have
but the more sensibly felt the absence of the remainder; and to the pleasure of
perusing the work has succeeded considerable anger against the author.

Your indifference, sir, or to speak more frankly, your indolence, must make
all those who know of what you are capable, as angry as myself. If you are so
indifferent to same as to contemn the reputation which must result from the
perfection of this work, the justice the public have done you with respect to
what you have already imparted to them, calls on you to give them the
remainder, which they expect with impatience. No one has ascended with more
truth, or more penetration to the fountain head, nor has any one treated this
subject with greater delicacy and precision. I shall excite all your friends to
importune you have made the work complete. At the head of these I shall place
the Countess, to whose lips the Graces have imparted a gift of persuasion;
after which it will be seen whether we shall leave you indolent, and at your
ease, for some time to come.

You did me justice, sir, when you asserted that I had no connection with the
author of the Voltairomanic, whoever he may be; and I further now declare to
you that I have never read the piece entirely through. I merely glanced over
it, because I was informed the author had cited are relative to M. de Voltaire;
a circumstance which I could not hear without indignation. I would gladly know
by what authority M. de Voltaire's name and mine are brought in question, since
neither the one nor the other are to be found in the work of mine which is
quoted by them. They go further: would you suppose it, sir? They have
interpreted what I meant to say. The deification, of which they speak, is
merely a work of imagination, a chain of fictions, the links of which are
connexed to form a whole. The design in this was to point out in general the
defects into which the learned fall, in various sciences and various nations.
The author has, therefore, in this work, been obliged to imagine circumstances,
which, although related as characteristically personal, should be regarded
merely as general satire, applicable to all the learned who may be guilty of
similar errors. It is not possible to write an allegory, or draw a character,
which the imagination of the reader cannot apply to some one; whom perhaps the
author has not even known. Thus, he who, in a work of invention, shall have had
only a general object, shall be made to allude to an individual, by the
malignity of false interpretation. If this be permitted, we must no longer
think of writing; at least till the public, becoming more reserved, judge of
the intention of the author in conformity with the general design of his work;
and till they forbear to cause the malignity of interpretation to recoil upon
the writer whom they interpret.

When I saw in what manner the writer of the Voltairomaine had decided on my
intention, I own to you, sir, that I was extremely surprised how he, who is
said to be the author of it, can be thus totally unmindful of all decorum. My
surprise equalled my indignation and his temerity, not to use a harsher term.
It is true that from the nature of the work, there is nothing which we might
not be led to expect.

I am informed that M. de Voltaire so much despised this book as not to aswer
it. He did perfectly right. Abortion is the destiny of such writings; which can
only exist by being the subject of conversation. M. de Voltaire has more
valuable employment. Cultivating at present the Musas severiores, they have
taught him to rise into those tranquil regions to which the vapors of the
earth do not extend: Sapientum templa serena.

Here, sir, are the two madrigals of M. de Big^icourt, which I could not
perfectly repeat to you the last time I had the honor of seeing you in Paris.

Des traits d'une injuste colere
Vous pays mes seux en ce jour:
Iris, pourquoi voulez-vous fair
La Haine ^ille de l'Amour With marks of unjust anger you now repay my passion.
Wherefore, Iris, would you make Hatred the child of Love?
?
AUTRE.
Iris, vous dedaignez les feux
Qu'en moi vos charms ont fait naitre:
Mon destin n'est pas d'etre heureux,
Mais mon coeur meritait de l'etre ANOTHER.

Iris, you disdain the flame which your charms have kindled in my bosom: it is
not my fate to be happy, yet my heart deserves so to be.


.
Pray inform me, sir, whether you are acquainted with the manuscript on
Tournaments, purchased by M. de Reiux; and, when time and circumstances shall
suit, do not forget that you have at Belleville a very humble and very obedient
servant,

SAINT-HYACINTH.

LETTER FROM M. D'ARGENSON, THE ELDER, TO M. DE VOLTAIRE.
Paris, Feb. 7, 1739.
THIS Abbe Desfontains is a vile man, sir; his ingratitude certainly surpasses
the crimes by which he gave you an opportunity of obliging him. Fear not but
that the people in power will be your partisans. I one day happened, at the
table of the cardinal, to affirm that he was the rector of a good living in
Normandy, by which I offended all present. His eminence made me repeat three
times what I had said, and I should have lost the esteem of the world, and have
ruined my fortune, had not the Prevot des Marchands bore witness to the fact.
The chancellor thinks as I do relative to this *** of the police; and M.
Herault ought to be of the same opinion, or he will render himself accountable
to those whom he may condemn. The chancellor thinks well of your works, which
he has often mentioned to me during our walks at Fresne. But of all your
knights, my brother is most angry with your enemy. I went to him after the
receipt of your letter, and he told me that, in conformity to the chancellor's
orders, the Abbe Desfontains would be summoned to declare, whether the libels
in question were written by him; and, if not freely, would be obliged to sign
the affirmative or the negative. Be assured the business will be properly
conducted. I will shortly solicit the chancellor in person.

I embrace your cause with adour and satisfaction, which is but just. I have
continually known you the enemy of scandal; you are angry with knaves, and
laugh at fools. I mean to imitate your example to the best of my ability; and
yet I think myself an honest man. This is no more than having an opinion; to
impart such an opinion to our friends is detraction, which religion, good
sense, and even instinct forbid. You have always appeared to me far from having
any such evil propensity, and I am confirmed in this supposition by your
acknowledged works, which are worthy of yourself. Continue to write without
fear for five and twenty years longer; but write poetry, notwithstanding your
oath in the preface to Newton. With whatever clearness, beauty, and dignity,
you may have understood and explained the philosophic system of this
Englishman, do not therefore despise poetical e^istles, poems, and tragedies.
We shall always obtain scientific food, but we shall soon have a dearth of
works of wit, and no longer will go to the theater from the want of good
authors in verse and prose.

Adieu, sir: why do you mention protection and respect to an old friend, and
one who will ever remain such?

LETTER FROM THE SIEUR DE BONNEVAL This Bonneval is a knave who formerly robbed
me of ten loui^ d^^rs was dismissed from the house o^ Mantr^ortel, and wrote a
li^^l against me. [Note of M. de Voltaire written on the original letter.]
, TO M. DE VOLTAIRE.
Paris, Feb. 27, 17^7.
I WAS at your house this morning, sir, with a (...) of having the honor of
seeing you, and was informed that you were at court. You would, without doubt,
have been surprised at my visit, but the motive by which it was occasioned
would have surprised you still more. Nevertheless, I assumed courage from the
reflections which naturally arise in a mind of the first order, and I said to
myself: It is true that, since the year 1725, I have scarce ever had the honor
of seeing M. de Voltaire, but he will recollect that he walks in a sphere which
does not permit every one to approach him; and he cannot be ignorant of the
admiration of him which I have ever avowed, nor can he doubt the avowal without
doing injustice to my discernment. No one at present has it more in his power
to render him justice than myself, from the opportunity which I had during a
year of observing him in those societies in which the mind and the heart may
discover their true feelings without danger; and thence I have formed an
opinion of him, which persuades me that it is a pleasure to him to confer
obligations.

These sentiments, sir, led me to your house to beg the favor of you to lend
me ten pistoles, for which I have an immediate occasion; and to offer you, for
payment, an authority to receive the sum from the a^rears of a rent which was
left me by a lady of your acquaintance, and who has been dead some years past.
If the dead had any influence I would implore her mediation in my behalf. You
would not have resisted that while she was living, and perhaps she still lives
in your memory; at least she merits the honor by the sentiments she
entertained respecting you. I was acquainted with them to the hour of her
death; and of that I was a sorrowful witness.

The request which I designed to have made personally to you* I now communicate
in writing, and if you should please to comply with it, I will wait on any
person you may think proper to name on your behalf, and place the authority in
his hands. I fear to offend (...) delicacy, should I here employ tricks of
eloquence to dispose you to do me this favor. To explain our necessity to a
person who think^ nobly, is to say every thing; and I will only add, that my
gratitude shall be equally ardent and durable.

I have the honor to be most truly, sir, your very humble servant,

DE BONNEVAL.
Rue St. Anne, at the house of M. Dicnis.
LETTER FROM M. PRAULT, JUNIOR, BOOKSELLER AT PARIS, TO MADAME DE CHAMPBONIN,
AT VASSY.
Paris, Jan. 24, 1739 MADAM.
YOU know that I am indebted, for the obligation of being introduced to M. de
Voltaire, to a magistrate who is his friend, and who is distinguished by his
virtue and his merit. I have long wished to bring my business into repute by
the works of a man whom I then knew only by the powers of his mind, and who has
since so strongly attached me to him by the qualities of his heart. My youth,
my good disposition, and my sincerity, titles to his favor which are ever
successful, completed that recommendation had commenced. Since that time, his
confidence has rendered me the instrument of so many acts of generosity, that,
(...) well in justice to him as in gratitude to ^riends whom I particularly
regret, I think it my duty to render an authentic testimony of all my
transactions relative to M. de Voltaire, and to answer the unjust accusation of
the lible entitled The Voltairomanie, which all worthy people behold with
indignation.

The following is the history of M. de Voltaire's works since I knew him, and
which I am enable ^o prove by authentic documents.

I began by printing the Henriade with considerable corrections, the profits of
which M. de Voltaire presented to a young man whose talents had made him his
friend; and to whom he also gave his tragedy of the Death of Caesar. At the same
time he gave the liberty of reprinting Za^re to another bookseller, whose
copy-right in that work had expired. He gave to me his tragedies of Oedipus,
Mariamne, and ^rutus, for my own emolument. I also published the Prodigal Son;
the person who was charged to treat with me for it demanded so reasonable a
price, that, far from having any disagreement. I gave him a hundred fran^s more
than the price he had demanded. Some days after M. de Voltaire informed me in a
letter that he never required money for his productions That is to say, for
himself.
, but books only. In fine, he made a present of his Element of Newton to his
Dutch booksellers. Shortly after an edition was printed which was called the
London edition, and I knew that the bookseller, who began it unknown to
Voltaire, thought, nevertheless, that it was an attention due to M. de Voltaire
to communicate the design to him and to submit it to his corrections before it
was published. The edition being ready to appear, M. de Voltaire bought a
hundred and fifty copies to present to his friends at Paris, which cost him,
including the binding, nearly a hundred pistoles.

This, madam, is the account of the profit which M. de Voltaire has drawn from
his works; or rather it is the means of confounding his calumniator; and you
will perceive what credit ought to be given to the impostures of which his
works is an entire tissue.

I have the honor to be, with the most profound respect, etc.

PRAULT, Junior.

Declaration of the Abbe Guyot Desfontaines to the Police.
I declare that I am not the author of a libel printed under the title of The
Voltairomanie; and that I altogether disavow it, regarding as calumnious all
the facts which are imputed to M. de Voltaire in that libel; and that I should
think myself dishonored had I taken the least part in that production,
professing as I do all the sentiments of esteem for M. de Voltaire which are
due to his talents, and which the public so justly express for him. Done at
Paris, April 4, 1739.

DESFONTAINES.

N. B. The original is deposited in the hands of M. Herault.

LETTER FROM M. DE CHAMPBONIN, TO HIS SON, AT THE FORTIFICATION OFFICE AT PARIS.
Champbonin, May 15, 1739.
YOU must no longer write to M. de Voltaire at Cirey, my son; he is lately gone
to Brussels with the Marquis and Marchioness du Chatelet. You will easily
conceive how much we are afflicted at his absence; never was there a more
tender or more respectable friend. We feelingly regret the four years which he
passed in Champaign. Those happy days, during which we lived with him, cannot
but recall to your memory the numerous marks of friendship he bestowed on us;
which were so effectual that, had I the power, I could not do more even for you
who are my son. How great then ought your gratitude toward him be? He was under
no obligation of affording you such singular marks of attachment, and I hope
you will never forget the excess of his kindness. It is not enough that you
should partake of the favors he has done us; it is necessary that you should
even surpass us in gratitude. Love him like your father; every feeling of
affection is due from you to him; and will give me still greater satisfaction
than the same affection felt for me.

The regret of your mother equals mine; you know our friendship for him, and we
both lament the loss of those proofs of congenial tenderness, which he was so
ready to return.

The Count and Countess de la Neuville, concerning whom you make enquiry, like
us, infinitely regret the loss of M. de Voltaire. He departed beloved by the
whole country, and we all bewail his absence. The Marquis and Marchioness du
Chatelet give us to hope that they will return to Cirey as soon as they shall
have completed their business.

Write regularly to Brussels, my son; and depend on the affection of myself and
of your mother.

CHAMPBONIN.

LETTER FROM THE ABBE PREVOST, TO M. DE VOLTAIRE.
January 15, 1740.
I AM extremely desirous, sir, of becoming some way useful to you; this is an
old sentiment which I have often expressed in my publications, which I have
communicated to M. Thiriot on more than one occasion, and which I feel very
forcibly renewed since the affair of Prault. I cannot endure that a multitude
of insignificant people, embittering their minds against such a character,
should, some of them from pure malignity, others from a false air of probity
and justice, exert themselves to communicate the poison of their heart to more
worthy people.

It has occurred to me that the public taste, which has been hitherto
sufficiently uniform in its partiality to my writings, would render me more
likely than any other man to do you some service. My admiration of your
talents, and the particular attachment I profess to your person, would alone
urge me to this object with much zeal: but my own interest is connected with my
wishes, and if I may in some measure add to your reputation you may at the same
time be serviceable to my fortune.

Here follow two points, sir, which demand a little explanation; but it shall
be short; for I have only to lay the proposition before you.

1st I have thought that A defense of M. de Voltaire and his works, written
with care, energy, and simplicity, etc. might be a valuable work, and might
perhaps once for all silence malignity. I should divide it into two parts; one
of which would respect his person, and the other his productions. Those
advantages which the habit of writing may have added to such abilities as I
possess I will employ. The work should be published before the end of winter.

2d. The derangement of my affairs is such that if Heaven or some one inspired
by Heaven, does not enable me to settle them, I shall soon depart for England.
I should not complain of my situation, had it originated in my ill conduct;
but, though I have been five years in France, with as many friends as there are
worthy people in Paris, and with the protection of a prince of the blood The
Prince de Conti.
who entertains me in his own house, I am yet without a benefice of five sons.
I owe about a hundred and fifty louis d'ors; for which my creditors, uniting
together, have made me give my personal security; and so urgent is my
necessity, that, having agreed to discharge my debts at a time which expires on
the first of the ensuing month, I am threatened with an arrest if I am not
punctual. Of a thousand opulent persons with whom I pass my life, I know not
one of whom I can venture to demand this sum, or who I think would advance it
for me.

The question is, would M. de Voltaire, partly engaged by his generosity and by
his zeal for men of letters, partly by my design to employ myself in his
service, be willing to deliver me from the most cruel embarrassment which I
have ever experienced? The undertaking is worthy (...) ^im; beside that the
novelty alone of settling the affairs of a man to whom the protection of a
prince of the blood, and I may add the friendship of all Paris, is ineffectual,
appears to me a singular inducement.

I have two ways of repaying the obligation. The first, by a grateful sense of
the favor; and I shall be reduced to that if death surprises me, for I do not
possess a revenue of a single son One Penny.
; but I am not advanced in years, and I enjoy a state of health which promises
me long life. The other mode is, to give security on my books; that would be
sufficient for my creditors if they would listen to reason, but my upholsterers
and tailors, who have waited some time for their debts, did not think the
security sufficient. A man of letters will better understand the value of this
fund.

I conclude, sir; for indeed here is a very extraordinary letter. I flatter
myself that, as I shall find much pleasure in boasting of your kindness should
you grant me the favor, you will also be careful to bury my request in
oblivion if any reason, which I shall feel no wish to discover, should prevent
you giving it the reception which I hope. But in either case, you will please
to regard as one of your most devoted, servants and zealous admirers the

Abbe PREVOST.
P. S. You will readily imagine that the two proposals I have made you sprang
from M. Prault's recital of your various beneficent actions.



REPORT, Made to the Academy of Sciences by Messrs. Pitot and Clairaut, April
26, 1741, relative to the memorial of M. de Voltaire, concerning Living Force.
WE have examined by order of the academy, the memorial of M. de Voltaire,
entitled, Doubts on the measure and the nature of moving Forces. The memorial
contains two parts. The first part is an abridged recital of the principal
reasons which have been adduced, to prove that the forces of bodies in motion
are as the quantities of motion, that is, as the mass multiplied by the simple
velocity, and not by the square of the velocity; as those pretend who adopt the
theory of Vis viva, or living force. The reasons stated by M. de Voltaire are
not given as demonstrations, but proposed as doubts: they, however, are the
doubts of a well informed man, and greatly resemble decision.

We shall not enter into the examination of this first part, because the
intention of the author seems only to have been to recite the strongest reasons
which have been given against living forces, in a manner sufficiently brief and
clear, so as to be recollected by the reader with facility.

In the second part, M de Voltaire considers the nature of force. As he has
concluded that moving force is only the produce of the mass multiplied by the
velocity, he admits of no distinction between the vis mortua, or dead force,
and the vis viva, or living force. When it is said that the force of a body in
motion differs infinitely from that of a body at rest, this, according to him,
is equal to saying that liquid is infinitely more liquid when it runs than when
it does not.

He next states that, if force be nothing more than the produce of the mass
multiplied by the velocity, it is nothing more than the body itself acting, or
ready to act. Thus he rejects the opinion of the philosphers, who have imagined
that force was a distinct being, a substance animating and separate from
bodies; that force ought to be sought for in the simple beings called monades,
etc.

M. de Voltaire having remarked, as many other persons have previously done,
that in various cases the quantity of motion augments, and remaining convinced
that force is merely the quantity of motion, he asks whether those philosophers
who have maintained the system of the preservation of an equal quantity of
force, in nature, are not as far from the truth as those who should maintain
the preservation of an equal quantity of species, individuals, forms, etc.

He next asks, by referring to the circumstance, that an elastic body striking
on another more large, does then communicate a greater quantity of motion, and
consequently according to him more force than it previously possessed, whether
it be not evidently deducible that bodies do not communicate force; so that,
the mass and the motion being insufficient for the communication of motion, the
vis inertia would be likewise necessary, without which matter would make no
resistance, and there would be no action.

M. de Voltaire further supposes, that the vis inertia, the mass, and the
motion, are not sufficient. He thinks there must be a principle which keeps all
bodies in motion, and incessantly communicates to them an acting force, or a
force ready to act; which principle, according to him, should be gravity;
whether gravity have ^r have not a mechanical cause.

Neither ca^ gravity, continues he, account for all the effects of nature. It
is very far from explaining the force of organized bodies, which must have an
internal principle, like that of elasticity.

M. de Voltaire concludes his memorial by saying, that since the active force
of elasticity produces the same effects as force of any other kind, it may be
concluded that nature, which often attains different ends by the same means;
may also attain one end by various means; and that therefore true philosophy
consists in recording the operations of nature, previous to subjecting the
whole to any general law.

Of the various questions, difficult to resolve, which the two parts of this
memorial contain, it appears that M. de Voltaire is well acquainted with what
relates to experimental philosophy; and that he has himself well considered
such subjects.

Paris, April 26, 1741. PITOT, CLAIRAUT.
I certify that the above copy is conformable to the original.

Paris, April 27, 1741. DORTOUS DE MAIRAN, perpetual secretary of the royal
academy of sciences.



LETTER FROM THE ADVOCATE MANNORY He received alms at my hand^, and wrote a
libel against me. Note of M. de Voltaire.
, TO M. DE VOLTAIRE.
May 10th, 1744.
IT is, sir, a long while since you heard from me; and it is very mortifying
that I am compelled to call your attention to me by a history of my
misfortunes. Yet I too well know the sentiments of your heart to yield to my
fears. My father is still living; he is eighty years old, and is extremely
feeble. At his death I shall possess more than a hundred thousand francs; but I
have not received a crown. My profession abounds with difficulties; and, to
pursue it, assistance is required, on which I have relied, and which has failed
me. I have been afflicted with long and severe sickness, and though at length I
regained my health, my practice had declined. I afterward formed an
acquaintance with a rich devotee; and, having incurred much expense in dress to
enable me to appear suitably at her table, she barbarously forbade me the
house. At last, sir, the poor M. de Fimarcon applied to me for assistance and
counsel, and as I thought his affairs promising I dedicated my whole time and
labor to the prosecution of his suit. My illness had deprived me of half my
business, and I lost the remainder by giving my whole time to M. de Firmarcon.

I flatter myself that I should acquire honor by extricating him from that
affair, and that his gratitude would sufficiently indemnify me. Every thing has
been unsuccessful, sir. Mean while I was three months in search of a house; on
the twenty-third of December I hired one, and since that time the workmen have
been employed in preparing it for my reception; so that six months have passed
in which I have been without a house, without chambers, and consequently
without employment.

Judge, sir, of my situation. I could not procure a crown from my father. He
who has been inflexible during his whole life, does not become feeling at the
age of eighty. M. Dodun, the old receiver-general, of whom I have hired my
house in the Isle A part of Paris.
, has made me wait, but he has expended four thousand francs to make the house
commodious for me, which will be to my advantage. I have some furniture which,
were they on the spot, would serve my purpose. I have not therefore, sir, any
present occasion for more money than will enable me to remove my furniture to
the place which of course is an object of importance, to pay some trifling
debts which I have contracted in the course of six months, and to leave me a
small sum with which I may open my chambers, and subsist till I shall fall into
practice, which I cannot fail to do.

I have frequently heard, sir, that the unfortunate are permitted to boast a
little. Claiming this privilege, to which my situation has given me too clear a
title, I may declare that I do not fear any advocate who is at present at the
bar. If I find assistance I shall soon recover my losses, and my chambers will
have their use; in the course of a year my practice will probably be
considerable; and my father must, in the end, leave me the property which he
cannot carry away with him. But should I not procure any aid, my house will
become useless; I shall be no longer able to appear at the courts; and I shall
be inevitably ruined; for I have no talents for any other employment. I will
give you all the security in my power; my wife and I will engage jointly and
separately for the debt; or I will even give bills of exchange for it, provided
sufficient time is granted me for the payment.

Will you abandon me, sir, and forget your long friendship for me? I am one of
your oldest partisans; and the defender of Oedipus ought not to perish for want
in the midst of the fairest hopes; nor does he ask for more than a little
assistance. You will have the honor of patronising an advocate; and, if he
become celebrated, the work will not be unworthy of you! Though you have
hitherto done so much and in various ways, this may perhaps be wanting to your
fame. My whole reliance is on you, sir; for the times are frightful since
nobody is interested in behalf of talents. You alone know all who possess them;
and you are their protector; and, should you think that I am among the number
you will not surely forsake me. My fortune then depends on the judgment which
you shall entertain of my capacity, and I expect your decision with confidence.
I lodge with M. Dubois, at the Palais Royal, Rue de la Comedy Francaise.
Before you enable me to remove to my house, I shall look for the honor of your
answer. I am, with the profoundest respect,

SIR, Your most humble, etc. MANNORY.

LETTER FROM THE SAME.
Thursday Morning.
YOU gave me permission sir, again to remind you of my situation after your
return from the country. I appear respectable enough in my counsellor's gown;
but I am in total want of clothes; nor can I pay any visits, which deranges all
my affairs. Be so good as to inform me, sir, if you have thought of M. Thiriot.
I have had but four sons to subsist on for six days, and you have promised me
some small assistance; do not withhold it at present, sir. Were I properly
dressed I would be in a condition to pursue my practice, and my situation would
change. I have the promise of many causes, but they are not yet ready for
trial. We approach the vacations, and the time is therefore unfavourable. Will
you sir, mean while, suffer me to die of hunger? I did not eat yesterday; and
the day before bread was my only food; but it was a feast. I cannot decently go
out in my gown, and my dress is in too bad a state to be seen. I dare not
therefore visit any one; nor have I money to procure any thing at home. My
situation is terrifying! For God's sake, sir, give the bearer of this letter
what you may think proper for my present relief; he is a person on whom you may
rely. Pray inform me what M. Thiriot does. Will you permit an old servant to
perish; a man who I venture to say possesses talents, and who is actually in
sight of the harbor? His vessel is somewhat impaired; but he needs only
assistance to enter the port. I am with the most lively gratitude,

SIR, Your humble etc. MANNORY.

LETTER FROM J. J ROUSSEAU, TO M. DE VOLTAIRE.
Paris, Dec. 11, 1745. SIR,
I HAVE endeavored during fifteen years to render myself worthy of your esteem
and your zeal for the interest of youthful poets in whom you discover talents.
But having composed the music of an opera, I find myself, I know not how,
metamorphosed into a musician. In this quality the Duke de Richelieu committed
to my care the alteration of the Divertissements which you have introduced into
the Princess of Navarre, and he even required me to make such changes in the
original plan as were necessary to adapt it to your new subject. I made
respectful remonstrances, the duke insisted, and I obeyed; it is the only thing
which can be done by a man in my situation. M. Ballot is charged to communicate
the alterations to you; which I have endeavored to execute in the fewest words
possible, and that is the only merit I can give them. Do me the favor, sir, to
examine them, or rather to substitute others more worthy of the place which
they were designed to occupy.

I also hope, sir, that you will please to give your opinion of the recitative
before it is performed, and point out to me the places in which I have departed
from good taste, that is to say from your conception. Whatever may be my
success in these trifling essays, they will ever make me proud should they
procure me the opportunity of being known to you, and of expressing the
admiration and profound respect with which I have the honor to be.

SIR, your very humble, etc. J. J. ROUSSEAU, Citizen of Geneva.

LETTER FROM THE SAME.
Paris, Jan. 30, 1750. SIR,
ONE Rousseau Jean Baptiste. We do not know the other Rousseau; it was not the
Rousseau of Thoulouse, author of the Journal Encyclopedique, nor the Rousseau
of Gotha.
formerly declared himself your enemy least he should be compelled to
acknowledge himself your inferior. Another Rousseau, without the genius of the
former, thought proper to imitate his malicious conduct. I am distinguished by
the same name as those, but possess neither the talents of the one nor the
presumption of the other, and am still less capable of their injustice to you.
I am very willing to live unknown but not dishonored; and such I should deem
myself had I failed in the respect which all men of letters owe to you, and
which all those entertain who merit respect themselves.

I will not dwell on this subject, nor violate, even when you are the object,
the law I have resolved to observe never to address the praises of any one to
himself, But, sir, I will take the liberty to say that you formed an unworthy
judgment of an honest man when you believed him capable of returning
ingratitude and arrogance for your kindness and politeness to him in the affair
of the Fetes de Ramire La Princess de Navarre, which was afterward called,
Les Fetes de Ramire.
. I have not forgotten the letter with which you honored me on that occasion,
and which convinced me that, notwithstanding base calumnies, you are the true
patron of rising talents which need protection. You deigned to promise your
friendship to the first efforts of my mind; they were unsuccessful, and that
was what I ought to have expected. A solitary being who knew not how to speak,
a timid, disconcerted man did not dare to present himself to you: and what
would have been my title? But it was confidence and not zeal that I wanted;
fearing to intrude on your observation, I expected from time a favorable
occasion to testify to you my respect and gratitude.

From that day I renounced letters and the delusive hope of acquiring fame;
despairing to obtain that object by the aid of genius, I have disdained to owe
it, like ordinary men, to indirect means. But I never shall renounce my
admiration of your works. You have painted friendship and every virtue as a man
who understands and loves them. I have heard envy murmur but have rejected its
clamours, and have said without fear of deceiving myself: "These writings which
elevate the mind and excite fortitude are not the productions of a man
indifferent to virtue."

Nor did you form juster notions of a republican, since I was known to you as
such. I adore liberty, and equally detest despotism and servitude, and would
not impose either on any man. Such principles illy sympathizs with insolence;
which is often the sentiment of slaves, or of men still more vile than those,
little authors who are jealous of great talents.

I declare to you then, sir, that not only Rousseau of Geneva never held the
discourse you have attributed to him, but also that he is incapable of such
language. I do not flatter myself that I shall deserve the honor of being
known to you; but if ever I enjoy that happiness it will be, I hope, only by
means worthy of your esteem.

I have the honor to be with profound respect.

SIR, Your very humble, etc. J. J. ROUSSEAU, Citizen of Geneva.

LETTER FROM THE MARQUIS D'ADHEMAR, TO M. DE VOLTAIRE,
Paris, Nov. 25, 1750.
I WAS, sir, at the time informed of the ingratitude and insolence of the
insignificant d'Arnaud toward you, and I expressed my indignation at his
conduct. I even desired M. d'Argental to refer back to the letter of Freron,
and to take a copy of it. This letter was in the hands of every one, and was
circulated in so disadvantageous a manner that I wished to see the preface,
which was complained of, and which was accused of being mutilated. It appeared
to me as simple as I could wish, and I found nothing to blame in it but the
name of the author and his style. In short, sir, I do not doubt that the king,
whom you serve, will do you speedy justice. He is fortunate who has occasion to
defend the truth before a monarch, who himself patronizes and disseminates
truth.

Yet, notwithstanding this assurance, sir, I must again exhort you to assume
greater fortitude. A splendid fame, and perfect tranquillity are rarely found
friends and companions.

But to return to this worthless man. I am this instant informed that he has
just written a new letter to Freron, in which he declares that the matter is
entirely accommodated. In the name of God, sir, while you patronize true
talents, beware of those drones, They preserve no remembrance of what they owe
you, except it be to injure their benefactor. This subject recals to my mind
that a person M. Dutartre.
told me one day, that, being placed at the theater near the Abbe Desfontains
and d'Arnaud, he heard the first reproach the other with entertaining some
attachment to you. But, sir, answered d'Arnaud, you do not consider that he
serves me, and that I owe him my gratitude. Oh! replied the abbe, we may
receive obligations from him when we have occasion; but we must calumniate him.

You see that the man has not forgotten this lesson, nor has been slow to put
it in practice.

Adieu, sir; disdain this vile race; and endeavor to arm yourself with
philosophy respecting events. Truth is ever finally triumphant, and envy sinks
under the weight of great reputations.

LETTER FROM THE SIEUR GUYOT DE MERVILLE The answer of M. de Voltaire will be
found in the fourth volume of the General Correspondence, erroneously dated
1754, together with an extract from this letter.
, TO M. DE VOLTAIRE.
Lions, April 15, 1755.
I IMAGINE, sir, you must be informed that I have been settled at Geneva this
two years. In the kind of necessity to which I was reduced by the unjust
conduct of the French comedians of Paris of quitting that place, there was no
retreat which better suited my natural inclination for repose and liberty; and
I am so much the more satisfied with my choice as other reasons have led you to
the same asylum. But it is not enough that our inclinations happen to be
mutual, our sentiments also should be in unison. How painful would it be to
each of us, if, inhabiting the same place and visiting the same families, we
can neither see nor converse with each other without restraint and perhaps
bitterness. I know that I have offended you, but it was not by indulging any of
those passions which are at once a disgrace to literature, and human nature.

My attachment to Rousseau, and my complaisance to the Abbe Desfontains were
the sole causes of the offense I have given you. Their death has avenged you of
them; and the little good I did by my sacrifices to them does not permit me to
lament their death.

A thousand men in my situation would tell you, sir, that they esteem you more
than your most zealous partisans, because their esteem was more consistent and
less blind. The proof, on my side, is incontestible. D'Auberval, the ^omedian
at Lions, whose talents you have admired, and whose character you would adore
did you know him as I do, can assure you that I charged him with the verses,
which I now send you, three days before your sudden and unforeseen departure. I
availed myself of your taking this city in your route; and through which I was
also passing. These verses are yet more seasonable than ever, as I shall be at
Geneva on the 22d of this month, and as we shall both be settled there. I have
nothing to add but the following offers.

I have written a criticism on your works in four volumes, which are yet in
manuscript; those I will send to you. Prefixed to my first comedy is a letter
with which you were offended, as I have been formerly told, by Rousset; I will
suppress that letter in the edition of my works which I am preparing. The Abbe
Desfontaines published two poems which he excited me to write against you; I
will suppress those also: and at this price will I merit your friendship.

I will do more; my fugitive pieces in two volumes are dedicated to a gentleman
of the country of Vaud, who is anxious to be known to you, and whose
acquaintance would give you pleasure; to convince the public of the sincerity
of my regard for you, I am ready, with your permission, to dedicate my Theater
in four volumes to you. I do not think that you can require any thing further.

But speaking of editions, it is time, sir, that you resolve, as well as
myself, to publish an edition of your works, avowed by yourself, and executed
under your own inspection. The public expect this with impatience, and they
will not believe any thing to be yours which you do not yourself give them. At
Geneva, you are in a place which will permit you to execute the design; and I
will undertake, if you think proper, a part of this work, in the same manner as
thirty years since at the Hague you confided to my care the correction of the
proofs for the Henriade.

I send a copy of this letter, and the verses which are enclosed, to M. de
Montperoux, who honors me with his esteem and friendship. I flatter myself
that he will be very happy to give the whole plan his protection. But is it
necessary that the resident should join his recommendation to the step which I
take? Do you not know, sir, that it is greater to acknowledge our faults than
never to have committed any, and more glorious to pardon than to avenge
ourselves? Merville addresses himself to Voltaire! You see that I finish
poetically; but it is not as a poet, it is as a friend, an admirer, and a man
who thinks, that I assure you of the particular esteem and perfect attachment
with which I am,

SIR, etc. GUYOT DE MERVILLE.

LETTER FROM J. J. ROUSSEAU See the letter of M. de Voltaire, to M. Rousseau,
dated August 30, 1755, in the fourth volume of the General Correspondence.
, TO M. DE VOLTAIRE
September 10, 1755.
IN every respect, sir, it is my duty to express my gratitude to you; and,
while I offered the rude outlines of my sorrowful reveries, I thought not of
making a present worthy of you, but of acquitting myself of an obligation by
rendering the homage which we all owe to you as our chief. Sensible, beside, of
the honor which you do my country, I participate in the gratitude of my fellow
citizens, and hope that it will augment in proportion to the profit they may
derive from your precepts. Embellish the asylum you have chosen, enlighten a
people worthy of your lessons, and do you, who so well know how to display
liberty and virtue, teach us to cultivate them in our actions as we adore them
in your writings. All who approach you ought to learn from you the road to
glory and immortality.

You perceive, sir, I do not aspire to the reputation of once more leading men
into the woods; not but that I regret my part of the loss of a state of nature.
With respect to yourself, sir, to make you a savage would be a miracle so great
that it can be wrought only by God, and so pernicious that it can be willed
only by the devil. Do not, therefore, attempt to walk on all-fours; to do which
no man on earth is less qualified. You teach men too effectually to stand
firmly not to remain erect yourself. I own the disgrace which attends on
celebrated men of letters is great indeed, nor do I deny that the evils are
numerous which are attached to human nature, and which appear to be independent
of our vain knowledge. Men have opened so many sources of misery to themselves
that their happiness is but little increased when they chance to escape a
single misfortune. There are secret connexions, however, in the progress of
things which are unperceived by the vulgar, but which do not escape the
thoughtful eye of the philosopher.

It was neither Terence, Cicero, Virgil, Seneca, nor Tacitus, who caused the
crimes of the Romans and the misfortunes of Rome. But without the slow and
secret poison which insensibly corrupted the most vigorous government of which
history has preserved the remembrance, Cicero, Lucretius, Sallust, and such men
had never existed or they had never written. The amiable age of Laelius and
Terence insensibly introduced the brilliant period of Horace and Augustus; and,
in fine, the horrid epoch of Seneca and Nero, that of Tacitus and Domitian. A
taste for the arts and sciences has its birth in a secret vice which it soon
augments in its turn; and if it be true that all human acquirements are
pernicious to the species, those of the mind and of knowledge, which increase
our pride and multiply our wanderings, will soonest accelerate men's
misfortunes. Yet, there necessarily comes a time in which those acquirements
are requisite to stay the progress of evil: it is the steel which must remain
in the wound, least, in removing it, the wounded should expire.

As to myself, had I pursued my first vocation and neither read nor written, I
should have been unquestionably more happy; yet if letters could now be
entirely effaced, I should be deprived of the only pleasure which is left me.
It is in letters that I find a consolation for all my misfortunes; it is among
their illustrious children that I taste the delights of friendship, and learn
to enjoy life and despise death. To them I owe the little merit I have, and to
them am I also indebted for the honor of being known to you. But let us
consult interest in our concerns, and truth in our writings. Although there
need philosophers, historians, and truly learned men to enlighten the world and
conduct its blind inhabitants, yet, if the wise Memnon has not misinformed me,
I know nothing more ridiculous than a nation of sages. Confess, sir, if it be
right that great minds should instruct men, the vulgar ought to receive their
precepts. If each takes upon himself to give instruction, where will those ^e
who are to receive it? The lame, says Montaigne, are ill calculated for bodily
exercise, or decripid souls for the exercises of the mind. Nevertheless, in
this learned age, we see none but the lame willing to teach others to walk.

Ordinary men receive the writings of the learned to criticize them, and not to
instruct themselves. Never was the world swarmed with such dwarfs in intellect;
they crowd the theater, the coffee-houses resound with their sentences, the
booksellers stalls are covered with their writings, and I hear the Orphan
criticized, because it is applauded, by a school boy so little capable of
perceiving its defects that scarcely can he feel any of its beauties.

Let us look for the first source of all the diso^ders in society, and we shall
find that the m^series of mankind proceed from error rather than ignorance; and
that what we do not know is much less prejudicial to us than that which we
think we understand. Now what surer means to run from error to error than the
rage of knowing every thing? Had not men pretended to know that the earth does
not turn on its axis, they had not punished Gallieo, for having affirmed that
it did turn. If none but philosophers had claimed the title of philosopher, the
Encyclopedia had experienced no persecution. If a hundred despicable beings had
not aspired to fame, you would have been left to the peaceful enjoyment of
yours, or at least you would have had to contend with none but adversaries
worthy of you. Be not surprised then should you feel some thorns which are
inseparable from the flowers that adorn superior talents. The calumnies of your
enemies are the followers of your triumph; as formerly satyric acclamations
were those of the Roman generals. It is the public eagerness for your writings
which produces the thefts of which you complain; but the assimilating them with
others is not easy, for neither iron nor lead unites with gold.

Permit me, in consideration of the interest which I take in your repose and
our instruction, to advise you to disdain vain clamours, by which it is less
the design to make you do ill than to divert you from producing good. The more
you shall be criticized, the more must you be admired; and a work of genius is
a terrifying answer to weak reproaches. Who will dare to attribute books to
you, which you have not written, while you continue to produce inimitable works?

I am proud of your invitation, and if this winter leaves me so circumstanced
that I can visit my native country in spring I will avail myself of your
goodness. But I would rather drink the water of your fountain, than the milk of
your cows; and with respect to the herbs of your orchard, I much fear to find
nothing there but the lotos which is only pasture for beasts, or the moli which
prevents men from becoming brutes. I am sincerely and respectfully, etc.

J. J. ROUSSEAU, Citizen of Geneva.

LETTER FROM THE ABBE AU^URT TO M. DE VOLTAIRE. (Accompanied by a Copy of his
book of Fables.)
Paris, January 10, 1758.
O TOI Oh thou whose song, sublime, rivals the shrill clarion and the trumpet
proud, deign to listen to the timid accents of my adventurous muse, and
listening not to condemn. Renowned interpreter of ambitious hearts, thou
speak with the tongues of princes and from the mouth of the ass give lessons
to folly. And should I by chance, in happy allegory, paint vice and virtue as
they are, to thee Voltaire the praise is due; for times unnumbered have I read
thy works.
don't les sublimes chants
Imitent les sons siers des clairons, des trompettes,
Daigne ecouter mes chansonettes,
Daigne favoriser mes timides accens.
Des coeurs ambitieux admirable interpret,
Ta muse fait parler les princes, les heroes;
La mienne fait jaser le serin, la fauvette;
Par l'organe de l'ane, elle enseigne les sots.
Si quelquefois, dans d'heureuses images,
J'ai peint avec succes le vice ou la virtue,
Voltaire, c'est a toi que l'hommage en est du.
J'ai relu cent fois tes ouvrages.
I have ever thought, sir, that the first duty of a man who wished to acquire
fame in any species of poetry, would be to form his taste on your writings, and
the second to offer his essays to your inspection. I acquit myself of this
last, with much reliance on your indulgence and advice. Hitherto those whom I
have consulted have given me such various counsels, that I know not which to
pursue. I am reproached by one for having too closely imitated la Fontaine; and
by another, for not having sufficiently imitated him. This friend complains
that the morals of my fables are too long; this, that they are too short; and a
third would compel me to suppress them all, alleging, notwithstanding the
example of all the fabulists, that the object of a fable should be so enforced
by the fable itself, as to pass for that species of commentary which is called
the moral. I have critics who wish that my fables were all as simple as that of
La Cigale et la Fourmi The grasshopper and ant.
; as if a writer of fables was condemned to be read by none but children.

This variety of opinions respecting my production has often led me to apply to
myself the fable of the miller, his son, and the ass: Parbleu, dit le meunier,
est bien fou du cerveau,
Qui pretend contenter tout le monde est son pere I see, said the miller, he
must be mad who pretends to please every body.
.


You see, sir, how necessary it is I should be determined by a sound judgment
and from which my critics cannot appeal, and I shall act according to your
advice, if I can deserve that the author of the Henriade should sacrifice some
moments to the reading a few fables, and that he should deign to communicate
his opinion to me. I expect this favor, sir, from your zeal to encourage
rising talents, and I should at all times be proud to take lessons from the
finest genius of France. I am, etc.

EPITRE DU MEME In answer to M. de Voltaire's letter of March 22, 1785,
addressed to the author of the fables. 5th Vol. of the general Correspondence.
.
MA muse My muse does not vainly hope, in her attempts, to equal the high
renown of la Fontaine. She knew the danger into which she was led by the love
of dulcet rhyme; but thou deignest to encourage; and, though her flight be
daring, if thee she can but please, what has she to fear? Since the time when
the delight of poetry first hurried me into the land of fable, my dread has
been continual: but now sweet hope guides and animates my steps, and I cede to
the seducive charms of indulgence which flatters me but too much. Who would not
be inebriated by incense, which thy hand dispenses!

I want the charming touches of the friend of la Sabliere; but of man and his
mistakes I may draw pleasant pictures, and in the palace or in the cottage
delinate his follies. I may teach every animal, whether lion, ant, eagle, or
sparrow, by new traits to discover the pride of human reason. Heroes thou have
sung; but whether of Athens or of Rome, Petersburgh or Paris, thy philosephic
dictates show heroes themselves are no more than men. The idiot clown of la
Fontaine, swelled with vanity, wished that he who created the oak had but
consulted him, in his work. Man is ever more or less inflated by some weak
vanity; and fable was invented artfully to correct the insolent haughtiness of
the great, the base flattery of parasites, and the rude obstinacy of the
vulgar. Happy the author who, all attentive to the absurdities of others, can
correct the defects discovered in himself. But reasoning were vain; for, should
my fables but excite a smile from thee, I still shall feel an increase of pride.


n'est pas assez vain
Pour esperer, par se essais,
Egaler les brillians succes
De l'ingenieux la Fontaine.
Elle connait tout le danger
Du gout decide qui l'entraine;
Mais tu daignas l'encourager:
Et si son vol est temeraire,
Des qu'elle t'a deja su plaire,
Que risque-t-elle a s'y livrer?
Depuis qu'au pays de la feinte
Un vif penchant me fait errer,
Sans cesse une importune crain^e
Devant moi venait se montrer.
Aujourd'hui la douce esperance
Y guide, y ranime mes pas;
Je cede au sednisant appas
D'une trop flatteuse indulgence.
Eh, comment ne s'enivrer pas
D'un encens que ta main dispense?
Je n'ai pas les charmans pinceaux
De l'ami de la Sabliere;
Mais sur l'homme et sur ses defauts,
Je puis dans de rians tableaux,
Repandre a mon tour la lumiere,
Et du scepter jusqu'au rabot,
Prouver a l'homme qu'il est un sot.
Tous les animaux, dans mes fables,
Lions, fourmis, aigles, moineaux,
Peuvent, par quelques traits nouveaux,
Trahir l'orgueil de mes semblables.
Ta voix a chante des heroes,
Mais qu'il soit d'Athene ou de Rome,
De Petersbourg ou de Paris,
Tes philosophiques e^rits
Font voir que tout heroes est homme.
Ecoutons ce rustre hebete
Que fait raisonner la Fontaine:
Il voudrait, plein de vanite,
Que celui qui crea le chene
Dans ses oeuvres l'eut consulte.
L'homme est plus ou moins entete
De quelque orgueilleuse faiblesse.
L'apologue fut invente
Pour corriger avec adresse
Des grands l'insolente fierte,
Des flatteurs l'indigne bassesse,
Des petits l'indocilite.
Heureux si, plein d'un zele extreme
Sur les ridicules d'autrui,
Un auteur corrigeait lui-meme
Les defauts qu'on remarque en lui.
Mais quoi que l'on en puisse dire,
Fire d'un si glorieux accueil,
On verra croitre mon orgueil
Si mes fables te font sourire.
OBSERVATIONS By the Ambassador M. de Chouvelin, on a Letter written by M. de
Voltaire to the King of Prassia, made by Order of the Ministry, in 1759 The
original of Voltaire's letter was never found. That of the King, in answer, is
inserted in the 2d Vol. of the correspondence, and is dated September 22, 1759.
.
THE letter is good, and the reasoning and the manner are excellent. I have
only two observations to make.

1st. I know not whether I would so positively present to him the idea of
restitution. I imagine this must ever be a bitter draught, and I know not
whether it will not injure his fame as much as his interest. Perhaps it will be
necessary to soften this passage.

2d. I think it would be expedient further to explain to him the basis of a
system of pacification which should originate in his own ideas, such as they
are found in his last letter; consequently to me it appears that I should
address him thus:

You will not make peace but in conjunction with the English, and you are
right, for your honor is pledged; but why will you not make peace for the
English and for yourself at the same time? Have you not sufficient claims to
their esteem, or ascendency enough over them, to induce them to sacrifice some
of their advantages to the honor of securing your own possessions? Would not
the French, in compensation for such a benefit, be impelled and authorized to
prevail on their allies to make concessions equivalent to those which the
English should have made in your favor? Will you not then become the author
and the mover of these reciprocal concessions which shall reduce the whole to
an equilibrium that will be desirable and beneficial to all parties? In a word,
should you induce the English not to engross the dominion of the seas, the
proprietorship of all the colonies, and of trade in general, can you doubt but
that the French would engage your enemies to renounce these claims which to you
are most noxious.

Such a paragraph modelled by the genious of M. de Voltaire, embellished by the
powerful charms of his style, and combined with the knowledge he has of
managing the king of Prussia and of the objects most proper to excite his
attention, would, in my opinion, fully display the grand outlines of a plan
which it would be very fortunate should this monarch seize on, adopt, and bring
to maturity.

LETTER FROM THE COUNT DE TRESSAN, TO M. DE VOLTAIRE.
Commerci, July 29, 1759.
HIS Polish majesty, sir, has commanded me to supply his loss of sight by
answering the charming letter he has just received from you, and by assuring
you of his friendship for your person, and of his high esteem for your works.

His majesty again confirms the attestation which he commanded me to send you
relative to the exact truth of all the facts contained in your history of
Charles XII. From you, sir, he is highly gratified to learn that the king his
son-in-law, by renewing the ancient privileges of your manor lands, has
afforded you a distinguished mark of his good will and esteem.

I cannot but be sensible, sir, how great your loss is in not reading
characters traced by the hand which you would kiss with so much pleasure; a
single word from this adored prince, who is continually performing every thing
which you must love to praise in great kings, would to you be a thousand times
more estimable than all which the most faithful of your servants and friends
can utter.

TRESSAN.
P. S. By King Stanislaus, scarcely legible.
I answer from the heart, being in want of eyes; and assure you that I
continually preserve sentiments of perfect esteem and friendship for you.


P. S. By Count de Trassan.
Your heart will easily divine what my dear and amiable master has written. --
I answer from the heart being in want of eyes, etc. Pity an active mind: (and
how seldom are the minds of kings so!) pity one^ who is deprived of the
pleasure of revising his works, and who no longer can read, write, play on
musical instruments, or see your old acquaintance Ancienne Ami. Some lady.
, at whose house his majesty has written this short postscript.



LETTERS FROM THE SIEUR CLEMENT, OF DIJON, TO M. DE VOLTAIRE.
LETTER I.
Dijon, December 6, 1759. SIR,
DID I not know you to be sufficiently wise to look with contempt on the
baubles of grandeur so as not to be susceptible of them, I should feel no
surprise that you had disdained to answer the letter I ventured to write to
you, in which my heart described all its sensations. I was convinced when my
hand was the faithful interpreter of my sentiments that the dignity of yours
would not suffer you to remain insensible to the afflictions of an unfortunate
man, and that you knew how to dry up the tears which grief had caused to flow.
I was persuaded that your bounty would not be implored in vain, that your arms
would readily open to afford innocence an asylum, and that your heart was
superior even to your understanding; such were, such still are, my thoughts;
and these emboldened me to explain my melancholy situation in my first letter.
Imagine, sir, whether I am not afflicted by your silence at present. Alas,
perhaps you have supposed I should repay your friendship and favors with the
blackest ingratitude, and that I should be cowardly and criminal enough not to
be grateful. Act, sir, as you please with respect to my other requests, but let
me entreat you not to do me the injustice of thus suspecting my probity. This
is the only wealth I now possess, it is a precious jewel which I wish to
preserve from the general contagion. Your suspicions dim its luster, but your
generosity and greatness of mind may preserve and render it more resplendent.
Affection, zeal, and respect, are all the wealth I have, and now are and ever
will remain yours. Were you to refuse me what I have requested with so much
ardour, but which it may be improper for you to grant, I should ever remain
convinced your refusal was dictated by virtue, and that you were guided by
reasons unknown to me; and I then should only be anxious of being informed of
what they were. In fine, sir, whatever your kind intentions may be, let me
desire you would inform a youth of them whom suspense keeps in a state the most
painful, and whose love would still be the same though you were to remain
ignorant of its reality.

Perhaps, sir, you have not received my first letter; if so, and you should
desire to see it, you will be pleased to inform me.

LETTER II.
Dijon, May 17, 176^. SIR,
PERMIT one of those who are most enamoured with the Belles Lettres without the
power of studying them, and with these men of genius who study them with
success, to take the present opportunity of renewing that homage which is more
flattering to himself than to you. The sentiments which I have ingenuously
avowed appear to have affected you, and for these I am sufficiently repaid
should your feelings have been in union with mine.

The kindness which you have shown toward me, induces me to ask a favor.
During these short intervals which employment more gloomy have allowed me to
dedicate to my love of poetry, I have formed the rash design of writing a
tragedy, the subject of which is perhaps the most singular and interesting of
any to be found in modern story. It is the death of Charles I. and the
usurpation of Cromwell. The difficulties attending such a fable were great, nor
have I by the labor of a year been able to surmount them. I have written
nothing more hitherto than the plan of my piece; after having changed it
several times, and most mercilessly burnt one entire act, and more, which did
not equal the high idea I had formed of my subject. I am not, however,
discouraged, but have begun again; yet my ardour has slackened, because I have
been informed that you have for some time been yourself at work on the same
subject, and that soon or late you intend to present your piece to the public.

You may well imagine, sir, that my rashness is not quite great enough to
contend with an antagonist like yourself. It belongs only to a few to enter the
lists with and vanquish their masters. I should quickly abandon my plan, were I
certain that you had formed the same; and especially as this perhaps will be
the only work I shall ever write during a life of obscurity; and banished as I
am to a town in which there are men of wit, but who make no use of that
quality, and who hate or despise those who do. My days will be shortened by
labor, which is the only wealth and the only pleasure of which fortune could
not deprive me; and Cromwell only, to whom I should dedicate the remains of
life, would preserve the memory of a youth who grew too early old because he
began to think too soon.

Yes, sir, at the age of seven, I endeavored to cultivate poetry, and you may
easily imagine how much assiduous study injures the health of a child. Excuse
me for having so long detained you on subjects of so little moment. Only let me
entreat you to inform me whether I ought to continue my project, and whether
you have not anticipated my design. Deign to afford me lessons, of which I am
too much in want, and of which I am so desirous, that you will scarcely refuse
them. By your aid, I may discover impediments which I have not foreseen, or
beauties which I could never have invented. You will encourage me in executing
a difficult task, and will teach me to avoid rocks and quicksands, among which
I should otherwise be wrecked, but which your genius will enable me to escape.
Do not, I conjure you, deny the request of a youth who seeks for instruction,
who respects his masters, who loves your person because he loves your works in
which your soul shines forth, and who is indebted to you for every thing,
because from you he has learned to think.

I am, sir, with all the esteem of heart, etc.

CLEMENT.

LETTER III.
Paris, December 5, 1768.
I HAVE broken my bonds, sir, and have shaken of classic dust. Here am I at
Paris, in freedom and almost happiness, and in the center of the arts where I
so long have desired to live and cultivate literature. But, ah, sir, how
strangely have literature and good taste gone to decay! How little does all I
see assimilate with the ideas I had formed from reading our best authors! I am
fallen as it were from the clouds. I understand no man, and no man understands
me. They tell me of comedies which make the audience weep, and I see tragedies
which oblige me to laugh. I am desired to write in the same taste, and I do not
know what taste they mean. It is necessary, however, that I should submit; and
I begin to perceive the thing it not so very difficult.

I really, sir, do not know what will hereafter be thought of the present age;
but I am convinced that it is intolerably like the age of Seneca and Silius
Italicus. You, sir, are the man who beheld the meridian of the Belles Lettres,
and for the decline of which you long have consoled us; but you have the
affliction of not leaving any hope behind you of similar consolation.

Pardon this complaint sir, from a gloomy partisan of old taste, and an admirer
of your works. I cannot prevail on myself ever to think that beautiful which
never can be so, unless it be proved that Moliere, Racine, Boileau, and
yourself are wretched writers.

But I come to the main purport of my letter, which is to thank you for having
procured me the acquaintance of M. de la Harp. I cannot sufficiently praise
his politeness, the goodness of the advice he has given me, and particularly
the veneration which he expresses for you, He swears by your name as
Philoctetes swore by Hercules; and I have no doubt but that he will nobly fill
the part of Philoctetes. He will certainly be well able to oppose the torrent,
and combat the monsters of literature. But the evil is too deeply rooted; his
his example will come too late; and he will only be able to save himself from
the general shipwreck.

I did not find the minds of men much prejudiced in favor of my Medee
non-Magicienne (Medea no Enchantress.) They took it ill that I should rob the
stage of a splendid spectacle which produced so fine an effect in the opinion
of merchant's clerks, and of the vulgar. They further add that the magic
invocations of Long pierre have their charms; and that his versification will
again become pleasant to our ears. In vain did I affirm with you that an
enchantress cannot affect the passions which are totally destroyed by magic,
and would be thought ridiculous in any other character except Medea, and that
it is disgusting and monstrous for her to kill her children without any cause,
since she might have carried them off in her carr. I added a thousand other
things of the same nature, but to no effect; and I find the people of this
philosophic age are more addicted to sorcery than they suppose.

In fine, sir, I have put my piece into the hands of M. le Kain, and am waiting
for his opinion previous to the reading of it to the actors collectively. I do
not augur much success, but I will console myself by writing better.

As my revenues are not sufficiently great to enable me to subsist entirely as
a poet, I am in search of some proper employment either ^as a secretary or a
teacher in some good family. If, sir, you should be able to assist my project
by the means of your acquaintance, I should add this to the many favors you
have already done me, and my gratitude would end only with my life.

I have the honor sir, to be, with the most sincere admiration and attachment.

CLEMENT.

LETTER FROM THE EX-JESUIT PAULIAN, TO M. DE VOLTAIRE.
Avignon, December 4, 1765. SIR,
IT is exceedingly flattering to me that the greatest genius of the age should
think proper to cast a glance over my works. I am sorry that the third edition
of the d^ctionary, after which you enquire, is not yet finished. When it shall
appear, with an additional vo^ume, I will do myself the honor of presenting it
to you; and hope it will be less defective than that which I now send. In the
mean time, let me entreat you to accept a copy of my Traise de paix enter
Descartes et Newton Treaty of Peace between Des Carts and Newton,
. Should it merit your approbation, I shall from this be certain that it will
merit immortality.

I have the honor to be, with respect, etc.

PAULIAN, Professor of experimental Philosophy, in the Jesuits College, at
Avignon.

LETTER FROM M. THIRIOT TO M. DE VOLTAIRE.
Paris, Friday, Jan. 13, 1769.
Nec si plura velim, tu dare deneges. YOU, my old friend, my honor, and my
support, are the only man in the world to ^^om I can write with my present
freedom. Frontis ad urbane descendo praemia. For these two years I have
habitually paid the tribute which age owes to nature. An asthma was my
prevailing and familiar malady; however, a severe regimen, and a plant which I
do not know, but of which I have fortunately procured a good stock, though I
have no occasion to use it at present, caused every symptom to disappear toward
autumn. My health theretherefore is as good as I could wish, but my trifling
fortune and my affairs are in the utmost confusion. I have for three years paid
600 livres annually, in consequence of the engagements into which I entered at
the marriage of my daughter.

The following is the state of my income: 1200 livres from the king of Prussia,
of which only a thousand are clear profit, 200 being set apart to pay for the
journals and papers from which I make my extracts, and for copying those and
other works which I find it necessary to add. These 1000 livres from the king
of Prussia, with an annuity of 2600 livres, which is secured on the Hotel de
Ville, and 400 livres per annum, paid me by the Count de Lauraguais, gave me
hopes of extricating myself from my difficulties, and of even continuing to pay
the 600 livres according to my engagement. But a new perpetual charge has
accrued by the necessity of my taking a second wife to aid me in my infirmities.

You did me the favor to inform me, in the beginning of 1766, when I begged
you to remember me in the distribution of your benefactions that I had deferred
my application too long, and that as a punishment I must wait longer; that I
ought to have reminded you of my granary in the time of the harvest, and that
every body had gleaned except myself, seeing I did not present myself among the
rest. You promised to repair the ill consequence of my negligence, and you
added in the most obliging and gratifying manner that you had the same regard
for me as formerly.

This recalls to my mind with what zeal you undertook and endeavored, toward
the latter end of the regency, to procure half of your pension to be settled on
me and in what manner, through your solicitations, the Duke de Melun interested
himself in the success of that design under the administration of the regent.
But the sorrowful events which followed in rapid succession rendered
ineffectual this uncommon instance of friendship and benevolence, and which was
particularly noticed in the Hollard Gazette. Hence, I have ever found myself
encouraged to say to you, when there sh^^ld b^ occasion, as Horace said to
Mecaenas while he enumerated his benefactions: Nec si^^l^ra velim, ^u dare
deneges.

And hence, also I was induced lately to say, at the table of the Lieutenant
Civil* that I knew of no one but M. de Voltaire of whom I could ask a favor,
or from whom I could receive one with pleasure.

I do not send you any literary intelligence, for I am too much engaged with
little domestic vexations. An officer of the Prevo^ des Marchands, of Paris.


MEMORANDUMS Respecting M. de Voltaire, and particular Facts relative to that
great Man; collected by me Le Kain.
to serve as an Appendix to his History, written by the Abbe du Vernet.
L'mitie d'un grand-homme est un bienfait des Dieux The friendship of a great
men is a gift of the gods.
. Oedipe, Act l. Scene I.
MAY I not be permitted to boast of a title which while it created my fortune,
constituted my happiness? I hope so, and that the facts I am about to state
will justify the motto I have chosen, although otherwise it might appear too
assuming.

The peace of 1748, having restored every ^^ecies of diversion to the city of
Paris, become the memorable epoch of a new institution of some societies formed
of tradesmen, ^he met together for the pleasure of playing dramatic pieces.

The first was established at the Hotel de Soyecourt in the Faubourg
Saint-Honore; the second, at the Hotel de Clermont Tonnerre (...) the Marshes;
and the third, at the Hotel de Jabac in the Rue Saint-Meri; of which last
theater I was the founder.

Among the young people who at that time played with some reputation, and part
of whom have since settled in the country, I am the only one who remained at
Paris; and this circumstance, which I owed rather to my good fortune than any
superiority of talents, happened in the following way.

The room in which we performed in the Hotel de Jabac being in such condition
that the repairing of it could be no longer delayed, we were under the
necessity of requesting permission of the comedians of the Hotel de Clermont.
Tonnerre to play an their theater, alternately with them. An agreement was
accordingly entered into by both parties, in the month of July, 1749, by which
we were bound to pay half the expenses; and we opened with Sidney and
George-Dandin.

It will be readily supposed that the emulation of the two companies would
excite disputes in the public, the result of which could not be favorable to
one without diminishing the reputation which the other till then had enjoyed.
The audience were divided in their opinion of these gentlemen and of those, of
the young ladies of this theater and the young ladies of that. The first were
more pleasing, but the other displayed more knowledge of the theater, and more
grace and art, etc. Thus were the public amused and combatted some for the
company de Tonnerre, and others for the company de Jabac. But who could have
imagined that a society of young people who united pleasure and decorum could
provoke the jealousy and complaints of the highpriests of Melpomene? Yet,
their influence interrupted our performances, and a Jansenist priest
re-established them. The Abbe de Chauvelin, Conseiller-Clerc of the parliament
of Paris, condescended to employ his power in behalf of pupils against their
masters, and we played the Mauvais-riche, a new comedy in five acts and in
verse, written by M. de Arnaud, to the most brilliant assembly then in Paris;
but it was received with little applause. This was in the month of February,
1750.

M. de Voltaire was invited by the author to see the representation; and,
whether induced by his compassion for M. d' Arnaud or his complaisance to the
actors who to the utmost exerted themselves to give some value to that feeble
uninteresting work, this great man appeared well pleased, and particularly
inquired who it was that played the part of the lover. He was informed that the
performer was the son of a goldsmith of Paris who played for his amusement, but
who really wished to make it his serious employment. He expressed to M. Arnaud
a desire of knowing me; and desired him to engage me to pay him a visit on the
following day.

The pleasure this invitation gave me was even greater than my surprise; but it
is impossible for me to describe the sensations of my mind when I beheld this
man whose eyes burned with imagination and genius. As I spoke to him I felt
myself penetrated with enthusiasm, admiration, and fear; but while I
experienced these sensations, M. de Voltaire had the goodness to put an end to
my embarrassment by taking me in his arms and thanking God for having created a
being who could excite his feelings by the repetition of such moderate verses.

He afterward made several enquiries relative to my situation, and that of my
father, the manner in which I have been educated, and the ideas I entertained
of my future fortune. Having satisfied him on these subjects, and having
partaken of a dozen cups of coffee mixed with chocolate, the only nourishment
which M. de Voltaire took from five in the morning till three in the afternoon,
I informed him with great earnestness that I knew no other happiness on earth
than that of playing dramatic pieces; that a melancholy loss had left me master
of my actions, and that enjoying a small patrimony of seven hundred and fifty
livres income, I had reason to hope that should I abandon my father's
occupation, I should lose nothing by the change, provided I could one day be
admitted into the king's company of comedians.

"Ah my friend," cried M. de Voltaire, "never take that resolution; continue to
perform for your pleasure, but think not of making this your profession. It is
one of the greatest and most difficult talents, but it is degraded by unfeeling
people and proscribed by hypocrites. France shall one day esteem your art, but
it will then no longer possess Baron, le Couvreur, or Dangeville. If you will
renounce your design I will lend you ten thousand francs to employ in commerce,
and you shall return the sum as it shall be convenient to you. Come to me again
at the end of the weak; reflect well on the subject, and acquaint me with your
possitive determination."

Disconcerted, and moved almost to the shedding of tears, with the generous
offer of this exalted being whom men have called avaricious, inflexible, and
unfeeling, I wished to give way to my sentiments in expressing of gratitude,
and four times began a speech without being once able to finish it. At length I
resolved to take my leave, which I attempted with a stammering voice; but as I
retired he called me back and desired me to recite some morsels of any part
which I had been accustomed to play. Without considering the subject I
foolishly enough proposed to speak the celebrated couplet in the second act of
Gustavus. "No, not Piron," said M. de Voltaire, with a piercing and terrifying
voice, "I wish not to hear bad verses. Repeat me any part you know from Racine."

Fortunately I recollected that while I was at the College de Mazarin I had
learned the whole tragedy of Athalie by having heard that play repeated
numerous times by the scholars who performed it. I began therefore at the first
scene and played Abner and Joad alternately. But I had not finished my task
when M. de Voltaire suddenly cried with enthusiasm, "Ah, my God what poetry,
and how astonishing that this tragedy should be written throughout with the
same purity and passion!" He then dismissed me; and said, while he embraced me,
"I foresee that you will possess a most pathetic voice; and that you will
become the delight of Paris; but think no more of a public theater."

This is an exact account of my first visit to M. de Voltaire. The second was
more conclusive, as he consented, after the most earnest solicitations on my
side, to receive me into his house, and to allow me a yearly income; he built,
over his own apartment, a small theater in which he had the goodness to see me
and the whole company to which I belonged play with his nieces. He could not
reflect without the strongest displeasure that till then we had been permitted
to expend much money to afford amusement to our friends and to the public.

The expense which M. de Voltaire incurred by this temporary establishment, and
his former disinterested offer to me, convinced me in the strongest manner that
he was as noble and generous in his actions as his enemies were unjust while
they ascribed to him the vice of sordid economy. These were facts of which I
was myself a witness; but truth obliges me further to confess that M. de
Voltaire did not only aid me with his advice for more than six months, but also
that he defrayed my expenses during the whole of that time, and that since my
being established in the theater I hate proofs of receiving from him more than
two thousand crowns. At present he calls me "His great actor, His Carrick, His
dear child!" These are titles which I owe solely to his partiality for me; but
the title which my heart adopts is that of a respectful and grateful pupil.

And indeed I ought to be grateful since it was to M. de Voltaire alone that I
owed the first notions of my art; and since it was solely through his interest
that the Duke de Aumont thought proper to grant the order for my first
appearance at the theater in the month of September, 1750; the result of which
was that, aided by a perseverance, proof against every obstacle, I, at the end
of seventeen months, surmounted all opposition from the city and the court, and
was entered on the list of the king's comedians in the mouth of February, 1752.

Whoever reads these details will observe that I am far from resembling those
ungrateful hearts who blush to acknowledge a benefaction; and who, to complete
their baseness, meanly calumniate their benefactors. I have known more than one
of that kind connected with M. de Voltaire. I have been witness of the
depredations which have been made on him by people of every rank. Some he has
pitied, silently despised others, but never avenged himself of any. The
booksellers, whom he has prodigiously enriched by the various editions of his
works, have ever publicly aspersed his character; but there is not one of them
who has dared to attack him in a court of justice, con^cious as they were of
their guilt.

The friendship of M. de Voltaire is ever unshaken. His manner is impetuous,
his heart good, his soul compassionate; he is modest in in an extreme degree,
notwithstanding the praises which have been lavished on him by kings, by men of
letters, and by a people assembled to hear and admire him; profound and just in
his opinion of the works of other writers, abounding with affability and
politeness in his commerce with men, and inflexible toward those who have
offended him. In these features his character will be seen drawn with truth.

He could never be reproached with having been the first to attack his
adversaries; but, after hostilities were commenced, he has appeared as a lion
rushing from his retreat, and at such times some of his enemies have fallen
before him, and others have taken their flight.

I have heard him frequently say, that his being unable to possess the
friendship of Crebillon gave him great affliction; that he had ever esteemed
his abilities, but could never pardon his having refused his approbation to
Mahomet.

I will say nothing of the sublimity of his various talents; in whatever way he
exercised them, he displayed erudition, wit, taste, and philosophy; and Europe
will pronounce his eulogium. His works, distributed over the earth, are
sufficient to form the materials of his praise; and happy is he who can
appreciate them, and speak worthily of this celebrated and extraordinary man.

The facility with which he wrote is universally known; but few have been
witness to such instances as the following, which I myself saw.

His amanuensis had lost or destroyed the fifth act of the tragedy of Zulima.
M. de Voltaire produced another in a very short time, and which abounded with
new ideas, that circumstances had suggested.

He altered the character of Cicero, in the fourth act of Rome Preserved, when
we performed that tragedy in the month of August, 1750, at the theater of the
Duchess du Maine, at the Chateau de Sceaux. I think it is not possible that any
one could be more true, more pathetic, or more enthusiastic than M. de Voltaire
in this part. It was, indeed, Cicero himself, pouring forth his eloquence from
the tribunal, against the destroyer of his country, of its laws, its manners,
and its religion. I cannot forget that the Duchess du Maine, after having
expressed her admiration of this new part, asked M. de Voltaire who was the
performer of Lentulus; Sura, and that M. de Voltaire answered, "Madam, he is
the best of us all." It was myself whom he treated with such distinguished
goodness, nor was it very flattering to the knights, counts, and marquisses,
whose companion I then was.

I will not conclude this article without naming some other anecdotes which
were within my own knowledge, and which may perhaps serve to give still more
correct ideas of the character of M. de Voltaire.

It is well known that, on the death of the celebrated Baron, and on the
retreat of Bauberg from the stage, both the comic and the tragic parts of these
great actors were given to Sarrasin, who at that time did not approach near the
excellence of his masters, a circumstance which drew a severe sarcasm from
Voltaire, who had committed to him the part of Brutus in the tragedy of the
same name. The piece was rehearsed at the theater, and the feebleness of
Sarrasin in his invocation to Mars, his want of vigor, grandeur, and dignity
throughout the first act, excited Voltaire's indignation to such a degree that
he cried out, "Sir, do you recollect that you are Brutus, the most august of
all the Roman Consuls, and that you must not address the god Mars as you would
say, Ah good Virgin, let me gain a prize of a hundred francs in the lottery!"

The result of this new mode of instruction was that Sarrasin displayed no more
strength of animation, for he did not possess those qualities, and was only a
good actor when the scene required pathos. He knew not the art of painting the
passions with energy, nor was the soul of Mithridates, nor the dignity of
Augustus ever perceived in him.

The celebrity which Mademoiselle Dumesnil had acquired in the part of Merope,
and which she has uniformly maintained during twenty years is well known. Yet
even this reputation was no protection from the railleries of M. de Voltaire.
When she rehearsed Merope for the first time he observed that this famous
actress did not inveigh against Polifonte in the fourth act with sufficient
vehemence and passion. "I must be possessed by the devil," said Madame
Dumesnil, "to assume the tone you desire." "Yes, Madam," answered Voltaire, "we
must be possessed by the devil to excel in any art!" I believe that M. de
Voltaire then spoke a great truth,

He was one day asked his opinion respecting the propriety with which some
preferred Mademoisselle Dumesnil to Mademoiselle Clairon, and the justness of
that enthusiasm which this last excited in the public to the great
mortification of the actress who had served her as a model. The partisans of
the old taste pretended that to seize on the soul and to excite its feelings,
it was necessary to possess, like Mademoiselle Dumesnil, the magic wand of
Corncille, and that Mademoiselle Clarion had it not. "She has it in the
throat," cried Voltaire; and the question was accurately decided.

A very young and beautiful girl, daughter of a Procureur An Attorney.
belonging to the parliament, played with me the part of Palmire in Mahomet, on
M. de Voltaire's theater. This amiable girl, who was but fifteen years old, was
far from being able to speak with sufficient strength and grandeur the
imprecations which it was her part to utter against her tyrant. She was young,
handsome, and interesting, and M. de Voltaire assumed more gentleness while he
showed her how far distant she was from the spirit of her part. "Madam," said
he to her, "imagine to yourself that Mahomet is an impostor, an attrocious
villian, who caused your father to be assassinated, has just poisoned your
brother, and who to crown his kindness would absolutely ravish yourself. If all
this trifling treachery gives you a certain pleasure, your politeness to him is
well judged. But if he excited the least disgust in you, this, Madam, it the
tone that you should assume."

Then M. de Voltaire himself repeated the imprecation and gave this poor
innocent girl, who was blushing with shame and trembling with fear, a lesson so
much more precious as he joined precept to example; and she afterward became a
very pleasing actress.

In 1755, being at M. de Voltaire's house of the Delices near Geneva, which he
had just obtained from the attorney general Tronchin, he deposited in my hands
the Orphan of China, which was at first in three acts, and which he named his
hidden treasure. Speaking of a noble character in this tragedy which possessed
great novelty, he said to me, "My friend, the inflexions of your voice are
naturally soft and melodious, but beware of suffering any of those to escape
you in the part of Gengis Khan. You must impress it strongly on your mind that
I have painted him as a tiger who, while he caresses his female, strikes his
talons into her sides. If the other performers find the piece languid in parts,
I permit them to make curtailments. These are citizens that we must sometimes
sacrifice to the safety of the republic. But take care that they use the
license with caution; for false critics are often more dangerous in dictating
these sort of alterations, than men who are downright ignorant."

After my departure from Ferney, in the month of April, 1762, M. de Voltaire
formed a desire to have the Orphan of China played at his little theater. The
bookseller Cramer studied the part of Gengis Khan, under the instruction of the
Duke de Villars. The pretentions of this nobleman to teach the art of
performing on the stage are well known; he made his pupil Cramer a cold,
insipid, declaimer. M. de Voltaire was not slow to perceive the defect; and, in
the first rehearsal, he was more than ever convinced that a man may be at the
same time a duke, a fine wit, and the son of a great man, without any of these
titles giving him talents to exercise the fine arts, knowledge to comprehend
their principles, or taste to decide on their execution.

M. de Voltaire hissed Cramer; and threatened to torment him this way till he
should have changed his style of acting. The faithful Genevese applied with
incredible application to forget the whole of his master's lessons, and
returned to Ferney at the end of fifteen days, to repeat his part in a new
manner before M. de Voltaire, who perceiving a very great change, cried with
rapture to Madame Denis, "My Neice, God be praised! Cramer has disgorged his
Duke!"

For more than thirty years Paris had never beheld a party as strong as that
which was formed to oppose the first representation of the tragedy of Orestes,
except indeed, that which was formed against Adelaide de Guesclan. Orestes was
hissed from three to eight in the evening. Yet, the best informed part of the
public, whose judgment alone survives temporary efforts because it is
impartial, prevailed by degrees over Crebillon's zealots, and finally testified
its satisfaction by the most unsuspected acclamations. It was in one of these
inebriating moments that Voltaire sprang half out of his box, and cried with
all his strength, "Go on Athenians! It is Sophocles!"

This frankness and admirable presence of mind every hour characterized the
only man of whom we have collected any anecdotes. This which follows displays
M. de Voltaire as nature formed him, that is, animated, eloquent, and ever
philosophic.

In 1743, at the third or fourth representation of Merope, M. de Voltaire
observed a defect in a part of the dialogue. On his return from the Marchioness
du Chatelet's house, where he had supped, he corrected the faulty part, made a
packet of his corrections, and ordered a servant to carry them to the Sieur
Paulin, a very worthy man, but a very moderate actor, whom Voltaire had
educated, as he used to say, with great care to play his tyrants. The servant
observed to his master that it was past midnight, and that it would be
impossible to awaken M. Paulin at that hour. "Away," replied the author of
Merope, "tyrants never sleep."

DECLARATION OF M. DE VOLTAIRE TO THE KING OF PRUSSIA. [Remitted by him to his
Majesty's Minister, at Frankfort, 1753.]
I AM dying; and I protest before God and man that, being no longer in the
service of his majesty the king of Prussia, I am not the less attached to his
interest, nor less ready to obey his pleasure for the short time I have to live.

He arrested me at Frankfort for a collection of his poetry, of which he made
me a present, and I remained in prison till the book was brought from Hamburg.
I have restored to the king's minister, at Frankfort, all the letters of his
majesty which I had preserved as precious marks of the goodness with which he
had honored me. At Paris I will restore all the other letters which may be
demanded by him.

His majesty wishes to recall a contract which he had deigned to make with me. I
am certainly ready to return it with all the rest; and, as soon as it shall be
found, I will restore it or cause it to be restored. This writing, which was
not a contract but altogether the effect of the king's goodness, and which has
been without any effect, was on a piece of paper one half less than that which
d'Arget took from my chamber to the king's apartment at Potsdam. It contained
nothing more than thanks on my part for the pension which his majesty had
granted me with the permission of the king my master, for that which he had
also granted to my neice after my death, and for the cross, and chamberlain's
key.

The king of Prussia deigned to write at the bottom of this scrap of paper, as
well as I remember: "I sign with great pleasure the grant which I have designed
to make for more than fifteen years past." This paper, absolutely useless to
his majesty, to myself, and the public, shall assuredly be returned as soon as
it can be found among my other papers. I neither can nor will make the least
use of it; and, to remove all suspicion, I declare myself guilty of treason
toward the king of France, my master, and the king of Prussia if I do not
deliver up this paper the instant it shall fall into my hands.

My neice, who attends me in my sickness, engages under the same oath to
restore it if it shall come into her possession; and till I can examine my
papers at Paris I entirely annul the said writing. I declare that I have no
claim on his majesty the king of Prussia; and, in my present cruel situation, I
look for nothing except the compassion which his greatness of mind owes to a
dying man who has hazarded and lost all by his attachment to his majesty, who
has served him with zeal, and has been useful to him but has never failed in
respect to his person, and who relies on the goodness of his heart. I am
obliged to dictate, being unable to write. I sign, with the profoundest
respect, the purest innocence, and the most lively grief,

VOLTAI^^

LES J' A VU At tibu^s faussement a M. de Voltaire, et qui le f^eut mettre a le
Bastille, sous la regence, en 1716 (...) ^sely attributed to M. de Voltaire;
for which (...) ^e regency he was sent to the Bastile, in the (...)
.
TRISTES Oh sight of gloomy woe! I have seen the Bastile, Vincennes, the
Chatelet, the Bicetre, and a thousand other prisons gorged with brave citizens
and faithful subjects. I have seen freedom in chains, and the people groaning
in rigorous bondage. I have seen sages counteracted, and their remonstrances of
no effect. I have seen magistrates oppress the kingdom by the worst of taxes
and unjust edicts. I have seen a demon govern in a woman's form Madame de
Maintenon.
, and sacrifice her God, her religion, and her soul, to seduce the mind of a
too credulous king. I have seen a man of horror M. D'Argenson.
, the barberous enemy of the human race, with arms in his hand exercising at
Paris authority the most abominable. I have seen tyrants unpunished, and men of
honor persecuted and in exile. I have seen error every where triumphan^ truth
betrayed, and faith with staggering steps. I have seen holy places defiled, and
Port Royal abolished. I have seen the blackest act that ever can be committed;
not all the waters of the ocean could wash away its guilt, nor will future
generations think it credible. I have seen in the pure abodes of mercy,
sacrilegious and profane hands disturb the seal of immortality! Nor is this
all. I have seen the mitre bought and sold, or made the reward of imposture. I
have seen high dignities the prey of the ignorant, and base men holding the
highest rank. I have seen holy prelates fall a sacrifice to the divine ardour
by which they were animated. Oh times! Oh manners! In this accursed age, I have
seen that Cardinal who is the ornament of France, more great and holy even than
fame reports him, feel the most horrible effects of vengeance. I have seen the
hypocrite honored, and in a word the jesuit adored. These evils I have seen,
during the reign of a Prince whom heavenly wrath in vengeance formerly granted
to our ardent wish. These evils have I seen, yet the age of twenty have not
passed.
et lugubres objets,
J'ai vu la Bastille et Vincennes,
Le Chatelet, Bicetre, et mill prisons pleines
De braves citoyens, de fidelles sujets:
J'ai vu la liberte ravie,
De la droite raison la regle poursuivie:
J'ai vu le peuple gemissant
Sous un rigoureux esclavage:
J'ai vu le soldat rugissant
Crever de faim, de soif, de depit et de rage;
J'ai vu les sages contredits,
Leurs remontrances inutiles:
J'ai vu des magistrates vexer toutes les villes
Par des impots crians et d'injustes edits:
J'ai vu sous l'habit d'une femme
Un demon nous donner la loi,
Sacrifier son dieu, sa religion, son ame
Pour seduire l'esprit d'un trop credule roi;
J'ai vu un homme epouvantable,
Ce barbare ennemi de tout le genre-humain
Exercer dans Paris, les arms a la mai^*
Unc police abominable:
J'ai vu les tyrans impunis:
J'ai vu les gens d'honneur persecutes, bannis:
J'ai vu meme l'erreur en tous lieux triomphante,
La verite trah^e, et la foi chancellante:
J'ai vu le lieu saint avili;
J'ai vu Port Royal aboli;
J'ai vu l'action la plus noire
Qui puisse jamais arriver;
L'eau de tout l'Ocean ne pourrait la laver,
Et nos derniers neveux auront peine a la croire:
J'ai vu dans ce sejour par la grace habit
Des sacrileges, des profanes
Remuer et tourmenter les manes
Des corpse marquis au sceau de l'immortalite.
Ce n'est pas tout encor; j'ai vu la prelature
Se vendre, ou devenir le prix de l'imposture:
J'ai vu les dignites en proie aux ignorans:
J'ai vu les gens de rien tenir les premiers rangs:
J'ai vu de saints prelates devenir la victime
Du feu divin qui les anime.
O temps! o moeurs! j'ai vu dans ce siecle maudit
Ce cardinal, l'ornement de la France
Plus grand encor, plus saint qu'on ne le dit,
Ressentir les effets d'une horrible vengeance:
J'ai vu l'hypocrite honor:
J'ai vu, c'est tout dire, le jesuit adore.
J'al vu ces maux sous le regne funeste
D'un prince que jadis la colere celiste
Accorda, par vengeance, a nos desirs ardens:
J'ai vu ces maux, et je n'ai pas vingt ans.
END OF THE JUSTIFICATORY PIECES.
MEMOIRS OF VOLTAIRE. WRITTEN BY HIMSELF.
I WAS tired of the lazy and turbulent life led at Paris, of the multitude of
Petit-Maitres, of bad books printed with the approbation of Censors and the
privilege of the King, of the cabals and parties among the learned, and of the
mean arts, plagiarism, and book-making which dishonor literature. In the year
1733, I met with a young lady who happened to think nearly as I did, and who
took a resolution to go with me and spend several years in the country, there
to cultivate her understanding, far from the hurry and tumult of the world.

This Lady was no other than the Marchioness de Chatelet, who, of all the women
in France, had a mind the most capable of the different branches of science.
Her father, the Baron de Breteuid, had taught her Latin, which she understood
as perfectly as Madame Dacier. She knew by rote the most beautiful passages in
Horace, Virgil, and Lucretius, and all the philosophical works of Cicero were
familiar to her. Her inclinations were more strongly bent toward the
mathematics and metaphysics than any other studies, and seldom have there been
united in the same person so much justness of discernment, and elegance of
taste, with so ardent a desire of information.

Yet, notwithstanding her love of literature, she was not the less fond of the
world, and those amusements which were adapted to her sex and age: she,
however, determined to quit them all, and go and bury herself in an old ruinous
chateau, upon the borders of Champagne and Loraine, and situated in a barren
and unhealthy soil. This old chateau she ornamented, and embellished with
tolerably pretty gardens; I built a gallery, and formed a very good collection
of natural history: add to which, we had a library not badly furnished.

We were visited by several of the learned, who came to philosophize in our
retreat: among others we had the celebrated Koenig for two entire years, who
has since died Professor at the Hague, and Librarian to her Highness the
princess of Orange. Maupertuis came also, with John Bernouilli; and there it
was that Maupetuis, who was born the most jealous of all human beings, made me
the object of a passion which has ever been to him exceedingly dear.

I taught English to Madame du Chatelet, who in about three months, understood
it as well as I did, and read Newton, Lock, and Pope, with equal ease. She
learnt Italian likewise as soon. We read all the works of Tasso and Ariosto
together, so that when Algarotti came to Cirey, where he finished his
Neutonianismo per le Dame, [The Ladies Newton,] he found her sufficiently
skilful in his own language to give him some very excellent information by
which he profited. Algarotti was a Venetian, the son of a very rich tradesman,
and very amiable; he traveled all over Europe, knew a little of every thing,
and gave to every thing a grace.

In this our delightful retreat we sought only instruction, and troubled not
ourselves concerning what passed in the rest of the world. We long employed all
our attention and powers upon Leibnitz, and Newton: Madame du Chatelet attached
herself first to Leibnitz, and explained one part of his system, in a book
exceedingly well written, entitled Institutions de Physique. She did not seek
to decorate philosophy with ornaments to which philosophy is a stranger; such
affectation never was part of her character, which was masculine and just. The
properties of her style were clearness, precision, and elegance. If it be ever
possible to give the semblance of truth to the ideas of Leibnitz, it will be
found in that book: but at present few people trouble themselves to know how or
what Leibnitz thought.

Born with a love of truth, she soon abandoned system, and applied herself to
the discoveries of the great Newton; she translated his whole book on the
Principles of the Mathematics into French; and when she had afterward enlarged
her knowledge, she added to this book, which so few people understood, an
Algebraical Commentary, which likewise is not to be understood by common
readers. M. Clairaut, one of our best Geometricians, has carefully reviewed
this Commentary, an edition of it was begun, and it is not to the honor of the
age, that it never was finished.

At Cirey we cultivated all the arts; it was there I composed Alzire, Merope,
l'Enfant, Prodigue, and Mahomet. For her use I wrote an Essay on Universal
History, from the age of Charlemagne to the present. I chose the epoch of
Charlemagne, because it was the point of time which Boussuet stopped at, and
because I durst not again treat a subject already handled by so great a master.

Madame du Chatelet, however, was far from satisfied with the Universal History
of this prelate; she thought it eloquent only, and was provoked to find that
the labors of Bossuet were all wasted upon a nation so despicable as the
Jewish.

After having spent six years in this retreat, in the midst of the arts and
sciences, we were obliged to go to Brussels, where the family of du Chatelet
had long been embroiled in a lawsuit with the family of Honsbrouk.

Here I had the good fortune to meet with a grandson of the illustrious and
unfortunate Grand Pensioner De Wit, who was First President of the Chamber of
Accounts, and had one of the finest libraries in Europe, which was of great use
to me in writing my Universal History.

But I had a still superior happiness at Brussels, and which gave me infinite
pleasure. I terminated the lawsuit, by an accommodation, in which the two
families had been ruining each other with expenses for near sixty years, and
gained two hundred and twenty thousand livres paid in ready money to the
Marquis du Chatelet.

While I remained at Brussels, and in the year 1740, the unpolished King of
Prussia, Frederic-William, the most intolerant of all Kings, and beyond
contradiction the most frugal, and the richest in ready money, died at Berlin.
His son, who has since gained so singular a kind of reputation, had then held a
tolerable regular correspondence with me above four years. The world never
perhaps beheld a father and son who less resembled each other than these two
monarchs.

The father was an absolute Vandel, who thought of no other thing, during his
whole reign, than a massing of money, and maintaining, at the least possible
expense, the finest soldiers in Europe. Never were subjects poorer, or King
more rich. He bought up at a despicable price the estates of a great part of
the Nobility, who soon devoured the little money they got for them, above half
of which returned to the Royal coffers by means of duties upon consumption. All
the King's lands were farmed out to tax-gatherers, who held the double office
of Exciseman and Judge; insomuch, that if a landed tenant did not pay this
collector upon the very day appointed, he put on his Judge's robe, and
condemned the delinquent in double the sum. It must be observed, that if this
same Exciseman and Judge did not pay the King by the last day of the month, the
day following he was himself obliged to pay double to the King.

Did a man kill a hare or lop a tree any where near the Royal domains, or
commit any other peccadillo? he was instantly condemned to pay a fine. Was a
poor girl found guilty of making a child? the father or the mother, or some
other of the girl's relations, were obliged to pay his Majesty for the fashion.

The Baronness of Kniphaussen, who at that time was the richest widow in
Berlin, that is to say, she had between three and four hundred a year, was
accused of having brought one of the King's subjects clandestinely into the
world in the second year of her widowhood. His Majesty thereupon wrote her a
letter, with his own hand, wherein he informed her it was necessary, if she
meant to save her honor, and preserve her character, she must immediately send
him thirty thousand livres (1250 l.) This sum she was obliged to borrow, and
was ruined.

He had an Ambassador at the Hague, whose name was Luisius; and certainly of
all the Ambassadors that appertained to royalty, he was paid the worst. This
poor man, that he might be able to keep a fire, had cut down some trees in the
garden of Hous-lardick, which then appertained to the Royal-house of Prussia.
His next dispatches brought him word that the King, his gracious Sovereign, had
stopped on this account, a year's salary to defray his damages, and Luisius, in
a fit of despair, cut his throat with the only razor he had. An old valet,
happening to come in, called assistance, and unhappy for him saved his life. I
afterward met with his Excellency at the Hague, and gave him alms at the gate
of the Palace, which is called the Old Court, and which belonged to the King of
Prussia, where this poor Ambassador had lived twelve years.

Turkey, it must be confessed, is a Republic, when compared to the despotism
exercised by this Frederick-William.

It was by such like means, only, that he could, in a reign of twenty-eight
years, load the cellers of his Palace at Berlin with a hundred and twenty
millions of crowns (fifteen millions sterling) all well casked up in barrels,
hooped with iron.

He took great pleasure in furnishing the grand apartment of the Palace whith
heavy articles of massy silver, in which the worth of the workman surpassed not
the sterling of nature. He gave to the Queen his wife, in charge, that is, a
cabinet, the contents of which, even to the coffee-pot, were all gold.

The Monarch used to walk from his Palace clothed in an old blue coat, with
copper buttons, half way down his thighs, and when he bought a new one, these
buttons were made to serve again. It was in this dress that his Majesty, armed
with a huge serjeant's cane, marched forth every day to review his regiment of
giants. These giants were his greatest delight, and the things for which he
went to the heaviest expense.

The men who stood in the first rank of this regiment were none of them less
than seven feet high, and he sent to purchase them from the farther parts of
Europe to the borders of Asia. I have seen some of them since his death.

The King, his son, who loved handsome, and not gigantic men, had given those I
saw to the Queen, his wife, to serve in quality of Heiduques. I remember they
accompanied the old state coach, which preceded the Marquis de Beauvan, who
came to compliment the new King in the month of November, 1740. The late King
Frederic-William, who had formerly fold all the magnificent furniture left by
his father, never could find a purchaser for that enormous unguilt coach. The
Heiduques, who walked on each side to support it, in case it should fall, shook
hands with each other over the roof.

After Frederic-William had reviewed his giants, he used to walk through the
town, and every body fled before him full speed. If he happened to meet a
woman, he would demand why she staid idling her time in the streets, and
exclaim, "Go -- get home with you, you lazy hussy; an honest woman has no
business over the threshold of her own door;" which remonstrance he would
accompany with a hearty box on the ear, kick in the groin, or a few well
applied strokes on thee shoulders with his cane.

The holy Ministers of the Gospel were treated also in exactly the same style,
if they happened to take a fancy to come upon the parade.

We may easily imagine, what would be the astonishment and vexation of a
Vandal, like this, to find he had a son endowed with wit, grace, and good
breeding; who delighted to please, was eager in the acquisition of knowledge,
and who made verses, and afterward set them to music. If he caught him with a
book in his hand, he threw it into the fire; or playing on the flute, he broke
his instrument; and sometimes treated his Royal Highness, as he treated the
ladies and the preachers when he met with them on the parade.

The Prince, weary of the attentions of so kind a father, determined one sine
morning, in 1730, to elope, without well knowing whether he would fly to France
or England. Paternal economy had deprived him of the power of traveling in the
style of son and heir to a farmer-general, or even an English tradesman, and he
was obliged to borrow a few hundred ducats.

Two young gentlemen, both very amiable, one named Kat, the other Keit, were to
accompany him. Kat was the only son of a brave General Officer, and Keit had
married the daughter of the said Baroness of Kniphaussen, who had paid the ten
thousand crowns about the child-making business before mentioned. The day and
hour were appointed; the father was informed of the whole affair, and the
Prince and his two traveling companions were all three put under arrest.

The King believed at first, that the Princess Wilhelmina, his daughter, who
was afterward married to the Prince Margrave of Bareith, was concerned in the
plot: and as he was remarkable for dispatch in the executive branch of justice,
he proceeded to kick her out of a large window, which opened from the floor to
the cieling. The Queen Mother, who was present at this exploit, with great
difficulty saved her, by catching hold of her petticoats at the moment she was
making her leap. The Princess received a contusion on her left breast, which
remained with her during life, as a mark of paternal affection, and which she
did me the honor to show me.

The Prince had a sort of mistress, the daughter of a schoolmaster, of the
town of Brandebourg, who had settled at Potzdam. This girl played tolerably
well upon the harpsicord, and the Prince accompanied her with his flute. He
really imagined himself in love, but in this he was deceived; his avocation was
not with the fair sex. However, as he had pretended a kind of passion, the
King, his father, thought proper that the damsel should make the tour of
Potzdam, conducted by the hangman, and ordered her to be whipped in presence of
his son.

After he had regaled him with this diverting spectacle, he made a transfer of
him to the citadel of Custrin, which was situated in the midst of a marsh. Here
he was shut up, without a single servant, for the space of six months, in a
sort of dungeon, at the end of which time he was allowed a soldier as an
attendant.

This soldier, who was young, well made, handsome, and played upon the flute,
had more ways than one of amusing the royal prisoner. So many fine qualities
have made his fortune; and I have since known him, at once Valet de Chamber and
first Minister, with all the insolence which two such posts may be supposed to
inspire.

The Prince had been some weeks in his palace at Custrin, when one day an old
officer, followed by four grenadiers, entered his chamber, weeping. Frederic
had no doubt he was going to be made a head shorter; but the officer still in
tears, ordered the grenadiers to take him to the window, and hold his head out
of it, that he might be obliged to look on the execution of his friend Kat,
upon a scaffold expressly built there for that purpose. He saw, stretched out
his hand, and fainted. The father was present at this exhibition, as he had
been at that of the girl's whipping-bout.

Keit, the other confidant, had fled into Holland, whither the King dispatched
his military messengers to seize him. He escaped merely by a minute, embarked
for Portugal, and there remained till the death of the most clement
Frederic-William.

It was not the King's intention to have stopped there; his design was to have
beheaded the Prince. He considered that he had three other sons, not one of
whom wrote verses, and that they were sufficient to sustain the Prussian
grandeur. Measures had been already concerted to make him suffer, as the
Czarovitz, eldest son to Peter the Great, had suffered before.

It is not exceedingly clear, from any known laws, human or divine, that a
young man should have his head struck off, because he had a wish to travel. But
his majesty had found judges in Prussia, equally as learned and equitable as
the Russian expounders of law. Besides that his own paternal authority, in a
case of need, would at any time suffice.

The Emperor Charles the Sixth, however, pretended that the Prince Royal, as a
Prince of the Empire, could not suffer condemnation but in a full Diet; and
sent the Count de Sekendorf to the father, in order to make very serious
remonstrances on that subject.

The Count de Sekendorf, whom I have since known in Saxony, where he lives
retired, has declared to me, it was with great difficulty indeed, that he could
prevail with the King not to behead the Prince. This is the same Sekendorf who
has commanded the armies of Bavaria, and of whom the Prince, when he came to
the throne, drew a hideous portrait, in the history of his father, which he
inserted in some thirty copies of his Memoires dc Brandebourg I gave the
Elector Palatine the copy of this work, which the King of Prussia presented to
me.
. Who would not, after this, serve Princes, and prevent tyrants from cutting
off their heads?

After eighteen months imprisonment, the solicitations of the Emperor, and the
tears of the Queen, obtained the Prince his liberty; and he immediately began
to make verses, and write music more than ever. He read Leibnitz, and even
Wolf, whom he called a compiler of trash, and devoted himself to the whole
circle of sciences at once.

As the King, his father, suffered him to have very little to do with the
national affairs, or as there rather, indeed, were no such affairs in a
government the whole business of which was reviews, he emyloyed his leisure in
writing to those men of letters in France, who were something known in the
world. These letters were some in verse, and others were treatises of
metaphysics, history, and politics. He treated me as a something divine, and I
him as a Solomon. Epithets cost us nothing. They have printed some of these
ridiculous things in a collection of my works, and happily they have not
printed the thirtieth part of them. I took the liberty to send him an
exceedingly beautiful ink-stand; he had the bounty to present me with a few
gew-gaws of amber, and all the wits of the Parisian coffee-houses imagined with
horror my fortune was made.

A young Courlander, named Keizerling, who was likewise a rhymer, and of course
a favorite with Frederic, was dispatched from the frontiers of Pomerania to us
at Cirey. We prepared a feast for him, and I made a fine illumination, the
lights of which composed the cipher, and name of the Prince Royal, with this
device, l'Esperance du genre humain: -- "The hope of all nations."

For my own part, had I been inclined to indulge personal hopes, I had great
reason so to do; for my Prince always called me his dear friend, in his
letters, and spoke frequently of the solid marks of friendship which he
designed for me as soon as he should mount the throne.

The throne at last was mounted, while I was at Brussels, and he began his
reign by sending an Ambassador Extraordinary to France; one Camas, who had lost
an arm, formerly a French refugee, and then an officer in the Prussian army. He
said that, as there was a minister from the French court at Berlin, who had but
one hand, he, that he might acquit himself of all obligation toward the Most
Christian King, had sent him an Ambassador with only one arm.

Camas, as soon as he arrived safe at his inn, dispatched a lad to me, whom he
had created his page, to tell me that he was too much fatigued to come to my
house, and therefore begged I would come to him instantly, he having the
finest, greatest, and most magnificent present that ever was presented, to make
me on the part of the King his master. Run -- run as fast as you can, said
Madame du Chatelet, he has assuredly sent you the diamonds of the crown.

Away I ran, and found my Ambassador, whose only baggage was a small keg of
wine, tied behind his chaise, sent from the cellar of the late King by the
reigning Monarch, with a royal command for me to drink. I emptied myself in
protestations of astonishment and gratitude for these liquid marks of his
Majesty's bounty, instead of the solid ones I had been taught to expect, and
divided my keg with Camas.

My Solomon was then at Strasbourg; the whim had taken him while he was
visiting his long and narrow land, which extends from Guelders to the Baltic
ocean, that he would come incognito to view the frontiers and troops of France.
This pleasure he enjoyed at Strasbourg, where he went by the name of Count du
Four, a Lord of Bohemia. His brother, the Prince Royal, who was with him, had
also his traveling title; and Algaroti, who already had attached himself to
him, was the only one who went unmasked.

His Majesty sent me a history of his journey to Brussels, half verse, half
prose, written in a taste something similar to that of Bachaumont and Chapelle;
that is to say, as similar as a King of Prussia's could be supposed to be. The
following are extracts from his letter.

"After these abominable roads, we were obliged to put up at still more
abominable inns.

Hungry and cold, and late at night,
Each thievish host beheld our plight;
And each, with more than frugal fist,
(Stewed first in most infernal mist
Would poison us, and after rob us,
Happy to think how they could sob us.
Oh times! when robbing is so common!
Oh age! how wide from age of Roman!
Roads frightful! food bad, drink worse. This was not all; we met with many
accidents; and to be sure our equipage must have something very odd about it,
for every place we passed through they took us for outlandish animals.

One stares, and Monarchs us believes,
Others suspect we are civil thieves;
Some think us late let loose from college,
And eager all of farther knowledge,
They crowd and squint, and wish to smoke us,
As cockneys gape at hocus-pocus.
The master of the post house at Kell having assured us there was no safety
without passports, and seeing we were driven to an absolute necessity of making
them for ourselves, or of not entering Strasbourg, we were even forced to this
shift, in the execution of which, the Prussian arms, which I had upon my seal,
were marvellously useful. We arrived at Strasbourg, and the Corsaire de la
douane and the Visiteur seemed satisfied with our proofs. The rascals found
themselves in clover,
With one eye read our passports over,
And fixed the other on our purse,
Determined we should reimburse
Their pains, with guineas good and many;
Thus gold, with which Jove bought Miss Danao,
Thus gold, with which your mighty Caesar
Governed the world with wondrous ease, Sir;
Gold, greater far than all the noddies,
Ycliped or either God or Goddess,
Soon brought the Scoundrels to adore us,
And open the gates of Strasbourg for us Perhaps it is impossible to render the
true spirit of these extracts, and others inserted in these Memoirs, without
appearing either stupid or extavagant; thought liberties have been taken in the
style, which would scarcely be justifiable in other parts of the work.
."
we may see by this letter, that he was not yet, become the best of all
possible poets, and that his philosophy did not look with total indifference on
the metal of which his father had made such ample provision.

From Strasburg he went to visit his territories in the Lower Germany, and sent
me word he would come incognito to see me at Brussels. We prepared elegant
apartments for him in the little Chateau de Meause, two leagues from Cleves. He
informed me, he expected I should make the first advances, and accordingly I
went to pay him my most profound respects.

Maupertius, who had already formed his plan, having the mania of becoming
President of an Academy upon him, had presented himself, and was lodged with
Algaroti and Keizerling in one of the garrets of this palace. One soldier was
the only guard I sound. The Privy-Counsellor and Minister of State, Rambonet,
was walking in the courtyard, blowing his fingers. He had on a pair of large
dirty coarse ruffles, a bat, all in holes, and an old judge's wig, one side of
which hung into his pocket, and the other scarcely touched his shoulder. They
informed me, this man was charged with a state affair of great importance, and
so indeed he was.

I was conducted into his Majesty's apartment, in which I found nothing but
four bare walls. By the light of a bougie, I perceived a small truckle bed, two
feet and a half wide, in a closet, upon which lay a little man, wrapped up in a
morning gown of blue cloth. It was his Majesty, who lay sweating and shaking,
beneath a beggarly coverlet, in a violent ague fit. I made my bow, and began my
acquaintance by feeling his pulse, as if I had been his first physician.

The fit left him, and he rose, dressed himself, and sat down to table with
Algaroti, Kezerling, Maupertius, the Ambassador to the States General, and
myself; where at supper, we treated most profoundly on the immortality of the
soul, natural liberty, and the Androgynes of Plato.

While we were thus philosophizing upon freedom, the Prevy-Counsellor Rambonet,
was mounted upon a post-horse, and riding all night toward Liege, at the gates
of which he arrived the next day, where he proclaimed, with sound of trumpet,
the name of the King his master, while two thousand soldiers from Vesel were
laying the city of Liege under contribution. The pretext for this fine
expedition was certain rights, which his Majesty pretended to have over a part
of the suburbs. It was to me he committed the task of drawing up the manifesto,
which I performed as well as the nature of the case would let me; never
suspecting that a King, with whom I supped, and who called me his friend, could
possibly be in the wrong. The affair was soon brought to a conclusion, by the
payment of a million of livres, which he exacted in good hard ducats, and which
served to defray the expenses of his tour to Strasbourg, concerning which he
complained so loudly in his poetic prose epistle.

I soon felt my attachment to him, for he had wit, an agreeable manner, and was
moreover, a King; which is a circumstance of seduction hardly to be vanquished
by human weakness. Generally speaking, it is the employment of men of letters
to flatter Kings; but in this instance, I was praised by a King, from the crown
of my head to the sole of my foot, at the same time that I was libelled, at
least once a week, by the Abbe Des Fontaines, and other Grub street poets of
Paris.

Some time before the death of his father, the King of Prussia thought proper
to write against the principles of Machiavel. Had Machiavel had a Prince for a
pupil, the very first thing he would have advised him to do, would have been so
to write. The Prince Royal, however, was not master of so much finesse; he
really meant what he wrote; but it was before he was a King, and while his
father gave him no great reason to fall in love with despotic power. He praised
moderation and justice with his whole soul; and in the ardour of his
enthusiasm, looked upon all usurpation as an absolute crime.

This manuscript he had sent to me at Brussels, to have it corrected and
printed; and I had already made a present of it to a Dutch bookseller, one
Venduren, one of the greatest knaves of his profession. I could not help
feeling some remorse, at being concerned in printing this Anti-Machiavelion
book, at the very moment the King of Prussia, who had a hundred millions in his
coffers, was robbing the poor people at Liege of another, by the hands of the
Privy-Counsellor Rambonet.

I imagined my Solomon would not stop there. His father had left him sixty-six
thousand four hundred men, all complete, and excellent troops. He was busily
augmenting them, and appeared to have a vast inclination to give them
employment the very first opportunity.

I represented to him, that perhaps it was not altogether prudent to print his
book just at the time the world might reproach him with having violated the
principles he taught; and he permitted me to stop the impression. I accordingly
took a journey into Holland, purposely to do him this trifling service; but the
bookseller demanded so much money, that his Majesty, who was not, in the bottom
of his heart, vexed to see himself in print, was better pleased to be so for
nothing, than to pay for not being so.

While I was in Holland, occupied in this business, Charles the Sixth died, in
the month of October, 1740, of an indigestion, occasioned by eating
champignons, which brought on an apoplexy, and this plate of champignons
changed the destiny of Europe. It was presently evident, that Frederic the
third, King of Prussia, was not so great an enemy to Machiavel as the Prince
Royal appeared to have been.

Although he had then conceived the project of his invasion of Silesia, he did
not the less neglect to invite me to his court; but I had before given him to
understand I could not come to stay with him; that I deemed it a duty to prefer
friendship to ambition; that I was attached to Madame du Chatelet; and that,
between philosophers, I loved a lady better than a King. He approved of the
liberty I took, though for his own part he did not love the Ladies. I went to
pay him a visit in October; and the Cardinal de Fleury writ me a long letter,
full of praises of the Anti-Machiavel, and of the author, which I did not
forget to let him see.

He had already assembled his troops, yet not one of his Generals or Ministers
could penetrate into his designs. The Marquis de Beauveau, who was sent to
compliment him on his accession, believed he meant to declare against France,
in favor of Maria-Theresa, Queen of Hungary and Bohemia, and daughter of
Charles the Sixth; and to support the election of Francis of Lorraine, Grand
Duke of Tuscany, and husband of that Queen, to the Empire, supposing he might
thence derive great advantages.

I had more reason than any person to suppose, the new-crowned King of Prussia
meant to espouse this party; for three months before, he had sent me a
political dissertation, after his manner wherein he considered France as the
natural enemy and depredator of Germany. But it was constitutional with him to
do the direct contrary of what he said or wrote; not from dissimulation, but
because he spoke and wrote with one kind of enthusiasm, and afterward acted
with another.

He departed on the 15th of December, with the quartan ague, for the conquest
of Silesia, at the head of thirty thousand combatants, well disciplined, and
well accoutred. As he mounted his horse, he said to the Marquis de Beauvau,
Maria Theresa's Minister, "I am going to play your game; should the trumps fall
into our hands, we will divide the winnings."

He has since that written the history of that conquest, and he showed me the
whole of it. Here follows one of the curious paragraphs, in the introduction to
these annals, which I, in preference, carefully transcribed, as a thing unique
in its kind.

"Add to the foregoing considerations, I had troops entirely prepared to act;
this, the fullness of my treasury, and the vivacity of my character, were the
reasons why I made war upon Maria-Theresa, Queen of Bohemia and Hungary."

And a few lines after, he has these very words.

"Ambition, interest, and a desire to make the world speak of me, vanquished
all, and war was determined on."

From the time that conquerors, or fiery spirits that would be conquerors,
first were, to the present hour, I believe he is the only one who has ever done
himself thus much justice. Never man, perhaps, felt reason more forcibly, or
listened more attentively to his passions; but this mixture of a philosophic
mind, and a disorderly imagination, have ever composed his character.

It is much to be regretted that I prevailed on him to omit these passages,
when I afterward corrected his works; a confession so uncommon, should have
passed down to posterity, and have served to show upon what motives the
generality of wars are founded.

We authors, poets, historians, and academician declaimers, celebrate these
fine exploits; but here is a monarch who performs and condemns them.

His troops had already entered Silesia, when his Minister at Vienna, the Baron
de Gotter, made the very impolite proposal to Maria-Theresa, of ceding, with a
good grace, to the Elector and King his master, three-fourths of that province:
for which his Prussian Majesty would lend her three millions of crowns, and
make her husband Emperor.

Maria-Theresa, who at that time had neither troops, money, nor credit, was
notwithstanding inflexible; she rather chose to risk the loss of all, than
crouch to a Prince whom she looked upon as the vassal of her ancestors, and
whose life the Emperor, her father, had saved. Her Generals could scarcely
muster twenty thousand men. Marshal Neuperg, who commanded them, forced the
King of Prussia to give battle under the walls of Neisse. The Prussian cavalry
was at first put to the rout by the Austrian; and the King, who was not
accustomed to stand fire, fled at the first shock as far as Opeleim, twelve
long leagues from the field of battle.

Maupertuis, who hoped to make his fortune in a hurry, was in the suit of the
Monarch this campaign, imagining that the King would at least find him a horse.
But this was not the royal custom. Maupertuis bought an ass for two ducats, on
the day of battle, and fled with all his might after his Majesty on ass-back.
This steed, however, was presently distanced, and Maupertuis was taken and
stripped by the Austrian hussars.

Frederic passed the night on a truckle-bed, in a village alehouse near
Ratibor, on the confines of Poland, whence he was preparing to enter the
northern part of his own dominions, when one of his horsemen arrived from the
camp at Molwitz, and informed him he had gained the victory. This news was
confirmed a quarter of an hour after by an Aid-de-Camp, and was true enough.

If the Prussian cavalry was bad, the infantry was the best in Europe; it had
been under the discipline of the old Prince of Anhalt for thirty years. Marshal
Schwerin, who commanded, was a pupil of Charles the Twelfth. He turned the fate
of the day as soon as the King was fled. The next day his Majesty came back to
his army, and the conquering General was very near being disgraced.

I returned to philosophize in my retreat at Cirey, and passed the winter at
Paris, where I had a multitude of enemies; for, having long before written the
History of Charles XII. presented several successful pieces to the theater, and
composed an epic poem, I had, of course, all those who write either in verse or
prose as persecutors; and as I had the audacity to write likewise on
philosophic subjects, I of necessity, according to ancient usage, was treated
as an atheist by all those who are called devotees.

I was the first who dared develop to my countrymen, in an intelligible style,
the discoveries of the great Newton. The Cartesian prejudices, which had taken
place of the prejudice of the Peripatetics, were at that time so rooted in the
minds of the French, that the Chancellor d' Aguesseau regarded any man whatever
who should adopt discoveries made in England, as an enemy to reason and the
state. He never would grant a privilege that I might have my Elements of the
Newtonian Philosophy printed.

I was likewise a vast admirer of Lock; I considered him as the sole
reasonable Metaphysician. Above all, I praised that moderation so new, so
prudent, and at the same time so daring, where he says, we have not sufficient
knowledge to determine or affirm, by the light of reason, that God could not
grant the gifts of thought and sensation to a being which we call Material.

The obstinate malignity and intrepidity of ignorance, with which they set upon
me on this article, cannot be conceived. The principles of Lock had never
occasioned any disputes in France before, because the Doctors read St. Thomas
Aquinas and Quenel, and the rest of the world read Romances. As soon as I had
praised this Author, they began to cry out against both him and me. The poor
creatures, who were hottest in this dispute, certainly knew very little of
either matter or spirit. The fact is, we none of us know what or how we are,
except that we are convinced we have motion, life, sensation, and thought, but
without having the least conception of how we came by them. The very elements
of matter are as much hidden from us as the rest. We are blind creatures, that
walk on, groping and reasoning in the dark; and Lock was exceedingly right
when he asserted, it was not for us to determine what the Almighty could or
could not do.

All this, added to the success of my theatrical productions, drew a whole
library of Pamphlets down upon me, in which they proved that I was a bad Poet,
an Atheist, and the son of a Peasant.

A history of my life was printed, in which this genealogy was inserted -- An
industrious German took care to collect all the tales of that kind, which had
been crammed into the libels they had published against me. They had imputed
adventures to me with persons I never knew, and with others that never existed.
I have found while writing this, a letter from Marshal de Richelieu, which
informed me of an impudent Lampoon, in which it was proved his wife had given
me an elegant coach, with something else, at a time when he had no wife.

At first I took some pleasure in making a collection of these calumnies, but
they multiplied to such a degree I was obliged to leave off. Such were the
fruits I gathered from my labors: I, however, easily consoled myself;
sometimes in my retreat at Cirey, and at others ^n mixing with the best company.

While the refuse of literature were thus making war upon me, France was doing
the same upon the Queen of Hungary; and it must be owned, this war was equally
unjust; for after having solemnly stipulated, guaranteed, and sworn to the
Pragmatic Sanction of the Emperor Charles VI. and the succession of
Maria-Theresa to the inheritance of her father, and after having received
Lorraine as the purchase of these promises, it does not appear very consistent
with the rights of nations to break an engagement so sacred. The Cardinal de
Fleury was persuaded out of his pacific measures; he could not say, like the
King of Prussia, it was the vivacity of his temper which occasioned him to take
arms. This fortunate Prelate reigned when he was eighty-six years of age, but
held the reins of Government with a very feeble hand.

France was in alliance with the King of Prussia when he seized upon Silesia.
Two armies were sent into Germany at a time when Maria-Theresa had none. One of
these armies had penetrated to within five leagues of Vienna, without meeting a
single opponent. Bohemia was given to the Elector of Bavaria, who was elected
Emperor also, after having been created Lieutenant General of the armies of the
King of France. They soon, however, committed all the faults necessary to lose
the advantages they had ^^ined.

The King of Prussia in the mean time, having matured his courage, and gained
several victories, concluded a peace with the Austrians. Maria, to her infinite
regret, gave him up the county of Glatz with Silesia. Having, without ceremony,
broke off his alliance with France on these conditions, in the month of June,
1342, he writ me word he had put himself under a proper regimen, and should
advise the other invalids to do the like.

This Prince was then at the height of his power, having one hundred and thirty
thousand men under his command accustomed to victory, and the cavalry of which
he himself had formed. He drew twice as much from Silesia as it produced to the
House of Austria, saw himself firmly seated in his new conquest, and was happy,
while all the other contending powers were suffering the miseries of
depredation. Princes in these times ruined themselves by war -- be enriched
himself.

He now turned his attention to the embellishment of the city of Berlin, where
he built one of the finest opera-houses in Europe, and whither he invited
artists of all denominations. He wished to acquire glory of every kind, and to
acquire it in the cheapest manner possible.

His father had resided at Potzdam in a vile old house; he turned it into a
palace. Potzdam became a pleasant town; Berlin grew daily more extensive; and
the Prussians began to taste the comforts of life, which the late King and
entirely neglected. Several people had furniture in their houses, and most even
wore shirts, for in the former reign such things were little known. They then
wore sleeves and fore bodies only, tied on with pack thread, and the reigning
Monarch had been so educated.

The scene changed as it were by magic; Lacedaemon become Athens; deserts were
peopled; and one hundred and three villages were formed from marshes cleared
and drained. Nor did he neglect to make verses, and write music: I therefore
was not so exceedingly wrong in calling him, The Solomon of the North. I gave
him this nick name in my Letters, and he continued long to bear it.

MEMOIRS OF VOLTAIRE. WRITTEN BY HIMSELF. PART THE SECOND.
CARDINAL de Fleury died the twenty-ninth of February, 1743, at the age of
ninety. Never did man come to be Prime-Minister later in life, and never did
Prime-Minister keep his place so long. He began his career of good fortune at
the age of seventy-three, by being King of France; and so he continued,
indisputably, to the day of his death, always affecting the greatest modesty,
never amassing riches, and without pomp, forming himself only to reign. He left
the reputation of an artful and amiable person, rather than that of a man of
genius, and was said to have known the intrigues of a court, better than the
affairs of Europe.

I have often seen him at the house of Madam de Villeroi, when he was only the
ancient Bishop of the little paltry town of Frejus, of which he was always
called Bishop by divine indignation, as may be seen in some of his letters.
Madame de Villeroi was an exceedingly ugly woman, whom he repudiated as soon as
ever it was convenient. The Marshal de Villeroi, her husband, who knew not the
Bishop had long been the lover of his lady, prevailed on Louis XIV. to name him
Prceptor to Louis XV. From Preceptor he became Prime-Minister, and was not
backward in contributing to the exile of his benefactor. Ingratitude excepted,
he was a tolerably good man; but, as he had no talents himself, he took care to
drive away all those who had, be they of what kind they would.

Several of the Academicians were desirous I should supply his place in the
French Academy. It was asked at the King's supper, who should pronounce the
Cardinal's funeral oration at the Academy? His Majesty replied, it should be
me; the Duchess of Chateauroux, his Mistress would have it so; but the Count
de Maurepas, Secretary of State, would not. He was bit with a foolish rage of
quarrelling with all the Mistresses of his Master, and found the effects of his
disease.

An old idiot, who was Preceptor to the Dauphin, formerly a Theatine Monk, and
afterward bishop of Mirepoix, named Boyer, undertook, for conscience sake, to
second the caprice of M. de Maurepas. This Boyer having the disposal of the
church livings, the King left all the affairs of the Clergy to his management.
This, in his opinion, came under the head of ecclesiastical matters; and he
remonstrated that it would be an offense against God, should a profane person,
like me, succeed a Cardinal.

I knew that M. de Maurepas instigated him to act thus; I therefore went to
this Minister, and told him, that though the honor of being an Academician was
not a very important dignity, yet, after having been appointed, it was a
disagreeable thing to be excluded. You are upon ill terms with the Duchess de
Chateauroux, with whom his Majesty is in love, and likewise with the Duke de
Richelieu, by whom she is governed; but pray, my Lord, what connection is there
between these disputes of yours, and a poor seat in the French Academy? I
conjure you to tell me sincerely, in case Madame de Chateauroux can vanguish
the Bishop de Mirepoix in this contest, will you remain neuter? -- He seemed to
collect himself for a moment, and then replied, "No; I shall crush you."

The Priest at length conquered the Mistress, and I lost my seat in the
Academy, which did not give me much vexation; but I love to recollect this
adventure; it depicts so truly the little arts of those whom we call the Great,
and shows how really trifles are often considered by them as very important
matters.

Public affairs, however, went on no better since the death of the Cardinal,
than they had, done during the two last years of his life. The House of Austria
rose from its ashes into new life; France was pressed hard by her and by
England; and we had no resource left but in the King of Prussia, who had led us
into this war, and who abandoned us in our necessity. They conceived the design
of sending secretly to sound the intentions of this Monarch, and try if he was
not in a humor to prevent the storm, which, soon or late, must gather at
Vienna, and fall upon him* after having visited us; to see therefore if he
would not lend us a hundred thousand men on this occasion, and thus fix himself
more firmly in the Silesian conquest.

The Duke de Richelieu, and the Duchess de Chateauroux first imagined this
scheme, the King adapted it, and M. Amelot, Minister for Foreign Affairs, but
in a very subaltern situaation, was singly charged to hasten my departure. A
pretext was wanted, and I seized that of my dispute with the old Bishop of
Mirepoix, which met with his Majesty's approbation. I writ to the King of
Prussia, that I could no longer endure the persecutions of this Theatine Monk;
and that I must take refuge with a King, who was a philosopher, to escape the
snare of a Bishop, who was a bigot. This Prelate always signed himself l'anc,
instead of Pancien, [the ancient] Bishop of Mirepoix; and his writing being
very bad, (...) used continually to read and call him the ass of Mirepoix. It
was a subject of pleasantry, and never was negotiation more gay.

The King of Prussia, who struck not with a palsied hand, when the blow was
intended for the cheek of a Monk, or a Prelate become courtier, replied with a
deluge of sarcasms upon the ass of Mirepoix, and pressed me to come.

I took great care, that both my letters and these answers should be read. It
soon came to the Bishop's ears, and he went to complain to his Majesty, that he
was laughed at for a fool in a foreign court.

The King's answer was, it was a matter agreed on, and he must let it pass
without notice.

This answer has very little of the character of Louis XV. in it; and, as
coming from him, always appeared to me extraordinary. Thus I had, at once, the
pleasure of revenging myself upon a Bishop, who had excluded me from the
Academy, of taking a very agreeable journey, and of having an opportunity to
exert myself in the service of the King and State. Even the Count de Maurepas
entered into this project with warmth, because at that time he governed M.
Amelot, and considered himself, in fact, as the minister for foreign affairs.

The most singular part of this business was, that we were obliged to let
Madame du Chatelet into the secret. There was not, in her opinion, any thing in
the world so unmanly, so abominable, as for a man to leave a woman to go and
live with a King; and she would have made a most dreadful tumult, had they not
agreed, that to appease her, she should be informed of the reason, and that the
letters should all pass through her hands.

Whatever money I wanted for my journey, was given, upon my mere receipt, by M.
de Monmartle, which power I took care not to abuse. I stayed some time in
Holland, while the King of Prussia was galloping, from one end of his
territories to the other, to be present at reviews, and my stay at the Hague
was not useless. I had apartments in the Palace de la Vicille Cour, which
belonged at that time to the King of Prussia, in participation with the House
of Orange. His envoy, the young Count de Padvitz, loved, and was beloved by the
lady of one of the principal persons among their High Mightinesses; and he
obtained from her, copies of all their secret resolutions, which at that time,
were very prejudicial to the interests of France. These copies I sent to our
court, and my service was found very acceptable.

When I came to Berlin, his Majesty would lodge me in the Palace, as he had
done on my fo^mer visits. He led, at Potzdam, the life he had always led since
his advancement to the throne: the manner of it deserves a description.

He rose at five in summer, and six in winter. If you wish to know the royal
ceremonies, what they were on great, and what on common occasions, the
functions of his high Almoner, his great Chamberlain, the first Gentleman of
his Bedchamber, and his Gentlemen ushers, I answer, a single lacquey came to
light his sire, dress, and shave him, though he partly dressed himself alone.
His chamber was rather beautiful; a rich balustrade of silver, ornamented with
little loves, of exceedingly good sculpture, seemed to form the alcove of the
state-bed, the curtains of which were seen; but behind these curtains, instead
of a bed there was a library; and as to the royal bed, it was composed of a
stump bed-stead without sacking, but cross corded, and a slight mattress, the
whole concealed by a screen. Marcus Aurelius and Julian, the two greatest men
among the Romans, and Apostles of the Stoics, lay not on a harder couch.

As soon as his Majesty was dressed and booted, Stoicism, for a few moments,
gave place to Epi^urism. Two or three of his favorites ente^ed: these were
either Lieutenants, Ensigns, Pages, Heiduques, or young Cadets. Coffee was
brought in, and he to whom the handkerchief was thrown, remained ten minutes
tete a tete with his Majesty. Things were not carried to the last extremity,
because, while Prince, in his father's life time, he had been very illy treated
for, and effectually cured of love, in his amors de passade Of once and away.
. He could not play principal, and was obliged to content himself with the
second.

These schoolboy sports being over, the state affairs next were considered,
and his first Minister came with a large bundle of papers under his arm. This
first Minister was a clerk, with lodged up two-pair-of-stairs in the house of
Fridesdorff, and was the soldier, now valet de chamber and favorite, who had
formerly served the King at Custrin. The Secretaries of State sent all the
dispatches to the King's Clerk, who brought extracts to his Majesty, and the
King writ his answer in the margin in two words. The whole affairs of the
Kingdom were expedited in an hour, and seldom did the Secretaries of State, or
the Ministers in office, come into his presence; nay, there were some to whom
even he had never spoken. The King, his father, had put the finances under such
exact regulations, all was executed in such a military manner, and obedience
was so blind, that four hundred leagues were governed with as much ease as a
manor.

About eleven o'clock, the King, booted, reviewed in his garden his regiment of
guards; and at the same hour all the Colonels did the like throughout the
provinces, in the interval of parade and dinnertime. The Princes his brothers,
the General Officers, and one or two of his Chamberlains, eat at his table,
which was as well furnished as could be expected in a country where they had
neither game, tolerable butcher's meat, nor poultry, and where they got all
their wheat from Magdebourg.

When dinner was over, he retired to his cabinet, and writ verses till five or
six o'clock; a young man of the name of Darget, formerly Secretary to M. de
Valory, the French Envoy, then came and read to him. At seven he had a little
concert, at which he played the flute, ^^d as well as the best performers. His
own c^^positions were often among the pieces played, for there was no art he
did not cultivate; and had he lived among the Greeks, he would not, like
Epaminondas, have had the mortification to confess he did not understand music.

They supped in a little hall; the most singular ornament of which was a
picture, the design of which he himself gave to Pene, his painter, and one of
our best colourists. The subject was totally Priapian. Turtles billing, young
men in the embraces of young women, nymphs beneath satyrs, cupids at lascivious
sports, people fainting with desire at beholding them, and rams and goats at
similar pastimes. The supper was frequently seasoned with the same kind of
philosophy; and any person who had heard the discourse, and looked at this
picture, would have supposed they had caught the Seven Sages of Greece in a
brothel.

Never was there a place in the world where liberty of speech was so fully
indulged, or where the various superstitions of men, were treated with so great
a degree of pleasantry and contempt. God was respected, bur those who in his
name had imposed upon credulity, were not spared. Neither women nor priests
ever entered the palace; and, in a word, Frederic lived without religion,
without a council, and without a court.

Some of the provincial Judges were about to burn a poor devil of a Peasant,
accused of an intrigue of a shocking nature. No person, however, is executed in
the Prussian dominions till Frede^^^ has confirmed the sentence; a most humane
law, practiced likewise in England, and other countries. The King wrote at the
bottom of the sentence, that free liberty of opinion, and of ******* were
allowed throughout his Territories.

A Minister, near Stettin, thought this indulgence exceedingly scandalous, and
let fall some expressions in a sermon upon Herod, which glanced at the King; he
was therefore summoned to appear before the Consistory at Potzdam, though, in
fact, there was no more a Consistory at Court than there was a Mass. The poor
man came. The King put on a band and surplice. M. d'Argens, Author of the
Jewish Letters, and one Baron de Polnitz, who had changed his religion three or
four times, dressed themselves up in the same manner. A folio volume of Bayle's
Dictionary was placed upon the table by way of a Bible, and the culprit was
introduced by two grenadiers, and set before these three Ministers of the
Gospel.

My brother, said the King, I demand, in the name of the Most High God, who the
Herod was, concerning whom you preached? He who slew the children, replied the
simple Priest. But was this Herod the first? said the King; for you ought to
know there have been several Herod's. The Priest was silent; he could not answer
this question. How! continued the King, have you dared to preach about Herod,
and are ignorant both of him and his family? You are unworthy of the holy
ministry. We shall pardon you for this time, but know we shall excommunicate
you if ever you dare hereafter preach against any one whom you do not know.

They then delivered his sentence and pardon to him, signed by three ridiculous
names invented on purpose. We shall go to morrow to Berlin, added the King, and
we will demand forgiveness for you of our brotherhood. Do not fail to come and
find us out. Accordingly the Priest went, and enquired for these three
laborers in the gospel vineyard all over Berlin, where he was laughed at; but
the King, who had more humor than liberality, forgot to reimburse him for the
expenses of his journey.

Frederic governed the church with as much despotism as the state. He
pronounced the divorces himself when husband and wife wanted to pair themselves
differently. A Minister one day cited the Old Testament on the subject of
divorces, and the King told him, Moses managed the Jews just as he pleased; as
for me, I must govern my Prussians to the best of my abilities.

This singularity of government, these manners still more singular, this
contract of Stoicism and Epicurianism, of severity in military discipline, and
effeminacy in the interior of the palace, of Pages with whom he amused himself
in his closet, and of Soldiers who ran the gauntlet six and thirty times, while
the monarch beheld them through his window, under which the punishment was
inflicted, of reasoning on ethics, and of unbridled licentiousness, formed,
altogether, a heterogeneous picture, which, till then, few had known, and which
has since spread through Europe.

The greatest economy of every kind was observed at Potzdam; the King's table,
and that of his officers and domestics, were regulated at thirty-three crowns
(about four guineas) a day, exclusive of wine. Instead of the Officers of the
Crown taking charge of this expense, as at other courts, it was his valet de
chamber Fridesdorff, who was at once his High Steward, Great Cup Bearer, and
First Pantler.

Whether it was from policy or economy, I know not, but he never granted the
least kindness to any of his former favorites, especially to those who had
risked their lives for him when he was Prince Royal. He did not even pay the
money he borrowed at that time. Like as Louis XII. would not revenge the
affronts of the Duke d'Orleans, neither would the King of Prussia remember the
debts of the Prince Royal.

His poor mistress, who had suffered whipping for his sake by the hands of the
common hangman, was married at Berlin to the Clerk of the Hackney-Coach office;
for they had eighteen hackney-coaches at Berlin; and her royal lover, allowed
her a pension of seventy crowns (eight pounds fifteen shillings) a year. She
called herself Mademoiselle Saumers, and was a tall, meagre figure, very like
one of the Sybils, without the least appearance of meriting to be publicly
whipped for a Prince.

When, however, he was at Berlin, he made a great display of magnificence on
public days. It was a superb spectacle for the vain, that is to say, for almost
all mankind, to see him at table, surrounded with twenty Princes of the Empire,
served in vessels of gold, the richest in Europe, by two and thirty Pages, and
as many young Heiduques, all splendidly clothed, and bearing dishes of massy
gold. The State Officers were also employed on these occasions, though unknown
at any other time.

After dinner they went to the Opera at the large Theater, three hundred feet
long, which had been built without an Architect by one of his Chamberlains,
whose name was Knoberstoff. The finest voices and best dancers were engaged in
his service. Barberini at that time danced at his Theater, the same who has
since been married to the son of his Chancellor. The King had her carried off
by his soldiers from Venice, and brought even through Vienna as far as Berlin.
He was a little in love with her, because she had legs like a man; but the
thing in most of all incomprehensible, was, that he gave her a salary of thirty
two thousand livres (above thirteen hundred pounds.) His Italian Poet, who was
obliged to put the operas into verse, of which the King himself gave the plan,
had little more than a thirtieth part of this sum; but it ought to be
remembered, he was very ugly, and could not dance. In a word, Barb^rini touched
for her share more than any three of his Ministers of State together.

As for the Italian Poet, he one day took care to pay himself with his own
hands, for he stripped off the gold from the ornaments in an old chapel of the
first King of Prussia's; on which occasion Frederic remarked, that as he never
went to the chapel, he had lost nothing. Besides, he had lately written a
dissertation in favor of thieves, which is printed in the collections of his
academy; and he did not think proper this time to contradict his writings by
his actions.

This indulgence was not extended to any military being. There was on old
gentleman of Franche Comte, confined in the prison of Spandau, who was six feet
high, and whom the late King, for that reason, had inveigled into Prussia. They
promised him the place of Chamberlain, and gave him that of foot soldier. This
poor man soon after deserted with one of his comrades, bat was taken and
brought before the late King. He had the simplicity to tell him, he repented of
nothing but that he had not stabbed such a tyrant; and for this answer he had
his nose and ears cut off, ran the gauntlet six and thirty times, and was
afterward sent to wheel the barrow at Spandau. He continued this employment to
the very time that M. de Valory, our Envoy, pressed me to beg remission for him
of the most clement son of the most iron-hearted Frederic-William.

His Majesty had been pleased to say, it was to oblige me that he had got up an
Opera, full of poetical beauties, and written by the celebrated Metestasio,
called La Clemenza di Tito. The King, with the assistance of his composer, had
set it to music himself. I took this opportunity to recommend the poor old
Frenchman, without nose and ears, to his bounty, which I did in the following
admonitory verses.

What! can it be when mighty Frederic reigns
That wretches groan? Oh! Genius universal,
Soul firm, jet feeling, deign to end the culprit's
Torments; cease not your generous cares so Misery:
Lo! at your feet, where Pity, daughter of
Repentance, mistress of great minds, kneels trembling;
Astonished to find her tears shed in vain,
On the hand that has driven Sorrow from the Earth.
Wherefore displayed with such magnificence
The triumphs of great Titus? Imitate
Him every way, or vaunt of him no more.
The request was something daring, but one may say what one will poetically.
His Majesty promised remission, and some months after even had the bounty to
send the poor gentleman in question to the Hospital, at three pence a day,
which favor he had refused to the Queen, his mother; but she, in all
probability, had asked only in prose.

In the midst of all these feasts, operas, and suppers, my secret negotiation
went forward; the King was willing I should speak on every thing, and I
frequently took occasion to intermix questions concerning France and Austria
with the Eneid and Roman History. The conversation was sometimes animated; the
King became warm, and would tell me, that while our Court was knocking at every
door to procure peace, he should not think it advisable to go to war in our
defense. I sent my reflections upon paper, left half blank, from my apartment to
his; and he answered my daring remarks in the margin. I have this paper still,
in which I have said,

Can it be doubted that the House of Austria will seize the very first
opportunity to redemand Silesia? to which he answered in the margin Ils seront
recus, biribi,
A la facon de Barbari,
Mon ami.
Then they received, my friend, shall be
After the mode of Barbary.


This new kind of negotiation finished by a discourse, in which, in one of his
moments of vivacity, he made me against the King of England, his dear Uncle.
These two Kings did not love one another. My Prussian Monarch told me, "George
was the Uncle of Frederic, but not of the King of Prussia;" and he ended by
saying, "Let France declare war against England, and I will march."

This was all I wanted. I returned instantly to France, and I gave an account
of my journey; with such hop^s, to the French Ministry as had been given me at
Berlin. Neither were they false, for the spring following the King of Prussia
concluded a new treaty with France, and advanced into Bohemi^ with a hundred
thousand men, while the Austrians were in Alsatia.

Had I related my adventure to any good Parisian, with the service I had done
the state, he would not have made the least doubt of my having been promised an
excellent place. I will tell you what was recompense. The Duchess de
Chateauroux was vexed the negotiation had not been brought about entirely by
her means; she had likewise an inclination to have M. Amelot turned out because
he stuttered which trifling defect she found offensive, and she farther hated
him because he was governed by M. de Maurepas; he was accordingly dismissed
eight days after, and I was included in his disgrace.

It happened some time after this, that Louis XV. fell extremely ill at the
City of Metz. This was the time for M. de Maurepas and his cabal to ruin the
Duchess de Chateauroux. The Bishop of Soissons, Fitz-James, son of the bastard
of James II. who was thought a saint, would, in quality of Grand Almoner,
convert the King; and declare he would neither grant him absolution, nor suffer
him to communicate, if he did not drive his Mistress, with her Sister the
Duchess of Laurigais, and their friends from court; and the two Sisters in
consequence departed, with the execrations of the people of Metz.

This action of Louis XV. was the occasion that the Parisians, equally stupid
with the good folks of Metz, gave him the surname of Bien-Aime, Well beloved. A
fellow named Vade first invented this title, which all the Almanacs echoed. As
soon as the Prince recovered, he desired only to be the well-beloved of his
Mistress, for whom he found his affection increase; and she was again going to
undertake her Ministry, when she died suddenly, in consequence of the passions
into which she had been thrown by her dismission. She was presently forgot.

A Mistress was now wanted, and the choice fell upon the Demoiselle Poisson.
She was the daughter of a kept woman and a countryman, who lived at La
Fertesous-Jouare, and who had amassed some money by selling wheat to the corn
factors. This poor man at that time had absconded, having been condemned for
malversation, and they had married his daughter to the under Farmer general le
Normand, Lord of Etiole, and Nephew of the Farmer-general le Normand, of
Tourneham, who kept her mother. The daughter had been well educated, was
prudent, amiable, very graceful, had great talents, a fine understanding, and a
good heart.

I was tolerably intimate with her, and was even the confidant of her amors.
She confessed to me, she had always had a secret forethought that the King
would fall in love with her, and that she had always ardently wished he might,
without making her wishes too apparent. This idea which seems so chimerical for
a person in her station, originated from her having been often taken to the
royal hunt in the forest of Senar. Tourneham, her mother's lover, had a country
house near there, and used to take her out to air in a neat Calash. His Majesty
had observed her, and had often sent her venison. Her mother never ceased
telling her she was handsomer than Madame de Chateauroux, and the good man
Tourneham confirmed it in raptures. It must be owned, the daughter of Madame
Poisson was a morsel for Majesty. After she was certain of her Royal Lover, the
told me she was firmly persuaded of the doctrine of predestination, and she had
some cause so to be. I passed several months with her at Etiole, while the King
made the campaign of 1746.

I hence obtained rewards which had never been granted to my works or my
services. I was deemed worthy to be one of the forty useless Members of the
Academy, was appointed Historiographer of France, and created by the King one
of the Gentlemen in Ordinary of his Chamber. From this I concluded it was
better, in order to make the most trifling fortune, to speak four words to a
King's mistress than to write a hundred volumes.

As soon as I had the appearance of a fortunate man, the whole brotherhood of
the Beaux-Esprits of Paris was let loose upon me, with all the inveterate
animosity which might be expected from them, against a person who obtained
those benefactions, which they imagined only due to their own merits.

My connection with Madame du Chatelet was never interrupted; our friendship,
and our love of literature, were unalterable; we lived together both in town
and out of town. Cirey is situated upon the borders of Lorraine, and King
Stanislaus at that time kept his little agreeable court at Luneville. Old and
fanatic as he was, he yet had a friendship with a lady who was neither. His
affections were divided between Madame da Marquise de Boufflers, and a Jesuit,
whose name was Menou; a Priest, the most daring, the most intriguing I have
ever known.

This man had drawn from King Stanislaus, by means of his Queen, whom he had
governed, about a million of livres, (near forty-two thousand pounds) part of
which were employed in building a magnificent house for himself and some
Jesuits of Nancy. This house was endowed with twenty-four thousand livres, or a
thousand pounds a year; half of which supplied his table, and the other half
was to give away to whom he pleased. The King's mistress Omit the word
Mistress, it is false, and insert Friend. The Marchioness de Boufflers was a
most disinterested friend, and seldom used her interest but in the service of
her friends; and the expression, wherewith to buy her petticoats, is not at all
applicable.
was not by any means so well treat^d; she scarcely could get from his Polish
Majesty wherewith to buy her petticoats; and yet the Jesuit envied what she
had, and was violently jealous of her power. They were at open war Madame de
Boufflers never was at varience with Father Menou, who, all-intriguing as he
was, never thought of giving Stanislaus Madame du Chatelet for a mistress. That
lady, and M. de Voltaire, never were at Luneville, except when invited by M. de
B***, whom they often visited, and found very amiable; they never went as to
the King of Poland. If Menou really proposed the journey to Voltaire and Madame
du Chatelet, it was when he was informed they were coming, and to make a merit
of it with the King.

The two last notes are by M. de St. Lambert, author of a Poem on the Seasons.


, and the poor King had enough to do every day when he came from mass to
reconcile his mistress and his confessor. Our Jesuit at last having heard of
Madame du Chatelet, who was exceedingly well shaped, and still tolerably
handsome, conceived the project of substituting her to Madame de Boufflers.

Stanislaus amused himself sometimes in writing little works, which were bad
enough, and Menou imagined an authoress would succeed with him as a mistress
better than any other. With this fine trick in his head he came to Cirey,
cajoled Madame du Chatelet, and told us how delighted King Stanislaus would be
in our company. He then returned to the King, and informed him how ardently we
desired to come and pay our court to his Majesty. Stanislaus asked Madame de
Boufflers to bring us; and we went to pass the whole year, 1749, at Luneville.
But the projects of the holy Jesuit did not succeed; the very reverse took
place; we were devoted to Madame de Boufflers, and he had two women to combat
instead of one.

The life led at the court of Lorraine was tolerably agreeable; though there,
as in other courts, there were plenty of intrigues and artifice.

Toward the end of the year, Poncet, Bishop of Troyes, who was overwhelmed
with debts, and whose reputation was lost, wished to come and augment our
intrigues and artifice.

When I say he had lost his reputation, I mean also the reputation of his
sermons and funeral orations. He obtained, through the interest of our two
ladies, the place of Grand-Almoner to the King, who was flattered by having a
Bishop in his pay, and at very small wages too. This Prelate did not come till
1750: he began his career by intriguing against Madame de Boufflers, his
benefactress, and was dismissed. His anger alighted on Lewis XV. the son-in-law
of Stanislaus: being returned to Troyes, he would needs play a part in the
ridiculous farce of the confessional billets, invented by Beaumont, Arch bishop
of Paris: he made head against the parliament, and braved the King. This was
not the way to pay his debts, but to get himself imprisoned. Lewis sent him
into Alsatia, and had him shut up in a convent of fat German Friars.

But I must return to what concerns myself. Madame du Chatelet died in the
palace of Stanislaus, after two days illness; and we were so affected, that not
one of us ever remembered to send for Priest, Jesuit, or any of the Seven
Sacraments. It was we, and not Madame du Chatelet, who felt the horrors of
death. The good King Stanislaus came to my chamber, and mixed his tears with
mine: few of his brethren would have done so much on a like occasion. He wished
me to stay at Luneville, but I could no longer support the place, and returned
to Paris.

It was my destiny to run from King to King, although I loved liberty even to
idolatry. The King of Prussia, whom I had frequently given to understand I
would never quit Madame du Chatelet for him, would absolutely entrap me, now he
was rid of his rival. He enjoyed at that time a peace, which he had purchased
with victory; and his leisure hours were always devoted to making verses, or
writing the history of his country campaigns. He was well convinced, that in
reality his verse and prose too, were superior to my verse and prose, as to
their essence; though as to the form, he thought there was a certain something,
a turn, that I, in quality of Academician, might give to his writings; and
there was no kind of flattery, no seduction, he did not employ to engage me to
come.

Who might resist a Monarch, a Hero, a Poet, a Musician, a Philosopher, who
pretended too to love me, and whom I thought I also loved. I sat out once more
for Potzdam, in the month of June, 1750. Astolphus did not meet a kinder
reception in the palace of Alcina. To be lodged in the same apartments that
Marshal Saxe had occupied; to have the royal cooks at my command, when I chose
to dine alone; and the royal coachmen, when I had an inclination to ride, were
trifling favors.

Our suppers were very agreeable. I know not if I am deceived, but I think we
had a deal of wit. The King was witty, and gave occasion to wit in others; and
what is still more extraordinary, I never found myself so much at ease. I
worked two hours a day with his Majesty, corrected his works, and never failed
highly to praise whatever was worthy of praise, although I rejected the dross.
I gave him details of all that was necessary in rhetoric and criticism, for his
use; he profited by my advice, and his genius assisted him more effectually
than my lessons.

I had no court to make, no visits to pay, no duty to fulfill; I led the life of
liberty, and had no conception of any thing more happy than my then situation.
My Frederic-Alcina, who saw my brain was already a little disordered, redoubled
the potions that I might be totally inebriated. The last seduction was a letter
he wrote, and sent from his apartments to mine. A Mistress could not have
written more tenderly; he labored in his epistle to dissipate the fear which
his rank and character had inspired; it contained these remarkable words:

"How is it possible I should bring unhappiness on the man I esteem, who has
sacrificed his country, and all that humanity holds dear, to me? I respect you
as my Master, and love you as my friend. What slavery, what misfortune, what
change can be feared, in a place where you are esteemed as much as in your own
country, and with a friend who has a grateful heart? I respected the friendship
that endeared you to Madame du Chatelet, but after her I am one of your oldest
friends. I give you my promise you shall be happy here as long as I live."

Here is a letter, such as few of their Majesty's write: it was the finishing
glass to complete my drunkenness. His wordy protestations were still stronger
than his written ones. He was accustomed to very singular demonstrations of
tenderness to younger favorites than I, and forgetting for a moment I was not
of their age, and had not a fine hand, he seized it and imprinted a kiss; I
took his, returned his salute, and signed myself his slave.

It was necessary I should get permission from the King of France to belong to
two Masters: the King of Prussia took charge of every thing, and wrote to ask
me of Louis. I never imagined they were shocked at Versailles, that a Gentleman
in Ordinary of the Chamber, one of the most useless Beings of a Court, should
become a useless Chamberlain at Berlin. They granted me full permission, but
were highly piqued, and did not pardon me. I greatly displeased the King of
France without pleasing the King of Prussia, who laughed at me in the bottom of
his heart.

Behold me then with a silver key gilt with gold hanging at my button-hole, a
cross round my neck, and twenty thousand livres, or eight hundred guineas a
year. Maupertuis fell sick, and yet I did not perceive the occasion.

At that time there was a Physician at Berlin, one La Metrie, who was the most
frank and declared Atheist of all the medical people of Europe. He was a gay,
pleasant, thoughtless fellow, who knew the theory of physic as well as the best
of his brethren, but without contradiction the worst practitioner upon earth,
for which reason he had left the profession. He ridiculed the whole faculty of
Paris, and had even written many personalities against individuals, which they
could not pardon; and they obtained a decree against him, by which a reward was
offered for his apprehension.

La Metrie had, in consequence, fled to Berlin, where he amused himself
sufficiently by his gaiety, and likewise by writing and printing all that can
be imagined most impudent upon manners; his books pleased the King, who made
him, not his Physician, but, his Reader.

One day after the lecture, La Metrie, who spoke whatever came uppermost, told
his Majesty there were persons exceedingly jealous of my favor and fortune. --
"Be quiet a while," said Frederic, "we squeeze the orange, and throw it away
when we have swallowed the juice." -- La Metrie, did not forget to repeat to me
this fine apophthegm, worthy Dionysius of Syracuse. From that time I determined
to take all possible care of the orange peel. I had about twelve thousand
guineas to place out at interest, but was determined it should not be in the
territories of my Alcina. I found an advantageous opportunity of lending them
upon the estates which the Duke of Wurtemberg possessed in France.

The King, who opened all my letters, did not doubt of my intention to quit his
court. The furor of rhyming, however, still possessin^ him, as it did
Dionysius, I was obliged continually to pore, and again revise his History of
Brandenbourg, and all the rest of his works.

La Metrie died from having eaten a pasty stuffed with truffles, after a very
hearty dinner at the table of Lord Tyrconnel, Envoy from France, It was
pretended he had been confessed before his death. The King was exceedingly
vexed at this, and took care to be exactly informed concerning the truth of the
assertion; they assured him it was an atrocious calumny, for La Metrie had died
as he lived, abjuring God and Physicians. His Majesty was convinced, and
immediately composed his funeral oration, which was read, in his name, at a
public sitting of the Academy, by Darget his Secretary. He settled five and
twenty pounds a year likewise upon a girl of the town, whom La Metrie had
brought from Paris, where he had left his wife and children.

Maupertuis, who knew the anecdote of the orange-peel, took an opportunity to
spread a report, that I had said, the place of King's Atheist was vacant. This
calumny did not succeed; but he afterward added I had also said, the King's
poetry was bad; and this answered his purpose.

From this time forward, I found the King's suppers were no longer so merry; I
had fewer verses to correct, and my disgrace was complete.

Algaroti, Darget, and a Frenchman, whose name was Chasol, one of the King's
best Officers, left him all at once. I was preparing to do the same, but I
wished, before I went, to enjoy the pleasure of laughing at a book Maupertuis
had just printed. It was the best of opportunities, for never had any thing
appeared so ridiculous or absurd. The good man seriously proposed to travel
directly to the two Poles; to dissect the heads of giants, and discover the
nature of the soul by the texture of the brain; to build a city, and make the
inhabitants all speak Latin; to sink a pit in the center of the earth; to cure
the sick by plaistering them over with gum-resin; and, finally, to prophesy, by
enthusiastically inflating the fancy.

The King laughed, I laughed, every body laughed at his book; but there was a
scene acting at that time of a far more serious nature, concerning I know not
what mathematical nonsense that Maupertuis wanted to establish as discoveries.
A more learned Mathematician, Koenig, Librarian to the Princess of Orange at
the Hague, showed him his mistake, and that Leibnitz, who had before time
examined that old idea, had demonstrated its falsity in several of his letters,
copies of which he sent Maupertuis.

Maupertuis, President of the Academy at Berlin, enraged that an associate and
a stranger should prove his blunders, took care first to persuade the King,
that Koenig, being settled in Holland, was of course his enemy; and next, that
he had said many disrespectful things of his Majesty's verse and prose to the
Princess of Orange.

This precaution taken, he suborned some few poor pensioners of the Academy,
his dependents, had Koenig condemned as a forger, and his name erased from the
number of Academicians. Here however he was anticipated, for Koenig had sent
back his Patent-Academician-Dignity to Berlin.

All the men of letters in Europe were as full of indignation at the maneuvers
of Maupertuis as they were weary of his book, and he obtained the contempt and
hatred even of those who did not understand the dispute. They were obliged to
content themselves at Berlin with a mere shrug of the shoulders; for the King
had taken a part in this unfortunate affair, no person durst speak. I was the
only one who spoke out. Koenig was my friend; and I had at once the
satisfaction to defend the liberty of the learned, the cause of a friend, and
of mortifying an enemy, who was as much the enemy of moderation as of me.

I had no intention to stay at Berlin; I had always preferred liberty to every
thing; few men of letters have a proper sense of it; most of them are poor;
poverty enervates, and even philosophers, at court, become as truly slaves as
the first Officer of the Crown. I felt how displeasing my free spirit must be
to a King more absolute than the Grand Turk. He was a pleasant Monarch, in the
recesses of his palace, we must confess: he protected Maupertuis. and laughed
at him more than any one. He writ against him, and sent his manuscript to my
chamber by one Marvitz, a Minister of his secret pleasures; he turned to
ridicule the Pit to the center of the earth, the method of cure with Plaster
of gum-resin, the voyage to the South Pole, the Latin city, and the cowardice
of the Academy, in having suffered the the tyranny exercised upon poor Koenig.
But his motto was, "No clamor when I don't cry;" and he had every thing burnt
that had been written upon the controversy, except his own work.

I sent him back his order, his Chamberlain's key, and his pension; he then did
every thing in his power to make me stay, and I every thing in my power to
depart. He again gave me his cross and his key, and would have me to sup with
him; I therefore once more supped like Democles, after which I parted with a
promise to return, but with a firm design never to see him more.

Thus there were four of us who had escaped in a short time, Chasol, Darget,
Algaroti, and I; in fact, there was no such thing as staying. It is well known
how much must be borne from Kings, but Frederic was too free in the abuse of
his prerogative. All society has its laws, except the society of the Lion and
the Lamb. Frederic continually failed in the first of these laws; which is, to
say nothing disobliging to any of the company. He often used to ask his
Chamberlain Polnitz, if he would not willingly change his religion a fourth
time, and offered to pay a hundred crowns down for his conversion. "Good God,
my dear Polnitz, he would say, I have forgot the name of that person at the
Hague, whom you cheated by selling him base for pure silver; let me beg of you
to assist my memory a little." He treated poor d'Argenes in much the same way;
and yet these two victims remained. Polnitz having wasted his fortune, was
obliged to swallow serpents for bread, and had no other food; and d'Argens had
no property in the world, but his Jewish Letters, and his wife, called Cochois,
a bad provincial actress, and so ugly she could get no employment at any trade,
though she practiced several. As for Maupertuis, who had been silly enough to
place out his money at Berlin, and not thinking a hundred pistoles better in a
free country than a thousand in a despotic one, he had no choice but to wear
the setters which himself had forged.

MEMOIRS OF VOLTAIRE. WRITTEN BY HIMSELF. PART THE THIRD.
LEAVING my palace of Alcina, I went to pass a month with the Duchess of
Saxe-Gotha, the best of Princesses, full of gentleness, discretion, and
equanimity, and who, God be thanked, did not make verses. After that I spent a
few days at the country house of the Landgrave of Hesse, who was still a remove
father from poetry than the Princess of Gotha. Thus I took breath, and thence
continued, by short journies, my rout to Franckfort, where a very odd kind of
destiny was in reserve for me.

I fell ill at Franckfort, and one of my nieces, the widow of a Captain who had
belonged to the regiment of Champagne, a most amiable woman, with excellent
talents, and who, moreover, was esteemed at Paris as belonging to the Order of
Good Company, had the courage to quit that city, and come to me on the Maine,
where she found me a prisoner of war.

This fine adventure happened thus: one Freitag, who had been banished Dresden,
after having been put in chains and condemned to the wheel-barrow, became
afterward an agent to the King of Prussia, who was glad to be served by
suchlike Ministers, because they asked no wages but what they could steal from
travelers.

This Ambassador, and one Schmitt, a tradesman, formerly condemned and punished
for coining, signified to me, on the part of his Majesty the King of Prussia,
that I must not depart from Franckfort, till I had given back the precious
effects I had carried off from his Majesty. "My very good Messieurs (said I) I
have brought nothing out of that country, I can assure you, not even the least
regret; what, then, are these famous jewels of the crown of Brandenbourg, that
you thus re-demand?" -- "Dat it be, Montseer (answered Freitag) ouf dey vurks
ouf poesy ouf de King mine master." -- "Oh! (answered I) with all my heart; he
shall have his works in verse and prose, though I have more titles to them than
one, for he made me a present of a fine copy, printed at his own expense; but,
unfortunately for me, this printed copy is at Leipsic, with my other effects."

Freitag then proposed that I should stay at Franckfort till this treasure
arrived from Leipsic, and signed the following curious quittance:

Montseer so soon as shawl dey great pack come ouf Leipsic, mit de vurks ouf
poesy be given mit me, you shawl go ouf vere you do please. Given at Franckfort
de vurst of June, 1753. -- Freitag, Resident ouf de King mine master.

At the bottom of which I signed, -- Good, vor dey vurks ouf poesy ouf de King
your master: -- With which the Resident was well satisfied.

On the twelfth of June the great pack of poesy came, and I faithfully remitted
the sacred deposit, imagining I might then depart, without offense to any
crowned head; but at the very instant when we were setting off, I, my
Secretary, my servants, and even my niece, were arrested. Four soldiers dragged
us through the midst of the dirt, before M. Schmitt, who had I know not what
right of Privy. Counselor to the King of Prussia. This Franckfort trader
thought himself at that moment a Prussian General; he commanded twelve of the
town guards, with all the importance and grandeur an affair of such consequence
required. My niece had a passport from the King of France, and, moreover, never
had corrected the King of Prussia's verses. Women are usually respected amidst
the horrors of war, but the Counselor Schmitt, and the Resident Freitag,
endeavored to pay their court to Frederic, by hauling one of the fair sex
through the mud. They shut us up in a kind of inn, at the door of which the
twelve soldiers were posted. Four others were placed in my chamber, four in the
garret, where they had conducted my niece, and four in a still wore wretched
garret, where my Secretary was laid upon straw. My niece, it is true, was
allowed a small bed, but four soldiers, with fixed bayonets, served her instead
of curtains and chamber-maids.

In vain we urged we had been invited to the court the Emperor had elected at
Franckfort; that my Secretary was a Florentine, and a subject of his Imperial
Majesty; that I and my niece were subject of the most Christian King; and that
there was no difference between us and the Margrave of Brandenbourg. They
informed us, that the Margrave had more power at Franckfort than the Emperor.

Twelve days were we held prisoners of war, for which we paid a hundred and
forty crowns, or seventeen pounds ten shillings a day. The Merchant Schmitt had
seized on all my effects, which were given back one half lighter: one need not
wish to pay dearer for the ^oesy of the King of Prussia. I lost about a much as
it had cost him to send for me and to take lessons, and we were quits at
parting.

To complete the adventure, one Venduren, a Bookseller at the Hague, knave by
profession, and bankrupt by habit, was then retired to Franckfort. This was the
man to whom I had made a present thirteen years before of Frederic's manuscript
of the Anti-Machiavel. One finds friends where one least expects them. He
pretended that his Majesty owed him some twenty ducats, for which I was
responsible: he reckoned the interest, and the interest of the interest. The
Sieur Friliard, a Burgo-master of Franckfort, in the then year of his reign,
said, he, as a Burgo-master, found the account exceedingly right; he likewise
found the means to make me disburse thirty ducats, six and twenty of which he
took to himself, and gave the remaining four to the honest Bookseller.

These Ostrogothian and Vandalian affairs being all thus satisfactorily ended,
I embraced my hosts, thanked them for their kind reception, and departed.

Some time after I want to drink the waters of Plombieres, and with them drank
heartily of the waters of Lethe, from a thorough persuasion, that misfortunes
of all kinds are good for nothing but to be forgotten. My niece, Madame Dennis,
who was the consolation of my life, attached to me by her taste for letters,
and the tenderest friendship, accompanied me from Plombieres to Lions. Here I
was received by the acclamations of the whole city, and tolerably ill too by
the Cardinal de Tencin, Archbishop of Lions, so well known by the manner in
which he had made his fortune; that is, in making the famous Law, or Lass,
Author of the system that ruined France, a Catholic. His Council of Embrin
finished the fortune his conversion of Law had begun. This system made him rich
enough to purchase a Cardinal's hat. He was a Minister of State, and told me in
confidence, he durst not give me a public dinner because the King of France was
vexed that I had quitted him for the King of Prussia. To this I answered I
never dined, and as to Kings or Cardinals, I was the man who perhaps of any in
the world was soonest determined how to act.

I had been advised to drink the waters of Aix, in Savoy, and though this place
was under the dominion of a King, I proceeded to take the journey. I
necessarily passed through Geneva, where the famous Physician Tronchin was just
established, and who declared that the waters of Aix would kill, but that he
would cure me, and I followed his advice. No Catholic is permitted to settle at
Geneva, nor yet in the Swiss Protestant Cantons; and it was to me a subject of
pleasantry, to aconite domains in the only country upon earth where it was
forbidden I should have any.

I bought, by a very singular kind of contract, of which there was no example
in that country, a small estate of about sixty acres, which they sold me for
about twice as much as it would have cost me at Paris; but pleasure is never
too dear. The house was pretty and commodious, and the prospect charming; it
astonishes without tiring: on one side is the Lake of Geneva, and the city on
the other. The Rhone runs from the former in vast gushes, forming a canal at
the bottom of my garden, whence is seen the Arve descending from the Savoy
Mountains, and precipitating itself into the Rhone, and farther still another
river. A hundred country-seats, a hundred delightful gardens, ornament the
borders of the lakes and rivers. The Alps at a vast distance rise and terminate
the horizon, and among their prodigious precipices, twenty leagues extent of
mountain are beheld covered with eternal snows.

I had another good house, with a more extensive view, at Lausanne; but a seat
near Geneva is much more agreeable. In these two habitations I enjoyed what
Kings do not give, or rather what they take away, Liberty and Ease. I likewise
had what they sometimes do give, and what I had not of them. Here then I put my
own precepts in practice.

How happy did I live in this iron age! Every convenience of life and good
cheer were found in my two houses. An affable and intelligent society, filled
up the moments which study and the care of my health left vacant. My prosperity
was sufficient to make my dear fellow laborers in literature burst with envy.
I was not however born rich, and it may be asked by what art I could acquire
wealth enough to live like a Farmer-general: to which I answer, and I would
have others make me their example, I had seen so many men of letters poor and
despised, that I had long determined not to augment the number.

In France, every man must be either the hammer or the anvil, and I was born
the latter. A small patrimony daily becomes less, because the price of every
thing gradually increases, and because government often has both rent and crop.

It is necessary to be attentive to every alteration which Ministry, ever in
want and ever inconstant, makes in the finances. There always are occasional
opportunities by which an individual may profit without obligation to any one,
and nothing is so agreeable as to be one self the founder of one's fortune. The
first efforts are a little painful, the following are pleasant; and he who is
an economist in his youth, will be surprised in old age at his own wealth,
which is the time when fortune is most necessary. It was then I enjoyed
fortune: it was then that, after having lived with Kings, I became a King
myself.

And now, while living in this peaceable opulence, and the most rigid
independence, the King of Prussia thought proper to be appeased: in 1755 he
sent me an Opera he had made from my Tragedy of Merope, which was, without
dispute, the worst thing he ever wrote. From that time he continued to write to
me: I always had held a correspondence with his sister, the Margravess of
Bareith, whose goodwill toward me was unalterable.

Thus while I, in my retreat, enjoyed the most pleasant life imaginable, I had
the philosophic satisfaction of seeing, that the Kings of Europe tasted not of
my tranquillity; and of thence inferring, that the situation of an individual
is often preferable to that of the greatest Kings, as will presently be seen.

In 1756, England made a piratical war upon France for some acres of snow; at
the same time that the Empress Queen of Hungary appeared very desirous to
recover her dear Selisia, of which she had been pillaged by his Majesty of
Prussia. For this purpose she negociated with the Empress of Russia and the
King of Poland, that is, in quality of Elector of Saxony, for nobody negociates
with the Poles. On the other hand, the King of France wished to revenge himself
upon Hanover, for the mischief which the Elector of Hanover, the King of
England, did him at sea. Frederic, who at that time was in alliance with
France, and who held our government in the most profound contempt, preferred an
alliance with England; he therefore united himself with the house of Hanover,
imagining he could keep the Russians out of Prussia with one hand, and the
French out of Germany with the other. He was mistaken in both these imaginings;
but their was a third in which he was not mistaken; which was to invade Saxony
under pretext of friendship, and make war upon the Empress Queen of Hungary
with the money he should rob the Saxons of. The Marquis of Brandenbourg, by
this remarkable maneuver, singly changed the whole system of Europe. The King
of France, desirous of retaining him in his alliance, sent the Duke de
Nivernois, a man of wit, and who made very pretty verses, into Prussia. The
embassage of a Duke, a Peer, and a Poet, seemed likely to flatter the vanity
and taste of Frederic; but he laughed at the King of France, and signed his
treaty with England, the very day the Ambassador arrived. He played off the
Duke and the Peer very happily, and made an epigram upon the Poet.

It happened at that time to be the privilege of poetry to govern kingdoms.
There was another Poet at Paris also, a man of rank, very poor, but very
amiable; in a word, the Abbe de Bernis, since Cardinal. He began by writing
verses against me; he afterward was my friend, though that was of little
service to him; but he likewise became the friend of Madame de Pompadour, and
she served him effectually. He had been sent from Parnassus on an embassy to
Venice; and he was then returned to Paris, and in great credit.

The King of Prussi^ had glided a verse in his poor book of poesy, which that
Freitag had re-demanded so earnestly at Franckfort, against the Abbe de Bernis.

"Avoid the steril abundance of Bernis." I do not believe either the book or
the verse ever reached the Abbe; but as God is just, God made him an instrument
to avenge France of Frederic. The Abbe concluded an offensive and defensive
treaty with M. de Staremberg, the Austrian Ambassador, in despite of Rouille,
then Minister for Foreign affairs. Madame de Pompadour presided at the
negotiation; and Rouille was obliged to sign the treaty, in conjunction with
the Abbe de Bernis, which was a precedent without example. Rouille, it must be
owned, was the most useless Secretary of State the King ever had; and moreover,
the most ignorant the Long Robe ever knew. He asked one day if Weteravia was in
Italy. While there was nothing difficult to transact, he was suffered; but as
soon as great objects came on the tapis, his insufficiency was felt, and the
Abbe de Bernis supplied his place.

Mademoiselle Poisson, the wife of Le Normand, and Marchioness de Pompadour,
was in reality first Minister of State. Certain outrageous terms let slip
against her by Frederic, who neither spared women nor poets, had wounded the
Marchioness to the heart, and contributed not a little to that revolution in
affairs, which, in a moment, reunited the French and Austrians, after more
than two hundred years of a hatred supposed to be immortal. The court of
France, that pretended to crush Austria, in 1741, supported her in 1756; and in
conclusion, France, Sweden, Russia, Hungary, the half of Germany, and the
Fiscal of the Empire, all declared against the single Marquis of Brandenbourg.
This Prince, whose grandfather could scarcely maintain twenty thousand men, had
an army of a hundred thousand foot, and forty thousand horse, well provided,
well selected, and better disciplined; but there were four hundred thousand men
in arms to oppose these. It happened in that war, that each party seized upon
what was next at hand. Frederic took Saxony; France took the territories of
Frederic, from the town of Guilders to Minden upon the Weser, and for a while
possessed all the Electorate of Hanover and Hesse, the allies of Frederic;
while the Empress of Russia took the whole of Prussia. The King of Prussia,
beaten at first by the Russians, beat the Austrians, and was afterward beaten
by them in Bohemia, the eighteenth of June, 1757.

The loss of one battle ought apparently to have crushed this Monarch; pressed
on all sides by the Russians, French and Austrians, he himself gave all for
lost. Marshal de Richelieu had just concluded a treaty near Stadt, with the
Hanoverians and Hessians, which greatly resembled that of the Caudian Forks.
Their army was no longer allowed to serve, and the Marshal was ready to enter
Saxony with sixty thousand men: the Prince de Soubise prepared to penetrate it
on another side, with thirty thousand, and was to be seconded by the arms of
the circles of the empire, whence they were to march to Berlin. The Austrians
had gained a second victory, and were already in possession of Breslau; and one
of their Generals had even pushed to Berlin, and laid it under contribution.
The treasury of the King of Prussia was nearly exhausted, and in all appearance
he would not long have a single village left. They were going to put him under
the ban of the empire; his process was begun; he was declared a rebel, and had
he been taken, in all probability would have been condemned to lose his head.

In this extremity he took a fancy to kill himself. He wrote to his sister, the
Margravess of Bareith, that he was going to terminate his life; but he could
not conclude the play without rhyming. His passion for poetry was still
stronger than his hatred of life; he therefore wrote the Marquis d' Argens a
long epistle in verse, wherein he informed him of his resolution, and bade him
adieu.

However singular this epistle may be, from the subject, the person by whom it
was written, and the person to whom it was addressed, it cannot be transcribed
entirely, because of the many repetitions; but there are passages, which I will
insert, tolerably well turned for a Northern King.

Yes, D' Argens, yes; the die, my friend, is cast;
Sick of the present, weary of the past.
To bear Misfortune's yoke no longer prone,
Henceforth or pains or pleasures I disown;
Nor thus in misery will I deign to live,
The lengthened day, which Nature meant to give;
With heart well fortified, with eye as firm,
Undaunted I approach the happy term,
When Night eternal shall my foes confound,
And Fate no more shall have the power to wound.
Grandeurs adieu! -- adieu Chimeras all!
No more your flashes dazzle or appall;
Though on my morn of life you falsely smiled,
And, prone to vain desires my soul beguiled,
Long since have vanished all desires so vain,
And Truth and stern Philosophy remain.
How frivolous you were by Zeno taught,
Your errors are no longer worth a thought.
Adieu, ye gentle Pleasures and Delights,
Seductive nymphs, whose flowery yoke unites,
The sweets of smiling Gaiety and Ease,
And all the idle arts by which you please.
But oh! shall I, Misfortune's bondsman, speak
Of Pleasures and Delights, where Sorrows shriek!
Can plaintive nightingale, or turtle-dove,
When vultures tear them, sing or coo of love?
Long has the star of day but lighted me
To newborn ills, increase of misery;
His popies Morpheus has disdained to shed,
Near the dank turf where I have lain my head;
Each morn I cry, and still the tear overflows,
Behold another day, and other woes.
When night appears, night cannot give relief,
Each moment adds eternity to grief.
Heroes of Liberty, whom I revere,
Brutus and Cato, ye of soul sincere,
Your deaths, illustrious, dissipate my gloom,
Your funeral flambeaux light me to my tomb;
Your antique virtue Fear and Death controuls,
And points a road unknown to vulgar souls.
Vanish, ye pompous Phantoms of romance,
Ingend'ring superstitious ignorance;
Religious aid I seek not when I Would known,
Or what we are, or whence we come or go;
Epicurus has taught how I Am annoyed,
My body by injurious time destroyed;
And for the quickening fire, the spark, the breath,
Mortal like me, it perishes in death:
Part of a being organized it is born,
Grows with the Child, and does the Man adorn;
Suffers when I Am in pain, pleased when I Am pleased,
Is old when I am, ill when I Am deseas'd;
And when eternal night shall life invest,
Will sink, like me, to everlasting rest.
A vanquished fugitive, by friends betrayed,
I suffer torments more than ever were laid
(As most fictitious lying fables tell)
On poor Prometheus in the depths of Hell;
Therefore, as wretches who in dungeons deep,
Weary of thus existing but to weep,
Deceive their butchers, snap their strongest chains,
And end at once their being and their pains;
So, with one noble effort, will I rend
The web of life, and all my mis'ries end.
This dreary picture will inform thee why
I thus, my friend, have been induced to die;
Nor hence conclude I vainly seek to claim,
From the dark senseless grave, the bubble Fame:
But yet remember me when fruitful earth
Gives odoriferous shrubs and myrtles birth;
Each spring, when flowers adorn the youthful year,
Drop over my tomb a rose bud and a tear.
He sent me this epistle written with his own hand. Several lines are pillaged
from the Abbe ^e Chaulieu and me. The ideas are often incoherent, and the
verses in general unmusical; but there are some good; and it was a great thing
for a King to write two hundred bad verses in the state he then was. He was
desirous it should be said he preserved all his presence of mind and liberty of
thinking, at a moment when they are usually lost to others.

The letter he wrote me testified the same sentiments, but there were less of
the eternal Night, Myrtels and Roses, Flambeax, Chimeras and shrieking Sorrows.
I combated in prose the resolution he had taken to die, and had not much
trouble in persuading him to live. I advised him to imitate the Duke of
Cumberland, and set a negotiation on foot with Marshal de Richelieu; in short,
I took all the liberties one could take with a despairing Poet, and who was not
likely much longer to be a King. He wrote to Marshal de Richelieu, but not
receiving any answer he determined to beat us, and sent me word he was going to
attack Marshal de Soubise. His letter finished with verses, worthy of his
sitution, his dignity, his courage, and his wit.

When shipwreck stares as in the face,
Daring let us death embrace,
And live and die a King.
As he marched toward the French and Imperialists, he wrote to the Margravess
his sister, that he should kill himself, but he was happier than he said or
hoped. He waited on the fifth of November, 1757, for the French and Imperial
army, in a tolerably advantageous post at Rosbach, on the frontiers of Saxony;
and as he had been continually talking of killing himself, he was willing his
brother, Prince Henry, should perform this promise for him, at the head of five
Prussian battalions, which were to sustain the first shock of the enemy, while
his artillery thundered upon them, and his cavalry attacked theirs.

Prince Henry was, in fact, slightly wounded in the neck by a musket ball, and
I believe was the only Prussian hurt on that day. The French and Austrians fled
at the first discharge, and the rout was the most unheard of and complete that
history can afford. The battle of Rosbach shall long be celebrated. Thirty
thousand French, and twenty thousand Imperialists, were seen flying, shamefully
and precipitately, before five battalions and some squadrons. The defeats of
Agincourt, Cressy, and Poictiers, were not more humiliating. The discipline and
military evolutions, which the father had begun, and the son made perfect, were
the true cause of this strange victory. The Prussian exercise had been fifty
years in bringing to perfection. They wished to imitate them in France as well
as in other countries; but they could not effect that with the French,
naturally averse to discipline, in ^^ur years, which the Prussians had been
fifty about. They had even changed their manoeuv^^s in France at each review,
so that the officers and soldiers, not ^alf perfect in each new one, and the
evolutions being all different from one another, had in reality learnt nothing,
but were actually without any kind of discipline. All was in disorder at the
very sight of the Prussians; and Fortune, in one quarter of an hour, snatched
Frederic from the depth of despair to seat him on the heights of happiness and
glory.

He was, however, very fearful, that this good fortune was merely temporary; he
dread^d to support the whole weight of the French, Russian, and Austrian
powers, and was desi^ous of detaching Louis XV. from Mar^^ T^resa.

The fatal affair at Rosbach, occasioned all France to murmur at the treaty of
the Abbe de Bernis, with the court of Vienna. The Cardinal de Tencin,
Archbishop of Lions, had always maintained his rank of Minister of State, and a
private correspondence with the King of France and he was, more than any one, a
verse to the Austrian alliance. He had given me a reception at Lions, which he
had a right to believe was not very satisfactory; the itch of intriguing,
however, which followed him in his retreat, and which, it is said, never leaves
men in place, made him desirous of leaguing with me to engage the Margravess of
Bareith to treat with him, and put the interests of her brother in his hands.
He would reconcile the King of Prussia to the King of France, and hoped to
procure a peace. It was not difficult to persuade Madame de Barieth, and the
King her brother, to this negotiation; and I undertook it with the greater
alacrity, because I foresaw it could not succeed. The Margravess wrote to
Frederic, and the letters between her and the Cardinal passed through my hands.
I had the secret satisfaction of being the intermediator in that grand affair;
and perhaps a still farther pleasure, that of foreseeing the Cardinal was
preparing for himself a subject of great disappointment. He wrote to the King
of France, and enclosed the letter of the Margravess; but how utter was his
astonishment at receiving a laconic answer from the King by which he learnt,
the Secretary for Foreign Affairs would inform him what was his Majesty's
pleasure. The Abbe de Bernis dictated the answer which the Cardinal was obliged
to send to Frederic; which answer was an entire refusal to negociate. He was
forced to sign a copy of this letter, by which every thing was ended, and died
of chagrin in about a fortnight afterward.

I never could thoroughly understand this kind of death, or how Ministers of
State, and old Cardinals with hardended souls, should have a sufficient degree
of sensibility to die through some trifling disgust. My design was only to
laugh at him; to mortify, and not to kill.

There was a kind of greatness in the Ministry refusing thus to treat of peace
with the King of Pruss^a, after having been beaten by him, and humbled; there
was also great fidelity and good nature in sacrificing themselves for the House
of Austria; but these virtues were long ill recompensed by Fortune. The
Hanoverians, Hessians, and Brunswickians, were less observant of public faith,
but more successful. They had stipulated with the Marshal de Richelieu not to
bear arms against us, but to repass the Elbe, beyond which they had been sent;
they, however, broke their bargain of the Caudian Forks, as soon as they knew
we had been beaten at Rosbach. Desertion, the want of discipline, and disease,
destroyed our armies; and the result of all our operations, in the spring of
1758, was, that we had lost twelve millions and a half sterling, and fifty
thousand men in Germany, in support of Maria-Teresa, as we had done in 1741
with fighting against her.

The King of Prussia, who had beaten our army at Rosbach, in Thuringia, went
next to fight the Austrian army at sixty leagues distance. The French then
might still have entered Saxony; the victors were gone, there was nothing to
oppose them; but they had thrown away their arms, lost their cannon,
ammunition, provisions, and especially their understanding. They were
dispersed, and their remains were with difficulty collected. A month
afterward, and on the same day, Frederic gained a still more signal and better
fought victory over the Austrians ^ear Breslau. He retook Breslau with fifteen
thousand prisoners, and the rest of Silesia was soon subdued. Gustavus Adolphus
never performed such acts; we must therefore pardon him his poetry, his
pleasantries, his little malice, and even his feminine sins. The defects of the
man vanish before the glory of the hero.

I left writing memoirs of myself on the 6th of November, 1759, thinking them
as useless as Bayle's letters to his mother; the life of St. Evremont, written
by Defmaiseaux, or of the Abbe Mongon, written by himself. But many things,
either new or laughable, have again induced me to the ridicule of speaking of
myself From this passage, and others, it is evident, these memoirs were
addressed to some indivi^^al, a Lady, by Voltai^e.
. I behold from my windows the city where John Chauvin, the Picard, called
Calvin, reigned; and the place where he burnt Servet for the good of his soul.
Almost all the priests of this country think at present like Servet; nay they
even go farther. They do not believe that Jesus Christ was God; and these
Messieurs, who formerly gave no quarter to purgatory, are now so far humanised,
as to find favor for souls in hell. They pretend their torments shall not be
eternal; that Theseus shall not always sit upon his stony chair, nor Sysiphus
continue everlastingly to roll his rock. Thus they have turned their hell, in
which they no longer believe, into purgatory, in which also they do not
believe. This is rather a pleasant revolution in the history of the human mind,
and might furnish disputes enough for the cutting of throats, making of
bonfires, and acting St. Bartholomew's day once more. And yet they do not even
call names, and reproach one another, so much are manners changed. I must
indeed except myself, whom ^^e of their Preachers attacked for having dared to
assert that Calvin, the Picard, was of a cruel nature, and had burnt Servet
without cause. Only observe the contradictions of this world; here are people
almost avowedly sectaries of Servet, who, yet, abuse me because I found Calvin
wrong for burning him at a flow fire of green faggots.

They would prove to me in form, that Calvin was a good Christian, and
petitioned the Council of Geneva to communicate the papers used on the trial of
Servet; but the Council was more prudent; the papers were refused, and they
forbidden to write against me in Geneva. I look upon this little triumph, as
one of the strongest proofs of the progress of reason in our age.

Philosophy enjoyed a still more signal victory over its enemies at Lausanne.
Some Gospel Ministers of that country thought proper to compile, I know not
what bad book against me, for the honor, as they called it, of christianity;
and I, with little difficulty, was empowered to seize and suppress the
impression by authority of the Magistrates. This was perhaps the first time
Theologians have been obliged to be silent, and respect a Philosopher. Judge
then if I ought not passionately to love this country. Yes, thinking beings, I
assert it is exceedingly agreeable to live in a republic where you may say to
its chiefs, -- Come tomorrow and dine with me.

I did not, however, yet think myself perfectly free; and as I held this a
subject worthy attention, that I might become so, I purchased some adjoining
lands in France. There were two estates about a league from Geneva, which had
formerly enjoyed all the privileges of that city; and I had the good fortune to
obtain a Brevet from the King by which those privileges were continued to me.
At last I so managed my destiny that I was independent in Switzerland, the
territories of Geneva, and in France. I have heard much of liberty, but do not
believe there is an individual in Europe who had wrought his own freedom like
me. Let those who will, follow my example; or, rather, those who can.

I certainly could not have chosen a better time than this, to enjoy repose far
from Paris. They were then as mad and inveterate about their private disputes
as in the days of the Fronde, except having actually a civil war. But as they
had neither a Monarch of the marketplace, like the Duke de Beaufort, nor a
Co-adjutor, granting benedictions with a dagger, they proceeded only to wordy
wars. They began by forging bank bills for the other world, invented as I have
already said by Beaumont, Archbishop of Paris, an obstinate man, who did evil
with all his heart, and from an excess of zeal. He was a serious fool,
something in the style of St. Thomas a Becket. The quarrel grew more violent
concerning an office in the hospital, the appointment to which the Parliament
pretended was in them; and the Archbishop holding it to be a sacred place, said
it depended totally on the church. Paris was all divided into parties, and the
trifling factions of Jansenists and Molinists did not spare each other. The
King thought proper to treat them as they some times serve fools who fight in
the street, over whom they throw buckets of water to part them: he very rightly
said they were both wrong; but they remained not the less enveno^^d. He exiled
the Archbishop and the Parliament; but a master should not turn off his
servants, till he is certain of finding others to supply their places. The
Court was obliged to recall the Parliament, because a Chamber, called royal,
composed of Counselors of State, and Masters of Requests, and erected to
determine Lawsuits, had lost its practice. The Parisians had taken a fancy not
to plead before any Court of Justice, except that called the Parliament. All
the members therefore were recalled, and imagined they had gained a signal
victory over the King. They paternally advised him in their remonstrances no
more to banish his Parliament, because, said they, that is giving a very bad
example. They proceeded to such lengths at last, that the King resolved to
abolish one of their Chambers, and diminish the others; and, soon after, these
Messieurs all had their dismission, except those of the great Chamber. Loud
murmurs now went abroad; they publicly declaimed against the King, and the fire
which came out of their mouth unhappily caught the brain of a Lackey, named
Damiens, who often frequented the great Hall. It is proved, by the process,
this fanatic of the long robe never intended to kill the King, but only to
inflict a gentle correction. There is nothing so absurd which may not enter the
head of man. This poor wretch had been usher to the Jesuit's College, where I
have sometimes seen the scholars give slight stabs with their penknives, and
the ushers return them. Damiens, therefore, went to Versaills with this
resolution, and there, in the midst of his cour^iers and guards, wounded the
King with a small penknife.

They did not fail during the first horror of the accident, to impute the blow
to the arm of the Jesuits, to whom, said they, it belonged according to ancient
usage. I have red a letter from one father Griffet, in which he says, This time
it was not us; it is at present the turn of Messieurs. It was of course the
office of the Grand Prevot of the Court to judge the assassin, because the
crime had been committed within the precincts of the palace. The culprit began
by accusing seven members of the Court des Enquetes, and they wished nothing
better than to leave this accusation upon record, and execute the criminal.
Thus the King rendered the Parliament odious, and obtained an advantage which
will endure as long as the monarchy.

MEMOIRS OF VOLTAIRE. WRITTEN BY HIMSELF. PART THE FOURTH AND LAST.
IT was thought, that M. d'Argenson advised the King to grant the Parliament
permission to judge the foregoing affair, and he was well rewarded; for eight
days after he lost his place, and was exiled. The king had the weakness to
grant large pensions to the Counselors who conducted the trial of Damiens, as
if they had rendered him some signal and difficult service; which conduct
inspired them with new confidence. They again imagined themselves important
personages, and their chimeras of representing the nation, and being tutors to
Kings, were once more awakened.

This scene over, and having nothing else to do, they amused themselves with
persecuting the philosophers. Omer Joli de Fleury, Advocate general of the
Parliament of Paris, displayed a triumph the most complete, that ignorance,
deceit, and hypocrisy ever obtained. Several men of letters, most estimable
from their learning and deportment, formed an association to compose an immense
dictionary of whatever could enlighten the human mind, and it became on object
of commerce with the booksellers. The Chancellor, the Ministry, all encouraged
an enterprise so noble; seven volumes had already appeared, and were translated
into English, Italian, German, and Dutch. This treasure, opened by the French
to all nations, might be considered as what did us at that time the most
honor; so much were the excellent articles in the Encyclopedia superior to the
bad, which were also tolerably numerous. They had little to complain of in the
work, except too many puerile declamations unfortunately adopted by the authors
of the collection, who seized whatever came to hand to swell the book; but all
which those authors wrote themselves was good.

Omer Joli de Fleury, however, on the twenty-third of February, 1759, accused
these poor philosophers of being Atheists, Deists, corrupters of youth, rebels
to the King, etc. etc. etc. and to prove his accusation, cited St. Paul, and
the trials of Theophilus and Abraham Chaumaix Abraham Chaumaix, formerly * * *,
since Jansenist and Convulsionary, was then the oracle of the Parliament of
Paris. Omer Joli de Fleury cited him as a Father of the Church; he has since
been a schoolmaster at Moscow.
. He wanted nothing but to have read the book against which he exclaimed; for
if he had read it, he was a strange imbecile being. He demanded justice of the
Court against the article soul, which, according to him, was pure materialism.

Pray remark that the article soul, one of the worst in the work, was written
by a poor Doctor of the Sorbonne, who killed himself with declaiming, right or
wrong, against materialism.

The whole discourse of this Omer Joli de Fleury was a string of similar
blunders. He informed against a book he had either not read or not understood;
and the entire Parliament, at the requisition of Omer, condemned the work, not
only without examining, but even without reading a single page. This manner of
doing justice, is very much beneath the custom of Bridoye, for there they may
chance to be right.

The editors had procured the King's privilege, and the Parliament certainly
had no right to revoke a privilege granted by his Majesty. It appertains not to
them either to judge of an Arret du Conseil, or of any thing confirmed in
Chancery: they however assumed the power to condemn what the Chancellor had
approved, and appointed Lawyers to decide upon the subjects of geometry and
metaphysics contained in the Encyclopedia. A Chancellor of the least fortitude
would have annulled the Arret of Parliament as incompetent: the Chancellor
L'Amoignon satisfied himself with revoking the privilege, that he might not
undergo the shame of seeing what he had stamped with the seal of supreme
authority judged and condemned.

One would imagine this adventure had happened in the days of Father Garasse,
and that these were arrets against taking emetics; but on the contrary, it was
in the most enlightened age France had ever seen. So true it is, that one fool
is enough to dishonor a nation.

No one will scruple to confess, that under such circumstances, Paris was no
resting place for a Philosopher, and that Aristotle was very prudent in
retiring to Chalcis when Fanatacism reigned at Athens. Besides, the condition
of a man of letters, at Paris, is but one step above a Mountebank.

The place of Gentleman in ordinary to his Majesty, which the King had given
me, was no great thing. Men are very silly; for my part, I think it much better
to build a fine mansion, as I did, have a theater, and keep a good table, than
to be hunted at Paris like Helvetius, by people holding the court of
Parliament, or by other people holding the stables of the Sorbonne. As I was
certain I could never make men more reasonable, the Parliament less pedantic,
nor the Theologians less ridiculous, I continued to be happy far from their
follies.

And yet, while I contemplate the storm, I am almost ashamed of my own
tranquillity. I behold Germany dyed in blood; France utterly ruined; our fleets
and armies beaten; our ministers dismissed, one after another, without any
prospect of better success; and the King of Portugal assassinated, not by a
Lacky, but the Nobility of the kingdom. Neither can the Jesuits this time say,
it was not us: they have carefully preserved their rights; it has been
sufficiently proved these good Fathers had given the sanctified knife to the
Parricides. They give for reason their sovereignty of Paraguay, and say they
have treated with the King of Portugal as between crown and crown.

I shall now relate a trifling, but as singular an adventure as ever happened
since Kings and Poets first were seen on earth. Frederic, having passed some
time guarding the frontiers of Silesia, in an impenetrable camp, began to be
tired of inactivity; and, therefore, to pass time away, composed an Ode, and
signed it Frederic; this he put at the head of an enormous bundle of verse and
prose, which he sent to me. I opened the package, and found I had not been the
first who had performed that operation; it was evident the seals had been
broken, and I was terrified at reading the following verses: Oh trifling
nation, light and vain!
Are these the warriors whom Turenne
And Luxembourg with laurels bound,
Whom Fame's immortal honors crowned;
Who, as we are told in ancient story,
Danger and death despised for glory?
Lo the vile rout! behold each slave
Fearful in fight, in pillage brave!
Behold their feeble Monarch move,
The tool of Pompadour and Love!
To Love opprobious, as to Fame,
Unworthy he the Monarch's name:
At random see he flings the reins,
Detesting Empire's anxious pains;
His land and people in distress,
He revels on in lewd excess;
Himself a slave, when pride inflates,
Would dictate laws to Kings and States.


I trembled as I read the poem, some lines of which are excellent, or may pass
for such. I had unfortunately acquired, and deserved, the reputation of having
been the continual corrector of the King of Prussia's poetry. The packet had
been opened, the verses read, might perhaps have been published, the King of
France would attribute them to me, and I should become not only guilty of high
treason against the King, but, which was still worse, against Madame de
Pompadour.

In this perplexity, I desired the French Resident at Geneva to come to my
house, and showed him the packet. He agreed it had been opened before it
arrived, and thought there was no other way of acting in a case where the
safety of my head was concerned, but sending it as it was to the Duke de
Choiseul, Minister of State. In any situation but this I should not have
followed his advice; but it was necessary to prevent my own ruin, and I
acquainted the court with the true character of its enemy. I knew the Duke de
Choiseul would not betray me, but content himself with persuading his Majesty
that Frederic was an enemy, whom, if they could, they ought to crush.

The Duke did not stop here; he was a man of wit, wrote verses, and had friends
who wrote also: he paid the King of Prussia in his own coin, and sent me a
satire against Frederic, as biting and unmerciful as his own. The following
lines are extracted from this Poem I have been assured by M. the P. F. of S.
this Ode was written by S. Palinot de Montenoy.
: No longer he the man, by whom
The arts, from black oblivion's tomb,
Were called and over Germaina spread:
A husband, brother, son of guilt,
His Sire, in justice, would have spilt
The blood which so much blood has shed.
Yet he, audacious, durst aspire
To touch Apollo's sacred lyre;
The rhyming King of Poet-tasters:
His Mars and Phoebus are the same,
Alike in war and verse his fame,
Zoilus and Maevius are his masters.
Behold, in spite of all his guards,
Where Nero meets the due rewards
Of all his hideous provocation;
The Tyrant see of Syracuse
Now prostitute to barren muse,
Despised while he insults the nations.
And wherefore, savage Censor, say,
Would thou impede their harmless play,
When Love, with Nature, smiling comes?
Shall thou pretend to judge their rites,
Who never could taste but those delights
Imparted by thy noisy drums?


The Duke de Choiseul assured me when he sent this answer, that he would print
the satire if the King of Prussia published his; and added, they would beat him
as heartily with the pen, as they hoped to do with the sword. Had I been
inclined so to amuse myself, it depended only on me to set the King of France
and the King of Prussia to war in rhyme, which would have been a farce of
novelty upon earth. But I enjoyed another pleasure; that of being more prudent
than Frederic. I wrote him word his ode was beautiful, but that he ought not to
publish it; he had glory enough without that, and should not shut every door of
reconciliation with the King of France, aggravate him beyond bearing, and force
him to some desperate effort to obtain a just revenge. I added, my niece had
burnt his ode, in mortal fear of its being imputed to me. He believed me, and
returned me thanks; but not without a few reproaches, for having burnt the best
verses he had ever written. The Duke de Choiseul kept his word, and was
discreet.

To make the pleasantry complete, I thought it possible to lay the foundation
of the peace of Europe on these poetical pieces, which might have continued the
war to the destruction of Frederic, My correspondence with the Duke de Choiseul
gave birth to that idea; and it appeared so ridiculous, so worthy the
transactions of the times, that I indulged it, and had myself the satisfaction
of proving on what weak and invisible pivots the destinies of nations turn. The
Duke wrote me several ostensible letter, conceived in such terms, as the King
of Prussia might venture to make overtures of peace without danger of Austria
taking umbrage at France; and Frederic returned answers in a similar way, with
little risk of displeasing the English court. This ticklish treaty is still in
agitation, and resembles the sports of cats, which give a pat with one paw and
a scratch with the other. The King of Prussia, driven out of Dresden, and
beaten by the Russians, is in want of peace; and France, beaten at sea by the
English, and on shore by the Hanoverians, with an ill-timed loss of men and
money, is obliged to finish this ruinous war.

And this, beautiful Emily, is the point at which, for the present, we stop.

December 27, 1759.
I continue to write, and on singular events. The King of Prussia ended a
letter to me on the 17th of November thus: "I shall write more fully from
Dresden, where I shall be in three days;" and the third day he was beaten by
Marshal Daun, with the loss of ten thousand men. It seems to me, every thing I
behold is the fable of the girl and her milk. Our great sea-politician,
Berrier, formerly Lieutenant de Police at Paris, and who, from that post,
became Secretary of State and Minister of the Marine, without ever having seen
a vessel larger than the ferry-boat of St. Cloud, or the barge Auxerre; this
Berrier, I say, took a fancy to fit out a fine fleet, and make a descent on
England; but scarcely had the fleet peeped out of Breast, before it was beaten
by the English, wrecked upon the rocks, destroyed by the winds, or swallowed up
by the seas.

We have seen one Silhouette, made Comptroller General of the Finances, of whom
no man knew any thing, except that he translated some of Pope's poetry into
prose. He was said to be an eagle, but in l^s^ than a month the eagle was
metamorphosed to an owl. He found the secret of annihilating public credit to
that degree, that the State all at once wanted money to pay the troops. The
King was obliged to send his plate to the Mint, and a great part of the kingdom
followed his example.

January 1st, 1760.
Frederic must be perfidious; he has sent my confidential letters to London,
and has endeavored to sow dissension betwixt us and our allies. All kind of
perfidies, permitted to a Grand King of Prussia, has he acted; even to the
making of verses, for those he must ever make. I sent them to Versailles,
doubting they would be accepted. He will cede nothing; and proposes, in order
to indemnify the Elector of Saxony, that they shall give him Erford, which
belongs to the Elector of Mentz. He always must rob somebody; it is his way. We
shall see the result of all this, and of the campaign they are going to make.

As this great and horrid tragedy has ever (...) mixture of the comic, so they
have lately printed at Paris, "Des Poesies ouf de King mine Master," as Freitag
says; in which there is an epistle to Marshal Keith, where he ridicules
christianity, and mocks at the immortality of the soul. The devotees are
displeased; the Calvinist clergy murmur. These pedants looked upon (...) as a
support to the good cause. When he threw the Magistrates of Leipsic into
dungeons, and sold their beds to get their money, he had the admiration of such
Priests; but when he amuses himself by translating passages from Seneca,
Lucretius, and Cicero, they look upon him as a monster.

Priests would canonize Cartouche or Jonathan Wild, were they devotees.

THE END.

