The import of the Saint's confession, that the Times of Men are in the hand of
God: EXHIBITED TO VIEW IN AN ANNIVERSARY, EUCHARISTICAL, AND HALF-CENTURY
SERMON; Delivered at EAST-HAMPTON, on the LORD's DAY, January 1, 1792.

By SAMUEL BUELL, D. D. And Pastor of the Church there.

-- For He is thy life, and the length of thy days. MOSES. Having therefore
obtained help of God I continue unto this day. PAUL. -- Knowing that the
goodness of God leads to repentance. PAUL. -- We will remember thy love more
than wine. SOLOMON. As ye have therefore received Christ Jesus the Lord, so
walk ye in him. PAUL. I will remember the years of the right hand of the Most
High. DAVID. NEW LONDON: PRINTED BY T. GREEN and SON.

To the flock of Christ in East-Hampton.
THE following Sermon which was primarily designed for your private use, at
your request, is made public by the press; whereby it is hoped (that by the
blessing of God) it will become useful to others, as well as to you. I suppose
one reason why you have desired its publication, may be for the purpose of
transmitting down to the rising generation, some signal dispensations of divine
Providence and grace in your day: Also, in part, in that it is a Half Century
Sermon, it being rare that such an one is preached; I myself never heard, nor
saw one: Partly, also, as I hope, for your own instruction and edification.
Although I was twice, or more than twice as long as common in the delivery,
(being two hours) yet I observed that your attention was kept up and increasing
to the end. Under each branch of my discourse I studied precision and brevity,
suppressing a flow of thought that I might avoid prolixity; but I found I could
not possibly do justice in any tolerable degree, to such a variety of
interesting topics, and avoid being lengthy. As to this little piece of mine, I
question not, but like the generality of single sermons, after it has had a
perusal for once, it will, by some, be laid aside as worn out and forgotten;
but "as your times are in the hand of the Lord," I trust you will find
something here, that may be useful in all the times that pass over you; that it
will especially be useful for Communicants to read after they come from the
Lord's-Table; and when you are called to elect a Pastor, if I am then dead, I
shall hereby speak to you. -- May the Lord continue to own and bless you -- and
enrich you with all the graces of his Spirit -- And may we rejoice together in
the presence of the Lord Jesus Christ, at his appearing. To this end may He
bless the following sermon to (...), (and also to others) which is the prayer
of him who is your servant for Jesus' sake.

SAMUEL BUELL.

Anniversary, etc.
I AM come into this awful and delightful desk at this time with a view to
deliver you an Anniversary Eucharistical and Half-Century Sermon. This
threefold occasion will necessarily invite your mediation upon a variety of
topics. I shall not undertake that which is beyond the compass of my power,
viz. fully to ascertain how far forth we stand connected with things past,
present and to come, but I shall lead you to see, that as called into
existence, "your times are in the hand of God" -- That you are acting a part
upon the stage of life, as in a probationary state for an endless eternity --
That you will soon exchange worlds, and meet the august realities of an
everlasting state -- That preparation therefore, is of the highest possible
importance -- That you are under infinite obligations to live to God, and to
acknowledge Him in all that variety of dispensation, wherein he passes before
you; suffice it to say, at present, I shall invite your run of meditation
correspondent to the threefold occasion of my preaching at this time. While a
number of texts have been revolved in my mind, adapted to the present purpose,
I have elected those words which you may read in PSALM xxxi. 15. My Times are
in thy Hand.

THIS Psalm was penned by the Royal Prophet David in his advanced age, and when
exposed to the loss of life. In this situation he had recourse by faith to his
God, and soon became the subject of apprehended safety, triumphant joy, and
divine gloriation in Him. He had just said, "thou art my God," my God in
covenant with me, and then adds, "my times are in thy Hand." The Psalmist makes
use of the plural number, "my times," that is, all the events of time, and the
timing of them; prosperity, adversity, life and death, all the changing scenes
of life from the first era or beginning of time, to the end thereof with us,
are in God's hand. That is, in the hand of divine power, and under the
all-disposing providence of God: for this figurative mode of expression,
ascribing a hand to God, who is a Spirit, and has not bodily parts, is to be
understood only as expressed by way of analogy or allusion, and principally
imports divine power and providential influence, or the exertment of God's
power and perfections on the creature. Isa. 59. (...). Job 2. 10. etc.
The words of our text contain an excellent confession of faith, made by the
"man after God's own heart:" A confession highly worthy of our imitation, both
as to the matter and manner thereof; truly believing that "our times are in the
hand of God." In as much as we all give our assent to this interesting truth,
the proof thereof at this time may be the less needful.

Therefore in discoursing further upon the words, it is proposed by the
assistance of divine grace, I. To point out some signal times and capital
events to which the words of our text may refer, or will aptly apply. II. To
consider the import of the confession expressed in our text, "My times are in
thy hand." III. The Improvement will follow suitable to the respective
occasions of this discourse.


I. In the first place then, I am to point out some signal times and capital
events, to which the words of our text may refer, or will aptly apply. Here we
may first observe, that the first existence of man and beginning of time with
him is in the Lord's hand. Let philosophers dispute about the origin, nature
and essence of the soul of man -- when first formed by the creating power of
the Father of Spirits, and when first united to the body; and (...) divines
determine with St. Augustine, that the soul is created in infusing, and in
infusing it is created, all must agree that there is the beginning of time with
man. Self-existence, independency and eternity, as being from everlasting to
everlasting, is peculiar to the great I AM, or Jehovah. As to man, a creature
of time, in connection with eternity, he is called into existence and is born in
the set time that God designed and ordered, as doing all things "according to
the counsel of his will:" Hence the royal inspired Preacher tells us, "there is
a time to be born." Thus it has been with reference to all that have come into
existence and been born in the old or new world; or that shall till time will
be no more. God "has made of one blood all nations of men for to dwell upon
the face of the earth, and has determined" -- or has marked out in his
eternal and unerring counsel the times fore allotted [to each] in their
respective order, and appointed the several boundaries of their habitation --
to this one great end, that they might be excited to seek after the Lord their
maker.

I proceed -- the time of the new birth, and for the effectual application, or
actual bestowment of salvation which is by Christ Jesus, is in the Lord's hand.
This implies the mission of the Holy Spirit, his preparatory work, (in the
adult) -- his regenerating act, or his implanting a principle of spiritual life
and grace -- and effectual calling by his powerful efficiency: -- by all which,
the happy subjects thereof, are now made partakers of Christ, and brought into
the fellowship of the Son of God: they are now in him, "who of God is made unto
them wisdom, and righteousness, and sanctification, and redemption." They now
through faith receive the atonement, and are not only justified and sanctified,
but have also "power given them to become the children of God; and if children,
then heirs, heirs of God and joint heirs with Jesus Christ. The Holy Spirit is
given to them to dwell in them, as his proper lasting abode, and as a divine
supernatural spring of life and action. They share in all the benefits of
redemption by Jesus Christ, and are crowned with the loving kindness of God, in
the life which now is, but most eminently in the life which is to come. -- Now
the time for all this, is in the Lord's hand. He has his set time therefore, "a
day of power," "the day of espousal," of joy and gladness, "the accepted time,
the day of salvation:" the hour now comes, in which the dead are made to hear
and live. They must have preservation in life, till the happy moment of their
spiritual marriage with Jesus Christ. The Lord said unto them when in their
blood live: (Heb.) "I said unto thee live in thy blood." Ezekiel. 16. 6.
They must live until the fixed time for God to manifest his infinite love to
them. Then the decree brings forth by all-powerful and all-glorious operation.
A work this is of equal necessity as that of impetration or procurement of
redemption. This work of application, is therefore a work of the last
importance: -- What is Christ to me, unless he is mine?

Again, Times of increasing light, for transformation -- for the formal sealing
the Holy Spirit, and thereby assurance of divine love -- and for sensible
nearness to, and solemn, delightful fellowship and communion with the divine
Trinity -- and for abounding solid joy and peace divine, are in the Lord's
hand. These spiritual blessings, these divine beatitudes lie inwrap'd in
precious promises, as rich veins of gold and silver do in a mine, and by the
experiment or power of faith, become inlayed and clustered together in the
heart of the real Christian. Every true convert as the subject of divine
illumination, has a spiritual knowledge of the glorious objects of divine faith
and love; and possesses some degree of peace and joy divine, at least, some
times, or if under desertion, is mourning the want thereof. For otherwise, how
can it be, that "old things are passed away, and all things are become new?"
Every true believer is the subject of the object seal of the Holy Spirit, which
distinguishes the person from others, as now sanctified and set apart for God
and his service. The formal sealing of the Holy Spirit, is, his giving a sure
and certain testimony to the reality of that work of grace He has wrought in
our souls, and to our interest in Christ, and our eternal salvation, according
to the promises, "that are yea and amen in him, to the glory of God." Now fears
and doubts are exiled, and the love of God ratified and cleared up to the soul.
This certificate brought from the throne of mercy, by the blessed Spirit sealed
with Christ's blood, ushers into the heart light and life, joy and peace
divine, and even heaven upon earth. This formal seal of the Holy Spirit never
preceeds, but is consequent upon believing, as the Apostle says to the
Ephesians, "after ye believed, ye were sealed by the Holy Spirit of promise."
Ephesians. 1. 13.
Sometimes it follows immediately upon the soul's first closing with Christ.
The happy young convert has such powerful illumination, clear views of divine
objects, visible actings of grace, and sensibility of divine love as give a
comfortable or full assurance of an interest in Christ, and the promises.
Unutterably happy the portion of such converts, if they never lose their first
love -- persevere in a walk under the cloudless shines of Jehovah's precious
countenance, possessing the power and comfort of religion, till time with them
is no more. But commonly young converts are the subjects of light and darkness
hopes and fears, and are often well nigh, or quite giving up their hope of a
saving change, after their first light and comfort. If for a time they think
their mountain stands strong, they shall never be moved, yet presently they are
in darkness and trouble again. Nothing can, or ought to give satisfaction in
this case, short of increasing light and sensible actings of grace* That which
is now wanting is the formal sealing of the Holy Spirit, which is frequently
given after exercises have run high, and the soul has followed hard after God.
-- "Then shall we know, when we follow on to know the Lord, his going forth is
prepared as the morning;" Hosea, 6. 3. -- Psalm 30. 5.
that after a night of darkness, perplexity and weeping, the morning comes with
beams of light and joy, leading on to meridian splendour, and fullness of bliss,
in duration eternal. The Lord's people who make business of religion, and keep
up a close walk with Him, find more sensible nearness to him, and more intimate
communion with him at some particular seasons than they enjoy in a constant
way. Times in which, comparatively, (as Job speaks) they only hear with the
ear, and times in which they see with the eye. Job 42. 5.
The Father of mercies and of lights raying into their souls, they have
increasing, spiritual knowledge; and thereby increasing views of the true moral
beauty and infinite amiableness of divine objects and divine things. They
behold the moral perfection of Christ, the infinite excellency and amiableness
of his person, and his sufficiency as mediator; and under clear and lively
views of his divine and mediatorial glory, they find and feel a divine
gloriation in him, and ravishing sweetness, and heavenly joy in his excellent
and transcendent love. They behold him as "altogether lovely," having all
desirable excellencies in him. The Lord's people now behold his glory shining
in all his works; in special the harmony and infinite glory of his redeeming
attributes as manifested in the face, in the Person and mediation of the Lord
Jesus Christ, in the astonishing work of man's redemption by him. They see
"that mercy and truth have met together; that righteousness and peace have
embraced each other. -- In Christ all the divine attributes appear united in
the most glorious manner. When mercy shines and triumphs in infinite grace and
glory; when love divine stoops down to the deeps of misery to fetch poor, lost,
justly condemned sinners to the heights of eternal glory, inflexible, severe
and awful justice, and absolute purity and holiness sit on the throne of glory,
and triumph in infinite eternal honor. If a Saint were to speak out and tell
us his own experiences at such an hour as this, might we not expect to hear him
say, I see and feel, I am before God, and He appears upon a seat of majesty,
self-sufficient and all-sufficient, the fountain of being, perfection and
blessedness. He appears in the glory of his infinite and adorable sovereignty;
the supreme of Beings, sitting on a throne of grace, in the glory of his
holiness. The sight of his several awful endearing glories sink me into deep
self-abasement, I shrink, as it were, into nothing before Him, and feel myself
less than an attom. In the view of the infinite inflexible justice of God, and
his absolute and glorious holiness, I tremble before the bright, the pure and
blended flame, and feel abashed and confounded at my own infinite unlikeness to
that spotless rectitude and perfection. Although in a flame of supreme love to
divine objects, yet I find myself far, very far from perfection in holiness, or
any one grace. I never saw so much of my own infinite vileness, and the want of
conformity to the moral excellencies of God; nor did I ever loath myself for
sin as I now do. I never saw sin so contrary to all that is in God; to his
justice, to his holiness, to his grace, and to his glory. In the view of the
boundless goodness, love, and grace of God, I am filled with an overflowing
admiration and amazement, that he should open the inexhaustible stores and
treasures of that goodness to enrich and bless forever such an infinitely vile
sinner. I stand speechless, and am ready, as it were, to fall dead at the sight
of my own vile ingratitude and base returns to Him: That the great I AM looks
down from the height of his sanctuary upon me, as with a look of love and
compassion, and that I have so much overlooked such stoops and reaches of
boundless love and mercy. The soul now under realizing views of the glorious
wisdom and holiness of God, and his transcendent and infinite goodness, his
love and grace in his son Jesus Christ, feels an unutterable joy and
satisfaction in that boundless ocean of good and perfection, and does, as it
were, open, expand and stretch itself to grasp as much of it, as it can receive
for the present. The light which now transforms the soul into the moral or holy
image of God, and bows it low, as submissive to his sovereign will, elevates it
to the top of mount Pisgah; so that all the world becomes but a dark valley
below the feet: And the soul now dwells on high, (...) the possession of an
all-sufficing good, for time and eternity, while it seems swallowed up in God,
as in an infinite ocean of blessedness. The soul is now inspired with
undissembled gratitude, adoration and praise; but it seems to be a sort of
rashness and boldness for a creature so vile, so feeble and insufficient
therefore, to attempt the celebration of the praises of a Being so infinitely
great and glorious in holiness, as Jehovah now appears to the view of the soul;
yet a sight of the moral beauty and infinite amiableness of his perfections,
sensibility of his infinite love, and of infinite obligation to Him, seem to
have a sort of an omnipotent efficacy and sweet constraint in them, so that the
soul cannot refrain "crying, Hallelujah! For the Lord God omnipotent reigns."
The soul wishes the whole creation fired with praise, as David in some of his
last Psalms, is ready to, or does call upon the holy angels to afford their
welcome assistance in this joyful work. At the same time it appears to the soul
a reality, that a whole eternity of the sublimest praises raised and offered by
countless millions of the brightest and most exalted intelligences that do or
can exist, would be perfect silence before Jehovah, compared with his infinite
incomprehensible greatness and glory. Now (says the soul) I dwell at home in
God, and dwell in love divine. Now I become the subject of the formal sealing
of the Holy Spirit: I now have a new name in a white stone, which no man
knows, saving him that receives it: Now I have the witness of my own spirit
or conscience and the testimony of the Divine Spirit joined therewith, giving
assurance that I am an adopted child of God, and an heir of eternal glory. How
much so ever there may be of a medium or a mediate witness, it now at least,
seems to the soul that there is an immediate testimony of the Holy Spirit,
giving full assurance of the love of God. I need not light a candle to behold
the sun-shines; nor will I admit that to be the effect of the Holy Spirit's
operation, that will not bear the trial of the written word of God. Never had I
before this happy hour (says the saint) such clear light, and solid permanent
comfort, such a sabbath of rest and perfection of peace in believing, such a
solemn and delightful gracious communion with the divine Trinity. I find a new
engagedness of heart and disposition therefore, and consecrate myself afresh to
the service and glory of the adorable TRINITY forever and ever. Whatever others
may imagine, the Lord's people well know, that these divine manifestations and
operations, communications and prelibations of future immense and immortal
glory, are of and from the Lord; and that the timing thereof is in his
sovereign hand.

I add, those changes and vicissitudes of time which take place among men, with
reference to prosperity and adversity are ordered by, and are in the hand of
God. -- The Psalmist makes use of the plural number times, as expressive of
vicissitudes. -- The world is a rolling wheel, and every thing in it, even
those things that appear most stable, may suffer change and mutation. Nobles,
Princes, States, Kingdoms and Empires; Cities, Towns, Families and Individuals
may appear for the present in a flourishing situation, and seem to swim on the
smooth face of pleasure; wait but a little while and the scene is all changed;
the Lord, in whose hand our times are, turns a leaf in the volume of his
decrees, and those who sung for joy of heart, are suddenly plunged in misery
and sorrow. -- Others that have long groaned under burdens, sighed in misery
under painful sufferings, as hastily leap from them to liberty, light and
comfort. The Lord's people have new scenes almost continually opening to view;
all cannot exhibit visibility of change as Job, Joseph and many others have
done; but all are acquainted with vicissitudes. -- Happy they who are
habitually and actually prepared to meet all the changing scenes of life, "and
stand secure amidst a falling world:" And who can truly say, Through all the
changing scenes of life,
In trouble and in joy,
The praises of my God shall still
My heart and tongue employ.
All this strange variety of changes rolling on in perpetual succession, is the
work of God; He forms the light of prosperity, and creates the darkness of
adversity; good and evil come from his hand.

Moreover, the time of deliverance from trials and afflictive ills is in God's
hand. The Lord's people in this their state of probation often share in heavy
trials; sometimes they are grievously persecuted; sometimes they have to
conflict with terrible temptations, keen privations under the loss of their
dearest outward comforts; and sometimes are lamenting the absence of the
Comforter. Their exercises often run high in a great variety of respects; they
learn that in the "world they shall have trouble," and the cross is the way to
the crown. The kind, the degree, and the duration of their suffering afflictive
ill is in the Lord's hand, and he has a set time for their deliverance as
really as for Zion's prosperity; and as he had for the liberation of his people
from Egypt and Babylon

I add, the time for a person to exercise faith and repentance is in the Lord's
hand. Sinners under the gospel are called upon to exercise repentance toward
God, and faith in the Lord Jesus Christ, that they escape eternal death, and
possess eternal life. For this infinitely important purpose the Lord allows
sinners a space of time, as he gave Jazabel a space to repent. The day of grace
has differing periods; is sometimes longer and sometimes shorter, as the day
of life is. We say the sinner's time for faith and repentance is in the hand of
God, not eternity in the hand of God for this purpose; for beyond time, in
eternity, there is no repentance unto life; inspiration assures us that all
beyond time is eternal; therefore if the sinner goes into the eternal state
without grace, he will abide without grace forever. Here it may be observed,
that our day of grace may expire before the day of life; as the stalk may
continue after the flower be dropped off. There may be a judicial weighing of the
sinner, a mean t^kal, that puts an eternal period to his day of grace. God in
just and righteous judgment may give up disobedient sinners to a state of
blindness and hardness of heart, and by oath bar them out of rest forever.
Hence then how exceedingly precious is time, an happy or miserable eternity may
depend on the good or ill improvement of the present fleeting moments.

Moreover the time for a person's usefulness on the stage of life is in the
Lord's hand. Every person, especially every one that lays claim to the
christian character, is indispensably obligated to live to God, and to be
useful to society. Obligation is increased by the powers, capacities, talents
and stations, with which persons are betrusted for the purpose of serving God,
and their generation. Very various are the stations assigned mankind, and as
various the services called for; services to be performed for the glorifying of
God, and innumerable services to be done for the bodies and souls of men; to
promote their secular and civil interests, and their eternal salvation. Some
are advanced to the most honorable and important stations in Church or State
for the purpose of usefulness. Many are useful in the humble walk of private
life. Others in a twofold capacity at the same time, or at diverse times in
different stations. The sovereign Lord of the universe can with infinite ease
raise up, qualify and eminently improve a man for a time in a station high,
interesting and vastly important, and soon improve him in a sphere of action
equally high and important. Surprising and inconceivable as the beneficial
consequences are, and will be, we may behold the same extraordinary person
endowed with rare measures of military skill and prowess, acting the Hero in
the military line, "for our people, and for the cities of our God," and by his
blessing, success, and in consequence crowned with the laurels of victory and
triumph over mighty forces, rashly acting the part of opposition to the free
enjoyment of liberty and property. We may soon thereupon fix the eye on the
same extraordinary Person and view his as enriched with a fund of political
knowledge, wisdom and fidelity; elected by a united free people to preside in
the chief Chair of State, which he fills with honor, adequate to the merit of
his reputation, though standing so high in national fame, as well as by the just
tribute of an universal Plaudit by millions in United States, which constitute
an extensive and growing empire. The late revolution in our own country
exemplifies our remark, as affording witness to it by present living example.
If a person exalted so high on the stage of honor, acts the christian Hero so
as to overcome the mighty force of temptation to self-exaltation, (...) victory
and triumph will be immensely more noble and honorable than can possibly be
obtained in the military line or chair of State, although the whole world were
to be the field of conquest, or the seat of empire.

The victory and triumph of the real christian over death, is infinitely more
magnificent, gainful and honorable than all the triumphs ordained by the
Senate of Rome, in honor to their victorious Generals.


The Lord often conveys incomprehensible blessings to men, by the
instrumentality of man. Ministers of the gospel have designation to office in a
station highly honorable and immensely important, for the grand design of
usefulness. They have "the glorious gospel of the blessed God committed to their
charge," and are made guardians of souls which must exist eternally. They bear
an office which was sanctified by Christ, who himself bore it, and thereby
dignified it forever. The purposes we serve are high and God-like. We are to
"gather fruit unto life eternal." If some mostly employ their time and talents
in the lower sphere of scaffolding work; there are others more highly and
happily employed as at work upon the Temple, as instrumental in squaring and
laying the stones in the spiritual building, "the church of the living God."
They are enabled to improve their gifts and exercise their graces with a wise
reference to promoting the Redeemer's kingdom among men: -- and by the
cooperation of the Holy Spirit with their ministrations they "turn sinners to
righteousness, and build up saints in faith, holiness and comfort:" and as a
gracious reward shall shine as stars of the first magnitude in the kingdom of
glory forever. Now the duration of time for usefulness in any station
whatsoever is in the Lord's hand. Some have but a short space of time and
opportunity allowed them for usefulness in the world; others a longer space. --
Some have a long run and series of opportunity for special service, and are
eminently useful to a good old age. More eminent usefulness may cease before
the expiration of life; yet are the Lord's people useful as long as they can
pray and exhibit praiseworthy example. With respect to degrees of usefulness,
and the duration of time therefore, the glorious and adorable sovereignty of God
is most eminently displayed.

Lastly here, the duration and end of a man's time is in God's hand. "There is
a time to die," as well as to be born, and the one, and the other abide
unalterably fixed in the vast volume of the divine decrees. We are immortal
till the appointed time comes, for the end of time with us, beyond that we
cannot possess life for a moment, whether elder or younger. "Man knows not
his time;" but God as the sovereign Lord of life and death, "has appointed his
bounds that he cannot pass," and has (...) the final hour and moment, when
time with us, "shall be no more." Henceforth, all will be boundless eternity!

Thus have we taken a brief survey of the times of men as in the hand of God,
and seen how the text will apply: We now proceed,

II. Secondly, to consider the import of the ^aint's confession, that his
"times are in Gods hand." Now this implies a firm belief of the being and
infinite perfections of God. To profess that the times of men are in the hand
of God, and yet not to believe the existence of a God, is infinitely absurd.
That there is a supreme and eternal Being, and that he is possessed of all
infinite perfections, are truths so visible by the light of nature, that St.
Paul declares the heathen inexcusable that call these truths in question. (...).
Every thing in the natural and moral world -- the effects of the exertion of
infinite attributes, and the visible accomplishment of the prophecies and
promises (...) scripture demonstrate to the ^aint that there is a supreme
eternal Being, possessed of an assemblage of all infinite possible perfections.
Superadded to all this the true believer has a spiritual supernatural knowledge
of God in Christ, by divine illumination, and a feeling sense of the presence
of God; of his divinity, and the divinity of bible truth; as every one has that
is the happy subject of saving faith.

We proceed, this confession as made by the saint acting in character, implies
regeneration, the infusion of grace, and exercise of says, by the energy of
the Holy Spirit. No unregenerate person can make this confession both as to
matter and manner, as it ought to be made; for it supposes the exercise of
says. The psalmist in the exercise of says, said, "my God," and in the
exercise of that says, he adds, "my times are in thy hand."

I add, this confession, "my times are in thy hand," implies a firm belief and
full persuasion of the governing providence of God. The saint has full
assurance from divine revelation that the ONE supreme God, (...) great Creator,
is also the governor of the universe: that his providence is universal, and
extends to every individual in the whole system of beings. The saint knows and
believes that the divine pages plainly teach us, that God is qualified, by his
infinite perfections, for the government of the world; that it is necessary that
he should govern it, and that he therefore does. "The Lord has prepared his
throne in the heavens, and his kingdom rules over all:" Psalm 103. 19.
over all things in the natural world; and he is governor and judge also of the
moral world, angels and men, -- "and he does according to his will in the army
of heaven, and among the inhabitants of the earth." Dan. 4. 35.
The saint believes and confesses, that every thing which comes to pass is by
the ordinative or permissive providence of God.

Again, this confession implies, that the time allowed us here is God's time,
and man's talent. To confess that our times are in God's hand, is to
acknowledge that we are not lords of the time allowed us; but stewards under
him, entrusted by him with time, as a most precious talent, for the improvement
of which we are accountable to him. Time ought to be considered as one of the
most important betrustments committed to us, to be employed, in the service of
God; and in a way of preparation for eternity. Precious and important we call
the talent of time, for the man is yet unborn that can fully weigh and
comprehend the worth of it; while on it hangs suspended the weight of worlds
eternal: yet there is no one talent so misused and so universally, wretchedly
abused by mankind as the talent of time. Shall deathbeds tell us what it is to
murder time? time that is God's, and in his hand.

Moreover, this confession -- as connected with the foregoing words implies a
firm belief of protection and safety. The psalmist had said in the preceding
verse, his enemies had devised to take away his life, he adds, "but I trusted
in (...) O Jehovah: I said thou art my God:" Jehovah imports being and
eternity, and his name [FL.] that follows, translated [GOD] notes forth his
power: Now this "Jehovah, my God," who is Being from everlasting to
everlasting, possessed of omnipotent, supreme and eternal power is become
engaged for my protection and safety. His Name is the asylum or tower to which
I have recourse by says, and am entirely safe. Jehovah, God, is my shield, as
well as "my exceeding great reward:" I shall abide safe and comfortable "under
the shadow of the Almighty, in the secret place of the Most HIGH:" His infinite
attributes ascertain my safety and felicity for ever and ever.

Again, this confession -- as in connection with the foregoing words, implies
sight and sensibility of infinite distance between God and man, the Creator and
the creature. "Jehovah my God," "my times are in thy hand," all stand connected
together, but imply infinite disproportion between the beings spoken of.
Jehovah speaks being itself, a fullness of being, an immense sea of being, and
in whole very being itself. Self-existing, independent, fountain of all being,
eternal, immutable, infinite in power and all perfections. Now if we set this
acknowledgement in contrast with the confession the psalmist makes of himself,
the distance and disproportion will appear as it really is infinite. Jehovah,
thou art being itself, very being; I am but show, little more than a show, a
mere shadow, a semblance of being: Thou have an infinitude of being, which I
have not; I am nearer to nothing than fullness of being: Thou art self-existent
and independent; what little of being I have is derived; I am a created,
dependant creature: "my times are in thy hand," thou art eternal, from eternity
to eternity unchangeably the same. I have just come into existence, am but of
yesterday, a creature of time; thou art eternal, what thou now art thou ever
have been, and what thou ever have been, and now art, thou forever must needs
be. Thus we see the import of the confession in our text.

I again add -- this confession, "my times are in thy hand," implies a
necessary dependence upon God, and acquiescence in it, as submissive to the
divine will, as fitting it should be so. The dependence of the ray upon the
sun, of the stream upon the fountain, can be but a faint emblem of the
necessary dependence of the ^aint upon God for being and well-being. This the
psalmist well knew, when he made the confession in the text; he saw the events
of time were in the hand of his God, and that it was fitting it should be so,
he therefore submitted to him as on the throne of government and grace. He now
did that which the Lord's people can when they have a right frame of heart,
viz. sign a blank and leave it with the Lord to fill up: knowing that his power
is immense and uncontrollable, his sovereign will absolutely good and
infinitely perfect, and that the supreme wisdom cannot err.

Lastly, this confession, "my times are in thy hand," implies spiritual joy and
divine gloriation. The words evidently carry in them an air of joy and triumph.
My times, all the events of time, are in the hand of Jehovah, who is my God,
who will order all things for me according to covenant engagement. In Jehovah,
my God, I boast all the day long, my soul goes to him as to my "exceeding joy,"
my God in Christ. I am the subject of ineffable joy and divine gloriation, and
shall be forever, for "my times are in the hand of Jehovah my God."

We may hence see and learn, that there is much included in the saint's
confession rightly made. -- That it concerns us to be looking and preparing for
changes. -- That it becomes us to be reconciled to our own decease, and the
decease of relatives and friends; for our, and their times, are in the Lord's
hand. -- That to see all things and events in the hand of God, and to acquiesce
therein, is the one only certain way for rest and comfort in the world. -- But
we must not dwell here at present. Here this sermon may be divided.


Thus we have taken a brief survey of the times of men as in the Lord's hand:
and considered the import of the saint's confession of this truth. If we
reflect for a few moments upon the preceding discourse, we may observe that
it is adapted and will fitly apply to the threefold occasion of delivering a
sermon at this time, as advertised in the exordium, viz. an anniversary,
eucharistical and half-century sermon: for time, and all things relative to
each of these occasions, is in the hand of God. Therefore the foundation being
laid, that which remains to be spoken at this time, by way of improvement,
address, and application* may mostly be divided into three parts; the first of
which has respect to the anniversary occasion.

FIRST PART.
This first part, which is designed to be the improvement of an anniversary
Sermon, may perhaps, occasion a query with some, why this sermon (in part) has
the title of an anniversary sermon; the reply is, because, that for the space
of forty-five years I have annually or every year preached a new year's sermon
to my people. During this space of time, it has been the practice of minister
and people in this place, to take some special notice of the beginning of the
year, by meeting in this house on every new year's day, for solemn meditation
and religious exercises. Careful to avoid every thing of a superstitious
aspect, yet employing common time to holy purposes, as we have opportunity;
from a principle of zeal toward God, and of care for our souls: wishing to
redeem time, and to begin the year with God, by the exercises of worship and
solemn devotion. I would just premise and observe, that to commemorate the
works of God, is a duty of perpetual, as well as universal obligation, and can
never be out of season: but there are times in which it appears eminently in
season, and seems the special duty of the day: and most eminently so, is the
Lord's Day, and a New Year's day. Upon these days especially, it is important
duty to be exercised in meditating on, and commemorating God's wonderful works
of creation, redemption and providence. To call into view, to commemorate and
celebrate the display of the glory of God's creating perfections, the glory of
his power, and wisdom, and goodness, sovereignty and alsufficiency. As also the
yet more mavelous display of the glory of his redeeming attributes, as they
shine in their admirable beauty and harmony "in the face, in the person, of our
Lord Jesus Christ, the brightness of divine glory." Holding in memory his
glorious resurrection; and that as Lord of the sabbath, he has changed it from
the last, to the first day of the week. It is also eminently in season, on the
Lord's day, and on a New Year's day, to commemorate God's wonderful works of
Providence, and the display of the glory of his governing perfections. It is
therefore natural to observe, that we have now a double call to the important
duty of commemorating God's wonderful works of creation, redemption, and
providence: For this is the Lord's Day, and a New-Year's-day; they are now
associated, and unitedly invite us to commemorate those works of God, so
glorious, inexhaustable and eternal! The time will not admit at present, that
we meditate upon these divine themes distinctly; they must only occasionally be
touched upon in the several parts of our discourse as we proceed. Our text and
run of thought upon it, pointing out our "times as in the hand of God,"
directly tend to invite us at present, to commemorate the more signal
dispensations of God's providence and grace toward us. I shall therefore now
make an address to the assembly in general, upon this important point of duty.

My dear people, the most of you doubtless remember that God required the
Israelites "to remember all the way which he led them for forty years in the
wilderness" Deuteronomy. 8. 2.
-- that he called them "to look to the rock whence they were hewn" Isa. 51. 1.
-- that it was the pious resolve of David "to remember the years of the right
hand of the Most High." Psalm. 77. 1^.
Let me now invite you to call into view some singular tokens of God's infinite
kindness toward you, and thereby your infinite obligations to praise him, and
to be consecrated to his service and glory. How very singular and important our
existence here in this world: formed with such an alliance to angel and spirit
as to take rank above all the creatures on this side the stars! From the noble
structure and powers of the human mind, it appears that we were formed with a
subjective capacity, capable of the everlasting fruition of God. Such is our
kind of being, as declares our author God, the Father of our spirits, and that
we are bound to him; as manifesting such singular kindness unto us. Let us now
for a moment look back to the era of our existence and the timing of it, and
the manifestation of the singular kindness of God therein. Our God, in whose
hand "our times are," in his deep counsel and infinite wisdom fixed upon the
time for our existence and coming into the world. Not in the period of time
assigned the antediluvian world, "when all flesh had corrupted his way," -- nor
in the new world, before, nor under the law given by Moses, which had only "the
shadow of good things to come;" but under the christian dispensation; when "the
wall of partition is taken down" -- that Christ may be preached to the
gentiles." Not in the time of the bloody persecutions of the church, in the
three first centuries of the christian era, under Roman pagan: nor in the dark
and idolatrous time of antichristian tyranny and superstition; "when all the
world wandered after the beast;" but since the glorious reformation from
popery, and the establishment of the protestant religion: now near two thousand
years since the coming of Christ our Lord; -- and in a day of copious effusions
of the Holy Spirit, and of mavelous grace: so as that we see the preludes to,
and even the first dawnings of the latter-day glory. Nor is it to be passed
over in silence, that in consequence of the late wonderful revolution in
America we hope to enjoy perpetual freedom from civil and ecclesiastical
tyranny: which, with the enjoyment of all gospel privileges give us occasion to
adopt the language of inspiration, "The lines are fallen to us in pleasant
places." How has the Lord opened the treasures of his goodness and poured his
blessings in upon you on all sides, and followed you with his rich, various,
free and repeated mercies from the first commencement of your existence to the
present moment. In the days of helpless infancy, and through every stage of
life, how has he provided for you, and conferred the blessings of health, food
and raiment upon you? The luminaries of heaven shine, the earth labors, and
all the (otherwise discordant) elements conspire to promote your comfort. Power
and goodness divine have accompanied every moment of life, equally swift in
approach, for your conservation and consolation. If the series of mercies
seemed for a time in a measure interrupted, by afflictive ills, this manner of
dispensation, was wisely and well and even kindly calculated to afford you
lessons of useful instruction. When sickness and death have invaded your
neighbors, your friend; or relative, and spread havoc and desolation around
you, and it may be have taken away a member of the family in which you live,
you have escaped; and this day appear as monuments of God's sparing mercy. How
great the preventing and delivering goodness of God! What numerous seen, and
yet more unseen dangers have been escaped? What numberless positive blessings,
temporal, spiritual, personal and relative, public and private, have been
conferred upon you by the immediate hand of God, your bountiful benefactor.
Permit me to remind you yet more fully of the infinite kindness of God toward
you, manifested by the various means he makes use of to promote your eternal
salvation. In consequence of the donation, the mediation, the obedience and
death of Christ, you are invited, and urged by motives that have sanctions of
infinite weight, to make sure of an interest in Him by faith, and thereby of
eternal blessedness. By an early education you have been taught "man's chief
end;" divine providence has smiled or frowned to draw or drive; bibles have
been put into your hands; friends counsel you; thousands of saints are praying
for you; for this purpose holy angels attend our worshipping assemblies while
the gospel is preached to you, and holy ordinances administered; ministers of
the gospel "knowing the terrors of the Lord persuade you;" -- they set life and
death eternal before you, in all their glories and terrors; they proclaim your
guilt, misery and danger -- and exhibit to view the unsearchable riches of the
glorious Emmanuel: his suitableness as a Savior, and his infinite sufficiency
to save, and his gracious readiness. -- For this purpose, heaven darts down its
splendors to attract -- Sinai thunders wrath divine; hell flashes forth flaming
ruin, to the end you may be excited "to flee from the wrath to come;"
conscience admonishes you; the Holy Spirit co-operates with providence and
ordinances to excite you to make sure of an interest in the Lord Christ, and
eternal salvation by him. In the view of these numerous and mighty efforts of
divine goodness to promote your well-being in both worlds, may it not be said,
"what could have been done more, that has not been done?" -- Surely such an
amazing series of singular unmerited favors ought to inflame your gratitude,
and to excite entire consecration to the service and glory of God, your,
supreme benefactor. But if you refuse, -- hear O earth, with horror; be
astonished, O ye heavens, that God the fountain of being and all good, has so
little gratitude from our stupid world! Here I might naturally address the
Lord's people, who hope they have experimentally known his love; but this will
soon come in of course. I might also take special notice of the signal
salvations of our God the year past, how he has surrounded us with his
goodness, and enriched us with his mercy, and crowned the year with numerous
salvations; but the time would fail. In the view of such a profusion of
blessings let me call upon you cautiously to avoid vile and horrid ingratitude;
ingratitude that may justly shock and confound -- while it is enough to sink
the whole world into the depths of hell! To be every moment receiving blessings
from God, and yet perpetually offending him to his face; can infernal spirits
in everlasting chains become guilty of such astonishing ingratitude! Let me
invite you to abound in the duty of commemorating glorious divine operations,
relative to God's wonderful works of creation, redemption, and providence: and
take heed that you don't content yourselves with a mere historical and
superficial commemoration; but ever look that your remembrance of these high
and mighty events be attempered to the nature and importance of them, and
applied to experimental, devotional and practical purposes in religion. Our
remembrance must be attended with the exercise of particular graces and virtues
-- with assent and persuasion -- with approbation and wonder -- with humility
and reverence -- with contrition and penitence -- with affection and
complacence -- with thanksgiving and praise -- with faith, hope, prayer,
frequency and perseverence -- and with correspondent life and course of action.
-- Thus let us enter upon a new revolution of time; and as knowing our "times
are in the Lord's hand." I have only to add here, as in the view of such
peculiar distinguishing favors as we all share in; and of the answerable
obligations we are all under, -- "I beseech you therefore, brethren, by the
mercies of God, that you present your bodies a living sacrifice, holy,
acceptable unto God, which is your reasonable service. And be not conformed to
this world; but be ye transformed by the renewing of your mind, that you may
prove what is that good and acceptable, and perfect will of God."

SECOND PART.
Forasmuch as a large number of this large auditory have this day partaken of
the commemorating ordinance of the Lord's supper, this has given occasion for
this part of my discourse, which is called Eucharistical. The sacrament of the
Lord's Supper has several names by which it is known. It is frequently called
the eucharist; so the Greek church called it, and we from them give it the same
name, which properly signifies a thanksgiving; and it is so called in the first
place, because our Lord in the institution of it, gave thanks, (1 Cor. 11. 24.)
In the next place it is so called, because we in partaking thereof ought to
give thanks. It is an ordinance of thanksgiving, appointed for the joyful
celebrating of the Redeemer's praises. The cup of salvation must be "the cup of
blessing:" the high praises of God should be in our mouths and in our hearts.
It has been the practice of many churches of Christ to have a thanksgiving
day, following the eucharist -- others have a eucharistical sermon, exhorting
to give thanks, and to walk with God.
To attend the eucharist or holy sacrament, is to take an oath of allegiance
unto the Lord. God does in and by this ordinance seal to us, "to be to us a
God:" and herein we seal to him "to be to him a people." We resign and give up
our whole selves, body, soul, and spirit to God the Father, Son, and Holy
Ghost; covenanting and promising to walk closely with him in all manner of
gospel obedience all our days. -- Therefore it will be natural upon this
occasion to exhort the Lord's people to thanksgiving -- and consecration to the
service of God.

I therefore now make an address in particular to you my fellow-communicants,
and fellow-candidates for eternal glory. That I may inflame your love, increase
your gratitude, and excite you to give thanks and praise to the Divine Trinity,
"and to walk as you have received the Lord Jesus Christ," answerable to the
design of this eucharistical part of my discourse, it may be useful to exhibit
to your view the infinite obligations you are under to the performance of these
and all other duties; and the exercise of these and all other graces:
obligations resulting from the infinite perfections of God, and his
communicative goodness, and singular kindness toward you. But here let me just
observe, that whatever my charitable persuasion ^^ward you may be in general,
by that which I may now say, I do not mean to give my sanction to your hope
that you have received the grace of God. If in our Lord's little family of
twelve, there was a Judas that betrayed him under the mask of friendship, it
will be mavelous indeed, if there be not a traitor found among hundreds. But
as knowing that those who come to the Lord's Supper in this place, come with a
prevailing hope that they have experienced a saving change, I now meet and
address you on your own ground. -- Ye children of God, his peculiar favorites,
you have heard "that your times" in every point of view, are in "the hand of
your God," therefore make confession of this truth with thanksgiving and
praise. View the kindness of your God in your admirable formation; "there is a
spirit in man, and the inspiration of the Almighty gives him understanding."
You will view the timing of your existence and coming into the world, and with
gratitude acknowledge the kindness of your God: your lot is cast in a land of
mavelous light, and in a day of abounding grace, by plentiful measures of
divine influence. You will often recognize with gratitude the infinite kindness
of the Lord toward you in that he preserved you in life amidst perils of death,
from the moment of your existence, for a number of years "when lying in your
blood" and guilt, until the fixed time came for your effectual calling. You
will remember, that when the Holy Spirit first took hold of your heart by way
of powerful conviction of your sin, guilt, and misery, he found you rushing on
toward destruction, and that even then when "the arrows of the Almighty were
within you; and his terrors took hold of you," so that in the view of your
guilt you were trembling every moment with fears of just and speedy damnation
eternal, I say even then such was the reigning power of enmity in your heart;
and such the pride, the daring and horrid pride of your heart, that you
obstinately opposed the soul humbling method of salvation by the gospel: and
you would have resisted 'till dead, and damned forever, had not your opposition
been conquered by the irresistible energy of divine and sovereign grace, in the
day of the Lord's power, when you became the willing subjects of the Lord
Christ your King Redeemer. You will often review the more signal tokens of the
Lord's infinite loving kindness toward you through all the vicissitudes of
life since your first saving acquaintance with him. How you have been assisted
by the holy Spirit to exert your graces, and to perform duties spiritually and
evangelically; and to conform to the divine will, providential and revealed,
with a sacred pleasure. How you have by the power of divine grace repelled and
broke the force of temptation, by satan, the world and the flesh. How when
dismal gloom by desertion overspread your mind, and tormenting doubts and
fears rushed in upon you, the Lord dispelled your darkness, and revived your
hope and comfort by light divine. How he often enabled you "to cry Abba
Father," and often appeared for you as a prayer-hearing God. How he has upheld
and supported you under trials and afflictive ills, and has caused your
consolation to exceed your tribulation. How some events most unpromising and
adverse in themselves, have by the overruling power and love of God served to
promote your temporal and spiritual felicity. How when your graces and virtues
withered, he noticed your sighs for want of the absent Comforter, and granted
you "fresh anointings, so that your souls became "as a watered garden." -- How
has the Lord, from time to time admitted you to converse with him in public
ordinances, and also met with you in your retirements, both by day and night,
in the house and by the way, and held divine communion with you. In a word, how
have you found upon all occasions a sufficiency in the grace of God, for doing
and suffering his will: so that you have been ready to say a thousand times,
"surely God is good to Israel." Especially when he has, as it were, unlocked
his peculiar treasures to enrich you with light, love and peace divine, and
even caused you to rejoice with "joy unspeakable and full of glory."

Thus has the Lord le^^ you on in your way to heaven by his Word and Spirit to
this day; and this day has given a renewed testimony of his infinite kindness
by admitting you to communion with him at the holy eucharist, which demands
thanksgiving and praise. You will now reflect, that this is the Lord's Day, our
communion Day, and a new year's Day. -- Have we not to day, as it were, heard
the Lord of love saying unto us, "Come ye children of my love, I will begin
this new year with you at a love feast: as inviting you to behold the Lamb of
my election and affection in sufferings, even unto death for the purpose of
your eternal salvation. Here at my board, richly furnished, in and through the
Mediator the Son of my love, I make over my self to you in all my infinite
perfections, and all my most glorious subsistences, I will be your God, and you
shall be my people. By faith avouch me to be your God, and the promises and
blessings of the new covenant are ratified to you by solemn oath, and sealed by
sacred blood. Thus begin this year with me, perform your vows, walk with me,
and I, who Am that I Am, will be your confederate God for ever and ever." --
With holy joy and admiration we say Amen, we give thanks, and let the high
praises of the adorable TRINITY be in our mouths and in our hearts, henceforth
forever. If any of you have not had that sensible nearness to the Lord, and
that delightful communion with him, that you longed and prayed for, search
after the cause why you have not, and be humble. Learn the sovereignty of God
in timing his communications, and the necessity of the divine influences in
order to exercise graces, and to perform duties as you ought: -- mourn your
deficiences -- persevere in thirsting after and praying for nearness to God --
and improve this holy ordinance for the purpose of a purifying effect upon the
heart and life, and it will not be a lost, but gainful opportunity. -- If the
Lord in infinite condescending love and grace has admitted you to delightful
converse and communion with him; -- if he has brought you "into his banqueting
house, and his banner over you has been love," and his love has been shed
abroad in your hearts; -- if by faith you have fed on the bread of life from
heaven, and drunk of the soul-refreshing waters of eternal life -- you have
infinite occasion to give thanks and to sing unto the Lord. We have all indeed
occasion so to do, who are truly the Lord's people and have had such mavelous
sights exhibited to view to day. In the holy sacrament is to be seen the Lamb
of God slain, and as both able and worthy to open the seals of the everlasting
gospel, the book of light and life eternal. -- Here we see the infinite evil of
sin in the red glass of Christ's sufferings, and by his atonement made for it,
even by blood and death: -- here we see his free, distinguishing,
condescending, expensive, strong and everlasting love; and all needful
blessings for time and eternity flowing to us, as believers, in the stream of
his precious blood as incarnate God. Here we see the harmony of the redeeming
attributes of God as meeting in Christ, relative to the salvation of fallen
man, shining forth in their united full blaze of infinite everlasting glory.
These mavelous things apprehended by faith are enough to whelm the soul as in
an unfathomable, shoreless ocean of love, grace, and glory! -- and to excite
the angelic song, "glory to God in the highest." And now, ye saints of the most
high God, who has loved you with an everlasting love, everlasting in its
counsels, effects and consequences, and therefore with loving kindness has he
drawn you; drawn you by his arm exerted by infinite love, and sprinkled with
the blood of his coequal, coeternal, "well beloved Son," when driving back
the devouring flame, and snatching you "as brands out of the burning," and
drawing you near to himself. Making you the monumental pillars and trophies of
his boundless power, love and grace; thereby intending to show to all worlds
what the exertion of his perfections can produce out of the ruined mass of
mankind. And having loved you, "he will rejoice over you, and rest in his love
for ever." For you he has opened the inexhaustible fountain of his goodness*
and conferred upon you an affluence of spiritual blessings in Christ; --
blessings most excellent in their nature and quality, the sure pledges of
infinite love, and eternal in duration: -- And let me now add a consideration
which gives an amazing emphasis to all now said, viz. all this profusion of
singular, immortal, infinite, god-like blessings must be resolved into the
rich, free, sovereign, overflowing, infinite and unmerited goodness of God. If
the question should be asked, Why are we thus blessed? this is the only
solution, that can be given to all eternity, "even so Father for so it seemed
good in thy sight!" The demerit of our crimes was infinitely the reverse. -- We
deserved not the least mercy -- but to be made miserable, perfectly and
eternally. Now in such a view of things, what say you, my fellow candidates for
eternal glory, ye favorites of heaven, can ye refrain from praising God for
what he is in himself, and from giving thanks to him, for the overflowings of
infinite goodness to you. Is it possible for you to keep silence, that the
posts of the house, and stones of the wall may utter their voice, and cry,
Ingratitude, astonishing ingratitude! What evidence can you have that every
evil spirit is cast out of your heart, while a dumb spirit holds possession?
Can it ever be, that you who are the subjects of such a profusion of blessings
and bemiracled with mercies, should be the subjects of such vile and shocking
ingratitude? Surely, in as much as you enjoy blessings as great as the infinite
goodness of God can bestow, and as great as the infinite merit of Christ could
purchase, you will resolve with the sweet singer of Israel, "every day will I
bless thee, and I will praise thy name for ever and ever." Psalm. 145. 2.
And again, "while I live I will praise the Lord; I will sing praises unto my
God, while I have any being." Psalm. 146. 2.
You will sing "the song of Moses the servant of God, and the song of the Lamb,
saying, "Great and mavelous are thy works, Lord God Almighty." -- You will
every day join the everlasting song of saints, and sing -- "Unto him that loved
us, and washed us from our sins in his own blood; and has made us kings and
priests unto God and his Father; to him be glory, and dominion, forever and
ever, Amen."

What remains now, but to testify your gratitude, and sensibility of obligation
to praise and give thanks, by holy admiration, holy joy, and self-dedication to
the service and glory of God. You come from the holy eucharist, full of abiding
holy admiration. That "God is mindful of man," vile man: that he will dwell
with man on earth, and hold communion with him -- it is a truth, but an
astonishing one! -- You will come from this holy ordinance rejoicing in God, as
your exceeding joy; in all his infinite attributes; attributes which guaranty
your eternal salvation; and rejoicing in the whole of his will as absolutely
good and infinitely perfect. -- Rejoicing in the Lord Jesus Christ, in his
person -- in all his offices -- in the benefits of redemption by him -- in his
high exaltation and universal government -- in all his promises and all his
precepts: Rejoicing in the Holy Spirit, in all his infinite perfections, and
glorious operations: Rejoicing in the prosperity of Zion, and in the word and
ordinances of God, and in his people as the excellent of the earth. Let me
exhort you to see to it that your rejoicing in these glorious topics remains in
you; and that your joy in them is the death of all joy in sin. -- At the same
time intersperse lamentations with your joy, in the view of your numerous
deficiences and offenses.

" It grieves me, Lord, it grieves me sore,
" That I have lived to thee no more.
You will also see to it that you come from the Lord's table with firmness of
resolution made in the strength of the Lord, that you serve him, honor Christ,
cautiously avoid all evil; and persevere in the practice of every christian
duty and virtue. You profess experimental religion, and that you will endeavor
the practice of universal holiness. Without christian practice and an holy
life, you will lack scripture evidence that you have grace and holy affections;
for they directly, and powerfully tend to, and have their exercises and fruit
in holy practice. In order to your being universally holy and obedient, your
obedience must consist not only in negatives, universally avoiding wicked
practices; but also you must be universal in the positives of religion.
Christianity requires that you not only shun the very appearance of all evil;
and that as having named the name of Christ, you depart from iniquity in love
and practice, totally and finally; but also that you become fervent in spirit
serving the Lord; and holy in all manner of conversation. You must not only be
blameless and harmless; but ornaments to christianity. "Shining in the beauties
of holiness;" "your light so shining before men, that they may see your good
works, and glorify your Father which is in heaven." Let it appear that you have
been with the Lord Jesus; and that his life is manifest in you: in that, as
branches ingrafted in him by faith, as the true vine, you bring forth
evangelical fruits of heart, lip, and life; having your conversation as
becomes his gospel: Let his love constrain you to live to him, who you hope,
has died for you. It is true, that all persons under the gospel dispensation,
are under infinite obligation to serve God and their generation; obligation
resulting from the infinite perfections of God, his commanding authority, and
his communicative goodness. The violation of infinite obligation is iniquity
infinite. You hope the Lord has done singular things for you, that he has
dealt more kindly with you than others; may he not then expect you will do more
for him than others? Others share in the good things of the kingdom of common
providence, and in the good things of the kingdom of the gospel, they enjoy the
privilege of bibles, ministers and ordinances; but you share not only in these,
but in the special spiritual blessings of the kingdom of grace; and have a firm
title to the boundless blessings of the kingdom of eternal glory. Surely all
possible infinite obligation is devolved upon you to exert yourselves in your
several proper stations to glorify God, to honor Christ, and to do all the
good you can to others. -- Teach the world by your practice that the scripture
doctrine of salvation by free and sovereign grace, is a doctrine according to
godliness: "as a peculiar people showing forth the praises of your God, who
has called you forth out of darkness into mavelous light:" with full purpose
of heart cleaving to him, by faith, love, and obedience; "walking in his fear,"
as you would walk in the comforts of the Holy Ghost." Rest not in past
experiences and present seize; but "go on to perfection." Christians that
find they are under necessity of having recourse to past experience for
evidence of their gracious sincerity and comfort, have not at present that
exercise of grace and nearness to God they ought to have: if they had, light of
evidence and comfort would arise from the present exercise of grace, as it
always should. The more frequently the exercises of grace are renewed, the more
abiding and confirmed our assurance will be* therefore, "forgetting those
things which are behind," -- "Press toward the mark for the prize of the high
calling of God in Christ Jesus." -- "Give diligence to make your calling and
election sure* for if you do these things you shall never be moved." -- Stand
upon your watch tower, at all times, watching against sin and temptation;
watching unto duty -- the matter of it, the timing of it, and the manner of
performance. Pray and praise without ceasing -- converse much with God every
day in your closets -- and every day, and every hour in the day by ejaculatory
or mental prayer. Christians that do not abound in ejaculatory prayer and
praise, do not live near to God; they neglect a duty and mean eminently useful
to support and promote the vigor and vitality of grace in the heart, and that
by which the soul of the real christian is much fed and nourished. -- Pray with
an importunity that shall pierce even heaven, that the work of God among us,
and where ever it is begun, may go on, and make glorious progress. That every
department of Zion may be visited with a plentiful effusion of the Spirit. That
"the latter-day glory" may speedily commence, and spread through the world.
"That the knowledge of God may fill, and cover the earth, as the waters do the
sea." To add no more here, I beseech and entreat you, "as you have therefore
received Christ Jesus the Lord, so walk ye in him." You received him as your
supreme felicity and all-sufficing portion for time and eternity, preferring of
him above all other things, either in heaven or on earth, so walk as living to
him, and upon him. -- You received him as your teaching prophet to enlighten
you by his word and spirit, that by his divine instruction you might become
wise to eternal salvation; so walk. -- You received him as your great
high priest, and intercessor in the presence of God; as having made complete
atonement for sin, and brought in a law-fulfilling, everlasting righteousness,
rejecting your own righteousness, you depended entirely upon his for
justification before God; so walk. -- You received him as your king and
law-given, pleased with his government, and choosing he should reign in your
heart forever; thus walk ye in him. -- I beseech you by all the infinite
attributes of Jehovah, engaged from everlasting, and exerted in time, for the
purpose of your eternal salvation. I beseech you by the ineffable (...)
operation of the adorable Trinity, to effect and consummate your eternal
well-being. I entreat you by the name and love of our dear Savior -- by his
incarnation, obedience, and sufferings, by every drop of his precious blood, as
the bleeding Lamb of God; by the unutterable anguish which he bore when lifted
up upon the cross, "when the arrows of the Almighty were within him," and died
an accursed death for you his redeemed. -- I beseech you by the triumphs of his
resurrection, and his ascension to the regions of glory, and all the beneficial
consequences thereof on your behalf: -- By all the gracious invitations,
spiritual precepts, and precious promises, he has given you as your enthroned
Lord and Savior: -- By all that he has done for you in time, and that you
expect him to do for you in time, and for an eternal duration. I entreat you by
all the honor, glory and praise that is, and ever will be due to him, as God,
man and mediator. -- I beseech you by the infinite perfections and dignity of
the Holy Spirit; by his saving influences given for regeneration, for
sanctification, for consolation; and for edification, until you arrive at
perfection in glory. I beseech you by the love and compassion you have, (or
ought to have) to the faithful ministers of Christ, and to the friends and
divine lovers of Jesus, and of Zion's prosperity, as you would not cause their
hearts to bleed, and their eyes to weep. I entreat you by the immense worth of
immortal souls and the benevolence you have toward them, as you would not cast
stumbling blocks in their way, to fall over into endless flaming ruin. I
beseech you by the love you have to your own souls -- by the sure and solemn
prospect of a dying bed, and comfort in the final hour; and by the joyful
prospect of a personal appearance before the flaming tribunal of Christ, to
stand trial for fixation in an eternal state. I beseech you by your,
sacramental vow and oath of allegiance you have taken over the broken body and
shed blood of your Redeemer, that you will walk with him, and as his people
walk. -- I beseech and entreat you by the eternal agonies of the damned, which
you hope to escape, and by all the joys and beatitudes of the sanctuary of
immortality and glory that you hope to possess, "that you walk as you have
received Christ Jesus the Lord."

Thus I leave my endearing address and exhortation before you, and before the
Lord. I have discharged my embassy, I have told you my errand; more weighty,
awful and interesting arguments and persuasives I cannot suggest. I now
conclude, with a benevolent wish and prayer in the language of inspiration,
"Now the God of peace, that brought again from the dead our Lord Jesus, that
great shepherd of the sheep, through the blood of the everlasting covenant;
make you perfect in every good work to do his will, working in you that which
is well-pleasing in his sight, through Jesus Christ; to whom be glory for ever
and ever, Amen."

THIRD PART.
I am now come to the third and last part of my discourse, and must entreat
your patience and attention, while I make mention of some signal dispensations
of God, and manifestations of his sovereign, infinite, unmerited goodness
toward me: in doing which, you will observe, that in some of those
dispensations you are interested, as they have a relative respect unto you as
the dear people of my pastoral care and charge. Doubtless, every private
christian and especially ever minister of the gospel, ought to acknowledge God
as the author, preserver and disposer of our lives. I^ as ministers of Christ
our Lord, upon some proper public occasions we speak out our experience of the
power of divine grace -- and our trials and sufferings; our abounding labors,
and successful essays (by the blessing of God) to promote the Redeemer's
kingdom -- St. Paul (and other apostles and even prophets) will keep us in
countenance; provided that we primarily have and hold in view the glory of God,
the honor of Christ, and the benefit of others. We lay no claim to that which
is properly apostolic and extraordinary; we act in a lower sphere and
comparatively our labors are small and our usefulness inconsiderable: Yet "we
cannot but speak the things which we have seen and heard;" -- "we also believe
and therefore speak." If any are disposed to censure us, yet we hope that
others will profit thereby. Here I am naturally led to make the confession of
the saint as in my text, -- "My times are in the Lord's hand;" -- and to say
with the apostle, -- "Having therefore obtained help from God, I continue unto
this day*" You may recollect that when I preached to you on the Lord's day
October 30th, I then observed to you that that day completed half a century or
fifty years since I commenced a preacher of the gospel. On that day I invited
your meditations upon the words of Moses to Israel -- "He is thy life, and the
length of thy days:" I then observed, that I would defer preaching an half
century sermon 'till this day; if happily we might live to see it: The hoped
for day is come and brought with it numerous solemn services, and sacred
pleasures. You will allow me boldness and freedom of speech, even beyond what I
should think proper, did I not look upon myself near to another and better
world. --

When in the morning of life and bloom of youth, in the ever to be remembered
year 1735, it pleased a sovereign God to make me the subject of clear, powerful
and heart affecting conviction of sin, guilt, and misery; and to give me sight
of his justice in my eternal condemnation; after a powerful work of the law and
an absolute submitting of myself to God as rightful Lord and sovereign. He was
pleased "to shine into my heart to give the light of the knowledge of his glory
in the face of Jesus Christ." I now beheld the infinite amiable glory and all
sufficiency of Christ, as God, man mediator, and felt my heart go forth to him
in acts of trust and supreme love: I now saw the infinite excellence and safety
of the gospel method of salvation, and found my whole heart gained over to an
approbation of, and an entire acquiescence in that divine plan as the device of
infinite wisdom and boundless love. -- From that hour to this, (through
infinite riches of sovereign grace) I have found a new temper of heart, and
tenor of life. At this time reigning benevolence toward fellow-men took
possession of my heart, and has been kept up to this hour. Here let me observe,
that if my ministry has been useful to you, or others, the Lord was now
preparing the way therefore, even before most of you were born. -- In
consequence of these divine manifestations, for about the space of two years I
was held before the throne of grace daily praying for the knowledge of duty
with respect to my seeking a liberal education; and obtaining satisfaction in
this point, soon after the 20th year of my age I fixedly entered upon studies,
that prepared the way for taking my first degree at Yale-College in 1741. In a
few weeks after, I was invited and urged by some worthy ministers of the gospel
to attend their association, which was soon to have a session: I did so, and
offered myself to examination, was approved, and received license as a
candidate for the gospel ministry. Before and after I took my degree, I was
fully determined to live for half a year or a year with the Rev. Mr. Edwards,
of Northampton, pursuing theological studies, not having a single thought of
preaching, 'till I had so done: But falling in company with the Rev. Mr.
Jedediah Mills and Dr. Bellamy, they insisted upon my offering myself upon
trials soon. Still I had in view living with Mr. Edwards before I preached.
After about five months I arrived at Northampton, and was obliged to preach
almost daily there, as well as elsewhere: The Lord was pleased to crown my
labors with astonishing success, even there Mr. Edwards would not admit me to
sit down to study under him; insisting upon it, that it was my indispensible
duty to go on preaching as I had begun.
-- And about a year after was ordained at large, by members of the same
association. From the first I became an itinerant preacher. Making my tours in
various parts of these northern states. Preaching almost every day, and often
two and three times in a day; and often to very large congregations. I
journey'd about two thousand miles, and preached several hundred times in the
space of a year. I preached in many congregations where the work of God had
made great and glorious progress: In some places it had just begun. -- In some
places I saw much opposition made to the work: -- In some observed many
imprudences chargeable upon the friends of the work. -- Many congregations (and
some numerous ones,) I found under the power of awful security in sin: some of
which, were soon universally awakened by the preaching of the word, and
plentiful effusion of the Holy Spirit; so that in a few weeks several scores of
persons were in those places hopefully converted from sin to God. Thus amidst
abounding labors and an amazing run of services, I had the pleasure of seeing
the work of God going on and prospering gloriously. -- Thus I continued
itinerating and preaching for about four years. But here it may be noted, that
during this space of time, I was twice seized with a fever, which each time sat
heavy upon me, especially the last; so that my life was given over by myself
and friends: But it pleased the sovereign Lord of life, "in whose hand our
times are," to restore me again to health and usefulness. -- During the
forementioned space of time, your fathers in this place repeatedly and warmly
applied to me requesting that I would accept of a call to this place, with a
view to my settlement in the gospel ministry among them; which call I repulsed,
as I did many others in that day. -- In September 1745, President Edwards, (who
had from the first of my ministry acted the part of a kind father to me) by his
importunity prevailed upon me to set out upon a journey for the purpose of
preaching the gospel in the southern states. I proceeded as far as the Jerseys
on my way; where meeting with the Rev. Messi. Dickinson, Tennant and President
Burr, they professed a well pleasedness with my design; but as two of them had
just returned home from this place, and knowing the situation of this people,
they deliberated and proposed my coming here before I proceeded. -- I complied,
and came to this town November 9, 1745, and the next day being the Lord's Day,
I preached for the first time here upon the words of St. Paul, viz. "I
determine to know nothing among you, save Jesus Christ and him crucified." When
I came into town I was fully resolved to leave it in a few months; but spending
the winter here, the people in the spring gave me a very unanimous call to
settle in the ministry with them. I was thereupon for several months much
exercised as to my duty; but finally accepted the call; and was installed here
September 19th, 1746. President Edwards preached upon this occasion from a text
that some have since thought almost prophetical. Isai.
The Rev. Mr. Hunting being very infirm was dismissed from his pastoral
relation to this people upon my instalment. In his day, in the years 1741 and
42, there was a very powerful work of God in this place. In the time of
vacation at College, May, 1741, Mr. David Brainard and myself, having heard of
the work of God as going on at Southold, and in this place, came upon the
Island to acquaint ourselves with it. I had then much satisfaction, not only in
hearing the Rev. Mr. Burr preach several sermons in this place, but also in
conversation with many of the subjects of this work.
It was supposed, that upwards of a hundred persons were then savingly wrought
upon: In consequence of which, about three score persons were added to the
church soon after my instalment. In 1749 the work of God's grace was carried on
powerfully in our eastern and western villages: a considerable number of young
people were wrought upon in each. The work was not so powerful in the body of
the town at that time. But in the ever memorable year 1764, the work of God
became general and universal: persons of every age, from five or six years to
eighty, were the subjects of the work. This work of God was the most powerful,
the most genuine and evangelical that ever I knew. My printed Narrative of this
work in some of your hands, may inform you more fully. In consequence of this
glorious work, in a few months after it began, I propounded for full communion
99 persons at one time, who were added to the church; and soon after a large
number more. -- There were a great number of children, some youth, and many
that wanted more assurance, who were hopefully the subjects of a saving change,
that did not offer themselves to join the church at this time. This work
brought some of the subjects of it to the possession of the latter day glory to
an eminent degree, in which they lived and died. In the year 1785, it pleased a
sovereign God to grant again another plentiful effusion of the Holy Spirit upon
us. -- The work of God at this time was carried on with amazing power in the
midst of us. As many as six or eight every week for the space of three months,
were hopefully savingly wrought upon. As fast as some met with light and
comfort, others were awakened; yet the work was not so universal as in 1764:
yet in a few months above an hundred were added to the church; professing
experimental and practical religion. Others at this time became the subjects of
some hope of a saving change. In the last year, 1791, the work of God among us,
claims our remembrance "as one of the years of the right hand of the most
high." The Lord "with whom is the residue of the spirit" has been pleased to
visit us again with the divine influences. Between thirty and forty have been
lately added to the church, more we trust are on their way about to come, in
that many hope they have been the subjects of this work. The subjects of this
work have been very powerfully wrought upon; and seem to have been uncommonly
selected out from among others. This late work has not been so general among
sinners as usually we have known. But for a universal visitation and fresh
anointings of the Lord's people and their increasing light and comfort, I never
know a revival of religion among us equal thereto since I have been your
pastor. -- It is to be noted and remembered, that in the intermediate spaces of
these plentiful effusions of the Holy Spirit from first to last there have been
some hopeful instances of saving conversion to God. We have during the whole
time enjoyed some special tokens of the Lords gracious presence with us. Thus
have we seen and known since I have been your pastor, (exclusive of 41-2) four
harvest times and seasons of the plentiful out pouring of the Holy Spirit, and
times of the flocking of souls to Christ, and of accessions thereupon to his
church. I have not heard or known of a people in any department of Zion that
within the space of fifty years, have been so frequently favored with such
plentiful "out pourings of the Holy Spirit" upon them; infinitely vile,
unworthy and ungrateful as we are! Having thus briefly reminded you of the
infinite kindness of the glorious and eternal Trinity toward us, you will
naturally reflect that our obligations to those divine persons rise answerably
high; and that our ingratitude will be proportionably aggravated, base, and
vile.

I have now to observe, that the Rev. Mr. Hunting, my predecessor, and myself,
have between us, completed 92 years in the gospel ministry in this place. That
since my instalment in the year 1746, nine hundred eighty nine persons have
departed life, that belonged to this town -- thirteen of them the year past. In
the same space of time I have baptized in this place sixteen hundred -- 45 of
them the year past: near two hundred more than there are inhabitants at
present. When I received this church, it consisted of 81 members, but three of
which are now living. During this time, we have been called to part with many
excellent christians, rich in experience of divine grace; many of them died in
the triumphs of faith, others comfortably. Many valuable christians have
removed from us into various parts of the country, where, as we hear, they are
useful. -- Numerous heavy breaches and mournful vacancies have been made in
this our Zion; but the Lord, from time to time, has filled them all, and more
than filled them; "and caused joy, rejoicing, thanksgiving, and the voice of
melody to be heard in this city of our God." We have had the accession of
hundreds to the church: and perhaps the number of communicants was never larger
than at the present time. It must be registered in the catalogue of divine
favors that I have enjoyed such a series of health, that for 44 years I was
not so much as once prevented preaching by indisposition, nor had I a sick day
or hour during the whole space of time. Forty-three of those years I spent in
your service; and never to this day have I been prevented -- except when for a
few sabbaths I was debilitated by the influenza. Such an uncommon measure of
health, but little broke in upon for fifty years, has been improved for the
purpose of abounding ministerial services: I have preached in this space of
time, above ten thousand times. Designation to office, opportunities for
ministerial labors, gifts, graces, abilities more or less, aids, assistances
and successes, are all of and from the Lord; to whom be all the glory. "A man
can receive nothing (of this kind), except it be given him from heaven." The
Lord as an infinite sovereign upon his throne, in raising up instruments for
his service, can take them from the rushes, the sheepfolds, or fish-nets,
qualify them for usefulness, and by them "confound the wisdom of the mighty."
If He crowns our feeble attempts in his service with any degree of success, we
wish to speak of it with undissembled gratitude, and with deep abasement, as
conscious of our unworthiness, of our deficiences, and our selfishness
intermixed with all our performances; and with a spring of joy, that yet a
little while, and He will have all the glory of our usefulness.

Although I have preached abundantly in other places, since my connection with
you, yet mostly with you, the people of my special charge. With you, my dear
people, I have labored and traveled in the work of the gospel ministry, for a
long course of years; I may say it without ostentation, that "I have obtained
mercy of the Lord to be faithful: I have made it my constant endeavor and
business to gain souls to Christ, and build them up in faith and holiness:
principally insisting upon such truths as express the spirit of true religion;
and tending to direct, quicken and encourage you in the way to eternal life. I
esteem it as one of the precious mercies of the Lord toward me, that I have
not "run in vain nor labored in vain." I have abundant cause to bow my knee to
the Father of our Lord Jesus Christ, and bless his name that I have grounds to
hope that he has made me instrumental of bringing many among you into a saving
acquaintance with himself. -- Although you can easily recollect many of the
important capital doctrines which I have mainly insisted upon in the course of
my preaching; yet I have prepared therefore, and designed now to have given you
a summary account of them, but the time is elapsed. -- I must only say, "I have
not shunned to declare to you the whole counsel of God;" "and have kept back
nothing that is profitable unto you." The apostolic doctrines I have preached
to you are your crown and glory, as St. John speaks, "your crown of twelve
stars:" If ever you depart from such doctrines and let these truths go, the
"crown falls from your head," and the glorious God himself will depart and be
gone; yea, be gone far from a forsaken sanctuary; and you will see an Ichabod
upon the ministry! It is the more needful that I give you warning, and exhort
you to become rooted and established in the faith, and belief of the truth at
present, and thereby become guarded and fortified against error, because you
live in a day in which errors abound.

There are preachers and writers in this day, who boldly and freely speak out
and publish errors and principles, pernicious to the souls of men: and some, so
artfully, under the specious show of sanctity, that they would deceive the
elect, if that were possible. The most artful seducers are those who assert
many gospel doctrines, which they suppose will be pleasing to such as are sound
in the faith, concealing their corrupt principles, until they suppose they have
sufficiently gained interest in the affections of their hearers, and then they
will gradually give vent to them with as much plausibility as possible. You
will watch against verging to "another gospel." and contend earnestly for the
says once delivered to the saints; as knowing that the Holy Spirit co-operates
with truth; "and makes the gospel the power of God to every one that
believes." -- But as having preached the grand principles of the everlasting
gospel to you, I might now naturally put you upon examination and enquiry how
you have received and improved them: And observe to you, that if any of you
continue finally to slight and neglect them, your eternal condemnation will be
amazingly aggravated; "your blood will not be required of me;" I shall appear
as a witness against you before the awful bar of Christ, our final judge: But
the time will not admit to dwell here. -- If it should please the Lord to
prolong my life I shall count it worth while to spend the residue of my days in
promoting the welfare and prosperity of your souls. Although I do not perceive
that public services are now more wearisome than they were thirty years ago,
yet, if no acute disease invades according to a course of nature I cannot
continue your pastor much longer. For length of time we have had endeared
connection as one, mutually rejoicing in prosperity; sympathetic in adversity.
I presume I am not now preaching my valedictory sermon, however, I take this
opportunity to thank you for all your benevolence and kindnesses expressed
toward me and mine. -- Who will be my successor I know not; though I know what
he ought to be in character. I hope, "no grievous wolves will enter in among
you, not sparing the flock:" Nor "subtle foxes that spoil the tender vines
which have grapes:" Nor any that will dare "to list up their axes upon the
carved work of the temple." -- I pray the Lord in infinite mercy to preserve
you from the greatest outward judgment and calamity that can befall you, viz.
that of an unconverted ministry! I have often thought, that could I know this
would be your awful doom, from love to your souls, and the souls of your dear
children, I should grieve myself down into the grave. I speak the truth, the
very thought thereof, gives me a more sensible shock, than the thought of death
itself. -- I should account it one of the choicest favors in life to see an
ascension gift of our enthroned Savior Christ Jesus the Lord, conferred upon
you, before my departure hence. -- Now you observe that all is harmony, love
and good will -- that there is not a separate, a sectarian, or any one of a
different denomination from us in the boundaries of the town: -- but who can
say it will be thus, if after my departure, you are called to the re-settlement
of the gospel ministry among you? -- There may be that concealed in the heart,
which as yet is not acted out in the life, for want of time and answerable
temptation to draw it forth. Your present outward visible harmony, by reason of
an internal different taste and relish, may be broken in upon, when you come to
elect a pastor, and discord unhappily prevail. Although I thus speak (with a
degree of fear) "yet I hope better things." I presume you will not take up
satisfied with a flourish of words, and the art of oratory in speaking, if
there be wanting, solidity of thought, and apparent solemnity of spirit: Nor
with an unconnected, undigested, and confused manner of speaking, with much
apparent fervency and little knowledge. You will wish to have a minister that
is "both a burning and shining light;" having knowledge and zeal proportionably
associated, and both rising to a degree of eminency; -- a man of solid
judgment, of a fruitful invention, of learned acquirements, and Pauline in
principle; -- endowed with gifts and graces, and furnished with a fund of
doctrinal and experimental knowledge; not preaching up all his divinity in a
few sermons; but bringing out of his treasures things new and old -- "feeding
you with knowledge and understanding;" -- rightly dividing, and closely
applying the word, giving to sinners their portion; and "feeding the sheep and
lambs of Jesus, as a workman that need not be ashamed:" -- a preacher that does
not divine for money, (though to be honorably supported) preaching Christ, and
wise to win souls to him -- powerfully pressing upon you faith and repentance,
and strict conformity to all divine precepts; but always with evangelical
references. -- You will assuredly see to it, that your elect pastor, both in
praying and preaching gives due honor to the Holy Spirit; -- that he
frequently reminds you of the necessity, the excellency, and advantage of the
Spirit's mission -- that his gracious presence is the most necessary, vital,
and fundamental good; -- that where He suspends his influence there will be
weakness, darkness, and deadness, -- that where He divinely exerts the powers
of his office and the perfections of his nature, there will be light, strength,
and life divine. -- And that as a preacher he comes to you in the demonstration
of the Spirit and of power. -- May the ascended and exalted Savior, from his
unwasted stores and immense fullness, confer upon you the royal donative of a
spiritual pastor and teacher, "that the Lord God may meet with you in every
place, where He has recorded his Name," bless you, and dwell with you forever!

Finally, brethren, pray for me, (as I hope to for you, 'till my expiring
breath) and when I have gotten beyond the reach of your prayers, I hope you
will have occasion to praise the Lord for ever, that I was once for a time your
minister.

I shall now conclude in few words.

Having this day entered upon the threshold of a new year, let us now unite in
making the saint's confession, Jehovah, "my times are in thy hand." -- Let us
offer undissembled praise to God, that we have life prolonged to this day. --
Let us also enter upon this new revolution of time under realizing views of the
brevity and uncertainty of life. Nothing is more certain than that our time
here will be short; nothing more uncertain than how short it will be.

" The days how few, how short the years
" Of man's too rapid race!
" Each leaving as it swiftly flies,
" A shorter in its place.
" They who the longest lease enjoy,
" Have told us with a sigh,
" That to be born, seems little more
" Than to begin to die."
It seems that neither revelation, nor providence will let us live long in this
world. How short a duration is there for us on this side the grave? It is not
only possible, but highly probable, that death may meet some of us within the
compass of this year. If we could look into the volume of the divine decrees,
no doubt, one and another of us would there see our sentence, and the time of
its execution fixed -- "this year thou shall die." -- Surely it infinitely
concerns each and every one of us to be found in readiness for an exchange of
worlds: -- without interposing delay to transact with God through Christ the
divine Mediator relative to our eternal salvation. Suffice it to say, my dear
hearers, (or readers) you must remember, always remember, that you were made
for God, religion and eternity; and that you must have a religion that will
befriend you in life, at death, at judgment, and be as lasting as eternity.

In fine -- "whether we live, may we live unto the Lord; or whether we die, may
we die unto the Lord; whether we live therefore, or die, may we be the Lord's."

AMEN and AMEN.
Subscribers in EAST-HAMPTON.
B
DEACON Barns, 2 Capt. Jona. Barns, 1 Lieut. Matthew Barns, 1 Mr. Thomas Baker,
1 Mr. Nathaniel Baker, 1 Mr. Abraham Baker, 1 Mr. Stephen Babcock, 1 Mr. Seth
Barns, 1 Mr. Gamaliel Benit, 1 Mr. Abraham Barns, 1 Mr. Nathaniel Baker, 1 Miss
Sally Barns, 1
C
Mr. Sineus Conklin, 1 Mr. Elisha Conklin, 1 Lieut. Samuel Conklin, 1 Isaac
Conklin, Esquire. 1 Mr. Zebulon Conklin, 2 Mr. Daniel Conklin, 1 Mr. Daniel
Conklin, jun. 2 Mr. Jacob Conklin, 1 Mr. Henry Chatfield, 1 Mr. Jeremiah
Conklin, 1 Mr. Edward Conklin, 1 Mr. Stephen Conklin, 1 Mr. Jonathan Conklin, 1
Mr. Benja. Conklin, 1 Mrs. Amie Conklin, 2 Miss Esther Conklin, 1 Miss Mary
Conklin, 1 Cuffee Cuffee, 1
D
Deacon Dayton, 2 Mr. Elisha Davis, 1 Mr. John Davis, 2 Mr. Jesse Dayton, 1
Lieut. Nathan Dayton, 1 Mr. Samuel Dayton, 2 Mr. Jeremiah Dayton, 1 Mrs.
Abigail Dayton, 1 Mr. David Dayton, 1 Mr. John Domine, 1 Mr. Abraham Dimon, 1
Mr. Isaac Dimon, 1 Mr. Henry Domine, 1
E
Mr. Abraham Edwards, 1 Mr. Thomas Edwards, 1 Mr. Jonathan Edwards, 1 Mr. John
Edwards, 1 Mr. Isaac Edwards, 3 Mr. Reuben Edwards, 1 Mr. Gamaliel Edwards, 1
F
Mr. Jonathan Fethen, 1 Mr. James Field, 1 Mr. Thomas Filer, 2
G
Mr. Jeremiah Gardener, 2 Mrs. Mary Gardener, 3 Mr. John Gardener, 1 Mr.
Partrick Gould, 1
H
Mr. Stephen Hedges, 2 Mr. Nathaniel Hand, 6 Mr. Daniel Hedges, 3 Mr. Benjamin
Hedges 1 Mr. John Hand, 1 Mr. Joseph Hicks, 2 Mr. William Hedges, 1 Mr. Elihu
Hedges, 1 Mr. William Hunting, 1 Mr. Nathan Hedges, 1 Mr. James Hand, 1 Mr.
John Hunting, 1 Mr. Philip Hedges, 1 Mr. Abraham Hand, 1 Mr. Zachariah Hicks, 1
Mr. Jacob Hedges, 1 Mr. Isaac Hedges, 1 Mr. Ebenezer Hedges, 1 Mr. Reuben
Hedges, 1 Mr. Daniel Hopin, 1 Mr. Jacob Hand, 1 Mr. Jonathan Hedges, 1 Mrs.
Mary Hutcheson, 1 Mrs. Mary Hopin, 1 Mr. Matthew Hedges, 1 Mr. Thomas Hubbard,
1
I
Mr. Aaron Isaacs, 6 Mr. Aaron Isaacs, jun. 3 Mr. Jeremiah Jones, 1 Mr. Isaac
Isaacs, 1 Mr. Ezekiel Jones, 1 Mr. Samuel Isaacs, 1 Mr. Benjamin Jeffer, 1
K
Mr. Daniel King, 1
L
Mr. David Leek, 1 Mr. Amos Loper, 1 Mr. Clark Lester, 1
M
Abraham Miller, Esquire. 3 Mr. Jeremiah Miller, 1 Mr. Hunting Miller, 1 Capt.
Ezekiel Mulford, 4 Major Mulford, 1 Mr. Samuel Mulford, 1 Mr. William Mulford,
1 Mr. John Miller, 1 Mr. Abraham Mulford, 2 Mr. Benjamin Miller, 1 Mr. Josiah
Mulford, 1 Mr. Timothy Miller, 1 Mr. Elisha Mulford, jun. 1 Mr. Elisha Miller,
1 Mr. David Miller, 1 Mr. Nathan Mulford, 1 Mr. Jonathan Mulford, 1 Mrs.
Rebecca Miller, 1 Mr. Joel Miller, 1 Mr. Nathan Miller, 1 Mr. Matthew Mulford,
1 Miss Tempe Miller, 1
O
Capt. Jeremiah Osborn, 2 Mr. Elisha Osborn, 2 Mr. Joseph Osborn, 4 Mr.
Philetus Osborn, 1 Mr. Jacob Osborn, 2 Mr. Cornelius Osborn, 1 Mr. Daniel
Osborn, 1 Mr. Joseph Osborn, 1 Mr. Jonathan Osborn, 1 Mr. Henry Osborn, 1 Mr.
Thomas Osborn, 1 Mrs. Phebe Osborn, 2 Mrs. Jerusha Osborn, 1 Miss Phebe Osborn,
1
P
Mr. John Parsons, 1 Mr. Ludley Parsons, 1 Mr. Merry Parsons, 1 Mr. Samuel
Parsons, 1 Mr. Ely Parsons, 1 Mr. Stephen Parsons, 1 Mr. Benjamin Parsons, 1
Mr. Ezekiel Pain, 1
R
Mrs. Phebe Rysam, 2 Mrs. Abigail Reed, 1
S
Deacon Sheril, 2 Doct. Ebenezer Sage, 1 Mr. Jacob Sheril, 1 Mr. Stephen
Stratten, 1 Mr. Matthew Stratten, 1 Mr. Gideon Sisson, 1 Mr. John Strong, 1 Mr.
John Strong, jun. 1 Mr. Jona. Scelinx, jun. 2 Mr. Abrah. Scelinx, jun. 1 Mr.
Christo. Scelinx, 1 Miss Meriam Strong, 1
T
Deacon Talmage, 2 Mr. Thomas Talmage, 1 Mr. Enos Talmage, 1 Mr. David Talmage,
1 Mr. Jonathan Terry, 1 Mr. David Talmage, jun. 1 Mr. Tho's Talmage, jun. 1 Mr.
Jonathan Tuthill, 1
V
Mr. Isaac Vanscau, 2
W
Mr. Samuel Waters, 1
Mr. Timothy T. Smith, (A. M. 6 Mr. Frederick Halsey, (A. B. 6 Mr. Abraham
Thomson, 6 Academy.

