Mr. Dutch's Dedication-Sermon.

A DISCOURSE DELIVERED BEFORE THE ASSOCIATION, AT THE DEDICATION OF A NEW
MEETING HOUSE, AUGUST 9, 1791. BY EBENEZER DUTCH, A. M. PASTOR OF THE SECOND
CHURCH IN BRADFORD.

NEWBURYPORT: PRINTED AND SOLD BY JOHN MYCALL. MDCCXCII.

A DISCOURSE UPON THE PUBLIC WORSHIP OF GOD.
AS it is the professed business of the present solemnity, to DEDICATE THIS
HOUSE to the honor and Service of the Everlasting GOD -- a custom sanctioned by
the friends of piety, from the earliest ages of the Church -- And to those who
engage in it, with suitable views of the Object, and a proper temper of mind,
it will yield a most rational and sublime pleasure -- A crowd of the most
august and transporting ideas rush upon the soul, at the very mention of a
house on earth, wherein the God of heaven will deign to hear the prayers, and
give answers of peace to mortal men.

HENCE we find, when God made known his gracious intention of having an house
built, wherein he might record his name and manifest his glory to his people,
the king's, David and Solomon, were filled with pleasing astonishment -- and,
like the three disciples on the mount of transfiguration, they scarce knew in
which region they were, whether in heaven or on earth.

WHEN Solomon had completed the temple, and was about to invoke the Divine
Presence and blessing, the greatness of such an honor and favor, nearly
overwhelmed his pious mind; he staggered at the promise -- In the entrance of
his prayer, he hesitates -- After he had said, O God of Israel, let thy word, I
pray thee, which thou spakedst unto thy servant David, of dwelling in this
house, be verified! Here he checks himself -- But will GOD, in very deed, dwell
on earth! The Heaven of heavens cannot contain Thee! much less this house!

THE manifestation of the Divine perfections and presence, is, to the pious,
the dawn of heaven. This is the principal source of happiness to angels in
heaven, and men on earth.

To exhibit the glory of God to mankind, and render them happy in it, is one
grand design of all the religious institutions of God in our world. The Jewish
economy, with all its expensive sacrifices -- the incarnation of the Lord
Jesus Christ -- the promulgation and establishment of his religion -- all
concur to carry into effect this gracious design.

AND the temple, the house of God, and the church, meaning, in general, but one
thing, is the peculiar place, in which he has, hitherto, made the fullest
display of this glory.

AND what, my hearers, was your professed object, in erecting this elegant
house, wherein you are now assembled? Was it not for the glory of God, and to
promote the present and future happiness of yourselves and children? If
sincere, it is an honorable intention. This is to be co-workers with Christ.
This is well-doing.

BUT all is not yet done. This house cannot save us. In vain did the people of
Israel cry, The temple of the Lord, while they pretended to worship God in that
temple, without suitable views of him or themselves.

WHAT pity, that they should lose their labor, lose the blessing, and the
temple, and lose their own souls, by not worshipping in a suitable manner, in
the house built for that very purpose!

IF we would avoid their unhappy fate, we must avoid that temper, expunge that
leaven of hypocrisy that foamed in their worship.

IF we have built this house for the glory of God, and to prepare ourselves and
children for heavenly happiness, let us carefully pursue these important
objects.

AND, blessed be God, he has pointed out the way by which we may assuredly
obtain them.

KING DAVID, who first suggested the idea of building an house to the Lord, has
also given particular directions how to behave in it, so as to accomplish the
purposes above hinted at.

THAT method of worship is recorded in the ninety-sixth Psalm and ninth verse,
and Inscribed in Letters of Gold, conspicuously placed over our heads, Directly
over the Pulpit window, is placed the inscription in golden capitals.
always to remind us, when we enter GOD's house, how he is to be worshipped, O
WORSHIP THE LORD IN THE BEAUTY OF HOLINESS.


LET us conform to this, and the design of erecting this house will be
accomplished, to our unspeakable gain; and will be a better dedication of it,
than the offering of thousands of oxen and rivers of oil.

THE deeper to impress them upon our minds, they shall be the subject of our
present discourse, From which I shall I. MAKE some observations upon the act of
public worship: II. SHOW what may be implied in worshipping the Lord in the
beauty of holiness: III. BY way of Improvement, mention some arguments to
engage our compliance with the direction.


I am first to make some observations upon the act of public worship: and this
consists of several parts: and praise may be first mentioned.

I. PRAISE has reference to God as the source of being, perfection and
blessedness; the Author and Bestower of all favors, and as having already
communicated his goodness. So fully are his eternal power and greatness
exhibited in the works of nature and providence, that the very heathen,
unassisted by the light of divine revelation, are inexcusably guilty, if they
neglect to see and glorify him. And if they are inexcusable in neglecting to
pay this tribute of homage, much more criminal must those be, to whom are
committed the lively oracles of God, and yet neglect this duty of praise, when
thus doubly enforced.

WE find the wisest of men, when dedicating the temple, founding the first
exercise of its worship upon this well-known principle. Behold the heaven and
the heaven of heavens cannot contain thee: and, there is no God like unto thee,
who keep covenant and mercy for thy servants -- And the angels in heaven,
that world of vision, perform their constant worship upon the same principle.
Hence we are informed, that all the heavenly hosts join, with one accord,
"Great and mavelous are thy works, Lord God Almighty, just and true are thy
ways, thou King of saints." And a multitude of the heavenly hosts praised God,
at the Savior's birth. The mercy and good will of God, made known thereby,
gave occasion for new and nobler accents to their angelic hallelujahs.

So, praising God, in his house, is the nearest approach men on earth can make,
to the temper' the employment, and the pleasure that now circulates round the
hearts of the happy millions in heaven, while tuning their harps to the song of
Moses and the Lamb.

SINGING the praises of God has a powerful tendency to soften, smooth and
polish the rougher feelings of our nature -- it animates every part of worship;
it creates, and leaves on the mind a relish for the sacred employment, and
gives a heavenly turn and elevation to the whole soul.

LET the well-skilled musical band glory in acting well their part, as such
important and delightful effects attend the grace and power of their music.

ANOTHER part of public worship is, Secondly, Prayer. The foundation of
prayer, is' our entire dependence upon God, his infinite fullness and
sufficiency, and our poverty and want. It is the making known our desires to
him in the name of Christ for things agreeable to his will. He has styled
himself a prayer hearing God. And has graciously proclaimed himself the Parent
and Savior of mankind. And that he has all possible blessings on hand -- we
need either for body or soul, time or eternity.

AND be it remembered,

HE has also proclaimed, that he will be sought unto, by his creatures for the
bestowment of these blessings. What a privilege! That such indigent feeble
creatures, who are surrounded all the way through life with numberless dangers,
and attacked with complicated afflictions, every moment exposed to the
insatiable ravages of death and the grave and the miseries of hell. What a
privilege, that we may warrantably come to the house of God, and pray with the
greatest prospect of success, deliverance from some, support under others; and
that all may operate together to purge off the dregs of sin, and so work out
for us an exceeding and eternal weight of glory! None shall seek the Lord in
vain.

AND Solomon's prayer, made at the dedication of the temple greatly
corroborates this sentiment. It may be considered as a prophesy of what God
would do for his sincere worshippers in all ages.

THE eyes of the Lord are open toward his house, night and day, where his name
is, that he may hear the prayers and supplications made in it by all people;
and he will hear and forgive -- This, then, is the place more especially
pointed out to obtain relief under all common difficulties. When our land is
invaded by enemies, and we are smitten before them, to the house of God may we
repair, confessing our sins, and praying, When heaven is shut up, and there is
no rain, this is the place to obtain relief -- if pinched, for want of bread --
if pestilence, blasting and mildew -- in a word, if any plague or sickness
distress us, and cause mourning, the house of God and prayer, are the appointed
resort for relief.

AND, as under the darker dispensation, prayer might be made by all manner of
people for all temporal blessings, with the greatest prospect of success, if
properly qualified: So under the more glorious dispensation of the gospel, the
greatest spiritual and everlasting blessings may be prayed for with equal
probability of success. Ask, and ye shall receive, knock, and it shall be
opened unto you, seek, and ye shall find. Where two or three are met together
in my name there am I in the midst of them!

AND with more readiness than the fond parent will give a morsel of bread to
the hungry child that asks it, will I give the holy spirit to them who seek
his aid. And in our present mode of existence. We can neither ask or receive a
greater blessing. If we obtain and possess this, we virtually possess all
things in life and death, guided by the spirit that came forth from the living
God, we shall infallibly be led finally to a union with Deity. This is as great
a blessing as can be enjoyed, and greater than can be comprehended -- was not
bought with corruptible things, such as silver and gold, but with the precious
blood of the Son of God. Kings and Emperors can grant no such favors; all they
can give, all they possess, is trash, compared to this. It is not, however, to
be expected, but by waiting upon the Author and Bestower of every good and
perfect gift in prayer. -- Then the Lord opened the understandings of the
disciples; even when they were met together. True indeed he is not confined to
this mountain, nor Jerusalem, nor any particular place. But as yet in his
infinite wisdom, he has not seen fit to fill any place on earth with his
glory, except his temple, his house. Here his saving power has been seen and
felt.

THE house and worship of God are the school and nursery, where we and our
children may more especially be taught the language, the temper and employment
of heaven. We shall not begin to love these devotional exercises, in that state
of perfection. The beginning must be made in the lower school, in God's earthly
court. Our prayers, indeed, will cease in heaven, because our dangers will be
at an end, and our wants be satisfied.

3. ANOTHER exercise, is, preaching and hearing the word of God. Hereby the
duties men owe to their Creator, to each other, and themselves, are made known,
and enforced. The nature and consequences of sin, the danger, folly and misery
of it, evinced. -- Life and immortality set before us, with the conditions and
motives, by which we may all become partakers of the heavenly inheritance; and
the work of grace, be perfected in the hearts of the penitent, unto the day of
Jesus Christ.

BUT then it must be the word of God, quick, and powerful, sharper than any two
edged sword, piercing to the dividing asunder the soul and spirit, and of the
joints and marrow, a discerner of the thoughts and intents of the heart. For in
vain, says the Lord Jesus Christ, do men worship me, teaching for doctrines,
the commandments of men.

4. Baptism and the Lord's supper, are also parts of worship.

BY the one, we are initiated into the visible kingdom of Christ -- declared to
be members of his family -- Candidates for heaven. And our feeble helpless
offspring committed to the faithful Shepherd's care.

BY the other, we show forth the Lord's death; until he come the second time,
and receive an earnest of the paradise of God. These are the several parts
which constitute the general act of public worship.

BUT as the form profits but little, without the power -- this worship must
be performed in the beauty of holiness. This is the direction of the text --
and the qualification of its acceptibility -- and is now to be attended to
under the second general head.

II. To worship the Lord in the beauty of holiness, undoubtedly has reference
both to the object and subjects of worship.

I. As to the object, it is the Lord in the beauty of holiness -- Or God
manifest in and by Jesus Christ. -- The blessed God possesses all possible
perfection: nor are there any new excellencies derived to him, from any of his
works or creatures, through their infinite variety.

But these uncreated excellencies and beauties, may not all be exhibited at one
time, or in one work.

HENCE, it is said, his eternal power and Godhead are clearly seen by the
things that are made, plainly implying that other divine perfections are more
fully exhibited elsewhere.

His justice -- faithfulness -- goodness -- his love to the human race -- and
his aversion from sin, are manifested to us in the method of redemption.

The beauty of holiness and the glory of the Load are synonimous terms. God has
declared that his glory consists in his being the Lord, the Lord God,
gracious and merciful, slow to anger, and abundant in goodness Keeping mercy
for thousands, and yet by no means clearing the guilty -- waiting upon sinners
in order to be gracious to them -- taking delight in bestowing happiness upon
those whom justice had sentenced to misery -- giving life to those whom the law
had condemned to death. God appears beautiful in holiness, in being infinitely
removed from every species of iniquity -- in being incapale of admitting an
unclean thing into his presence: And yet, through the mediation of his Son,
admitting the most unworthy of penitent sinners, to a participation of his own
holy nature: And this in a way, so far from being derogatory to his justice and
truth, that the highest glory shall accrue to God from this very act: for,
while this heavenly peace and good will are exercised toward men, in this way,
glory is given to God in the highest degree.

Now, as the righteousness, truth and justice of God -- his infinite abhorrence
of sin, are awfully displayed, and fully vindicated by the mediation of the
Lord Jesus Christ and as redemption from misery, pardon of sin, a communication
of the divine nature, and endless happiness, can be freely granted to men,
through the same medium, and all this be confirmed, ratified and sealed to
believers by the oath of God and the blood of Christ, and God more ready to
perform all this for us than we are to seek, and receive it -- This may be
termed the beauty of holiness. But this illustrious and transcendent display
God makes of himself more especially in his temple, in his earthly court. -- So
that if the awful splendors of inflexible and eternal justice, the majesty of
invariable truth, united and mysteriously blending and mingling with the
measureless ocean of redeeming love and mercy, may be called the beauty of
holiness, the glory of the Divine character -- Then to have this view of God,
in his house, in the several parts of worship, is to worship him in the beauty
of holiness. This is one important qualification of worshipping God, as above
directed. It is this view of the Lord that fills the breasts of millions of
saints and angels with admiration and joy. It was this VIEW OF THE LORD made
David cry out, "how amiable are thy tabernacles, O Lord of hosts." This view of
God it was, made the Sabbath and sanctuary so welcome to his soul. To
Contemplate, to love to praise and pray to a being thus glorious in holiness,
made his pious soul faint with longing to go up to the court of the Lord --
"Blessed are they that dwell in thy house they will be still praising thee."

THIS same beauty of holiness, was, of old, shadowed forth in the sanctuary.
The ark was the token of the Divine Majesty, containing the law. The mercy-seat
entirely covered the ark. On this mercy-seat, God promised to meet Moses, and
commune with him, and be entreated by him. At each end of this mercy-seat, a
cherubim stood with outstretched wings, looking at each other, and looking
upon the mercy-seat, admiring and astonished -- Exodus xxv. 17, 22. -- This
mercy-seat represented, and the benevolent cherubims saw, the Lord Jesus
Christ, who, by his atonement, covered our sins, and bore the curse of the law,
for our sakes, that God might look on the law through him, as fullfilled on our
behalf: By whom God is reconcilling and uniting a lost world to himself; in
whom he will meet us, and commune with us, "through whom we may come boldly to
the throne of grace, ask mercy, and find grace to help us in every need."

THIS is the glory! this the beauty of holiness, in which the Divine Being
exhibiteth himself to us as the object of worship.

But to worship God in the beauty of holiness, has reference to the temper and
views of the subject, as well as to the excellencies of the object.

"God is a spirit, and those who worship him, must do it in spirit, and with
the understanding."

OUR temper and views, will, undoubtedly, be right in all parts of worship,
when in union with the divine character as above described. -- And this will be
worshipping in the beauty of holiness.

BUT this includes several particulars: As

I. Submission to the Divine Being.

THE public worship of God, is a duty made known and enforced by divine
Revelation; especially by the example of our Lord Jesus Christ. At Mount Sinai,
it was appointed by a positive, moral and perpetual commandment of God. And in
Heb. x. 25, it is recommended, "forsake not the assembling of yourselves
together." In short, it is a part of the law of God, so deeply engraven on the
natural table of the human heart, that while almost every other divine
impression is erased, by the general defection, this remains legible. Hence
may be seen, in every part of the world, among all nations, certain places and
times set apart for public worship.

It is evidently the mind and command of God.

THEREFORE to worship him in the beauty of holiness, must be from respect to
his authority; because it is his pleasure, that we assemble ourselves together
for this purpose: Making his command the rule of our conduct in this
particular. That servant cannot be called obedient one, who does the very thing
the master commands, unless he performs it in obedience to the command: He may
do the thing commanded, for other reasons.

MANY people, formerly among the Jews, and doubtless among us, attend the place
of public worship, not from respect to God, or his command, but for other
reasons; and neglect the worship of God also for the same reasons. Not because
God has forbidden it, I hope -- not purely as an intended affront to Deity: It
is because they choose so to do. But when it happens to be the good pleasure of
such people to repair to the house of worship, can they, in any sense, be said
to worship God in the beauty of holiness? If they are inattentive to his
command, they certainly see no comeliness in him, that they should desire and
praise him; and so are destitute of the first qualification, as it relates to a
right view of the object; and of the second, because not in obedience to his
requisition.

IF, then, we are desirous of worshipping God in the beauty of holiness, let
his sacred command have its proper influence upon us. Let us show respect to,
and honor his command, by waiting upon him in his house: And see to it, that
we are right in the first particular.

HE that honoreth me, I will honor.

THIS is binding upon all charcters. The first step in duty. And the man who
neglects to pay this tribute of public homage to the Deity, stands convicted of
most despicable disingenuity. He proclaims himself destitute of the fear of God
-- of a suitable respect for socity, and is unawed by his own conscience, or is
blinded by the God of this world.

ORDER is beautiful. God is a God of order. The order of his house and worship
is beautiful Here is a proper place; but I shall say nothing about coming in
season, at the appointed hour of worship, or respecting decency of behavior
while in the house. There is certainly no beauty in levity -- in gazing or
drowsiness; passing over these, I would observe, that a

SECOND qualification of acceptable worship is, that our hearts be possessed
with a solemn sense of the greatness and majesty of the Being with whom we have
to do.

IN the several parts of worship, we as really minister before God, as the
Angels who abide in his presence. We should behave, at least, with as much
reverence and fear, as if we were in heaven, in the immediate presence of God,
in the midst of all the blessed Angels, those ten thousand times ten thousand
who stand before him.

HERE God meets us, as he did Moses of old, on the mercy-seat -- he communes
with us -- he sees and knows our hearts, as perfectly as he sees the Angels in
heaven. Hence he requires us to worship him in the spirit, and with the
understanding. God and Angels are witnesses of our temper and conduct; it is an
affair in which life or death is pending. No wonder good old Jacob should say,
"How dreadful is this place! It is the house of God, the gate of heaven." --
And holy Job, "Shall not his dread, or the dread of him, fall upon us?"

GOD told the prophet, when thou speak to the people, "thou shall be as my
mouth." And the apostle said, "we beseech you in God's stead." And even the
heathen king of Moab, was impressed in such a manner, when the prophet told him
he had a message from the Lord, "he rose up out of his seat," to show his
reverence for the Deity. In great kindness, therefore, has our Savior
Commanded, "Take heed how ye hear." Our very life depends upon it. "Hear, and
your soul shall live."

3. We must disengage ourselves from the world. It Is cares must be laid aside.
"Two masters cannot be served at the same time." -- "Put thy shoes off thy
feet," was God's command to Moses, "for the place whereon thou stand, is
holy ground." Our hearts may not bring their coveteousness, nor worldly
embarrassments with them, into the worship of God: These will obstruct the
entrance of his word into the heart, "by which we must be begotten to a lively
hope."

WHEN Abraham was about to offer sacrifice, before he arrived at the appointed
spot, he made a pause; and said to his servants, "tarry ye here, while I go
yonder and worship." So, when we come to worship, all worldly anxieties must be
left behind; the best temporal things are but servants to men, as men should be
to God.

4. IT must be performed in the exercise of says. -- "He that comes to God,
to worship, must believe that he is, and that he is the rewarder of them who
diligently seek him." And our reward will be in proportion to the degree of our
faith. The Roman captain, when he sent to Christ, entreating help for his sick
servant' believed him possessed with divine power and willingness, to hear and
relieve the miserable; and he also felt his own unworthiness to receive a visit
from him. Penetrated with the divine condescension and readiness our Savior
exhibited in promising, even before he is requested, to go and heal him: The
centurion, unable to suppress the grateful emotion of his soul, answers, "Lord,
I am not worthy that thou should come under my roof, speak the word only,
and my servant shall be healed -- and he was healed from that hour."

With such a faith, in the power, willingness and condescension of the Lord, to
hear and relieve ourselves, and those for whom we pray, should public worship
be performed. This is honoring the Lord.

'DOES the fond parent, who is evil, readily give a morsel of bread to the
beloved child -- and will not the Lord, who is good, more readily give
spiritual blessings, even eternal life, to those who ask? Suppose it is the
reward of seeking, it is not of debt, but of grace.

'THIS is the faith in which the parts of worship should be performed. This is
according to truth, and is beautiful. But, destitute of this faith, our worship
will be deformed -- the Lord viewed as an "hard and austere master, reaping
where he has not strewed." This is not beautiful. Faith, then, in the
prevalency of Christ's intercession, in his all sufficiency, and readiness to
help, as being the day's man, between heaven and earth, is an important
qualification of worship.

5. It is also implied, that we have a supreme love to the object, and to the
service itself, for the sake of the object.

THOSE whose thoughts are wandering from thing to thing, to the utmost
boundaries of creation, while in the house of God, cannot be said to worship
him. But love will properly fix the mind. Love readily and naturally ponders
and muses upon its object. It will engage us in every part of worship, and
render the whole pleasant and delightful. Love is deaf, and blind to all but
its own object. God is the great object of worship; while addressing him; other
objects should be forgotten. It is the delight of such persons, to meditate in
the law of the Lord. -- Its discoveries allure their feet to the worship of
God, and sweetly detain them in the sanctuary. The psalmist was, no doubt, in a
suitable temper for worshipping God; and it was the very language of love, when
he said; "I was glad when they said unto me, come, let us go unto the house of
the Lord." It was love that tuned the harp of that sweet singer of Israel. It
was love induced him to say, that a day spent in the house of his God, was
better than thousands elsewhere. It was love made him prefer the office of a
doorkeeper, to a dwelling in the tents of wickedness. This is the frame of
spirit requisite to worship God in the beauty of holiness. David loved the
object -- so must we; so must every one else, to worship as he did. -- To such
souls, all the parts of worship, as means of intercourse with God, yield a most
delightful entertainment. The Throne of Grace is the very porch of heaven. Here
we are allowed, without the imputation of presumption, to plead with God, for
the good of our souls, and the best of favors. Here we may wait, and here
receive his blessing.

No doubt, the heavenly inhabitants worship in the beauty of holiness; but what
is the principal qualification? What the temper which animates the worship of
those happy spirits above? It is love. -- It is a servent unabating love to the
adorable object. And as the object of our worship is the same in this house as
in heaven, the same must be our love, at least in kind.

6. The last qualification I shall mention, is, harmony and union among
ourselves. It must be performed in the exercise of brotherly kindness. All
angry, tumultuous, and revengeful passions, must be suppressed, hushed into
silence. This is enjoined by our Savior, as a necessary duty. If we have aught
against a brother, acceptable sacrifice cannot be performed, until the means HE
has prescribed of reconciliation, be first used. And the Apostle exhorts, "Be
kindly affectioned one to another. Put on kindness and charity." This is
worshipping the Lord in the unity of the spirit, and in the bond of peace -- In
the spirit of Christ, by whom we are united to God, and one another. It is
abundantly evident, that one important qualification in social worship, is
benevolence and harmony among ourselves.

THE king's daughter is all glorious within -- and thus arrayed, Zion is the
beauty of the whole earth.

THUS have I endeavored to show, what views we must have of God -- and what
must be the temper of our minds, in order to worship the Lord in the beauty of
holiness.

THE method of discourse, renders it needless to say any thing to prove the
divine character altogether excellent and beautiful; or that it is exhibited
with a peculiar beauty of holiness "in the face of Jesus Christ." This is, no
doubt, the view the Psalmist had, of both, which excited that devout emotion of
soul, emphatically expressed by the interjection O!

FROM a contemplative view of the majesty of God -- the greatness of his
salvation -- and the solemnity of that all-important day, in which he will
judge the world in righteousness, the royal Preacher's soul, being warmed and
dilated with the divine fire of inspiration, generated arguments too
instantaneous for particular utterance; at once he brings them all forth. -- O
worship, etc.

OF the many arguments, which might, with advantage, be urged on this occasion,
couched in this one letter, O! I shall mention but a few, to persuade us to
worship the Lord as above described. And,

I. It is reasonable, corresponding to our nature. We were made for this
business. It is a peculiar honor, indeed, God has conferred on mankind, in
making them capable of performing such worship. It is reasonable that we have a
right view of the divine character, as possessing the right of command; that we
view ourselves as his servants. If our existence, and all our comforts are
derived from, and he possesses the only right and power to dispose of us, and
has commanded us to worship him, it is reasonable we perform that worship, as a
public testimony, that we are the Lord's, and his servants.

Our Savior has informed us, that upon our compliance with even all his
requisitions, we are to view ourselves as unprofitable servants. In a word,
whenever, or wherever, people build such a public house, they practically
declare their obligations to worship God. -- It is a sentiment deeply
interwoven with our very frame. The conduct of all nations and ages, in
agreeing to set apart some place or house for this purpose, fully evinces it.

IT requires but little reason to see even the dim light of nature teaches the
propriety of worshipping God in the manner above described. If he is infinitely
great, and good, and merciful, and just, and all our help is in and from him,
it is reasonable, that we see and acknowledge it -- That we apply to him for
help. And those who neglect to worship God, especially after they have built an
house for that very purpose, are guilty of self-contradiction; they condemn
their own conduct, at least one part of it. They use all the means -- sustain
all the labor and expense necessary to obtain a good end, and neglect it. That
man would act unreasonably, who should be at the expense of buying, fencing,
plowing, planting, hoeing and tending his field, with a view to a crop, if he
should totally neglect to gather in the full ripe corn, and suffer it to rot on
the ground, while himself and family must perish for want of bread.

To what end have you been at the expense and labor of building this house?
Was it not that you might here worship the Lord God of your fathers? -- form an
acquaintance with his character, and your own; that you might here ask mercy
for yourselves and children: That both you and they might be nourished with the
milk of the gospel; that the bread of life might be broken to you; that you
might grow in grace, to the stature of perfect men in Christ, and so be
prepared for an admission into the temple of God above in heaven? This is a
reasonable; it is a glorious end; but it is not yet obtained. -- Would you
obtain it? There is a certain way. -- O worship the Lord in the beauty of
holiness -- and, as certain as there is a heaven, you will be received into it.

MOREOVER this is the reasonable service God has required of us; this is the
part assigned to man's performance on the stage of life. The heavens, and the
earth, the sea, and all creatures, are called upon, and they do worship God,
but not in the beauty of holiness; they are unable to see the harmony of the
divine perfections in the method of redemption; much less can they learn to
exercise and imitate them. But, as we alone, of all God's creatures on earth,
can do both, let us play the man; act our part, while all nature around us is
acting here is.

AND, as the whole creation was made to groan in bondage, by our folly, has she
not a claim upon us? Does she not demand our assistance in prayer to God, and
in praise for possible relief? Let us then, as the head and representative of
the natural world, be the medium, and this house the place, where the feebler
homage of the inferior creation, may be offered to the Lord. As Christ is the
head of the moral, and medium through which our sincere worship comes up
before God; and as by our disobedience to the command of God, the curse was
inflicted on the earth, let us make the effort to extricate the creature from
that vanity and bondage to which our folly has subjected it; and now do as much
for her liberty, as we have done to rob her of that jewel, and subject it to
bondage.

2. O worship the Lord in the manner here enjoined, because every thing, short
of this, is insufficient and unavailing, and will leave us destitute of all
part in the blessings connected with true religion. The blessed God, in
requiring us to worship in this manner, exhibiteth as much of his wisdom and
benevolence, as of his authority. He can no sooner approve of, or be pleased
with worshipping him in any other way, than he can approve of, or be pleased
with our missing the blessing of eternal happiness. If it is his will, pleasure
and delight, that all should come to the knowledge of the truth, taste the
sweet, the honey of religion, and partake of eternal life; and if this is the
only view of God; or manner of worship, that will not leave us destitute of,
but insure these blessings, how can he approve of any other? Must not every
other way be as offensive and displeasing to God, as it is dangerous and
destructive to ourselves. -- His displeasure against every other way, must be
in proportion to the degree of its tendency, to our injury or misery, which is
the consequence of being left destitute of all the blessings connected with
true religion; and of not having right views of God and ourselves. --
Therefore, to pretend to worship God, without proper views of his character,
without regard to his command; ignorant of, and unaffected with our own
ill-desert and danger, without repentance and faith, without love to him, and
desire to resemble him: In a word -- Not "knowing the plague of our own hearts"
-- to pretend, I say, to worship God without either And as to those who are
ignorant of the object of worship, and so destitute of every qualification, I
would advise them to the same means the Psalmist formerly used in a case
something similar. He went into the sanctuary of God, there he understood
things of which before he was ignorant, respecting God's government. Let
ignorant sinners do likewise.
of these qualifications, is delusive and vain. And however we may flatter
ourselves with peace and safety, destruction and misery are in all ways
unapproved of God.

BENEVOLENT is that seemingly severe interrogation of Jehovah, designed to
correct so fatal a mistake, and prevent the inevitable destruction connected
with it. Who has required this at your hands? Bring no more vain oblations. As
I live, says the Lord, my soul has no pleasure in the death of the wicked,
nor with any method, though a religious name be tacked to it, by which they are
ignorantly going to destruction.

KNOWING the propensity of human nature to deceive itself, with the appearance
and shadow of reality and good, especially in matters relating to God, and its
own eternal salvation, the pious and benevolent soul of the Psalmist was moved.
His piety, benevolence, pity and fear, burst from his heart in the energetic
language of the text, O! worship the Lord, etc. -- As if he had said, Beware of
the sin of neglecting to worship God -- beware of the danger of performing it
in a careless, irreverent, hypocritical manner: And especially beware of doing
it by way of atonement for daring wickedness, and with a view of obtaining a
liberty of persisting in it. For God cannot be deceived, nor will he be mocked;
nor will he hold that soul guiltless, that takes his name in vain: All which
is awfully evinced from the signal and instant destruction of many who have
adventured in unappointed ways -- and which, no doubt, are recorded for our
warning. The two sons of Aaron, for neglect of order, for their careless,
irreverent behavior, were destroyed by fire from the Lord. Uzzah, for his too
officious uncommanded touch of the ark, was struck with instant death.

AND if, with a deviation from the appointed way of worship, under those carnal
ordinances, such bodily calamities were connected, no doubt, under the more
heavenly mode of worship, which now obtain spiritual disease and death, are
connected with, every way, excepting by Jesus Christ, who is the way, the truth
and the life. --

HENCE the Apostle expressly says, That for not discerning the Lord's body, i.
e. not having right views of the object, nor a proper temper in that part of
worship, "some were sick, and some dead."

WE ought, therefore, to be cautious how we worship, how we hear, etc. -- since
there is but one commanded safe way, even the name of the Jesus Christ, the
beauty of holiness. -- This is reasonable, safe and pleasant -- and all others
are dangerous as difficult. Our Savior, speaking of the attempts of sinners to
approach God in other ways than by the door, connects climbing and danger, and
criminality together.

THOSE who neglect and refuse to enter in by the door, shall be counted thieves
and robbers: To sinners out of Christ, "God is a consuming fire."

IT appears the Psalmist directs to the only safe method of worship. Therefore,

3. IT is the only pleasant and delightful way. To those who attend public
worship without these views of God's goodness and mercy and holiness -- without
a view of the necessity and sufficiency of the Redeemer's atonement and
righteousness -- without love -- without a desire to resemble him, and be with
him in heaven, how heavily does the hour of worship hang upon such people? how
small an obstacle will prevent their attendance! how seldom do they come! how
late when they do! how drowsy while here! Nothing but the address, novelty or
variety of the speaker, can gain their attention. Divine truth, the beauty of
holiness, is insipid to them; Christ has no charms -- the seals and pledges of
his love -- the very blood of the covenant, they count as nothing -- they long
to have the worship over -- and the Sabbath gone. Honey itself is not sweet to
their taste -- light itself is to them darkness. Such people lose not only the
first fruits of heaven, but all the cost and pains they are at in building a
house, and maintaining the worship of God, is lost to themselves, though not to
the cause, for the earth shall support the woman. And they will also lose
heaven itself.

But however dull and insipid the worship of God may be to a carnal mind, this
is for want of a right view of the object, and a suitable temper toward it:
For nothing can be more pleasant, nothing more animating to a soul sensible of
its own importance and danger, than the view of those thousands of mercies and
blessings God is keeping for all those who come to him through Jesus Christ.

Is there any thing on earth -- can all the profits, pleasures, and honors of
this world, and all the gay scenes of nature, supposing them all to fall to the
share of one man, can they all put such joy and gladness into the soul, as the
light of God's reconciling countenance, shining upon it through the medium of
his word and ordinances in his house? Here is the place where God and Christ
are wont to make themselves known to those who seek. It was when the disciples
were met together, the Lord opened their understandings, to see the glory and
beauty of the divine perfection shining in the plan of mercy: And GOD himself
condescending to beseech sinners to accept of pardon and eternal life; this is
reason enough, not only to remove all distressing fear, but to awaken, nay, to
fill the soul with a joy that is unspeakable and full of glory. To such a soul,
prayer, hearing the word read and explained, and praise, the worship of God is
above all things, the most entertaining. These views of the excellency of the
God of Jacob, would make David forget that he was the hero, the king of Israel,
and the three disciples, that they belonged to this world. In an ecstasy of
delight, the one cries out, "How amiable are thy tabernacles, O Lord of Hosts,
my soul longs, yea even faints for the courts of the Lord, my heart and my
flesh cry out for the living God. Blessed are they that dwell in thy house,
they will be still praising thee. A day in thy courts, is better than a
thousand elsewhere. I had rather be a doorkeeper in the house of my God, than
to dwell in the tents of wickedness." And the other, It is good for us to be
here. This is the pleasure -- this the delight of worshipping God in the beauty
of holiness. And as the Psalmist wishes every soul to taste and see that the
Lord is gracious; he exhorts, O, come worship the Lord in the beauty of
holiness.

A 4th Reason. It is the only method to prepare us to associate with saints and
angels in heaven -- to fit us for those exalted employments -- that rest which
remains for the people of God. Nothing on earth so nearly resembles heaven,
as an assembly worshipping God, united in the spirit of meekness, faith and
charity. No wonder the disciples should say, it is good for us to be here.
Those who sincerely love the gates of Zion, the worship and the order, are
candidates for heaven, making constant advances toward that happy region. And
when they are admitted into the temple above, will naturally and easily join in
that employment, for which they have been fitting in the house of God on earth.

ARE these the principal motives that have induced you patiently and cheerfully
to support the expense of time and property in building this house? That you
might publicly honor God -- secure an interest in his favor -- taste the
sweetness of redeeming love, and be preparing for the blessed society in
heaven; and that your children also, might become partakers of the same
heavenly benefits? Were these your motives, in erecting and beautifying, and
now dedicating this house to the Lord? And has not God favored your
undertaking, in a general good understanding among yourselves? Has not almost
every man voluntarily and repeatedly come forward, and exerted himself in
accomplishing this good work? Not a life lost, nor a limb broken -- Health,
safety and plenty, have been granted you, all which have tended to lighten the
burden, and facilitate the business.

THE house is finished to mutual satisfaction.

HERE you are assembled together, with your children, presenting yourselves
before the Lord. Solemn and pleasing prospect!

THIS, then, is the only thing that remains unfinished. Do but this, and all
will be happily completed.

NEED any thing further be added, to persuade you to reap the fruit of your
exertions?

DOES not every circumstance of this meeting, call upon us, and urge our
instant compliance with the king's directions? Does not yonder house, though
dying, silently speak to us -- does it not remind us of the certain and sudden
decay and dissolution of our clayey tabernacles, our natural bodies? and the
necessity of securing, in season, a new and better habitation for our immortal
souls!

WAS it not prudent to prepare and build this more commodious House before that
was totally worn out? And will it not be more wise, to look further forward,
and be preparing, by a right conduct in this house, to enter the far more
glorious courts of heaven?

THE unanimity and public spirit, exhibited in erecting this house, seem gently
to whisper and urge the propriety of harmony in worshipping.

AND the house itself, from every corner, echoes the same language. -- The
proportion of its parts, its simplicity and neatness, point to the same thing.

HARK! Do I not hear a voice! Does the house speak? or a beam from the wall
behind me? Listen! O WORSHIP THE LORD IN THE BEAUTY OF HOLINESS.


THIS is the way. -- walk ye in it. This voice is from heaven.

LET it be engraven upon our hearts. It will then be our passport into the
Assembly of the firstborn of God in the heavens.

THUS have I endeavored to illustrate and apply the text to the present
occasion, as was proposed.

A WORD shall close.

IF the object of worship is glorious in holiness -- if the qualifications of
the subject are beautiful -- if the act is reasonable, safe and pleasant -- the
motives generous, and the end happiness -- if the circumstances of the present
solemnity, the decays of the old house, and the beauties of the new -- if all
these call upon us, let their united influence animate our endeavors, that our
future conduct correspond to their general voice. -- And that our worship in
this house, be as much more spiritual, and our christian temper shine forth as
much more conspicuous than formerly, as the new house excels the old in
convenience and elegance. Let us, by a forgiving temper, by mutual kind
offices, by a sincere conformity to the precepts and example of the divine
Author of our religion: By this, I say, let us convince each other, and our
neighbors, that we have new and better hearts to serve God, as well as a new
and better house to the name of God.

HAVE we forsaken the former house? is it consigned over to oblivion? Let us
also forsake and consign to the same bottomless pit, all the old leaven of
hypocrisy, stupidity, biggotry, selfishness, ill will and revenge. In a word --
with the old house, let us all put off the old man, with his corrupt deeds;
and, with the new house, let us put on the new man, which, after God, is
created in knowledge, righteousness, and true holiness.

IN this new house, let us, as newborn babes, desire the sincere milk of the
word, that we may grow thereby to the stature of perfect men in Christ Jesus,
that when these earthly tabernacles shall be dissolved, we and our children may
be received into that house built without hands, eternal in the heavens. God of
his infinite mercy grant this to each soul, for Jesus' sake.

AMEN.

