Mr. ECKLEY'S ARTILLERY-ELECTION SERMON.

A SERMON, PREACHED AT THE REQUEST OF THE ANCIENT AND HONORABLE ARTILLERY
COMPANY, JUNE 4, 1792: BEING THE ANNIVERSARY OF THEIR ELECTION OF OFFICERS.

BY JOSEPH ECKLEY, A. M. MINISTER OF THE OLD SOUTH CHURCH IN BOSTON.

BOSTON: PRINTED BY SAMUEL HALL. MDCCXCII.

A SERMON.
PSALM LXXXV. II. TRUTH SHALL SPRING OUT OF THE EARTH; AND RIGHTEOUSNESS SHALL
LOOK DOWN FROM HEAVEN.
THERE is a grandeur and elegancy in the ancient poetry of the East, which, in
some particulars, has been unequalled in modern times. The words which I have
read to you include a striking illustration of the propriety of this remark, in
which truth and righteousness, two of the most exalted virtues conspiring to
ennoble the human race, are represented as forming both an easy and a happy
junction -- the one ascending from the earth as when she brings forth her
bud, or from the garden when it causes the things that are sown in it to
spring up -- the other looking down like the benignant sun in his daily course,
directing us by his rays, and refreshing us with his heat.

To a person of taste and science, the recital of the text will, on this
account, communicate an elegant pleasure. But when it is considered that, added
to this circumstance, it contains a prophetic declaration applying to the state
of man, we become interested in it as a public body. On the present agreeable
occasion, it solicits our attention, and will not fail, I hope, to afford us
entertainment in our several stations and capacities as good soldiers or as
statesmen, as philosophers and as Christians.

WILL you permit me to add, I contemplate it with satisfaction, that at the
request of this ancient and honorable Company, I have it in my power to
address you at a time, when, judging of the state of improvement, and the
revolutions in the world, the prophecy which it contains, seems to be fast
verging to an accomplishment. -- Scarcely will it be needful to observe that it
has an evident relation to the Messiah's reign on earth, embracing some
prosperous condition of things, surpassing any which has yet appeared, when the
knowledge and love of truth, which the Psalmist, by a bold and brilliant
figure, describes as coming from the earth, shall really arise in the hearts of
men, and the sun of righteousness look down and smile with blessings on them.

INDEED beautiful as the text is, it comprises little more than an epitome of
the illustrious signatures of the times it so happily soretels; in which,
relying on this and other gracious promises to the same effect, we find that
knowledge, liberty, peace, holiness, and happiness will universally prevail.

IN attempting to perform the duty annexed to the subject, it will be natural
for me then, in the FIRST PLACE, to propose to you some of the evidences
corroborating the text, on which the expectation of so glorious an era appears
to be founded -- offering some general remarks concerning the time in which it
may be expected. Having done this, I shall SECONDLY consider the means which
will probably conspire to its introduction -- subjoining a few observations on
the methods of improving the present complexion of things in the world at
large, and our country in particular.

AMONG the sacred references to this important era, the following, which are
selected from many others, appear to be sufficiently explicit. The earth shall
be full of the knowledge of the Lord, as the waters cover the sea. Wisdom and
knowledge shall be the stability of the times. There shall be abundance of
peace. They shall beat their swords into ploughshares, and their spears into
pruning hooks: Nation shall not lift up sword against nation, neither shall
they learn war any more; for they shall not hurt nor destroy. All the ends of
the earth shall remember, and turn unto the Lord. In his days shall the
righteous flourish. And it shall come to pass, that in the place where it was
said unto them, Ye are not my People, there it shall be said unto them, Ye are
the Sons of the living God. And men shall be blessed in him: All nations shall
call him blessed.

VARIOUS sentiments have been held by commentators relating to the time, when
these distinguishable prophecies will be fulfilled. Whilst one class of writers
has dated its existence at a season prior to the general resurrection or
conflagration of the world -- according to the theory of another class, it is
not to be expected 'till the second advent of our Savior on the great day of
judgment; after which, it is supposed that the righteous will reign with the
Redeemer on the earth, new formed amidst the convulsion which is to pass upon
the system, and properly prepared for their reception.

THE present opportunity will not admit of a particular discussion of the
subject. As it is interesting in its nature, and intimately connected with the
business of the discourse, I shall however briefly offer to you a few remarks,
inclining me to give the preference to the former of these theories.

IN the first place, it is to be a preferred on account of the general
complexion of the language used by the inspired writers in its numerous
representations. When we read of People and of Nations employed in converting
their warlike weapons into instruments of husbandry -- of the mountains
bringing forth peace, and the little hills producing righteousness, Psalm
lxxii. 3.
we find ourselves transported among beings of our own class and order -- we
mix in those scenes which have little or no affinity with the employments of
the resurrection state -- being vastly more allied to the circumstances of the
earth in its present situation, than when it will have been melted and
transformed by fire. And whatever allowance may be made for the figurative
manner in which the prophetic authors were accustomed to indite their thoughts,
the application of every metaphor is excluded from this subject by what we
learn in reference to the continuance of the season, which the Psalmist says
will be as long as the sun and the moon shall endure. In the 20th chapter of
Revelation we are informed indeed, that, at the close of this time, the
tranquillity will be interrupted a little season, by new enemies arising in
various quarters of the earth. But considering what is added concerning the
inefficacy of the attempt, owing to the direct interposition of heaven in
defense of the friends of righteousness, immediately preceding the judgment
and end of the world, the propriety of the observation still appears, when it
is said of this happy era that it shall last as long as the sun and moon.


SECONDLY, the doctrine, I think, is to be inferred, with some degree of
propriety, from a consideration of the nature and perfection of the divine
government and administration over all human affairs.

JUDGING from what appears to have been the design of the Creator, it is not so
easy to suppose that a period will be put to the world by judgment and by
conflagration, until a change has passed on it for the better. Scarcely does it
seem sufficient for the gratification of the good man to think that the clouds
which have hovered round this terraqueous globe, should be succeeded by the
brightness of some future state. As more honorary, in his estimation, to the
Almighty Architect, may it not be expected that the darkness, which, through
divine permission, has been spread over the earth, by the great adversary of
God and man, will be dissipated long before the setting of the sun -- that he
who crept in, by his wiles, into the habitations of men, will eventually be
driven from them, having first been conquered on his own assumed ground -- that
where in consequence of his success, innumerable thorns and briars have risen
up, the myrtle tree will put forth its fragrant leaves, and the little shrubs
their aromatic fruit -- and that in exchange for Eden, once the happy, but
forfeited seat of the two progenitors of mankind, a new paradise will be
formed, which instead of being circumscribed by the small bounds, capable of
having been traversed by Adam or by Eve, will be from sea to sea, and extend
from the river to the end of the earth.

INDEED of the rise and glory of such a distinguished time, we find there has
been a general impression with many of the most refined and polished nations of
the world. It is the season particularly noticed by the ancients under the
descriptions of the golden age -- the mighty years -- the halcyon days,
prognosticated by their common bards, and celebrated by their more refined
poets. The Pollio of Virgil Said to be taken from a Sibylline prophecy, which,
by whatever fraud obtained, corroborates the idea of the general expectation of
the times of which it speaks.
seems as if it had been composed with a pointed reference to the distinguished
circumstances of the important era; in which the writer, no otherwise mistaken
than in the name and title of his professed hero, bodly rises on the lofty
strains rehearsed in the imitation of the celebrated Pope, -- The Savior
comes, by ancient bards foretold;
Hear him ye deaf, and all ye blind behold.
No more shall nation against nation rise.
Nor ardent warriors meet with hateful eyes.
The lambs with wolves shall graze the verdant mead,
And boys in flowery bands the tiger lead.
No sigh -- no murmur, the wide world shall hear;
From every face, he wipes off every tear.
Fixed is his word -- his saving power remains;
His realm for ever lasts -- the great Messiah reigns.


Thus, as in the seventh day in the first sacred week, when the Supreme
Architect made a pause, and contemplating what he had produced out of the
preceding chaotic state, pronounced it very good, and sanctified it to man --
as on the sabbatical year in the Jewish economy when the land had rest -- so,
in this promised time of jubilee, the world shall enjoy an uninterrupted series
of happiness and composure -- the beneficent and wise designs of heaven
relating to the present state, assume the semblance of winding to a close; and
the affirmation of the angel to the Evangelist be accomplished, when he said,
that in the days of the voice of the seventh angel, when he shall begin to
sound, the mystery of God should be finished, as he has declared to his
servants the prophets. Rev. x. 7. -- It is well known that Seven is a kind of
sacred number in the scriptures, signifying in the several revolutions and
divisions of time, a season of religion and rest. For further particulars and
their application to this subject, the reader in referred to Loman and other
commentators on the prophecies.


IN the SECOND division of the discourse, it was proposed to consider the
means, leading to the introduction of this auspicious day. Among these, I
conceive that the progress of science in the world, holds a conspicuous rank.
Despotic governments, with their concomitant evils, always maintain their
strength proportionate to the degrees of ignorance among the people. The
dominion of tyranny is properly speaking a dominion of darkness -- supported by
the imposition of falsehood under the pretended vestiges of truth -- enervating
the mental powers of human beings, and degrading them from the rank of men.
Terrible in its external form, but base within, it may be compared with the
image in Nebuchadnezzar's vision, the head of which was of gold, but the feet
of iron, mixed with rotten clay. -- Against this, the kingdom of the Messiah is
professedly introduced, which, like the stone cut out of the mountain without
hands, will eventually overthrow the usurping idol, and maintain its place for
ever. Indeed, unlike the kingdoms of this world, it is of a spiritual nature --
designed to illuminate the understandings, and regulate the affections of its
subjects. By informing them for what purposes they were sent into the world --
enjoining a supreme veneration to the great Author of their being, and next to
this, and affectionate regard to one another, as children of the same eternal
Father -- partakers of the like wants, and brethren of one common family, it is
eminently calculated to meliorate the events which may be expected by them in
human life, until they are first prepared, and afterward translated to heaven.
It is the kingdom which God has given to his Son -- the laws by which it is
governed -- the promises which give it life, and the sanctions administering to
its support, being written by Prophets and Apostles inspired for the honorable
work, and guided by a hand which is divine.

WITH much reason it might be expected, that principles thus pure in
themselves, and friendly to the common benefit of mankind, would be disrelished
by despots and their dependants, whose object is a monopoly of power, as it is
of grandeur and wealth. Either therefore by a direct denial of the authenticity
of the sacred scriptures, or by the establishment of religious hierarchies,
professedly assisting, but actually subverting their operation, a great part of
the governments which have hitherto existed in the world, have united with
meretricious zeal. From such powerful causes, aided no doubt by the moral
depravity annexted to human nature in general, throwing a veil before the
intellectual vision, it has come to pass that the progress of religious science
has, for many ages, been comparatively small. But the interest of mankind is
too deeply concerned, to allow such licentious impositions to remain perpetual.
The enlarged cultivation of the art of printing, by which the mild and
equitable principles of our religion become more generally known -- the great
increase of commerce, introducing man to an acquaintance with his fellow man --
the burdens incident to tyrannical governments, with the public bankruptcies
which are threatened in consequence of the wanton wars concerted through the
mere ambition of statesmen and of princes, will no doubt, conspire in time, to
produce alarms, where despotism now prevails, occasioning many revolutions, in
which the people will judge it prudent to take the lead.

FORESEEING these things, it has pleased the benevolent Creator of the world,
plainly to foretell that the time will certainly come when mankind universally
shall be free. And he has foretold it, not only as a probable event, resulting
from an application of the truths of revealed writ to the general benefit of
society, but as that, which by his wise and holy providence, he is determined
to bring to pass. The language in which he has asserted it is, I the Lord will
perform it. In the government of the world, he no doubt, acts by means --
making use of the reason and abilities of his creatures in the accomplishment
of his wise designs. Acquainted with these means, and reasoning from analogy,
we may often judge of their operation with a great degree of probability and
precision. But there would be an uncertainty attending all human things, were
they to be left unaided by the concurrent influence of a divine and overruling
Mind. By ways and methods which are often out of sight by us, but perfectly
coincident with the well known and established doctrine of the moral liberty
and free agency of man, the purposes of infinite Wisdom are brought to view. In
expectation of the joyful jubilee on which we are now contemplating, we may
therefore rely not only on the probable conjunction of natural causes and
effects, but more surely on the divine promise certifying the event, and making
it the proper object of a rational and yet implicit faith. Thus supported by
the united aids of reason and revelation -- to the pleasure, we add the triumph
of our faith, in anticipating the happy era, when, in every nation under
heaven, the eyes of the blind will be opened, to release the prisoners from
their prison, and them that sit in darkness from the prisonhouse -- when the
brokenhearted shall be comforted, and liberty proclaimed to the captive --
they that erred in spirit, being brought to understanding, and they that
murmured to sound doctrine.

IN the preceding observations, the view which we have taken, has been
principally confined to the emancipation of mankind from the shackles of
oppression, and the emporium of reason in every nation of the world. A more
important article included in this promised era, is that of the universal
prevalency of religion; which, as it will be productive of the peaceful state
so beautifully described by the prophetic writers, will operate, with like
success, to complete the happiness and glory of the times.

ARGUING from the maxims already proposed, it is easy to conceive that at least
there may be a decided conviction of the value of political liberty, and a
general struggle in its behalf, where the knowledge of religions in its
spirituality and truth is by no means universal in its operation. The idea of
interest alone, resulting from the improvements made in society by experience
and by time, may be sufficiently operative in the production of very
astonishing changes in the political world. Whilst we are at no loss therefore
in accounting for the existence of such changes in the former of these
articles, we seem to be under the necessity of examining still further for the
cause of the latter.

AND this I conceive to be no other than the animating influence of the Divine
Spirit, which, when to answer the wise purposes for which the Deity gave
permission, the mystery of iniquity will have sufficiently worked -- the
weakness of all error been detected, and the force of moral principles obtained
at least a speculative triumph, he will then plentifully communicate to the
world; and thus, by refining the minds of men, will confirm them in the belief
of religious truth -- by meliorating their dispositions, insure to them the
enjoyment of liberty and peace -- and by sanctifying their hearts, prepare them
for the reception of every blessing they can enjoy both here, and for ever
hereafter.

THEN shall the reign of virtue -- the expected time of rest -- the promised
Sabbath -- the Messiah's kingdom on earth, be happily consummated; and the
ancient prophecy of Daniel, comprehending many others of more recent date,
advance to its complete fulfillment -- I saw in the night visions, and behold
one like the Son of Man, came with the clouds of heaven, and came to the
Ancient of Days, and they brought him near before him. And there was given him
dominion, and glory, and a kingdom, that all people, nations and languages
should serve him: his dominion is an everlasting dominion which shall not pass
away, and his kingdom that which shall not be destroyed.

PROCEEDING now from general principles to their application, it may be proper
in this place, to take a view of the present state of society in the world, and
enquire in what progress it appears to be toward the enjoyment of the expected
blessings -- so far especially as relates to the articles of knowledge and
liberty, which according to the account that has been given, will be
progressive in their operation, preceding the universal prevalency of religion
which will crown the whole.

AND I must take occasion here to congratulate my respected hearers, not only
on the present political state of their country, but on the circumstance of
their having lived in an age, when, as among the heavenly bodies, a newly
discovered planet, through the penetration of an Herschel, was added to the
system of which the earth is part, so the United States of America, by a mighty
movement in the great order of human things, were at the same time brought
forward to the admiring gaze of all the sons of freedom, and amidst their
acclamations, took rank among the nations of the world.

IT will be needless to attempt the recital of the remarkable scenes
accompanying the procession of this great event. With those who now hear me,
and have borne no inconsiderable part, as statesmen in projecting -- as
soliders by confirming, and as philanthropists in contemplating them, their
memory will be coequal with the duration of life. The principal business before
us is the consideration of their effects. And important as these have been to
the inhabitants of the United States, the circumstance which renders the
revolution of the highest value is the influence which it appears to have on
the sentiments of mankind in general, arising from the perception that it
embraces no other than the common cause of the great majority of people in
every clime and nation of the globe. -- Where is the place in which the
political doctrines which gave it brith -- the actions by which it was
sustained -- the signal providence appearing in its behalf, with the
unparalleled success by which it was finally crowned, have not been received
with avidity, and contemplated with surprise? From the general discussion it
has introduced on the subject of national politics, a degree of light has
emanated, through which many ancient but false maxims have been highly exploded
-- the design of government, with the proper business of public magistrates
been freely discussed; -- and whilst the antiquated notion of the divine
commission and authority of earthly sovereigns, true only as it related to the
Jews, has been giving way to the more rational opinion that it is God makes
men, and men make kings, MAN has come forward in his proper garb on the theater
of human life, where, instead of waiting like the silent mute for the single
purpose of external ornament, he has had his opinion to make known, and his
part of act in the important drama.

IN the mean time, the objects of religious hierarchies have been closely
inspected. Exploded in the new world, they have sunk in estimation in the old.
It is perceived that the rights of conscience are too sacred to be regulated by
mortals. The languages which has been held on the nature of religious liberty,
has been sufficiently energetic to command an universal hearing; and what a few
years past, would have brought the abettors to the dungeon or the stake, is now
triumphant over the united influence of the Inquisitions in Spain and Portugal,
or of the Vatican in Rome.

ON the subject of political changes, it is impossible to reflect without
advertence to the present state of France. Important to the world in general,
it is interesting to Americans, both as the professed friends of universal
freedom, and the recipients of the assistance of this magnanimous people, in a
time of trouble.

WE love the French: It is the debt of gratitude, for they loves us. In France
we have a brother. When the fair standard of American liberty was erected, he
heard the tidings. As the friend of liberty, he crossed the Atlantic to behold
and to protect it. He put his soul into the act; and having returned with the
affections of Columbia's sons, Fayette is now conspicuous near the like
standard in his native country, to join in dressing it with its proper
trophies, and to behold it flourish. The time is come when the like trophies
are in general admiration, and the sons of freedom, in whatever place they
dwell, are viewed as brethren. We have lived to see the world in mighty motion
-- combinations forming to relieve the oppressed and set the sons of Afric free
-- the rights of man assumed -- state prisons torn -- political and moral
principles examined with becoming freedom; and whilst many are running to and
fro, knowledge is increasing.

IN fine -- if it might not be deemed too particular, I should propose it for
enquiry, whether, judging from the past as well as present combination of
events, there is not sufficient reason to conclude, that we have advanced to
that important part of time delineated hieroglyphically in the vision of St.
John, by the pouring out of the sixth vial on the Euphrates? in which time, as
formerly by turning the waters of that river, and making the channel dry, a way
was found for the admission of the Eastern kings Cyrus and Cyaxeres into
Babylon, terminating in the deliverance of the Jews, then acknowledged to be
the people of God, so now, the floods of error are gradually passing away
before us, introductory to the complete establishment of the kingdom of
righteousness and truth, when, after the yet expected succession of events, the
seventh and last angel will pour his vial into the air, the seat of Satan's
sway -- a voice out of the temple of heaven from the throne will say, It is
done -- the millenium state, or empire of holiness commence with the
distinguished luster promised in the Messiah's reign, and the whole earth be
filled with his glory.

HAVING thus gone through with the principal ideas suggested by the text, and
taken a view of the present moral and political state of man, a few
observations shall be subjoined, arising from the particular situation of our
country, and on the happy methods of its improvement.

PERHAPS it may be thought a mistake, but I shall notwithstanding venture to
observe, that, considering the degree of political knowledge prevailing in
America, it appears to me to be next to impossible that tyranny should ever be
established in the United States. The sentiment, it is presumed, is founded on
the reason and nature of things: But if the preceding construction of the
scripture promises be true, it is removed still further from the admission of
dispute.

FOR myself therefore I must confess that I look forward, without the least
anxiety on this article, and anticipate many succeeding generations, each of
them illustrious for a happy race of freemen. It does not follow however, that
we are to expect a complete exemption from political evils. In the present
imperfect state of human nature, a revolution in the government may not only be
productive of a necessary change of duties, but in some respects, of a change
of dangers. There will every where be sinister and sordid men, who, when
desirous of places of emolument or honor, will be less anxious concerning the
means, than the certainty of their attainment. These are the time-servers and
the sycophants, who, in monarchical governments, will surround the court, or be
seen cringing within the vortex of the throne; and in the governments which are
more popular, will be equally busy, fluttering and negotiating, on all sides,
in the assemblies of the people. The object of their attraction is the same in
one as in the other situation: It is the power of serving and promoting them,
which, whether it be lodged in many or in a few, like the shrines of Demetrius,
will be sure of commanding a great crowd of adorers, crying, though in more
modernized language, Great is Diana of the Ephesians.

CONSIDERING this subject with the attention it deserves, may it not then, with
propriety, be concluded, that one of the most certain means productive of the
safety and happiness of a people, consists in their ability to distinguish and
find out disinterested and honest men to constitute the several departments by
which the laws are enacted, and righteousness professedly maintained. Let the
king live for ever, will invariably be the form of expression among suitors and
dependants, where absolute monarchy prevails. It is just as necessary in
republics, that the congratulatory address should be to liberty and the
constitution. Liberty is one of the noblest of all the birthrights, which a
wise and rational man can wish. But whilst the interested, as well as the
disinterested, may equally profess to be within the number of its votaries, the
inhabitants of these States will no doubt discover the necessity of committing
the protections of their laws and privileges to approved patriots --
judiciously guarding against the arts of those who merely address themselves to
the popular feelings of a day, thereby enfeebling the social compact -- and
preserving a just respect for the political sentiments which are frank and
undisguised, having been formed on an acquaintance with the history of
government in the world, exhibiting the various occasions of the rise and fall
of nations, testisied by reason, and confirmed by indubitable experience.

I CANNOT help adding a remark or two, in this place, on the subject of
religion. The unjustifiable influence of the Church, with the unbounded power
of its dignitaries and other priests, in various parts of Europe, has had the
unhappy effect of occasioning much infidelity with great numbers of the laity,
who, from their wealth and station in life, profess to think freely, or without
subjection to exterior control; and as this influence is now continually
diminishing, even with the other ranks and classes of the people, it is
probable that, in a few years, the interests of religion will undergo a more
material convulsion, the consequences of which will very generally be perceived
and known. Certainly there is much weakness in refusing to admit the evidence
of truth owing to the errors and misconduct of a part of those who are its
professed abettors. The various enormities, both in the doctrines and practices
of many churches, were really to be expected, because they were long ago
foretold by the great Author of our Religion; and every argument of this kind,
was thus completely wrested from the cause of infidelity.

BUT whatever may have been the bad effects of such religious impositions in
several of the nations in Europe, it is hoped they will not extend to the
citizens of America. For the credit of religion, it is no more than reasonable
to observe, that among the promoters of the Revolution in this country, there
is no class of persons who have been more indefatigable in their stations than
the body of the clergy -- explicitly declaring their disapprobation of all
religious establishments -- thus committing their temporal interest to the
governance of the people -- assuming no influence but such as might arise from
the general manner of their lives, and serious performance of the duties of
their office -- hereby removing every occassion of distrust and jealousy
against their order, and offering themselves, on well-known principles, as the
constant candidates for the friendship and esteem of those whom they profess to
serve. What the consequence has been, where the Church and State have been
blended together, as in some countries, is already discovered. What the
consequence may be, in relation to the present system adopted in America, less
than half a century now before us, will clearly determine. In the establishment
of the national system of government, it is a matter, I conceive, which is
worthy of attention. Whilst the clergy have no interest clashing with that of
the laity's, but the sacred offices of religion are engaged in by the former
from a sincere apprehension of their importance, and suitably encouraged by the
latter from the like faith and motives, it may be presumed that the most
salutary effects will be experienced by the community. In attempting to lay the
foundation for the happiness of posterity, it is not only wise and virtuous,
but absolutely requisite, to call in the united aids of morality and religion.
Never were the prospects of any people more promising and glorious than those
of the inhabitants of these States, or the means and capacity greater for
rendering them successful. Consequential on the exertions productive of the
Revolution in America, the mental abilities of her sons seem to have been
brought forward at an earlier period than is usual, and to have expanded to a
fuller growth. From the contemplation of the vast scenes through which we
passed during the war, and the great and important business which has been
transacted since the peace, there is an energy of mind, and a genius
characteristical of Americans, which, like a the Eagle in the escutcheon of the
National Arms, delights itself in soaring high, and beholding objects which are
great as well as deep. What tends still further to the growth of this mental
invigoration, is the knowledge of the vast capaciousness of the territory
belonging to the United States, already increasing in population with the most
astonishing repidity, and in like manner improving in the arts. It is to be
expected that the succeeding age will make progression both in agriculture and
science, which, if it were possible for us to behold it, would inspire our
minds with equal wonder and delight. On the excursive pinions of imagination,
we will now take the view. Roving by the perennial fountains, or on the verdant
banks of the meandring streams, we perceive the busy husbandman employed in
gathering the rich bounties of Ceres and Pomona -- the hills around him vocal
with the music of his bleating flocks -- the meads and valleys blooming like
the rose. Where the Wigwam stood, behold the Capitol erects its lofty dome, and
the sacred Church its spire. Cities after cities rise to court the admiration
of the observant eye; whilst Patriotism and Philosophy find new Washingtons and
Hancocks, Adamses and Franklins, to add to the resplendency and importance of
the times. -- Thus it is that Fancy assumes the privilege to indulge her
sportive flights. Guided, as she professes in the present case by the
conductress Reason, her flights are not in vain. Hail to the rising glory of
this Western World! Hail to the more happy days of universal peace and freedom!
Let thy ways, O Lord, be known on earth; and thy saving health among all
nations.

AS the subject on which we have contemplated, is highly interesting to every
friend of liberty and his country, there is, I conceive, a particular
application of it due on this occasion, to the ancient and honorable Company,
at whose desire we are now assembled.

Worthy and respected Gentlemen,

WITH pleasure I address you as the members of an association, incorporated
more than a century and half, as a military school and nursery for officers,
the utility of which has been experienced from its commencement to the present
time. Were it now a season of Alarm and War, it might have been requisite to
have discoursed to you on the immediate duties of the solider, or on the proper
use and design of Arms. In the present tranquil situation of the United States,
I have presumed there was no topic more naturally coinciding with your views,
or better harmonizing with the spirit usually cherished on this day, than such
as might lead me to the exhibition of some of the glorious fruits of the past
efforts of this country in the cause of truth and freedom; which, as they were
the objects with your Company, when it lately lent its generous aid in erecting
the waving banners in the military field, would in a similar manner, awaken the
same animation, if, in the course of human events, there should ever be the
necessity of taking the field again. You study tacticks from no delight in war,
but from the laudable and benevolent principle of maintaining righteousness
with peace. Inspired by so rational and conciliating a motive, you are entitled
to the thanks of your countrymen for the perseverance which you manifest in the
duties of your institution. From the respectable abilities of the Officers whom
in time past you have chosen to command you, as well as from the military
knowledge and attention of the Captain Colonel JOSIAH WATERS.
who leads your corpse this day, you no doubt derive very essential advantage.
Reflecting on the present glory of America, it is a satisfaction which you owe
yourselves, to call to mind how many members of your association became
distinguished in the late noble contest for our liberties, whose heroic
actions, with their names, the page of history will faithfully transmit to the
latest times.

THE polite attentions, added to the presence of your commander in chief, the
Governor of this Commonwealth, with that of the principal Gentlemen in the
civil and other offices in the State on these public days of your anniversary
election, must be convincing testimonies to you of their great esteem for your
ancient corpse, and their approbation of its honorable design. Having performed
the religious service of the Church, we shall cordially accompany you to the
Hall, where the festive board will be surrounded by so many friends and
defenders of the proper rights of man, and the hilarity during the regalement,
as well as through the future pastimes and military evolutions of the day, be
the result of those philanthropick sensations which extend from our country to
every nation on the globe.

RECEIVE from us our most hearty wishes for your future prosperity and honor.
Engaged in protecting the liberties of your countrymen, may you at the same
time experience the efficacy of that sacred and religious freedom, which is
proposed to us through the great Captain of our spiritual and everlasting
salvation -- that when you quit the ranks militant on earth, you may be
admitted to the angelick companies in heaven -- and putting off the sword and
buckler which are worn by Combatants, may receive the crowns of Conquerors in
the celestial state.

To this respectable assembly in general, let me now observe, that pleasing as
our political and other prospects may be considered, the time allowed us in
which to enjoy them is short and transient; after which, our conduct on the
serious question of their improvement, will pass a most solemn and august
review. An apprehension of the brevity of human life, should instruct us to
comprize in it as many duties as is possible. Among these, I presume, we may
rank the duties which we owe our country in particular, and the world at large.

SHALL I be allowed to make the enquiry, whether to the other methods of
improvement, and the numerous institutions among us, the establishment of a
Revolution or Constitutional Society, might not be attended with important
advantages -- part of the business of which should consist in a regular
correspondency with those of the same names in Europe, and the objects be the
dissemination of the great principles of liberty and good government, and the
introduction of some well-concerted plan among the nations, as the basis of a
universal peace. An idea of this kind has frequently been proposed, within the
present age, in several large or national assemblies in Europe as well as in
America. From the state of things on the old Continent, and indeed from the
complexion of the scripture prophecies, there is reason to think that very
desperate measures will be adopted, and that there will be much war and
bloodshed for some time to come, before the power, annexed to the various civil
and ecclesiastical usurpations, will be destroyed, and the people maintain
their rights. But as these important objects may be expected in the issue, no
small encouragement therefore is exhibited to each association on the
aforementioned plan; for though the good effects might not very soon be
universal, it is probable they would, in some particulars, be real; and in
junction with other means, might at length be happily instrumental in producing
the full establishment of the desired event.


THE happy influence of these Societies abroad has been confessedly
experienced; and in speaking of them, I am led to pay a tribute of respect to
the memory of a distinguished member, not long since deceased in Great Britain,
whose known attachment to the general cause of liberty, and affectionate
writings in favor of the interest of America, have inscribed his name upon our
hearts. Could we pay a visit to the tomb of Doctor PRICE, we would shed a tear
of friendship on his hallowed urn; or if the harmonious music of the band this
day, could reach the dead, we would bid it cease a while its martial notes, and
softly strike the funeral dirge.

WHAT a blessed revelation is the Gospel of the Son of God, in which we learn,
that after the body sinks, or goes to mingle with its native dust, the spirit
still survives! In the great world of spirits, the friends of liberty, in its
moral and most extensive sense, shall meet in perfect and never-ending bliss.
-- And with this idea, I conclude. -- Glorious as are the promises we have
contemplated relating to the prosperous state of nations, and the happy days of
universal jubilee, they are bounded by what may properly be called the events
of time. "The cloud-capt towers -- the gorgeous palaces -- the solemn temples
-- the great globe itself, with all that it inherit, shall dissolve -- and like
the baseless fabric of a vision, leave not a wrack behind." Or, in more
energetick, because inspired language -- The heavens shall pass away with a
great noise, and the elements shall melt with fervent heat; the earth also, and
the works that are therein, shall be burnt up.

BUT there are other promises which reach forward to eternity. If we are found
among the friends of truth and virtue, we shall be able to stand unmoved amidst
the convulsions of the present system; for there are prepared for us new
heavens and a new earth, wherein dwells righteousness; and we shall live
eternally with the Lord. -- To him be everlasting praises.

AMEN.

