MISCELLANEOUS ESSAYS AND OCCASIONAL WRITINGS OF FRANCIS HOPKINSON, ESQUIRE.

VOLUME I.

PHILADELPHIA: PRINTED BY T. DOBSON, AT THE STONE-HOUSE, No ^^. SECOND STREET.
M, DCC, XCII.

THE following pieces were copied out and prepared for the press by the author
before his death.

THEY are now published from his manuscripts, and submitted to the candor of
the public in the dress in which he left them.

CONTENTS VOLUME I.
AN extraordinary (...), Page 1 An improved plan of education, Page 12
Consolation for the old bachelor, Page 20 The old bachelor, No. 6, Page 29 --
8, Page 35 On Motto's, Page 42 On the ambiguity of the English language, Page
47 On adversity, Page 53 A revery, Page 58 A pretty story written in 1774, Page
65 A prophecy written 1776, Page 92 A Letter written by a foreigner (1776) on
the character of the English nation, Page 98 A political catechism, written in
1777, Page 111 A letter to Lord How (December 1776) Page 121 A letter to
Joseph Galloway, Esquire. (published in 1776), Page 127 Two letters by a tory
(published in 1776) Page 132 A letter to the editor of the New Jersey Gazette,
Jan. (1778) Page 142 An answer to General Burgoyn's proclamation, Page 146 A
proposal for establishing a nigh Court of honor, Page 151 A^vert sement
extraordinary, by James Rivington, Page 159 A reply in Mr. Rivington's own
style, Page 170 Intelligence extraordinary on the removal of Congress from
Philadelphia, Page 178 A summary view of some late proceedings in a certain
great assembly, Page 184 On the office and rights of a gr^nd (...)* Page 194 To
the people on the same subject, Page 21^ (...) a thought -- What is it lik^?
Page 22^ A new game at cards for the improvement of orthography, Page 239 A
sample of good writing Page 245 Speech of a post in the assembly-room, Page 252
Description of a machine for measuring a ship's way at sea, Page 274 Improved
method of quilling a harpsichord, Page 286 Description of a candle case, Page
293 A full and true account of a terrible^uproar which lately happened in a
very eminent family, Page 297 A remarkable historical fact, Page 316 Dialogues
of the dead Page 327 Specimen of a collegiate examination, Page 340 Address to
the philosophical society, Page 359 Account of a worm in a horse's eye, Page
372 An optical problem proposed to Mr. Ritt^nhouse with his Answer. Page 375
MISCELLANEOUS ESSAYS.
THE author used to amuse himself with writing, occasionally, little essays for
the Pennsylvania Magazine, published at Philadelphia in the years 1775 and
1776, by Mr. Robert Ait^en. The following are some of his contributions to that
work.

TO THE PUBLISHER OF THE PENNSYLVANIA MAGAZINE.
SIR,
I WAS much pleased when I heard of your intention to publish a Magazine o^
Monthly Miscellany. For you must know, Mr. Aitken, that I have long had an
earnest desire to appear as an author before the respectable public. When I
walk out alone, which I frequently do, observations and sentiments arise in my
mind, which appear to me as wise and important as many of those which the press
is continually obtruding upon the public notice.

TRUE it is, I have never yet been able to collect a sufficient number of these
bright ideas to form a regular piece of composition: but I had great hopes,
that if a proper occasion should offer, I might be able to furnish a short
essay upon some subject or other.

YOU may wonder, perhaps, why I have not tried my hand in some of the public
newspapers; but the truth is, that what with your Citizens, your
Philadelphians, your Lovers of Liberty, your Moderate Men, and your Immoderate
Men, there is no getting a word or two in, edge-ways, amongst them. Now, I look
upon your proposed magazine as a pleasant little path, where a man may take an
agreeable walk with a few orderly and agreeable friends, without the danger of
being jostled to death in a crowd.

I DETERMINED, therefore, to make my appearance in your first number; and, for
this purpose, I sat whole hours alone in my chamber: I took solitary walks, and
implored every muse to assist me. -- But all in vain. -- Those hard-hearted
goddesses were deaf to my earnest invocations, and absolutely refused to attend
me, either in their bettermost suits of flowing rhyme, or in their common dress
of homespun prose.

THE first important difficulty I met with was the choice of a subject; much
fruitless time was wasted in this pursuit. The whole train of sciences passed
in review before me; I chose, and rejected, my choice; I determined, and
altered lay determination; so many enticing objects courted my attention, that
fancy hovered over them like a bird, undetermined where to settle.

Having, one evening, wearied myself with this mental exercise, I retired to
rest. During the silent hours of night, when the powers of my soul, no longer
subjected to the directions of my will, were resigned to the influences of the
spiritual world, I was entertained with the following very EXTRAORDINARY DREAM.

I FOUND myself in a place where a thick fog surrounded me, and screened every
object from my view. The exerted powers of vision could extend no farther than
a few yards round me.

AT length I perceived a dense and sutty cloud, gradually descend and rest
before me. I attended its motions with earnest application. I observed that it
boiled in circling eddies, and labored with intestine conflict; it burst with
a peal of thunder, and vanished in thin air: and I saw an angelic form of
exquisite beauty standing before me. She was clad in flowing robes, white as
the new fallen snow, and was invested with an atmosphere of lambent glory. She
addressed me in words to this effect: Happy art thou, oh mortal! and highly
favored in this interview! I am TRUTH; and as thou art in the earnest pursuit
of knowledge, I am come to impress upon thy mind, by sensible objects, a
comprehensive view of human wisdom. Saying this, she waved her right hand, and
the fog dispersed. I then perceived that I was standing on a beautiful
eminence, which commanded an uninterrupted view of a very extensive garden.
Three sides of this garden were bounded by a lofty and substantial wall; the
fourth was washed by the waters of the ocean.

WHAT thou see before thee, (said my divine companion,) is the garden of
human knowledge. It is surrounded by a high wall, because the wisdom of finite
beings must be finite; and it lies on the banks of the ocean of eternity. You
may observe, that it has but one gate, leading into a long and narrow path, on
which nothing grows but a few nutritious fruits and salutary herbs. After this,
innumerable walks and alleys branch out, directing to the several departments
of the garden.

I SEE your eyes are fixed upon that remarkable tree in the middle of this
spacious garden. It does indeed make a very singular appearance now; but it was
once the glory of the whole scene. It is the tree of religion, and its fruit is
the most delicious and salutary that can be found in the whole garden. The
folly of mankind has reduced it to the deplorable situation in which you now
see it. Some thought its branches were too large, and spread too far: and lest
their shade should stint the growth of the paltry weeds they had planted under
them, they lopt off many of them close to the stock. Others, on the contrary,
concluded that, as it was so beneficial a tree, there could not be too much of
it, and therefore permitted the suckers to grow round its roots; and moreover,
brought cions from other trees and grafted them on the stock. Some learned
botanists insisted that all the virtues of this tree were contained in the
fruit, and would have all the leaves stripped off, as being of no use; whilst
others, as learned, contended, that if the leaves were preserved, it signified
nothing whether it bore fruit or not. Thus by their several systems and
improvements, they would reduce it to a mutilated, useless, and deformed trunk.

TURN your attention now to yonder labyrinth. That is the LAW department in the
garden of knowledge. In the center stands an elegant statue of Justice: but the
ways that lead to it are so intricate, and the paths so narrow and interwoven
with each other, that by the time those who reach it have got half through the
puzzle, they become more anxious to find their way back than to proceed. For
you must know, that the alleys are formed by stone walls and wooden fences
stuck full with nails and tenter-hooks; so that, if the bold adventurer should
even reach the statue, he gets there in a most ragged, and, sometimes, naked
condition. Moreover, the entrances to all these paths and alleys were much
encumbered with weeds, brush, and thorns; but a celebrated modern Blackstone.
has taken the pains to clear away a great deal of the rubbish, and has drawn
a plan of the several windings and intricacies of this labyrinth for the
benefit of mankind, yet the tenter-hooks remain in the walls as numerous as
ever.

YONDER large department is the district of PHYSIC. It abounds, indeed, with a
great variety of medicinal herbs and plants; but the misfortune is, that the
misapplication of their powers and qualities by unskilful pretenders, has been
the source of much misery to mankind. Add to this, that the affectation of pomp
and mystery, and the fopperies of fashion, have too frequently rendered this
important branch of knowledge ridiculous in the eye of truth.

THAT secluded corner, 'Dark with the cedar grove;
'Where fragrant spices bloom,
'And amorous turtles love
'Beneath the pleasing gloom,'
is devoted to the fine arts, PAINTING, POETRY, MUSIC, etc. It was once
enriched with a great profusion of fruits and flowers of exquisite scent and
varied hues: but these have long since been gathered by the artists of former
days. It is kept, however, in neat order, and furnishes many gay garlands and
agreeable nosegays. It must be owned too, that a modern poet Shakespeare.
cultivated here a number of flowers and ever-greens, with uncommon success.

HERE I interrupted my kind instructor, by asking, what that strange looking
place, near the walls of the garden, might signify.

THAT place, (said she) is a swamp, overgrown with briars and thorns. It is the
department of LOGIC; and the most useless and untoward spot in the whole garden
of knowledge. Nevertheless, there are not wanting some who take delight in
cultivating it. You see what odd nooks and angles form the outward boundaries;
and the internal parts are also cut by a thousand crooked paths, turning and
winding, dividing and subdividing, and all to no purpose.

THE proprietors of this swamp have, in vain, endeavored to drain it, as it
lies lower than all the neighboring ground. They have, however, somewhat
improved it by shutting up the most useless paths, and throwing bridges and
cause-ways over the marshy places. They have been pleased to dedicate their
labors to me; but I should be sorry if any of my votaries should so far
mispend their time, as to seek for me amidst the trifling intricacies of that
barren place.

NEAR to this swamp you see METAPHYSICS; but this department lies so close to
the wall which bounds all human knowledge, and is so shadowed thereby, that it
produces very few plants whose virtues can be depended upon. The laborers in
this ground are continually endeavoring to make peep-holes through the wall,
by which they may discover the adjacent country: but the materials of which
that wall is made are too hard to yield to any tools they can work with.

HERE my divine instructor turned to me, and said: I would willingly point out
to you the situation and destination of all the other parts of the garden; but
I perceive that by the natural course of your constitution, your spirit will
soon be again subject to your will, and of consequence plunged in the vortex of
the busy world. I hasten, therefore, to communicate to you some very important
intelligence, respecting both the spiritual and material kingdoms. Truths
beyond the reach of human investigation, which will tend to enlarge your mind,
and give you the most exalted ideas of the Omnipotent Author of nature.

ALL that extensive part of the garden which is bounded by the ocean, is
assigned for the several branches of NATURAL PHILOSOPHY. You may observe, that
a great^deal of it is beneficially cultivated, but much the greatest part of it
remains yet unexplored. By the study of natural philosophy and astronomy men
acquire some knowledge of the economy of the Great Supreme. In some instances
demonstration and fact confirm the truths discovered; but, in others, fanciful
hypotheses are substituted for truth, and errors become sanctified by system,
and habitual by education. My present design is to remove some of these
prejudices from your mind, and to enrich your understanding with true
philosophy.

"KNOW, then, and observe it well, that" -- At this instant, my servant knocked
at my chamber door, and told me that the barber waited for me. Think, Mr.
Aitken, what a mortification it was to me to be so unseasonably interrupted,
when I was just going to receive the secrets of nature from the lips of truth.
Instead of conversing further with that divine personage, I was obliged to
attend the impatience of Mons. le Friseur; who, without ceremony began to smeer
my face with nasty soap-suds. I heartily wished him in the ocean of eternity.

I MUST not forget, however, to tell you, that in a pleasant corner of the
garden of knowledge, I saw a neat little fountain of simple architecture, from
which issued several streams of pure water. On a handsome pediment in the front
of this fountain I saw inscribed THE PENNSYLVANIA M^GAZINE.

For the Pennsylvania Magazine. AN IMPROVED PLAN OF EDUCATION.
THERE are few objects in life of greater importance than the proper culture
and instruction of those who must in time supply the places of the present
generation.

VERY arduous is the task of education, both to the industrious teacher and his
assiduous disciples. What thanks then will be due to him who shall contribute
any thing toward rendering the road to science easy and pleasant, or shorten
the tedious length of the journey.

MANY schemes have been formed by ingenious men for this good purpose, in which
they have endeavored to blend the utile with the dulce, in so intimate a
connection, that the pupil becomes insensibly instructed, whilst he thinks he
is only amusing himself.

AS I am quite disposed to allow every person the praise due to his ingenuity,
I readily acknowledge the usefulness of their several devices: such as teaching
geography by maps pasted on thin boards, and cut into pieces, according to the
divisions of counties or kingdoms: commerce, by a te-to-tum: history and
chronology, by a pack of cards: and Euclid's elements, by figures cut out of
box-wood, with many other similar inventions, by which science is planted in
the minds of youth by the fair hand of innocent pleasure.

THE improvement I have made on this idea, appears to me so important, that I
cannot forbear offering it to the public for general use; heartily recommending
my plan to the trustees of our college, and to the patronage of the
legislature. I have, herein, not only united instruction with delight, but
added also the invaluable blessing of health; making these desirable
acquisitions to go hand in hand, mutually improving and strengthening both mind
and body, by one amusing process.

IN order to execute my plan, it will be necessary to purchase about twenty
acres of level ground, which must be well cleared of all encumbrances; and, if
laid out in a circular form, it may be called the whole circle of sciences.

TO begin with grammar, which costs the poor boys much trouble and painful
attention: I beg leave to quote a passage from a late humorous novel; from
which, I must in justice acknowledge, I took the hint of my improved plan of
education. The passage I allude to is this.

"HERE, Jackey, let the gentleman see you decline the pronoun article hic,
haec, hoc. Master Jackey immediately began hopping about the room, repeating
hic, haec, hoc; genitive, hujus, dative, huic; uccusative, hunc, haec, hoc;
vocative, caret; ablative, hoc, haec hoc. There now, says Selkirk, in this
manner I teach him the whole grammar. I make eight boys represent the eight
parts of speech. The noun substantive stands by himself; the adjective has
another boy to support him; the nominative case carries a little wand before
the verb; the accusative case walks after and supports his train; I let the
four conjugations make a party at whist, and the three concords dance the hay
together, and so on."

BY this contrivance, the common exercise of hop-step and jump is rendered
truly grammatical, and the head and the heels are improved by one operation.

IN like manner, may the young scholar be instructed in arithmetic, by the
healthful play of hop-scot; wherein certain squares are delineated on the
ground, and each superscribed with numerical figures: the dexterity consists in
hopping about on one foot, and kicking a piece of potsherd or oystershell into
such squares as shall produce the greatest amount of figures.

IT is easy to see that in such a commodious piece of ground the several
branches of mathematics, as trigonometry, surveying, navigation, etc. may be
acquired by actual exercise, in a mode very amusing to the student.

NATURAL philosophy may also be taught by the sports in common use amongst
boys. The vis inertiae of matter, elasticity, and the general laws of motion
may be evidenced in playing marbles, fives, and bandy-wicket. The doctrine of
projectiles, the accelerated velocity of falling bodies, and the parabolic
curve, the centrifugal force, and the laws of gravitation, may be understood by
shooting arrows, slinging stones, and throwing snow-balls. Pneumatics will be
taught in the use of the pop-gun, flying of kites, blowing bladders, and
lifting stones with a piece of wet leather and string: and hydrostatics may be
illustrated by the squirt and other aquatic amusements.

A SUFFICIENT knowledge of logic may be acquired by the same healthful and
entertaining means. Let a large boy represent the major proposition; a small
boy the minor; and a middle sized lad the conclusion: and let these three play
at hide and seek. A sorites may be very aptly represented by thread my needle
nan; and a dilemma by blind buck and Davy. Every species of syllogisms may be
exemplified by devices of the like kind.

THUS far the common sports of boys may be made the vehicles of instruction;
but some ingenuity on the part of the tutor will be requisite to teach them
moral philosophy and astronomy. In order to the first, I would propose that the
several passions and affections of the mind be represented by as many boys,
each of whom should have his destined course and distance assigned by the
tutor, who should himself represent reason. These boys should all be
blindfolded, and started as for a race; and whilst they are running,
helter-skelter, in full career, the tutor should exert himself with great
vociferation to direct them to keep in their several courses: calling out to
one to stop, to another to to push forward, and to all of them not to jostle or
interfere with each other. It would be proper that the stoutest and most active
boys should personate the passions, and that the cooler affections of the mind
should be assigned to the young, weak, and tardy. Large stumbling blocks should
also be placed at the end of their respective courses, which will probably
break the shins of those who attempt to pass their limits, and will give some
idea of the office of conscience: and it would be better still, if an impetuous
disciple, blundering over his stumbling block, should find himself entangled
amongst briars and thorns, previously disposed for the purpose. The
head-scholar should be seated on high as judge of the race, representing the
understanding: and the strongest lad start the racers, emblematical of the will.

TO teach astronomy, it will be necessary to make use of the whole twenty acres
of ground: which must be divided by concentric circles, at proportional
distances, for the orbits of the planets. Let the tutor place himself as the
sun, in the center: the larger boys representing the primary planets, and the
small ones attending them as satellites. The tutor, by the help of a speaking
trumpet, must direct them how to perform their several revolutions in due order
of time and place; which cannot fail giving these peripatetic philosophers a
competent idea of the solar system.

THIS is my proposed plan of education, and I hope I shall soon have the
pleasure of seeing it put in practice.

WHAT a glorious entertainment must it be to see a whole school of boys
practicing and actually performing their several exercises. Some hopping over a
grammar lesson; stepping by mood and tense, and jumping over nouns and
pronouns, verbs and adverbs? If the young student should happen to lean too
much on one side, he may be said to be declining; and if he should actually
fall, he will probably be in the vocative. There is no lover of learning but
must be delighted with such an exhibition.

AS a proof of my own public spirit, I am determined to give a considerable
part of the sum which our legislature shall order me as the reward of my
ingenuity, toward purchasing the aforesaid twenty acres of ground for the use
of the college.

IT may be objected, that this plan is calculated for fair weather only; but I
am now preparing for the press the completion of my scheme, by a variety of
in-door exercises; wherein I shall show, that laws and government may be taught
by the play of break the friar's neck; trade and commerce, by I am a Spanish
merchant; the occult sciences, by hide the slipper: and so on. But I will not
by anticipation lessen the pleasure my readers will have in perusing the second
part of education improved.

CONSOLATION FOR THE OLD BACHELOR. A paper, under the title of The Old
Bachelor, had been instituted in the Pennsylvania Magazine.

Mr. Aitken,
YOUR Old Bachelor having pathetically represented the miseries of his solitary
situation, severely reproaching himself for having neglected to marry in his
younger days; I would fain alleviate his distress, by showing that it is
possible he might have been as unhappy -- even in the honorable state of
matrimony.

I am a shoemaker in this city, and by my industry and attention have been
enabled to maintain my wife and a daughter, now six years old, in comfort and
respect; and to lay by a little at the year's end, against a rainy day.

MY good wife had long teased me to take her to New York, in order to visit
Mrs. Snip, the lady of an eminent tailor in that city, and her cousin; from
whom she had received many pressing invitations.

THIS jaunt had been the daily subject of discussion at breakfast, dinner, and
supper for a month before the time fixed upon for putting it in execution. As
our daughter Jenny could by no means be left at home, many and great were the
prepations to equip Miss and her Mamma for this important journey; and yet, as
my wife assured me, there was nothing provided but what was absolutely
necessary, and which we could not possibly do without -- My purse sweat at
every pore.

AT last, the long expected day arrived, preceded by a very restless night.
For, as my wife could not sleep for thinking on the approaching jaunt, neither
would she suffer me to repose in quiet. If I happened through wearisomeness to
fall into a slumber, she immediately roused me by some unseasonable question or
remark: frequently asking if I was sure the apprentice had greased the
chair-wheels, and seen that the harness was clean and in good order; often
observing how surprised her cousin Snip would be to see us; and as often
wondering how poor dear Miss Jenny would bear the fatigue of the journey --
Thus past the night in delightful discourse, if that can with propriety be
called a discourse, wherein my wife was the only speaker -- my replies never
exceeding the monosyllables yes or no, murmured between sleeping and waking.

NO sooner was it fair daylight, but up started my notable wife, and soon
roused the whole family. The little trunk was stuffed with baggage, even to
bursting, and tied behind the chair, and the chair-box was crammed with
trumpery which we could not possibly do without. Miss Jenny was dressed, and
breakfast devoured in haste: the old negro wench was called in, and the charge
of the house committed to her care; and the two apprentices and the hired maid
received many wholesome cautions and instructions for their conduct during our
absence, all which they most liberally promised to observe; whilst I attended,
with infinite patience, the adjustment of these preliminaries.

AT length, however, we set off, and, turning the first corner, lost sight of
our habitation, with great regret on my part, and no less joy on the part of
Miss Jenny and her Mamma.

WHEN we got to Poole's Bridge, there happened to be a great concourse of
wagons, carts, etc. so that we could not pass for some time -- Miss Jenny
frightened -- my wife very impatient and uneasy -- wondered I did not call out
to those impudent fellows to make way for us; observing that I had not the
spirit of a louse. Having got through this difficulty, we proceeded without
obstruction -- my wife in good humor again -- Miss Jenny in high spirits. At
Kensington fresh troubles arise -- Bless me, Miss Jenny, says my wife, where is
the band-box? I don't know, Mamma; the last time I saw it, it was on the table
in your room -- What Is to be done? the band-box is left behind -- it contains
Miss Jenny's new wire-cap -- there is no possibility of doing without it -- As
well no New York as no wire-cap -- there is no alternative, we must even go
back for it. Teased and mortified as I was, my good wife administered
consolation by observing, That it was my business to see that every thing was
put into the chair that ought to be, but there was no depending upon me for any
thing; and that she plainly saw I undertoook this journey with an ill will,
merely because she had set her heart upon it. Silent patience was my only
remedy. An hour and an half restored to us this essential requisite -- the
wire-cap, and brought us back to the place where we first missed it.

AFTER innumerable difficulties and unparalleled dangers, occasioned by ruts,
stumps, and tremendous bridges, we arrived at Neshamony ferry: but how to cross
it was the question. My wife protested that neither she nor Jenny would go over
in the boat with the horse. I assured her that there was not the least danger;
that the horse was as quiet as a dog, and that I would hold him by the bridle
all the way. These assurances had little weight: the most forcible argument was
that she must go that way or not at all, for there was no other boat to be had.
Thus persuaded, she ventured in -- The flies were troublesome -- the horse
kicked -- my wife in panics -- Miss Jenny in tears. -- Ditto at Trenton-ferry.

AS we started pretty early, and as the days were long, we reached Trenton by
two o'clock. Here we dined. My wife found fault with every thing; and whilst
she disposed of what I thought a tolerable hearty meal, declared there was
nothing fit to eat. Matters, however, would have gone on pretty well, but Miss
Jenny began to cry with the toothache -- sad lamentations over Miss Jenny --
all my fault, because I had not made the glazier replace a broken pane in her
chamber window. N. B. I had been twice for him, and he promised to come, but
was not so good as his word.

AFTER dinner we again entered upon our journey -- my wife in good humor --
Miss Jenny's toothache much easier -- various chat -- I acknowledge every
thing my wife says for fear of discomposing her. We arrive in good time at
Princetown. My wife and daughter admire the College. We refresh ourselves with
tea, and go to bed early, in order to be up by times for the next day's
expedition.

IN the morning we set off again in tolerable good humor, and proceeded
happily as far as Rocky-hill. Here my wife's fears and terrors returned with
great force. I drove as carefully as possible; but coming to a place where one
of the wheels must unavoidably go over the point of a small rock, my wife, in a
great fright, seized hold of one of the reins, which happening to be the wrong
one, she pulled the horse so as to force the wheel higher up the rock than it
would otherwise have gone, and overset the chair. We were all tumbled
hickledy-pickledy, into the road -- Miss Jenny's face all bloody -- the woods
echo to her cries -- my wife in a fainting fit -- and I in great misery;
secretly and most devoutly wishing cousin Snip at the devil. Matters begin to
mend -- my wife recovers -- Miss Jenny has only received a slight scratch on
one of her cheeks -- the horse stands quite still, and none of the harness
broke. Matters grew worse again; the twine with which the band-box was tied had
broke in the fall, and the aforesaid wire-cap lay soaking in a nasty mud-puddle
-- grievous lamentations over the wire-cap -- all my fault because I did not
tie it better -- no remedy -- no wire-caps to be bought at Rocky-hill. At night
my wife discovered a small bruise on her hip -- was apprehensive it might
mortify -- did not know but the bone might be broken or splintered -- many
instances of mortifications occasioned by small injuries.

AFTER passing unhurt over the imminent dangers of Passayack and Hackensack
rivers, and the yet more tremendous horrors of Pawlas-hook ferry, we arrived,
at the close of the third day, at cousin Snip's in the city of New York.

HERE we sojourned a tedious week; my wife spent as much money as would have
maintained my family for a month at home, in purchasing a hundred useless
articles which we could not possibly do without; and every night when we went
to bed fatigued me with encomiums on her cousin Snip; leading to a history of
the former grandeur of her family, and concluding with insinuations that I did
not treat her with the attention and respect I ought.

ON the seventh day my wife and cousin Snip had a pretty warm altercation
respecting the comparative elegancies and advantages of New York and
Philadelphia. The dispute ran high, and many aggravating words past between the
two advocates. The next morning, my wife declared that my business would not
admit of a longer absence from home -- and so after much ceremonious
complaisance, in which my wife was by no means exceeded by her very polite
cousin, we left the famous city of New York; and I with heartfelt satisfaction
looked forward to the happy period of our safe arrival in Water-street,
Philadelphia.

BUT this blessing was not to be obtained without much vexation and trouble --
but lest I should seem tedious I shall not recount the adventures of our return
-- how we were caught in a thunder storm -- how our horse failed, by which we
were benighted three miles from our stage -- how my wife's panics returned --
how Miss Jenny howled, and how very miserable I was made. Suffice it to say,
that, after many distressing disasters, we arrived at the door of our own
habitation in Water^street.

NO sooner had we entered the house, but we were informed that one of my
apprentices had ran away with the hired-maid, no body knew where; the old negro
had got drunk, fallen into the fire, and burnt out one of her eyes; and our
best china-bowl was broken.

MY good wife contrived, with her usual ingenuity, to throw the blame of all
these misfortunes upon me. As this was a consolation to which I had been long
accustomed in all untoward cases, I had recourse to my usual remedy, viz.
silent patience. After sincerely praying that I might never more see cousin
Snip, I sat industriously down to my trade, in order to retrieve my manifold
losses.

THIS is only a miniature picture of the married state, which I present to your
Old Bachelor, in hopes it may abate his choler, and reconcile him to a single
life. But, if this opiate should not be sufficient to give him some ease, I
may, perhaps, send him a stronger dose hereafter.

THE OLD BACHELOR, No VI.
-- OH, that I had been made an oyster! -- that I had been stationed in the
bottom of the sea -- the winds might have blown and swelled the waves mountains
high; I should not have heeded them. Mankind might have satiated themselves
with folly, iniquity and deceit; it would not have troubled me. But, what is
better than all, I should have propagated my species by a numerous offspring,
without the cares, without the plagues, without the expenses of a female
assistant.

HERE some journeyman philosopher would interrupt me with a learned
dissertation on sexes; and prove, by a chain of irrefragible suppositions, that
oysters are male and female. -- What Is that to you, sir? Who asked your
opinion? The deuce is in these coxcombs, that they cannot let a man go on in
his own way, but they must be throwing straws across his path. -- Go, Mr.
Philosopher, go, catch butterflies, and search for the pineal gland of a
musketoe.

OH, that I had been an oyster! -- It Is true I should not have known what are
called the joys of life; that is, I should not have eaten turtle-soup and
venison till I nauseated both, nor have drank Madeira till I loathed it. --
True, -- neither should I be tormented with the treachery of servants, the
hypocrisy of relations, or the insults and sarcasms of my fellow oysters.

YOU should have heard from me before this, Mr. Aitken, but I have been sick,
very sick, -- almost at the point of death; I caught cold by putting on a damp
shirt. -- If I had been married, my wife, perhaps, would have taken care that
my linen should have been well aired -- perhaps not. Be this as it may, I
caught cold, and was very sick. Nobody troubled their heads about me; I lay
helpless, languishing and neglected above; my servants rioted and plundered
below; every thing ran into confusion. The common comforts of the sick were not
administered to me; I lay many hours alone, brooding over my own melancholy
reflections. I thought I should die -- I supposed myself dead -- I saw my own
funeral -- Not a single tear to embalm my memory. A few straggling neighbors
attend the scanty procession, conversing on politics, or the current news of
the day, as they follow me to the grave. The day after the funeral, some person
of the next street asks one of my near neighbors, "Pray, how does the Old
Bachelor? I hear he is sick." "He was sick, but he is well enough now -- he was
buried yesterday." -- "Dear me! I never heard of it -- and how has the old
curmudgeon left his estate? -- "To the Pennsylvania Hospital." No more is said
about me -- they pass on to other chat. After three days, I am no more thought
of than if I had never existed, except by the managers of the Pennsylvania
Hospital. No widow to be visited and comforted for the loss of me -- no
children to keep my name and memory alive in the world, and to talk of their
dear father, some ten or a dozen years after my decease. No elegy in verse or
prose to celebrate the virtues I never possessed, or palliate the faults I
really had. Not even a paragraph in the newspaper to announce my departure --
Yes -- I had some comfort in supposing that my name might creep into the
fag-end of your Magazine, under the list of deaths, with a declaration that I
had charitably left my estate to the Pennsylvania Hospital.

SUCH was the dismal train of ideas that presented to my imagination. My
disorder increased, my life was despaired of. Some half a dozen second and
third cousins came to see me. They disgusted me with their officious and
overacted kindnesses. "Why did you not send, my dear cousin, to let me know you
was sick?" "I never heard a word of it till this morning, and I came the moment
I was informed of your danger." Says another, -- "Do take this." -- " Pray try
that." -- "There is nothing better for a fever, I have known it to do wonders."
Another of my very loving cousins sat down by my bedside, and with a doleful
countenance began a lecture upon the uncertainty of life, and the certainty of
death. After a few common place observations he came to the point he had in
view. "I hope, my dear cousin, (said he) that you have settled your worldly
affairs; your loving relations expect it of you; I hope you have made your
will; these things had better not be delayed; it will be an ease to your mind
when that necessary business is over, and you will not die an hour the sooner
for having completed it. We all hope you may recover; God grant you may! But,
as we are all mortal, and know not how soon we may be called upon, it is
prudent to provide against the worst." I told him that my will was already
made, and that I had no inclination to alter it. My cousins continued to tease
me with unremitting cruelty; my strength was so exhausted that I could not
scold, storm and swear, as I wished to do. I fretted inwardly; my physician,
too, was in league with my cousins; he denied me every thing I desired, and
forced upon me every thing I loathed and abhorred; my situation was truly
deplorable. I earnestly longed for a draught of cold water; I requested it in
terms of the most pathetic solicitation; but to no purpose. -- At length I
prevailed upon an old negro wench, who is not worth a farthing, and yet the
most valuable servant I have got, to bring me, privately, a tankard of water
fresh from the pump. I drank it off greedily. It threw me into a profuse sweat
and deep sleep -- it saved my life -- I began to recover. No sooner was I out
of danger, but my loving cousins, whom I had not seen for four years before my
illness, left me with one consent: and it is more than probable, that they will
not visit me again for four years to come -- Heaven grant they may not! But I
fancy I need be under no apprehensions on that account, a^ they will discover
by this paper that I mean to leave my estate to the Pennsylvania Hospital.

SUCH is the forlorn state of an Old Bachelor. Sick or well there is none will
do him a service, or even an act of charity, but from interested motives. I
sometimes wish I had married when I was young; but when I look round amongst my
acquaintance, and see a tyrannical and extravagant wife, a reprobate
spendthrift son, and a daughter, running off with the first vagabond that
offers, I hug myself in my solitary state, and bless my stars that I did not
marry when I was young.

UPON the whole, I find so many reasons to wish myself a married man; and see
so many reasons to rejoice that I am not; that my mind is like the pendulum of
a clock hanging in suspense, and perpetually vibrating between two opinions.

NOTWITHSTANDING all the fine things that have been said, time out of mind,
about the married state, I am persuaded that he who marries must venture
boldly. It is not a subject that will bear much reasoning upon. Ninety-nine
times out of a hundred it is passion, or interest, not reason, that points to
matrimony. Should a man, before he engages, call up to view all the disasters,
troubles, and inconveniences, some of which probably may, and others certainly
will, occur in the married state, he would never have the courage to engage in
it. In my youthful days I fancied myself in love two or three times; I even
made some advances toward a courtship: but I reasoned too much on the
consequences, and therefore I remain, as you see, a fretful Old Bachelor.

THE BACHELOR, No. VIII.
-- I might have sat in my elbow chair till doomsday, and revolved the matter
over and over again, till my brain had become as dry as a box of Scotch snuff.
I might have wasted the midnight lamp; read all the works of the learned, and
of the unlearned, upon the subject; and even out-studied Duns Scotus, without
being able to determine the point. It Is very strange, said I, that any
speculation whatever, should be supported and contradicted, established and
confuted by reasons so exactly balancing each other as to leave the judgment
hanging in suspense like Mahomet's coffin. The hundred-thousandth part of a
grain would set all agoing; and yet I cannot throw that hundred-thousandth part
of a grain into one scale, but I find just as much has dropped into the
opposite. In a word, I found it impossible to determine, whether I had better
marry or not.

AT last, an accident -- who would have thought it! -- an accident settled this
important question; broke down the dam which I had been so many years building
up, strengthening and repairing, and let out all my objections at once in a
torrent. It would have surprised any body to see how many prudential motives,
self-love, avarice, pride, peculiarities of opinion, etc. tumbled out, helter
skelter, head-over-heels, in the gushing stream. Here lay Pride, bouncing and
flouncing indignant through the foaming tide; there lay Avarice, wriggling and
twisting in mud and slime -- On one side, Self-love, like a tortoise, collected
within its own unsocial shell; on the other, thousands of odd notions and
peculiarities of opinion crawling about like snails, tad-poles, and unformed
vermin.

BUT the accident, which occasioned this extraordinary revolution, is worth
relating --

I acquainted you in a former letter, with my illness and recovery. For the
better establishment of my health, exercise and air were much recommended. I
made it a practice, therefore, whenever the weather was suitable, to walk two
or three miles before dinner. One day, as I was taking my usual excursion along
the road that leads to the lower ferry on Schulkyl, two women passed me in a
chair. The youngest of the two drew the attention of a momentary glance. I
thought I saw something in her that made me wish for a longer view. They had
not proceeded above an hundred yards when their horse took fright, ran up
against the fence, and overset the chair. I made all possible haste to the
assistance of the unfortunate ladies. The elder seemed to have received no
great injury; but the young lady, either from the force of the fall, or through
fear, had fainted away. I took her in my arms; her head reclined upon my bosom
-- she was delicate -- she was lovely: I felt an anxiety I never felt before.
Love, though I knew it not, stole into my heart under the disguise of
compassion. I chased her temples, her wrists, and the palms of her hands. The
soft touch thrilled through every vein, and awakened unusual sensibilities. She
recovered, and, observing her situation, with a gentle effort, disengaged
herself from my arms, and thanked me for my care with graceful ease and a
lunguishing voice. The elder lady, who was her mother, joined in
acknowledgements. The horse and broken chair were left at a neighboring house,
and I insisted on conducting the ladies home.

LITTLE passed during this walk but thankful expressions on the part of the
ladies, and polite assurances on mine. I did not fail, however, to examine the
young lady's person and deportment with great attention, and the more I
observed the more I was pleased with her. As they were both much discomposed by
the accident, I did not think it proper to intrude upon them at that time; but
took my leave at the door, with a promise to wait upon them the next day to
enquire after their health.

WHEN I returned home, this adventure engrossed all my thoughts; I secretly
wished myself some twenty years younger, that I might with propriety make this
aimable young woman all my own. What a treasure, said I, must she be to a man
of sense and delicacy: How happy should I be at this time if I had, in the
earlier part of my life, connected myself with such a sweet companion -- but I
have missed the golden opportunity, and must even fret out the remainder of my
days as well as I can.

THE day was long -- the night longer. The next morning was chiefly spent in
preparations for my afternoon's visit. I was uncommonly particular about my
dress, although I had no determined object in view. The barber had express
orders respecting the dressing of my wig; my best suit of broad-cloth was taken
out of the press, and my new beaver neatly and carefully brushed. In short, I
was more attentive to my preparations for this visit than I had been for many
years. But I placed all to the account of politeness and civility.

WHEN all was ready, I went to the glass to adjust my wig. I thought I looked
uncommonly well -- at least I observed a neatness in my dress and a vivacity in
my countenance to which I had long been unaccustomed. Certain reflections arose
in my mind which I could not then suppress. And thus I reasoned with myself.
Few men carry their age better than I do -- this must be owing to the
temperance and regularity of my passed life. A discreet man of fifty has the
powers of life in greater vigor than a debauchee of twenty-five. Who knows
what may happen? -- perhaps -- Oh! the enchanting idea! -- stranger things have
come to pass -- my fortune is unexceptionable -- my person, I think, not
disagreeable, and my constitution rather better since my late illness than
before. At this instant I took up my hat which lay on the table close by an old
quarto Family Bible, the corner of my hat, in lifting it, took hold of the
upper cover of the Bible and threw it back -- when behold! on the first leaf of
the aforesaid Bible, these words, in very legible characters, saluted my eye --
George, the son of Thomas and Alice Sanby, was born in the city of London, on
the 10th day of October anno Domini **** -- I need not give you the figures --
suffice it to say, that this malicious accident had a great effect on my mind.
It struck the topsails of my vanity in a moment, and dispersed all the gay
ideas I had conjured up. I left home somewhat disconcerted; and many jarring
sensibilities distracted my mind till I got to the house where I was to make my
visit.

IT is time to inform you that the mother of this young lady keeps shop in --
street: upon the profits of which, and the interest of a thousand pounds left
her by her deceased husband, she supports herself and her only daughter -- Her
husband had been a merchant of some note; but partly by loses in trade, and
chiefly by living too expensively for his income, had it not in his power to
leave any thing considerable to his family. This intelligence I artfully
obtained from an acquaintance in the common way of chat.

I was received by my new friends with great cordiality. The mother was all
complaisance and civility, the daughter all sweetness and innocence. Our
discourse first turned upon the accident of the preceding day. I was happy in
finding it attended with no bad consequences; and happier still (as I took
occasion to observe) it had been the means of introducing me to such an
agreeable family; declaring my intention to take advantage of it by occasinal
visits. To this a reply was made quite to my satisfaction. I spent the
afternoon and a good part of the evening most agreeably. I returned home in
high spirits, and much enamoured with the young lady. I thought no more of the
accident of the family Bible, but indulged myself for the remainder of the
night in a thousand golden dreams.

NOW, if ever you expect to hear from me again, I insist that you do not
entitle this, or any subsequent letter from me, The Old Bachelor. I am not so
old perhaps as you may imagine. I dare say Methuselah was in leading-strings at
my age, or just beginning to cut his teeth. A man so hearty and ruddy as I am,
cannot with any propriety be called Old -- Old philosopher, Old hermit, Old
married men, Old widower, may be well enough -- but old should never be applied
to a bachelor until he is a great deal older than I am yet -- thank God! You
may allege that in some of my letters I have called myself an Old Bachelor --
but I was not well then, and somewhat low spirited -- I did myself great
injustice, and have a right to recall the expression -- which I now do --
Indulge me in this particular, and perhaps you may hear from me again.

ON MOTTOS.
I WAS much entertained by your friend's explanation of the devices and mottos
which distinguish our continental bills of credit. When a motto accompanies a
device, there should be such a connection between them that the one should be
explanatory of the other, so that a little knowledge of the language from which
the motto is selected, should be sufficient for a discovery of the author's
sentiment. But I have often puzzled my brains to no purpose to translate some
of the mottos in heraldry; there being seldom any connection between the device
and the inscription. And as the grammar of the motto is almost always
incomplete, I have been inclined to think that the words were only intended as
ornamental, in filling up the vacant space of a handsome scroll.

YOUR writers of essays and pamphlets are generally very fond of mottos -- as
well no title page as no motto. The person amongst the Indians who acts in the
capacity of physician and magician (for they always unite these characters)
wears a leaf of some plant on his forehead or breast, to indicate his knowledge
in the medicinal qualities of herbs; just so a fragment from Virgil or Horace
is frequently stuck in the title page of a pamphlet, merely to show that the
author understands Latin.

IT is curious to observe how the works of the ancients have been frittered
into scraps for this use, and how strangely they have been misapplied. Three or
four detached words, having the least seeming analogy with the subject in hand,
are eagerly seized upon for a motto: whereas, perhaps, upon examining the
passage from which these words have been plundered, and observing what precedes
and what follows, we may find a sentiment very different from that to which the
modern author has applied them, if not directly contrary to it.

BY the same management passages in Holy Writ may be adduced as authorities for
every species of immorality and wickedness. For example, if I wanted a motto in
favor of THEFT.
"Stolen waters are sweet." -- Prove. ix. "Deceit is sweet to a man." -- Prove.
xx.
COVETOUSNESS.
"Wealth makes many friends." -- Prove. xix. "The rich man is wise." -- Prove.
xxviii. "Money answers all things." -- Ecc. x.
FOLLY.
"Inherit folly -- folly is joy." -- Prove. xiv.xv. "In much wisdom is much
grief." -- Ecc. i. "Lay hold on folly." -- Ecc. ii. "Folly is set in great
dignity." -- Ecc. x.
TATTLING.
"Hold not thy peace." -- Psa. cix^
INJUSTICE.
"Punish the just." -- Prove. xvii. "A just man falls." -- Prove. xxiv. "There
is not a just man upon earth that does "good." -- Ecc. vii.
SUICIDE.
"Put a knife to thy throat." -- Prove. xxiii.
REVENGE.
"Heap coals of fire upon his head, and the Lord shall reward thee." -- Prove.
xxv.
UNCLEANNESS.
"Cause thy flesh to sin." -- Ecc^ v.
DRUNKENNESS.
"Tarry long at the wine." -- Prove. xxiii. "Give strong drink." -- Prove. xxxi.
"There is nothing better for a man than that he should eat and drink." -- Ecc.
ii. "A man has no better thing under the sun than that he should eat, drink,
and be merry." -- Ecc. viii.
COWARDICE.
"Happy is the man that fears always." -- Prove. xxviii.
SIN IN GENERAL.
"Be not righteous overmuch." -- Ecc. vii. "Though a sinner does evil an
hundred times, yet surely I know it shall be well with him." -- Ecc. viii. "As
is the good, so is the sinner." -- Ecc. ix.
ATHEISM.
"There is no God." -- Psa. liii.


ABSURD as these applications of scripture may appear, I have known learned
preachers almost as much out of the way in handling a text. A text is a motto
of the first rank, as it is, or ought to be, the sole business of the
subsequent discourse to explain and enforce it to the improvement of the
hearers. How many sermons fall short of this end? How frequently is a text to a
sermon, what a motto is to a coat of arms -- mere matter of decoration? Or,
which is much worse, how often do preachers distort and misapply texts of
scripture to favor some new doctrine or erroneous dogma?

THERE is no doubt but that mottos may be used to advantage, when they are
selected with judgment, and applied as an authority or elucidation of the
subject in hand. They are with more propriety prefixed to short essays than to
prolix and elaborate works; because the general sense of a concise performance
may be condensed into a few words more easily than can be expected of a diffuse
and voluminous work.

THE AMBIGUITY OF THE ENGLISH LANGUAGE.
I AM by birth a foreigner, have been some years in the mercantile way, and by
a successful attention to business have acquired a handsome fortune for a
single man. Content with my acquisitions I closed all accounts, and resolved to
travel, and settle wherever my inclination should determine. This city, for
many reasons, became the place of my choice. I found it absolutely necessary to
devote some time to the study of the English language; and for this purpose I
purchased grammars, dictionaries, and some of the most approved authors in
prose and verse; all which I studied with no small assiduity. I thought, at
length, that I had made a considerable proficiency; but either I was deceived,
or the language itself must be in the fault.

PRECISION in terms, is certainly an important perfection in any language: but,
in this, the English tongue seems to be very deficient; witness the opportunity
it affords to your demi-witlings to quibble and pun upon every occasion; owing,
as I apprehend, to the ambiguity of the language: many words having the same
pronunciation, but widely differing in signification; and many of which are
both pronounced and spelt precisely alike, are made to answer to very different
ideas; hence the noble art of punning, to which ^e English are more addicted
than any other nation.

THIS want of precision in a language may sometimes be productive of real
inconveniences and serious mistakes, as I know by woeful experience. I will
relate a few of the grievances I have suffered on this account; which may amuse
you, but were, at the time they happened, truly vexatious to me.

HAVING a desire that my best room should be genteely furnished, I wrote to my
correspondent in London for the purpose; and amongst other articles, req^^sted
him ^o ^^nd me a handsome pair of dogs, and half a dozen of the most
fashionable chairs. He replied, that he had endeavored to comply with my
order. That the dogs he had shipped were of an excellent breed, and were
thought to be very great beauties, and that he had sent me as handsome a sedan
as could be made; apologizing that the other five could not be got ready in
time for that conveyance, but should be forwarded as soon as completed. Judge
of my disappointment when a pair of beagles came yelping up from the ship.
Besides the first purchase, I had two guineas to pay for their passage, when I
would not have given five shillings for their whole race. And ^he^ ^o add t^ my
mortification, whilst I was unpackin^ my sedan chair, one of my witty
neighbors observed, tha^ I was determined to have good cheer, let the world go
as it would; and then making three loud huzzas, said there were three cheers
more at my service. I wished the chair at the devil, and cursed the language
that was liable to so much ambiguity. I sold this chair for less than it cost
me, and had just time to countermand the five others my correspondent was
preparing to forward.

HAVING accidentally broke a lady's fan, I ordered my servant, the next
morning* to look for and purchase the best and handsomest fan he could get, and
carry it to the lady with my compliments. My servant returned, after an absence
of two hours, and told me that the lady refused to receive the fan; saying,
that he must certainly be mistaken; that it could not be intended for her; and
that she had no use for such a thing. I was surprised, and asked my servant
what he had done with it. -- "Sir, I have brought it home with me." -- "Well,
and where is it?" -- "At the door in a cart." -- "In a cart! -- A fan in a
cart!" -- I ran to the window, and saw a huge Dutch fan for winnowing corn.

AT another time, I wanted to rack off some wine, and sent my blundering
servant to buy a crane for the purpose. After a long stay, he came back and
told me he could not find one in the whole market, but had bought a turkey
worth half a dozen cranes; very wisely observing, that cranes were but poor
eating. In like manner, when I once sent him to buy a goose, he brought home a
taylor's iron goose for my dinner. There is no end to my vexations of this
kind. Having an inclination to ride out, I ordered him to saddle and bridle the
horse: but he came into ^e, sometime after, with the bridle in his hand, and
with an embarrassed countenance declared he did not know how to put it on the
horse. I called him a blockhead, and went out to show him how it should be
done; when, behold, he had contrived to fasten my saddle on the wood-horse, and
had been puzzling himself with the bridle, not knowing where to fix it. At last
I got myself properly equipt; and intending to visit a friend a few miles out
of town, I stopped a man on the road, and asked for directions to my friend's
house. He told me that I must go on about a mile farther, and I should see a
large house on the left hand, and must go in at a great gate. Accordingly, as
soon as I came in sight of the house, I put spurs to my horse, and rode full
gallop up to the door. The family were all greatly alarmed, as I had like to
have ran over one of the children in my way, and they were, moreover,
apprehensive of sudden bad news. I told them that I had only observed the
directions that had been given me, viz. to go in at a great gait; but they
informed me, that the gate at the end of the lane was meant, and not the gait
of my horse.

ONE of my friends having bought a fine mare for me, I told my servant to go
and fetch the mare. By and by comes the worshipful the mayor of the city to
know what particular business I had with him. I was confounded with shame, and
had a thousand apologies to make.

BUT it would be too tedious to recount all the blunders, mistakes, and crosses
that have occurred to me in consequence of the duplicity of the English tongue.

TO render a language precise and determinate, every thing should have its
proper name; which should differ from all other names as really as the thing to
which it belongs differs from all other things. By applying the same
appellation to different subjects, we are under the necessity of adding some
explanatory word for the sake of distinction: which is not only a troublesome
multiplication of words, but a clog to the language, and greatly diminishes its
force and elegance. Thus, we are obliged to say, a bottle-crane, a wood-horse,
a fire-engine, etc. etc. Would it not be much better if each thing had a name
peculiar to itself, by which it might, in one word, be known and distinguished
from all other things?

ON ADVERSITY.
THE least attention will satisfy the ^nquiring mind, that the present state of
man is not final, but preparatory to a future existence; the happiness or
misery of which will not be determined by the unalterable decree of the
omnipotent Crea^or, but will more probably depend on the temper and capacity of
the soul of each individual to become an angel of light, or a fiend of
darkness. We cannot reasonably suppose that God will forcibly compel any man to
be either happy or miserable. Good and evil are set before us, and our own
wills must determine the choice. Such, indeed, are the infirmities of our
nature, that without divine assistance we are unable to persevere in the paths
of righteousness. This assistance, however, is graciously promised to those who
sincerely desire it. To will, or not to will, to be good and happy is in our
own power; but really to be so, is the gift of God. He does indeed continually
incite men to a happy choice by the various dispensations of his Providence:
either by an accumulation of benefits, which ought to engage their love and
gratitude; or by suffering them to experience the trials of adversity, that
they may see the vanity of temporal enjoyments, and turn their views to more
substantial happiness. Yet so entirely free is man, that he too often suffers
neither of these powerful inducements to influence his mind as they ought. The
smiles of prosperity frequently producing arrogance, self-sufficiency,
immorality, and excess: and the wholesome chastisements of an affectionate
Father frequently creating murmurings and discontent.

IN the early periods of life, our senses alone are the touch-stones of good
and evil. Whatever is grateful and pleasant to them we denominate good;
whatever is painful and uneasy, we denominate evil. This simple distinction is
sufficient for the state of infancy, when the nurture and security of the body
is the chief concern: but when the mind comes to be enlightened by reason and
religion, it will easily perceive, that an undue attention to present
enjoyments, or a misapplication of them, may be productive of much future
misery; and that temporal crosses and afflictions fit the soul for eternal
happiness and glory.

HUMAN nature has a strong abhorrence of pain, grief, and care. Were it
otherwise they would be of no use in weaning the affections from the vanities
of the world. Most medicines are nauseous to the palate and severe in their
operation. In this their virtue consists. Affliction is the medicine of the
soul. It softens the obdurate heart, and renders it susceptible of good
impressions. When we are in pain and sorrow, we learn to feel for the distress
of others, and are prompted to acts of charity. When we find that the pleasures
of the world cannot give solid, permanent satisfaction -- cannot gratify all
our desires, we are induced to turn to that only Being who is the source of
true felicity, and in whom alone there is fullness of joy. In the time of
distress we feel and know what we only had, perhaps, a transient idea of
before, that the Christian graces and virtues are the only true sources of
happiness; and will be our comfort in the last inevitable hour: when all the
palliating vanities of the world, and the anodynes of pleasure, must entirely
lose their effect. The sensibilities attendant on affliction and distress, are
too strong to be continued through the common course of life. The wounds of the
mind will heal as well as those of the body. But if afflictions produce their
proper effect, the mind, ever remembering that those things may be, will
acquire a calm and steady adherence to the dictates of conscience and the
practice of virtue: not as a task imposed by a superior power whose wrath he
would deprecate; but as the highest gratification to himself. He will become
habituated to do good; and what is duty in others will be nature in him.

THUS it is that the calamities of life may become real blessings, if a right
use be made of them. If the smiles of prosperity do not fill the soul with
gratitude, love, and religious joy; they will produce arrogance,
self-sufficiency and pride: If pain, distress, and disappointment, the loss of
those we love, and injuries from those who love not us, do not wean the heart
from too strong an attachment to the transitory pleasures of life, and direct
our views to better hopes; they will either plunge us in the giddy eddies of
vicious enjoyments, to drown every painful sensibility, or will throw the mind
into a wicked despondency, and occasion profane murmurings against the Author
of our existence, or fix us in a gross and sinful infidelity.

I may, perhaps, in some parts of this paper, have left open a door for
controversy. But I shall not enter the lists with any one. I would rather spend
my time in the most unmeaning amusements, than corrupt my heart with the pride
and obstinacy of what is called religious disputation.

PLACED, as we are, in a transitory scene of probation; drawing nigher still
and nigher, day by day, to that interesting crisis which must introduce us into
a new system of things; ought it not to be our principal concern to use every
means that may have a tendency to fit us for that heaven we hope to enjoy? This
cannot be done by speculative opinions or ingenious theories; but by
habituating the heart to devout sensibilities, and making that, rather than the
head, the seat of virtue.

DRY and unfruitful reasonings, on the one hand, and the enthusiastic rambles
of unbridled imaginations on the other, have been the sources of much error to
mankind in religious matters. We are not all capable of understanding the
casuistical refinements of the book-learned, neither can we all follow the
extravagant sallies of overheated brains; but we all know, or may know, the
unquestionable path of virtue. Let us pursue that path with unremitting
diligence: performing the duties of our respective stations in life with a
cheerful activity; enjoying the world without being wedded to its follies, and
prepared to leave it when the awful summons shall arrive.

A REVERY.
I ACCIDENTALLY opened the 35th No. of the Guardian, wherein a correspondent
informs the Author, that some learned men having determined the pineal gland to
be chief seat of the soul's residence, he had procured from a great philosopher
a box of snuff, which had this remarkable property, that a pinch of it, duly
administered, would so affect his pineal gland as to enable his soul to leave
her residence for a while, and enter that of any other person; where she, in a
moment, become acquainted with all the stranger's ideas, knowledge, and
pursuits, by mere intuition.

AFTER reading the paper, I closed the book, and reflecting on the singularity
of the thought, I fell into one of those deep reveries in which the mind is
entirely absorbed, and rendered for a while totally inattentive to the objects
of the senses; forming a kind of waking dream.

I fancied myself possessed of some of this extraordinary snuff, and enabled
thereby to examine a variety of characters, divested of all dissimulation. My
heated imagination led me a long chase through the intricate windings of the
human heart. The rapidity of my progress made it impossible to delineate my
observations on paper: for it takes a great deal more time to write than to
think. But I will try to recollect two or three of my excursions for your
amusement.

AFTER taking a view of many capricious characters, I entered the pineal gland
of a miser, I found his soul seated on her throne, with a large family of
domestics around her: some waiting the orders of her will, and others executing
her purposes with the utmost attention and assiduity.

You see, (said she) with what industry I am laboring to fulfill the designs of
our great Creator. You know that he has assigned us our respective little
dominions here, that by a proper direction of the will, left free for that
purpose, we may attain happiness. I cannot indeed say that I have as yet quite
answered this benevolent end; but I am striving for it with all possible
assiduity. I have, by unremitting care and attention, acquired a large portion
of wealth, which would, I believe, make me very happy, were it not for two
terrible apprehensions. One is, lest, by some unforeseen accident, I should be
deprived of the fruit of my long labor; and the other is, lest an awful
summons should remove me from this government, and compel me to leave all my
hard earned acquisitions behind. I endeavor to guard against the first of
these evils by continually making such additions to my stock as to render it
improbable that any one casualty should deprive me of the whole: and as the
other is without remedy, I endeavor to think of it as little as possible.

I now took a view of her family, which I found in a deplorable condition
indeed -- and no wonder -- since Avarice was prime minister, and had gained an
entire ascendency over the soul. I saw Honesty languishing under an incurable
hectic: Conscience dying of her wounds: and Honor lay gasping for breath, and
as cold as a stone; all the noble passions were benumbed and frost-bitten; and
as for Religion, she was close confined under a suspicion of disaffection to
the present government, and of having formed a traitorous design to obstruct
the soul in her pursuit of happiness. I enquired for Charity; but was told that
she died an embryo: her body, however, had been preserved in spirit, and was
shown to me as a great curiosity -- Natural affection, sympathy, compassion,
and all the social feelings were crawling about naked and almost starved to
death. In the midst, sat the soul herself, sullen, fearful, and deeply anxious.
She was neither clothed with the robes of knowledge, nor decorated with the
jewels of fancy. In vain did Memory strive to sooth her melancholy, by
recounting the transactions of former times; and Hope, who should have sung of
joys to come, had got so bad a cold that she could not sing at all. Her palace
was in no better condition than her family. The necessary repairs were refused
or neglected -- decorations it had none. Within and without it exhibited the
appearances of extreme poverty. Numberless fine aqueducts were entirely dried
up and in a ruinous condition: others were choked up with undigested
crudities, and the animal spirits were inspissated by long inactivity, and
lazily crept through their rusty channels -- Even the throne itself, the pineal
gland, had shrunk into less than ordinary size; from whence it had been
concluded, that the man had a little soul -- but erroneously, for, in fact,
souls are of no size at all.

FROM this odious habitation I flew on the wings of thought to a character the
very reverse. I entered the pineal gland of a Libertine. Here all was uproar
and confusion: the soul seemed to have lost her command. Her unruly passions
had wrested the government from her hand, and tyrannised over her domestics
with unlimited sway; whilst the soul sat upon her throne in stupid amazement.
Religion lay in a deep trance; Conscience was dosing under repeated anodynes;
and the the voice of Charity could not be heard in the tumult. Hope was wasting
in a deep consumption; and Fear lay, with her throat cut, a ghastly sight, but
as the wound was not mortal, she made frequent and dreadful struggles for life.
Ambition was in a state of insanity, and played off a thousand ridiculous
gambols; Love lay grovelling in the mire, with his wings clipped, and all his fine
feathers sullied with mud and filth; and Honor had become so whimsical and
captious, that she was perpetually embroiled in quarrels and disputes. As to
the palace itself, it was so filled with combustibles that I expected every
minute it would take fire and be entirely consumed. I left it therefore as
speedily as possible, and by an easy transition, found myself in the pineal
gland of a sot.

HERE I found the soul sitting solitary on her throne, abridged of almost all
her domestics, and divested of almost all her powers. She was afflicted with a
deep and incurable lethargy, nearly approaching to absolute annihilation. She
might have found some degree of satisfaction even in her insensibility, but
that Truth, whose voice she could not silence, frequently reminded her, that
the dissolution of her dominion was near at hand, when the domestics she had
now dismissed would return, and become her perpetual tormentors. I observed,
with great surprise, that she had lost much of the spirituality of her nature,
and seemed to be condensed into an almost palpable and visible mass of matter.
I scarcely knew her to be one of us -- her habitation, for it could not be
called a palace, was in a most alarming condition. An inundation, highly
corrosive, had insinuated itself into every department, defiled the very seat
of majesty, and undermined the foundation of the building, so that it tottered
on its base, and seemed just ready to fall in ruins.

HAVING gone thus far, I had an inclination to visit a body after the soul had
left it. By an effort of imagination, I pierced the grave, and entered the
pineal gland of a corpse newly i^^erred. But description would here be highly
disgusting. Every thing I saw inspired aversion and horror. The hissings of
putrid fermentation -- the cracking of the cordage, and the bursting of
cataracts, sounded through the hollow fabric, and filled me with inconceivable
terror and dismay. But what alarmed me most, I perceived a gentle oscillation
beginning in the heart, and felt myself constrained by a potent influence, like
a person oppressed with an Incubus. These symptoms were the effects of my
pretense, and fearing lest a connection should be formed, I broke the charm by
a violent exertion, and with pleasure returned to my own body.

MY efforts were assisted by the noise of a fife and drum which just then
passed by my windows, and raised me from this strange revery.

A PRETTY STORY: Written in the year 1774.
CHAP. I.
ONCE upon a time, a great while ago, there lived a certain nobleman, who had
long possessed a very valuable farm, and had a great number of children and
grandchildren.

BESIDES the annual profits of his farm, which were very considerable, he kept
a large shop of goods; and being very successful in trade, he became in process
of time exceeding rich and powerful, insomuch that all his neighbors feared
and respected him.

HE had examined all the known systems of economy, and selected from them, for
the government of his own family, all such parts as appeared to be equitable
and beneficial, and omitted those which experience had shown to be inconvenient
or prejudicial: or rather, by blending their several constitutions together, he
had so ingeniously counter-balanced the evils of one by the benefits of
another, that the advantages were fully enjoyed, and the inconveniences
scarcely felt.

HE never exercised any undue authority over his children or servants; neither
indeed could he greatly oppress them, if he was ever so disposed; for it was
particularly covenanted in his marriage articles, that he should never impose
any task or hardships upon his children without the consent of his wife.

Now the custom in his family was this: -- that at the end of every seven years
his marriage became null and void, at which time his children and
grandchildren met together and chose another wife for him, whom the old
gentleman was obliged to marry under the same articles and restrictions as
before. By this means the children had always a great interest in their
mother-in-law, and through her a reasonable check upon their father's temper.
For, besides that he could do nothing material respecting them without her
approbation, she was sole mistress of the purse-strings, and gave him from time
to time such sums as she thought necessary for the expenses of his family.

BEING one day in a very extraordinary good humor, he gave his children a
writing under hand and seal, by which he released them from many badges of
dependence, and confirmed to them several very important privileges. The chief
of these were, that none of his children should be punished for any offense, or
supposed offense, until twelve of his brethren had examined the facts, and
declared him subject to such punishment; and, secondly, he renewed his
assurances that no tasks or hardships should be imposed upon them without the
consent of their mother-in-law.

THIS writing, on account of its singular importance, was called THE GREAT
PAPER. After it was executed with the utmost solemnity, he caused his chaplain
to publish a dire anathema against all who should attempt to violate the
articles of the Great Paper, in the words following:

"In the name of the Father, Son, and Holy Ghost, Amen! Whereas our Lord and
Master, to the honor of God, and for the common profit of this farm, has
granted for him and his heirs for ever, these articles above-written; I his
chaplain and spiritual pastor of all this farm, do admonish the people of this
farm, once, twice, and thrice. -- Because that shortness will not suffer so
much delay as to give knowledge to the people of these presents in writing: I
therefore enjoin all persons, of what estate soever they be, that they, and
every of them, as much as in them is, shall uphold and maintain these articles,
granted by our Lord and Master, in all points. And all those that in any point
do resist, or break, or in any manner, hereafter procure, counsel, or any ways
assent to, resist, or break these ordinances, or go about it by word or deed,
openly or privately, by any manner of pretense or color; I, the aforesaid
chaplain, by my authority, do excommunicate and accurse; and from the body of
our Lord Jesus Christ, and from all the company of heaven, and from all the
sacraments of holy church, do sequester and exclude."

CHAP. II.
NOW it came to pass, that this nobleman had, by some means or other, acquired
a right to an immense tract: of wild, uncultivated country, at a vast distance
from his mansion house. But he set little store by this estate, as it yielded
him no profit, nor was it likely so to do; being not only difficult of access
on account of the distance, but was inhabited by numerous wild beasts, very
fierce and savage, so as to render it very dangerous to attempt taking
possession of it.

IN process of time, however, some of his children, more stout and enterprising
than the rest, requested leave of their father to go and settle in this distant
country. Leave was readily obtained: but before they set out, certain articles
were stipulated between them. The old gentleman engaged on his part to protect
the adventurers in their new settlement; to assist them in chasing away the
wild beasts; and to extend to them all the essential privileges and benefits of
the government under which they were born: assuring them, that although they
would be removed so far from his presence, they should always be considered as
the children of his family. At the same time he gave each of them a bond
Charters.
for the faithful performance of these promises: in which it was moreover
covenanted, that they should have the privilege of making such rules and
regulations for the good government of their respective families as they should
find most convenient: provided only, that these rules and regulations should
not be contradictory to, or inconsistent with, the general established orders
of his household.

IN return, he insisted that they, on their parts, should at all times
acknowledge him to be their father; that they should not deal with others
without his leave, but send to his shop for what they might want, and not ^ell
the produce of their lands to any but those he should point out.

THESE preliminaries being duly adjusted, our adventurers bid adieu to the
comforts and conveniences of their father's house. Many and great were the
difficulties and dangers they encounterred on the way; but many more, and much
greater, on their arrival in the new country. There they found mountains
covered with impervious forests, and plains steeped in stagnated waters -- no
friendly roof to shelter them from the roaring tempest -- no fortress to
protect them from surrounding dangers -- many sunk under sickness and disease,
and others fell a prey to the barbarous natives of the country.

THEY began, however, under all disadvantages to clear the land. The woods
resound with the strokes of the ax -- they drain the waters from the sedged
morass, and pour the sun beams on the reeking soil. They are compelled to exert
all the powers of industry and economy for bare subsistence; and, like their
first parents, when driven from paradise, to earn their bread with the sweat of
their brows. In this work they were frequently interrupted by the incursions of
the savages, against whom they defended themselves with great magnanimity.

AFTER some time, however, by their indefatigable perseverance they found
themselves comfortably settled, and had the delightful prospect of fields
waving with luxuriant harvests, and orchards, glowing with the fruits of their
labor.

IN the mean while they kept up a constant correspondence with their father's
family; and provided, at a great expense, the means of procuring from his shop
such goods and merchandises as they wanted, for which they duly paid out of the
produce of their lands, and the fruits of their industry.

CHAP. III.
NOW the new settlers had adopted a mode of government in their several
families similar to that to which they had been acustomed in their father's
house: particularly in taking a new wife at the end of certain periods of time,
without whose consent they could do nothing material in the conduct of their
affairs. Under these circumstances, they thrived exceedingly, and became very
numerous, living in great harmony with each other, and in constitutional
obedience to their father's wife.

TO protect them against the incursions of the barbarous natives, and the
attacks of some of their neighbors, the old nobleman sent a number of his
servants, but then he required that they should reimburse him for the trouble
and expense he was at in furnishing this assistance; and this they cheerfully
did, by applying from time to time to their respective wives for the necessary
cash.

THUS did matters go on for a considerable time, to the mutual benefit of the
old and new farms. But at last the nobleman's wife began to look with an
avaricious eye toward the new settlers; saying to herself, if by the natural
consequence of their friendly intercourse with us, and constitutional
dependence on me our wealth and power are so much increased, how much more
would they accumulate, if I can persuade them, that all they possess belonged
originally to me, and that I may, in right of my prerogative, demand of them
such portions of their earnings as I please. At the same time, being well aware
of the promises and agreements her husband had made, and of the tenor and force
of the Great Paper, she thought it best to proceed with great caution, and
determined to gain her point, if possible, by subtle and imperceptible steps.

FOR this purpose, she first issued an edict, setting forth -- That whereas the
tailors of her family were greatly injured by the people of the new farm,
inasmuch as they undertook to make up their own clothes, whereby the said
tailors were deprived of the benefits that should arise from their trade: it
was ordained, that for the future, the new settlers should not be permitted to
have any shears Prohibition of splitting-mills.
or scissars in their families, under severe penalties. In consequence of this,
our adventurers were obliged to have their clothes made up by the tailors of
the old farm, although they were well able to make them up themselves.
Nevertheless, out of respect to the old gentleman, they patiently submitted to
this imposition.

OBSERVING also, that the new settlers were very fond of a kind of cider, which
they purchased of a person in friendship with their father (the fruit proper
for making this cider not growing on their own grounds), she issued another
edict Duty on wines.
, obliging them to pay her a certain stipend on every barrel of this cider used
in their families -- To this they likewise submitted; not yet seeing the scope
of her designs against them.

THUS she gradually proceeded in her plan, imposing internal taxes on the new
settlers, under various pretenses, and receiving the fruits of their toil with
both hands: moreover she persuaded her husband to send amongst them, from time
to time, a number of the most lazy and worthless of his servants, under the
specious pretext of defending them in their settlements; but, in fact, to rid
his house of their company, not having employment for them at home: and more
especially to be a watch and a check upon the people of the new farm. He had
also ordered that these protectors, as they were called, should be supplied by
the new settlers with bread and butter, cut in a particular form. But the head
of one of the families, refused to comply with this whimsical order. He engaged
to give the guests, thus forced upon him, bread and butter sufficient, but
insisted that his wife should cut it in what shape she pleased. This put the
old nobleman in a violent passion, insomuch that he had his son's wife put into
jail Suspension of the legislature of New York, for supplying the army with
pepper and vinegar, by act of assembly.
, for presuming to cut her own loaf according to her own mind.

CHAP. IV.
AS the old nobleman advanced in years, he neglected the affairs of his family;
leaving them chiefly to the management of his steward. Now the steward had
actually debauched his wife, and gained an entire ascendency over her. She no
longer deliberated upon measures that might best promote the prosperity of the
old farm or the new; but said and did whatever the steward put into her head.
Nay, so entirely was she under his influence, that she could not utter even aye
or no but as he directed her. For he had cunningly persuaded her, that it was
very fashionable for women of quality to wear padlocks on their lips; and he
accordingly fastened a small padlock to each corner of her mouth: when the one
was open she could only cry aye; and when the other was unlocked she could only
say no. And he took care to keep the keys of these padlocks in his own pocket;
so that her words were the expressions of his will rather than of her own.

NOW the old lady and the steward had set themselves strenuously against the
people of the new farm; and began to devise ways and means for their total and
unconditional subjection. And to this end they prevailed on the nobleman to
sign an edict against the new settlers; in which it was declared, that, as
children, it was their duty to contribute toward supplying their father's
table with provisions, and toward the support of the dignity of his family;
for which purposes it was ordained, that all their spoons, knives and forks,
plates and porringers, should be marked The Stamp act.
with a certain mark by officers he should appoint for the purpose; for which
marking they should pay certain fees into his strong box: and it was ordained,
that they should not, under severe penalties, presume to use any spoon, knife,
fork, plate or porringer before it had been so marked by the officer, and the
fees paid.

THE inhabitants of the new farm began now to see that their father's
affections were alienated from them; and that their mother was but a base
mother-in-law, governed by their enemy the steward. They were thrown into great
confusion and distress by this discovery. They wrote the most supplicating
letters to their father; in which they acknowledged their dependence upon him
in terms of the most sincere affection and respect. They reminded him of the
difficulties and hardships they had suffered in settling this new farm; and
pointed out the great addition of wealth and power his family had acquired by
their improvement of an unprofitable wilderness; and showed him that all the
fruits of their labor must, by a natural circulation, finally enrich his
money-box. They mentioned, in terms of humility, his promises and engagements
to them when they left home, and the bonds Charters.
he had given them; and held up in a strong point of view, the solemnity and
importance of the Great Paper. They acknowledged that he ought to be
re-imbursed the expenses he had incurred upon their account; and that it was
their duty to assist in supporting the dignity of the family. All this they
declared they were willing and ready to do; but requested that they might do it
in the manner pointed out by the Great Paper; by applying to their respective
wives for the keys of their money-boxes, and furnishing him from thence: but
earnestly prayed that they might not be subjected to the caprice and tyranny of
an avaricious mother-in-law, whom they had never chosen, and of a steward, who
was their declared enemy.

SOME of these letters were intercepted by the steward; others indeed were
delivered to the nobleman: but he was persuaded not only to treat them with
contempt, but to insist the more strenuously on the right his wife claimed to
mark the knives and forks, plates and porringers, of the new settlers.

WHEN the people of the new farm heard of the ill success of their letters, and
understood how matters were conducted in their father's family, they were
exceedingly alarmed and distressed. They consulted together on the situation of
affairs, and determined that they would no longer submit to the arbitrary
impositions of their mother-in-law, and of their enemy the steward; that they
considered the new decree as a direct violation of the Great Paper; and would
not pay obedience to it, but would sup their broth and eat their pudding as
usual, without having their spoons, knives and forks, plates or porringers,
marked by the new officers.

THE old nobleman and his wife, finding that the new decree could not be
established without actual force, and fearing the consequences of an open
contest, thought fit to annul the offensive edict, under the pretense of mere
expediency; Declaratory Act.
declaring and protesting, at the same time, that he and his wife had an
undoubted right to mark all the furniture of the new settlers, if they pleased,
from the silver tankard in the closet to the chamber pot under the bed: that,
with respect to them, he was not bound by the shackles of the Great Paper; and
in a word, that he and wife had, and ought to have, an uncontroled power over
them, their lives, liberties, and property.

THE people, however, took little notice of these pompous declarations. They
were glad that the marking decree was annulled; and were in hopes that by
degrees things would settle in their former course, and mutual affection be
again restored.

CHAP. V.
IN the mean time the new settlers increased exceedingly, their dealings at
their father's shop became proportionably enlarged, and their partiality for
their brethren of the old farm was sincere and manifest. They suffered, indeed,
some in conveniences from the protectors which had been stationed amongst them,
who became very troublesome in their houses. They introduced riot and
intemperance into their families, debauched their daughters, and derided the
orders they had made for their own good government. Moreover, the old nobleman
had, at different times, sent over to them a great number of thieves,
murderers, and robbers, who did much mischief by practicing those crimes for
which they had been banished from the old farm. But they bore those evils with
as much patience as could be expected; not choosing to trouble their old father
with complaints, unless in cases of important necessity.

NOW the steward began to hate the new settlers with exceeding great hatred,
and determined to renew his attack upon their peace and happiness. He artfully
insinuated to the nobleman and his foolish wife, that it was very mean, and
unbecoming their greatness, to receive the contributions of the people of the
new farm through the consent of their respective wives: that upon this footing
they might some time or other refuse to comply with his requisitions, if they
should take into their heads to think them oppressive and unreasonable; and
that it was high time they should be compelled to acknowledge his unlimited
power and his wife's omnipotence, which, if not enforced now, they would soon
be able to resist, as they were daily increasing in numbers and strength.

ANOTHER decree was, therefore, prepared and published, directing that the
people of the new farm should pay a certain stipend upon particular goods,
Painter's colors, glass* etc.
which they were not allowed to purchase any where but at their father's shop;
specifying that this imposition should not be laid as an advance upon the
original price of these goods, but should be paid as a tax on their arrival in
the new farm; for the express purpose of supporting the dignity of the
nobleman's family, and for re-imbursing the expenses he pretended to have been
at on their account.

THIS new decree occasioned great uneasiness. The people saw plainly that the
steward and their mother-in-law were determined to enslave and ruin them. They
again consulted together, and wrote, as before, the most dutiful and persuasive
letters to their father -- but to no purpose -- a deaf ear was turned against
all their remonstrances, and their humble requests rejected with contempt.

FINDING that this moderate and decent conduct brought them no relief, they had
recourse to another expedient: they bound themselves to each other in a solemn
engagement, Non-importation agreement.
not to deal any more at their father's shop, until this unconstitutional
decree should be repealed, which they one and all declared to be a direct
violation of the Great Paper.

THIS agreement was so strictly observed, that in a few months the clerks and
apprentices in the old gentleman's shop began to raise a terrible outcry. They
declared, that their master's trade was declining exceedingly, and that his
wife and steward would by their mischievous machinations ruin the whole farm.
They sharpened their pens, and attacked the steward, and even the old lady
herself, with great severity: insomuch, that it was thought proper to withdraw
this attempt also, upon the rights and liberties of the new settlers. One part
only of the decree was left still in force, viz. the tax upon water gruel. Tea.


NOW there were certain men The India company.
in the old farm, who had obtained an exclusive right of selling water gruel.
Vast quantities of this gruel were vended amongst the new settlers, as they
were extremely fond of it, and used it universally in their families. They did
not, however, trouble themselves much about the tax on water gruel; they were
well pleased with the repeal of the other parts of the decree, and fond as they
were of this gruel, they considered it as not absolutely necessary to the
comfort of life, and determined to give up the use of it in their families, and
so avoid the effects of that part of the decree.

THE steward found his designs again frustrated: but was not discouraged by the
disappointment. He devised another scheme, so artfully contrived, that he
thought himself sure of success. He sent for the persons who had the sole right
of vending water gruel; and after reminding them of the obligations they were
under to the nobleman and his wife for the exclusive privilege they enjoyed, he
requested that they would send sundry wagons laden with gruel to the new farm;
promising that the accustomed duty which they paid for their exclusive right
should be taken off from all the gruel they should so send amongst the new
settlers; and that in case their cargoes should come to any damage, the loss
should be made good to them out of his master's coffers.

THE gruel-merchants readily consented to this proposal; considering that if
their cargoes were sold, their profits would be very great; and if they failed,
the steward was to pay the damage. On the other hand, the steward hoped that
the new settlers would not be able to resist a temptation, thus thrown in their
way, of purchasing their favorite gruel, to which they had been so long
accustomed; and if they did use it, subject to the tax aforesaid, he would
consider this as a voluntary acknowledgement that the nobleman and his wife had
a right to lay upon them what impositions they pleased, and as a resignation of
the privileges of the Great Paper.

BUT the new settlers were well aware of this decoy. They saw plainly that the
gruel was not sent for their accommodation; and that if they su^^ered any part
of it to be sold amongst them, subject to the tax imposed by the new decree, it
would be considered as a willing submission to the assumed omnipotence of their
mother-in-law, and a precedent for future unlimited impositions. Some,
therefore, would not permit the wagons to be unladen at all; but sent them
back untouched to the gruel-merchants; and others suffered them to unload, but
would not touch the dangerous commodity; so that it lay neglected about the
roads and highways till it was quite spoiled. But one of the new settlers,
whose name was JACK, either from a keener sense of the injuries intended, or
from the necessity of his situation, which was such that he could not send back
the gruel, because of a number of mercenaries Board of Commissioners.
whom his father had stationed in his house to be a watch over him -- he, I
say, being almost driven to despair, stove Destruction of the tea at Boston.
to pieces the casks of gruel which had been sent him, and utterly destroyed
the whole cargo.

CHAP. VI.
THESE violent proceedings were soon known at the old farm. Great was the
uproar there. The old nobleman fell into a furious passion, declaring that the
new settlers meant to throw off all dependence upon him, and rebel against his
authority. His wife also tore the padlocks from her lips, and raved and stormed
like a Billingsgate, and the steward lost all patience and moderation --
swearing most profanely, that he would leave no stone unturned, till he had
humbled the settlers of the new farm at his feet, and caused their father to
tread upon their necks. Moreover, the gruel-merchants roared and bellowed for
the loss of their gruel; and the clerks and apprentices were in the utmost
consternation lest the people of the new farm should again agree to have no
dealings with their father's shop.

VENGEANCE was forthwith prepared, especially against Jack. With him they
determined to begin; hoping that by making a severe example of him, they should
so terrify the other families, that they would all submit to the power of the
steward and acknowledge the omnipotence of the great Madam.

A very large padlock The Boston Port-bill.
was sent over to be fastened on Jack's great gate; the key of which was given
to the old nobleman, who was not to suffer it to be opened until Jack had paid
for the gruel he had spilt, and resigned all claim to the privileges of the
Great Paper -- nor even then, unless he should think fit. Secondly, A decree
was made to new model the regulations and economy of Jack's family, in such
manner that they might in future be more subjected to the will of the steward.
And, thirdly, A large gallows was erected before the mansion house in the old
farm, that if any of Jack's children should be suspected of misbehaviour, they
should not be convicted or acquitted by the voice of their brethren, according
to the purport of the Great Paper, but he tied neck and heels, and sent over to
be hanged on this gallows.

ON hearing of these severities, the people were highly enraged. They were at a
loss how to act, or by what means they should avoid the threatened vengeance.
But the old lady and the steward persisted. The great padlock was fastened on
Jack's gate, and the key given to the nobleman as had been determined on;
without waiting to know whether Jack would pay for the gruel, or allowing him
an opportunity to make any apology or defense.

POOR Jack was now in a deplorable condition indeed: The great inlet to his
farm was entirely shut up; so that he could neither carry out the produce of
his land for sale, nor receive from abroad the necessaries for his family.

BUT this was not all -- The old nobleman, along with the padlock aforesaid,
had sent an overseer General Gage, made Governor of the province.
to hector and domineer over Jack and his family, and to endeavor to break his
spirits by every possible severity; for which purpose, this overseer was
attended by a great number of mercenaries, and armed with more than common
authorities.

WHEN the overseer first arrived in Jack's family, he was received with great
respect, because he was the delegate of their aged father. For, notwithstanding
all that had past, the people of the new farm loved and revered the old
nobleman with true filial affection: and attributed his unkindness entirely to
the intrigues of the steward.

BUT this fair weather did not last long. The new overseer took the first
opportunity to show that he had no intention of living in harmony and
friendship with the family -- Some of Jack's domestics had put on their Sunday
clothes, and waited on the overseer in the great parlour, to pay him their
compliments on his arrival Address to General Gage.
; and to request his assistance in reconciling their father to them, and
restoring peace and cordiality between the old and new farms. But he, in a most
abrupt and rude manner, stopped them short in the midst of their address;
called them a parcel of disobedient scoundrels; bid them go about their
business; and turning round on his heel, left the room with an air of contempt
and disdain.

CHAP. VII.
THE people of the new farm seeing the importance of their situation, had
appointed a grand committee, consisting of some of the most respectable
characters from each family, to manage their affairs in this difficult crisis.
Jack, thus oppressed and insulted, requested the advice Boston consults the
congress of the states.
of the grand committee as to his conduct. This committee in their answer,
sympathized cordially with him in his afflictions -- they exhorted him to bear
his suffering with fortitude for a time; assuring him, that they looked upon
the insults and punishments inflicted on him with the same indignation as if
they had been inflicted on themselves; and promised to stand by and support him
to the last -- They recommended it to him to be firm and steady in the cause of
liberty and their just rights, and never to acknowledge the omnipotence of
their mother-in-law, nor submit to the machinations of their enemy the steward.

IN the mean time, lest Jack's family should suffer for want of necessaries,
his great gate being fast locked, contributions were raised for his relief
amongst the other families Money raised by the states for the relief of the
poor of Boston.
, and handed to him over the garden wall.

THE new overseer still persisted in his hostile behavior, taking every
opportunity to mortify and insult Jack and his family -- observing that some of
the children and domestics held frequent meetings and consultations together,
sometimes in the garret, and sometimes in the stable, and understanding that an
agreement not to deal with their father's shop, until their grievances should
be redressed, was again talked of, he wrote a thundering prohibition
Proclamation at Boston forbidding town meetings.
, much like a pope's bull, which he caused to be pasted up in every room of the
house -- In which he declared and protested, that such meetings were
treasonable, traitorous, and rebellious, contrary to the dignity of his master,
the nobleman, and inconsistent with the duty they owed to his omnipotent wife:
and threatened that if two of the family should be found whispering together,
they should be sent over in chains to the old farm, and hanged upon the great
gallows before the mansion house.

THESE harsh and unconstitutional proceedings of the overseer, so highly
irrita^ Jack, and the other families of the new farm, that ******.

Cetera desunt.
A PROPHECY: Written in 1776.
NOW it shall come to pass in the latter days, that a new people shall rise up
in a far country, and they shall increase exceedingly, and many shall flock
unto them; and they shall build cities in the wilderness, and cultivate their
lands with the hand of industry, and the fame of them shall spread far and near.

AND it shall be that the king of islands shall send over and plant in the
midst of them a certain tree. Its blossoms shall be delightful to the eye; its
fruit pleasant to the taste, and its leaves shall heal them of all manner of
diseases. And the people shall cultivate this tree with all possible care, and
they shall live under the shadow of its branches, and shall worship it as a God.

BUT in process of time, there shall arise a North wind, and shall blast the
tree, so that it shall no longer yield its fruit, or afford shelter to the
people, but it shall become rotten at the heart; and the North wind will break
the branches thereof, and they shall fall upon the heads of the people, and
wound many.

THEN a prophet Dr. F -- n.
shall arise from amongst this people, and he shall exhort them, and instruct
them in all manner of wisdom, and many shall believe in him; and he shall wear
spectacles upon his nose; and reverence and esteem shall rest upon his brow.
And he will cry aloud, and say -- Seeing that this tree has no strength in it,
and that it can no longer shelter us from the winds of the North, but is become
rotten in the heart; behold now, let us cut it down and remove it from us: And
in its place we will plant another tree, young and vigorous; and we will water
it, and it shall grow, and spread its branches abroad. And moreover, we will
build an high wall to defend it from the winds of the North: that it may be
well with us, and our children, and our children's children.

AND the people shall hearken to the voice of their prophet, for his sayings
shall be good in their eyes. And they shall take up every man his spade and his
ax, and shall prepare to dig up and cut away the shattered remains of the
blasted and rotten tree, according to the words of their prophet.

THEN a certain wise man shall arise, and shall himself CATO Dr. S -- h.
; and he shall strive to persuade the people to put their trust in the rotten
tree, and not to dig it up, or remove it from its place. And he shall harangue
with great vehemence, and shall tell them that a rotten tree is better than a
sound one; and that it is for the benefit of the people that the North wind
should blow upon it, and that the branches thereof should be broken and fall
upon and crush them.

AND he shall receive from the king of the islands, fetters of gold and chains
of silver; and he shall have hopes of great reward if he will fasten them on
the necks of the people, and chain them to the trunk of the rotten tree. And
this he shall strive to do by every insinuating art in his power. And shall
tell the people, that they are not fetters and chains, but shall be as
bracelets of gold on their wrists, and rings of silver on their necks, to
ornament and decorate them and their children. And his words shall be sweet in
the mouth, but very bitter in the belly.

MOREOVER, he will threaten them, that if they will not obey his voice, he will
whistle with his lips, and raw-head and bloody-bones shall come out of France
to devour them and their little ones; and he will blow with his horn, and the
wild bull of Spain will come and gore them with his horns, and trample upon
them with his hoofs, even until they die. And he shall stand upon Mount-seir,
and shall pun upon Mount-seir in the face of all the people. And all the people
shall laugh him to scorn.

AND it shall come to pass that certain other wise men shall also stand up and
oppose themselves to Cato; and shall warn the people not to trust in the
allurements of his voice, nor be terrified with his threats, and to hearken to
his puns no more. And they shall encourage the people to go on with the work
they had taken in hand, according to the words of their prophet. And they shall
earnestly exhort the people to despise and reject the fetters of gold and the
chains of silver, which the king of the islands would fasten upon them.

AND one of these wise men shall call himself CASSANDRA, and the other shall
call himself THE FORESTER: and they shall fall upon Cato, and shall strip him
of every disguise, and show him naked before all the people. And Cassandra
shall tie him up, and the Forester shall scourge him until he shall become
exceeding sore. Nevertheless, Cato shall not repent, but shall harden his
heart, and become very stubborn, and shall be vexed till he die. And when he
shall be dead, his funeral oration shall be pronounced. And the heads of the
people shall order that his funeral oration be printed; that all men may know
of his death. Howbeit, in those days, it shall not be customary for the heads
of the people to desire that funeral orations should be printed; yet that all
men may know of Cato's death, and that the people may be delivered from the
fear of the raw-head and bloody-bones of France, and the wild bull of Spain,
his funeral oration shall be printed.

AND in process of time, the people shall root up the rotten tree, and in its
place they shall plant a young and vigourous tree, and shall effectually defend
it from the winds of the North by an high wall. And they shall dress it, and
prune it, and cultivate it to their own good liking. And the young tree shall
grow and flourish and spread its branches far abroad: and the people shall
dwell under the shadow of its branches, and shall become an exceeding great,
powerful, and happy nation. And of their increase there shall be no end.

AND Cato and his works shall be no more remembered amongst them. For Cato
shall die, and his works shall follow him.

TRANSLATION OF A LETTER, WRITTEN BY A FOREIGNER ON HIS TRAVELS.
London, Dec. 3, 1^. DEAR COUNT,
I HAVE now been six months in England, and eight weeks in this metropolis. You
should have heard from me before; but my frequent avocations, as well as the
want of a suitable opportunity, have prevented. Agreeably to my promise,
however, I now sit down to give you some account of the character and politics
of this strange people. So copious a subject cannot be discussed in one letter;
but you shall hear from me again, when further observation shall have enabled
me to be more particular.

THE general character of the English is certainly the most fantastic and
absurd that ever fell to the lot of any known nation. As they are made up of
contradictions, it would be unjust to give them any uniform designation. There
is scarce a virtue that adorns the mind, or a vice that disgraces human nature,
but may be ascribed to them as part of their national character. But the former
are often rendered ineffectual by misapplication, and the latter qualified by a
levity of manners, which shows them not to be constitutionally prevalent. An
Englishman will treat his enemy with great generosity, and his friend with
ingratitude and inhumanity. He will be lavish of his wealth when he has but
little of it, and become a miserly wretch when fortune pours her favors into
his purse. He will brave the ^ost hardships, and encounter the severest trials
with heroic fortitude; and will drown or hang himself because the wind is in
the east. He will lend large sums to a stranger on the slightest security, and
refuse his nearest relation the means of subsistence. Today, his heart expands
with social benevolence; tomorrow, he is cold, sullen and morose -- Today, he
possesses the wealth of a nabob; tomorrow, he refuses a sixpence to a beggar,
lest he should himself be reduced to the want of that sixpence. In a word,
contradiction and absurdity make an Englishman.

DURING the last century, this people has risen in wealth, power, and
prosperity; but the instability of their temper will not permit them to enjoy
with content any blessing in possession -- At peace with all the world --
feared and respected by their neighbors -- an established policy, reformed
religion, and extensive commerce, are circumstances sufficient, one would
suppose, to render any people happy. But the thirst of lawless ambibition can
never be satisfied. The English assume to themselves the character of being the
most just, generous, and humane nation in the world, and yet they encourage the
African trade -- a trade attended with circumstances of injustice, cruelty, and
horror, that disgrace human nature; whereby they fasten for life, the chains of
servitude the most abject, and misery the most complete, on many hundreds of
their fellow creatures every year.

THIS just and humane nation also sent one Clive to the East Indies, to secure
a dominion for them there. A country which, it should seem, the Creator never
intended for the English, because he had placed it on the opposite side of the
globe, and made the inhabitants of a quite different complexion. This Clive,
however, arrived with his forces in the East Indies, and under the sanction of
his most gracious Britannic majesty and a free parliament, put to death some
hundred thousands of the inoffensive inhabitants, by the sword, by famine, and
the most attrocious cruelties -- After which he retured to England with immense
riches, and a wife set in diamonds, and was made a Lord -- and then cut his
throat with a penknife.

YOU will be surprised at this; but the people here were not surprised at all.
It is no uncommon thing to spend an evening with a man, in all the easy gaiety
of social life, and to hear next morning that he hanged himself in a stable, or
practiced phlebotomy on his own jugular vein with a razor.

THE English now govern in the East Indies with a tyranny so pure, so
unadulterated with any mixture of justice or humanity, as could not have been
exceeded in the reigns of the twelve Caesar's.

THIS best of all kings has now turned his attention to AMERICA. There he had
three millions of subjects, who loved, honored, and obeyed him. He governed
them by officers of his own appointment: he had the whole regulation of their
commerce; and the over-flowings of their wealth were conducted, by easy
channels, into his coffers, and into the purses of the merchants and
manufacturers of his kingdom. But he has quarrelled with these loyal and
beneficial subjects, because they are so obstinate that they will not
acknowledge that two and two make five. Whole volumes have been written on this
subject, and all the force of reason and eloquence exerted to convince this
wise king that he is in an error. The Americans have most emphatically
beseeched him to accept of the undissembled loyalty of their hearts; declaring
that they are satisfied that the fruits of their industry should center with
him and his people, as heretofore, to enrich and aggrandise them; but humbly
pray that they may not be compelled to acknowledge that two and two make five,
which would be to them a most dangerous and distressing violation of truth. But
this wise and humane monarch is far from being disposed to give up the point.
He has rejected their petitions with scorn, and spurned at their offers of
affection and fidelity; and declares, that he will even risk the crown of his
ancestors, but he will make the obstinate Americans subscribe to his new dogma.

TO this end he has sent over, not only his own fleets and armies, but has
hired a banditti of foreign mercenaries from a petty prince, who supports the
splendour of his court by selling the blood of his subjects; and he has also
employed negroes and wild Indians to persecute the poor Americans without
mercy, until they shall acknowledge that two and two make five.

AMERICA is at this time a scene of desolation and distress; a theater whereon
is acted a real tragedy, exhibiting every species of cruelty and injustice. The
royal army of this most enlightened of all nations are ravishing the women,
murdering the men, and laying waste that fertile and beautiful country, under
the conduct of Lord and General How; who are executing their bloody mandate,
with all the composure in the world. His most gracious majesty receives, from
time to time, such accounts of their proceedings as they please to give him,
and is as happy as such a monarch can be.

WHO would have thought that the peaceful plains of America would be desolated
because the inhabitants will not believe that two and two make five, when their
good king and his wise parliament require them so to do.

ON the contrary, the Americans, highly resentting this treatment, have
declared, that they will no longer be pensioners of the smiles of such a king,
or submit to a government in which they have no share, and over which they have
no control, and which is therefore, with respect to them, a government of mere
will and pleasure. They have determined to be henceforth a free people; and
have publicly avowed that they will en^oy the inestimable, privileges of
believing, and saying, that two and two make only four, according to the common
sense of mankind.

HOW this affair will terminate, God only knows: but it seems very probable,
that the king of England will lose the most valuable jewel of his crown, in the
pursuit of his present views.

YOU will say, perhaps, that the king could not act so absurdly were he not
countenanced and supported in his folly by the assent of his people. But the
truth is that the king, by means of his ministers has gained such an
ascendency over the parliament, which is the constitutional voice of the
people, that he can obtain their sanction for any project in which their rights
are not openly and directly attacked. As to the people at large, they do not
trouble themselves about the right or wrong of the matter in contest. America
is a great way off, and they have no feelings for what is passing there. They
grumble, indeed, about the diminution of their trade in consequence of this
war, but leave the discussion of national politics to their parliament. The
crown has imperceptibly extended its prerogative so as to destroy the boasted
balance of the British constitution; and if the king's power should be further
strengthened by the subjugation of America, the people of England may bid adieu
to their constitutional freedom. Some of the wisest amongst them see this, and
have openly declared, that the salvation of England depends upon the success of
the Americans in the present war.

THIS infatuated people have wearied the world, for these hundred years with
loud eulogiums liberty and their constitution; and yet they see that
constitution languishing in a deep decay, without making any efforts for its
recovery. Amused with trifles, and accustomed to venality and corruption, they
are not alarmed at the consequences of their supineness. They love to talk of
their glorious constitution, because the idea is agreeable, and they are
satisfied with the idea, and they honor their king, because it is the fashion
to honor the king. Half the loyalty of the nation is supported by two popular
songs. viz. " Britons strike home; and God save the king. These are vociferated
at taverns, over porter, punch and wine, till the imagination is heated, and
the blood in a ferment, and then these pot-valiant patriots sally forth and
commit all manner of riot and excess in honor of their king and country.

THERE are fanatics in politics as well as in religion, and both are managed in
the same way, viz. by keeping up the delusion in which they delight The men in
power well know the weakness of the multitude, and when they observe them to
grow uneasy under the too barefaced encroachments of prerogative, they get half
a dozen of court scribblers to expatiate on the glories of the British
constitution, and to sing the sweet Lullaby of Liberty to the people -- and all
is well. Just so a nurse rattles three pieces of tin in a little rush basket to
amuse her crying child. The poor infant thinks it has the world in possession,
and is satisfied.

THE extreme ignorance of the common people of this civilized country can
scarce be credited. In general they know nothing beyond the particular branch
of business which their parents or the parish happened to choose for them. This,
indeed, they practice with unremitting diligence; but never think of extending
their knowledge farther.

A manufacturer has been brought up a maker of pin-heads: He has been at this
business forty years, and of course makes pin-heads with great dexterity; but
he cannot make a whole pin for his life. He thinks it is the perfection of
human nature to make pin-heads. He leaves other matters to inferior abilities.
It is enough for him, that he believes in the Athanasian Creed, reverences the
splendour of the court, and makes pin-heads. This he conceives to be the
sum-total of religion, politics, and trade. He is sure that London is the
finest city in the world; black-friars bridge the most superb of all possible
bridges; and the river Thames, the largest river in universe. It is in vain to
tell him that there are many rivers in America, in comparison of which the
Thames is but a ditch; that there are single provinces there larger than all
England; and that the colonies, formerly belonging to Great Britain, now
independent states, are vastly more extensive than England, Wales, Scotland and
Ireland, taken all together -- He cannot conceive this. He goes into his best
parlour, and looks on a map of England, four feet square* on the other side of
the room he sees a map of North and South America, not more than two feet
square, and exclaims -- How can these things be! -- It is altogether
impossible! He has read the Arabian Nights Entertainment, and he hears this
wonderful account of America -- he believes the one as much as the other --
That a giant should rise out of the sea, or that the Delaware should be larger
than the Thames, are equally incredible to him. Talk to him of the British
constitution, he will tell you it is a glorious constitution -- Ask him what it
is, and he is ignorant of its first principles; but he is sure that he can make
and sell pin-heads under it. Mention the freedom of elections, and he will tell
that he does not meddle in these matters; that he lives in a borough; and that
it is impossible but that squire Goose-Cap must represent that borough in
parliament -- because Squire Goose-Cap is acquainted with the prime minister,
and his Lady comes every Sunday to ^^e parish church in a brocaded gown; and
sits in a pew lined with green cloth -- How then can it be otherwise -- but
these are things in which he is not concerned. He believes in the Athanasian
Creed, honors the king, and makes pin-heads -- and what more can be expected
of man.

IT is not so in America. The lowest tradesman there is not without some degree
of general knowledge. They turn their hands to every thing; their situation
obliges them to do so. A farmer there cannot run to an artist upon every
trifling occasion -- He must make and mend and contrive for himself. This, I
observed in my travels through that country. In many towns, and in every city,
they have public libraries. Not a tradesman but will find time to read. He
acquires knowledge imperceptibly. He is amused with voyages and travels, and
becomes acquainted with the geography, customs, and commerce of other
countries. He reads political disquisitions, and learns the great out-lines of
his rights as a man and as a citizen -- He dips a little into philosophy, and
knows that the apparent motion of the sun is occasioned by the real motion of
the earth -- In a word, he is sure that, notwithstanding the determination of
king, lords, and commons to the contrary, two and two can never make five.

SUCH are the people of England, and such the people of America. These nations
are now at daggers drawn. At first, the Americans knew little or nothing of the
art of war, but they improve daily. The British troops are teaching them how to
conquer; and they find them very apt scholars. The probable consequence is,
that England will lose, and America gain, an empire. If George the Third should
subjugate America on his present principles, all good men will abhor him as a
tyrant; if he should fail in his project, all wise men will despise him for
risking the immense advantages he derived from a friendly connection with that
country.

BUT it is time to conclude this long Letter -- for the present, therefore
adieu! and believe me ever,

Your, etc. etc. etc.

A POLITICAL CATECHISM: Written in 1777.
Question. WHAT is WAR?

Answer. The curse of mankind; the mother of famine and pestilence; the source
of complicated miseries; and the undistinguishing destroyer of the human
species.

Q. How is war divided?

A. Into offensive and defensive.

Q. What is the general object of an offensive war?

A. Sometimes it is to regain by the sword what had been unjustly taken from
the rightful possessor: Sometimes to prevent impending dangers, which cannot be
avoided by other means: But, for the most part, it is undertaken to gratify the
ambition of a prince, who wishes to subject to his arbitrary will a people whom
God created free, and to gain an uncontrolled dominion over their rights and
property.

Q. Are there any instances of such princes?

A. Yes, many. History is filled with the wicked lives and miserable deaths of
tyrants. The present king of Great Britain, whose history is not yet completed,
is a living example of such a prince. He carried an offensive war into the East
Indies, and deprived many thousands of those innocent people of their lives and
property: and he is now carrying on an offensive war in America, without one
specious plea of justice for so doing: Most wickedly aiming at the absolute
disposal of that extensive country, and its numerous inhabitants. For this
purpose he has spread desolation and death amongst their friendly habitations,
and prosecutes his wicked design with aggravated cruelty and horror.

Q. What may justly be said of such a prince?

A. That he looks on his fellow creatures as created only for his use, and
makes their misery his sport. That the spirit of thousands, who have fallen a
sacrifice to his ambition, flutter round the polished points of his imperial
crown, and cry to heaven for justice -- that his throne rests on the sculls of
the slain -- that his unhallowed feasts are defiled with blood -- and that the
curses of widows and orphans are poured out against him at every rising sun.

THAT history will do justice to his memory, and record his crimes with his
name, for the abhorrence of posterity -- and that the blood he has wantonly
spilt in unjust pursuits will most assuredly be required of his hands.

Q. WHAT is defensive war?

A. IT is to take up arms in opposition to the invasions of usurped power, and
bravely suffer present hardships, and encounter present dangers, to secure the
rights of humanity, and the blessings of freedom, to generations yet unborn.

Q. IS even defensive war justifiable in a religious view?

A. THE foundation of war is laid in the wickedness of mankind. Were all men
just and good, there would be no cause of contention amongst them; but as the
case is far otherwise, war is become absolutely necessary, as many other
institutions are, which derive their origin from the weakness or wickedness of
men. Even laws and government would be useless encumbrances were there no open
violence or secret treachery to be guarded against. God has given man will to
contrive, power to execute, and freedom of will to direct his conduct. It
cannot be but that some, from a depravity of will, will abuse these privileges,
and exert these powers to the injury of others: and the oppressed would have no
safety or redress but by exerting the same powers in their defense: and it is
our duty to set a proper value upon, and defend to the utmost, our just rights,
and the blessings of life: otherwise a few miscreants would tyrannise over the
rest of mankind, and make the passive multitude the slaves of their power. Thus
it is that defensive is not only justifiable, but an indispensable duty.

Q. IS it upon these principles that the people of America are resisting the
arms of Great Britain, and opposing force with force?

A. STRICTLY so -- The Americans had nothing in view but to live peaceably and
dutifully under a constitutional subjection to their acknowledged sovereign.
They patiently submitted to many unjust encroachments of power. They were not
tenacious of every right. But at last the designs of Great Britain became too
manifest to be mistaken: and the Americans were urged on to the distressing
necessity of choosing one of two great evils; either to enlist themselves, and
their unborn posterity, the unconditional slaves of a corrupt and wicked
administration; or to brave the horrors of war, under every disadvantage, in a
noble struggle for the rights of mankind. They have resolutely determined on
the latter; and after solemnly appealing to God and the world for the justice
of their cause, are prosecuting the war with promising hopes of success.
Supported by the rectitude of their principles, they have surmounted the
greatest difficulties, and have exhibited instances of personal bravery and
military conduct not exceeded by the heroes of antiquity -- And may Heaven
prosper their virtuous undertaking!

Q. BUT it has often been said, that America is in a state of rebellion. Tell
me, therefore, what is REBELLION?

A. IT is when a great number of people, headed by one or more factious
leaders, aim at deposing their lawful prince, without any just cause of
complaint, in order to place another on his throne.

Q. IS this the case of the Americans?

A. FAR otherwise. -- They have repeatedly declared, with the most solemn
protestations, that they were ready to support, with their lives and fortunes,
the present king of Great Britain, on the throne of his ancestors; and only
requested, in return the enjoyment of those rights, which the British
constitution confirms to all his subjects; and without which, the boasted
freedom of that constitution is but a solemn mockery and an empty name.

Q. TO whom has the king of England committed the conduct of this war?

A. TO Lord and General HOW.

Q. WHO are these gentlemen?

A. THEY are the brothers of a Colonel HOW, who fought bravely along with the
Americans in a former war between the English and French, and fell in battle.
The Americans loved and honored this Colonel How: they lamented his fate, and
at their own expense erected a monument to his memory in the town of Boston.
But these gentlemen, with unrelenting hearts, and sacrilegious hands, have
defiled their brother's tomb with the blood of those whose affection had raised
it to his honor; and have plunged their hostile swords into bosoms glowing
with love and esteem for their mother's son.

Q. WHAT progress have they made in subduing America?

A. VERY little. -- They got possession of the town of Boston; but could not
hold it. They were but tenants at will there, strictly speaking, for their
landlords ejected them without any warning, and distrained for rent upon
certain military stores.

Q. What did they next?

A. THEY took Staten-Island, where there was nothing to oppose them, and a part
of Long Island, and so ferried themselves over to the city of New York. From
thence they crept into Jersey, and taking advantage of a critical period, when
the American troops were disbanded by the expiration of their enlistments, and
before a new army could be raised, they advanced to the banks of the Delaware,
well knowing that there was nothing to oppose their progress. On the banks of
the Delaware they sat themselves down, and fell to plundering the adjacent
country. In the mean time they published an enticing proclamation, offering
pardon and protection to all those who would accept of it, upon the easy terms
of unconditional submission. But the Americans did not despair: they soon found
a spirited militia to supply the place of their disbanded troops until a new
army could be raised. This militia, with a small remainder of the regular
troops, crossed the Delaware at midnight, in a snow-storm, and following their
gallant general through the most severe and inclement weather, unexpectedly
attacked, and drove the enemy from their station in the utmost confusion, and
made twelve hundred of their men prisoners of war, and then re-crossed the
river to their former encampment. The British then rallied, and returned to
their post, knowing that a large reinforcement was on the way to their relief.
But the American general, having a range of fires along the banks of the river
to deceive the enemy, marched his army in the night, re-crossed the Delaware,
and by a circuitous rout, surprised, attacked, and defeated the enemy's
expected reinforcement. The royal army is now lying in Brunswick, mortified and
crest-fallen.

Q. WHAT are the striking outlines of the king of England's character?

A. Injustice, obstinacy, and folly. He is unjust, because he endeavors to get
by force what is denied him by the laws of the realm over which he presides,
and in direct violation of his coronation oath: he is obstinate, because he
refuses to hear the humble petitions of an oppressed people: and his folly is
conspicuous in quarrelling with the Americans who loved and honored him -- who
were the faithful and zealous contributors to the support of his crown and
dignity, and a never failing and increasing source of wealth to him, and to the
merchants and manufacturers of his country.

Q. WHO has the chief command of the American army?

A. HIS Excellency GENERAL WASHINGTON.

Q. WHAT is his character?

A. TO him the title of Excellency is applied with peculiar propriety. He is
the best and the greatest man the world ever knew. In private life, he wins the
hearts and wears the love of all who are so happy as to fall within the circle
of his acquaintance. In his public character, he commands universal respect and
admiration. Conscious that the principles on which he acts are indeed founded
in virtue and truth, he steadily pursues the arduous work with a mind neither
depressed by disappointment and difficulties, nor elated with temporary
success. He retreats like a General, and attacks like a Hero. Had he lived in
the days of idolatry, he had been worshipped as a God. One age cannot do
justice to his merit; but a grateful posterity shall, for a succession of ages,
remember the great deliverer of his country.

A LETTER TO LORD HOW. [December 1776.]
MY LORD,
WHATEVER errors the court of Great Britain might have fallen into in the
commencement of the present unhappy contest with America, it was at least a
politic step to commit the conduct of this important affair to your Lordship,
and the General your brother.

THE name of How is dear to America; and amongst the many distressing
difficulties we have to encounter, it is no inconsiderable one to overcome the
predilection we feel for your family. The exalted virtues of your heroic
brother Colonel Lord' How, was in Genesis Abercombie's army at the battle of
Ticonderoga, and was there killed by a random shot. The town of Boston erected
a Monument to his memory.
, whose bones are embraced by that soil you are now drenching with blood, often
rise in painful remembrance.

WE are ready to acknowledge the good dispositions that distinguish your
private character, and whilst we feel the smart of the wounds you inflict, wish
they had been administered by another hand. We would fondly consider you as the
executioner of another's wrath -- not your own: and forgive with as much
sincerity -- pardon the allusion! -- as the condemned wretch forgives the
appointed officer who is about to torture him into another state of existence.

THE idea we have of your Lordship's character compels us to suppose, that
before you undertook this cruel task your conscience was fully convinced, that
the inflexible rules of right and honor, and the spirit of the British
constitution, fully authorized the present war: and that the resistance of
America to the claims of the British legislature is, and ought to be, deemed
rebellion. Under such a supposition, can we blame your Lordship for asserting
and enforcing what you may believe to be the rights of your sovereign.

LET the same candor be extended to the poor Americans. They think and are
fully persuaded, that neither the rules of honor or equity, the spirit of the
British constitution, or the rights of mankind, can authorize the views of
Britain in the prosecution of the present war: on the contrary they believe,
that is an indispensable duty, which they owe to themselves and their unborn
posterity, to oppose to the utmost the troops you have brought into their
country, and to refuse submission to the yoke that is prepared for them. Ought
they not then to be respected as acting upon the best principles, however
ill-founded you may suppose these principles to be? And ought you not at least
to pity, whilst you think you justly punish?

THE present dispute is, what the rights of the crown and parliament are with
respect to America, and what they are not -- Great Britain would have us
acknowledge her claims of unlimited power; and that too, without reasoning on
the subject -- she will not condescend to reason with us -- she will not
receive our humble petitions, or even hear what we have to say in our own
behalf -- we must implicitly acknowledge her claims to be just. And when, my
Lord, were acknowledgements of this kind ever forced upon mankind with success?
To own the supremacy of the British parliament over the lives and properties of
the people of America, or own the supremacy of his holiness over our immortal
souls, are doctrines which can only be established by the sword and the faggot
amongst men who have the free use of their reason. But I am, perhaps, going too
far -- I mean not to offend, nor would I be wanting in the respect due to your
character and station. Should my zeal on so interesting a subject appear
somewhat intemperate, I trust your Lordship will make a proper allowance, yet
suffer me to shed a few tears over the mangled limbs of my bleeding country.

KNOW then, that devastation, insult, murder, and ruin mark the way of your
savage troops through this cultivated, hospitable, and once happy land. It is
not enough that the manly youth, with a heart high-beating in his country's
cause, is called forth, and cut down in the field of battle, an early sacrifice
at the shine of Liberty; but the voice of the helpless virgin cries aloud to
Heaven against the brutal force of the salacious ravisher. Take a view of the
country before you -- villages in ruin, cities abandoned, and the miserable
inhabitants driven from their comfortable homes, and all the endearing sweets
of domestic felicity, to seek for shelter in this inclement season -- they know
not where -- leaving their property a prey to unpitying foreigners, who
destroy, without remorse, what they cannot immediately use or conveniently take
away. This is no exaggerated picture, overcharged in the coloring -- facts
have justified the drawing, and the mournful occasion prompts the style.

SUCH is the nature of the commission you have come to execute amongst us.
Cruel as it is, I would fain hope that you think you are only brandishing the
sword of justice, not inflicting the rod of oppression -- but how you can think
so, it is hard for an American to conceive.

THE unpardonable fault of America now is the declaration of Independence. When
our faults were less they were as hardly thought of. Our modest complaints were
called presumption -- our humble petitions dismissed with contempt -- no
lenient hand was held out -- no friendly measures proposed to sooth the griefs
we thought we suffered, and prevent the horrors that now surround us --
independence was not the wish of America, but a hard and cruel necessity has
forced us to this desperate determination -- we trust in the justice of our
cause, and leave to the God of battles the great event.

IN the mean time, though you carry on your master's work, let not the lawless
hand of rapine spread unnecessary desolation through our bleeding country --
Arrest the plunderer's greedy grasp, and suffer not the cries of the despoiled
virgin to call to Heaven for vengeance on those who regard not God, and trample
on the sacred rights of humanity. Wrongs like these, tarnish the luster of
victory, and blast the laurels of the brave.

A LETTER TO JOSEPH GALLOWAY, ESQUIRE. [Published in 1778.]
NOW that you have gained the summit of your ambitious hopes, the reward of
your forfeited honor, that dear bought gratification, to obtain which you have
given your name to infamy, and your soul to perdition -- now that you fit in
Philadelphia, the nominal governor of Pennsylvania, give me leave to address a
few words of truth to your corrupted heart. Retire for a moment from the
avocations and honors of your new superintendency, and review the steps by
which you have mounted the stage of power -- steps reeking with the blood of
your innocent country.

WHEN the storm was gathering dark and dreary over this devoted country -- when
America stood in need of all the exertions which her best patriots and most
confidential citizens could make, you stepped forward -- you offered yourself a
candidate, and with unwearied diligence solicited a seat in the American
congress. Your seeming sincerity, and your loud complaints against the unjust
usurpations of the British legislature, gained the confidence of your country.
You were elected -- you took your seat in congress -- and let posterity
remember, that while you were vehemently declaiming in that venerable senate
against British tyranny, and with hypocritical zeal urging a noble stand in
behalf of the liberties of your country, you were at the same time betraying
their secrets, ridiculing their economy, and making sport of their conduct, in
private letters to your friend governor ********.

BUT your abilities were not equal to your treachery. Your character became
suspected. You were left out of the delegation, and fearing the just resentment
of your injured country, you took refuge under the banners of General How. You
well knew that professions alone would not recommend you to his notice: actual
services must be rendered to raise you above neglect, and even contempt of your
new patron. The general knowing your conduct to have been such as to render all
reconciliation with your country impossible, and thinking that from your
knowledge of the people he meant to ruin, you might be a useful tool in his
hands, took you into his service. You found it no hard task to come into his
views; to banish every virtuous sensibility, and even steel your heart against
the cries of suffering humanity, and wade through the blood of your
fellow-citizens to your promised reward. Is there a curse denounced against
villainy that hangs not over your head? -- It was owing to your poisonous
influence that * -- * took part against his country's cause, and involved his
family in misery and distress. Let their misfortunes sit heavy on your soul! It
was owing to your seductions that a hopeful young man was cut off with infamy
in the prime and vigor of life. -- Let the blood of Molesworth He was detected
in endeavoring to procure pilots to conduct the British fleet up the Delaware;
was tried, convicted, and hanged.
sit heavy on your soul! You attended the British army from the Head of Elk to
the city of Philadelphia -- you rode in the rear of that army in your
triumphant carriage -- you feasted your eyes with scenes of desolation -- the
cries of ruined families, and the curses of the distressed, composed the music
of your march, and your horses hoofs were wet with the blood of your
slaughtered countrymen and former friends. -- Is there a curse denounced
against villainy that hangs not over your head? -- Let these things sit heavy
on your soul!

BUT you are now in the seat of power in the city of Philadelphia. The glow of
gratified ambition burns on your cheek, whilst like a bashaw of the east, you
order this or that fellow-citizen to prison and punishment. You sit down daily
to a board spread with more than plenty, and know, with unconcern, that numbers
of your countrymen, even some of your former acquaintance, are suffering all
the lingering anguish of absolute famine in the jails of the city -- within
your reach -- within your power to relieve. You well know that under the
discipline of that arch-fiend, Cunningham, they have plucked the weeds of the
earth for food, and expired with the unchewed grass in their mouths Cunningham
had deserted from the Americans to the British, and was made keeper of the
provost prison. The state-house in Philadelphia was made use of for this
purpose; and the author was assured, by some who made their escape from thence,
that they had seen bodies lying in the yard of prisoners, who had died of mere
famine, with unchewed grass hanging out of their mouths. Some of the citizens
had one day sent a bucket full of broth to the prisoners of the provost -- the
infernal Cunningham took it into the state-house yard, and when the starving
wretches had gathered eagerly round, he kicked over the bucket with his foot,
and then laughed to see them lie on their bellies and lap the slop from the
ground, like dogs, with their tongues.
-- yet you pity not the misery to which you have yourself been instrumental,
nor will you suffer their torture to touch your heart -- Oh! let this too, sit
heavy on your soul!

THE time is at hand when the army on which you build your support must
withdraw, and abandon their vain attempt, When this shall happen, then fly --
fly to England, for you will not be safe here -- your life and estate are both
forfeited -- and both will be but a poor atonement for the wrongs you have
done. -- Fly to England, and if you should find yourself despised and neglected
there, as will most probably be the case, for the English hate a traitor, even
though they benefit by the treason -- then fly thence, with the monster
Cunningham, to the barren desert, and herd with hungry beasts of prey.

THE temporary reward of iniquity you now hold will soon shrink from your
grasp; and the favor of him on whom you now depend will cease, when your
capacity to render the necessary services shall cease. This you know, and the
reflection must even now throw a gloom of horror over your enjoyments, which
the glittering tinsel of your new superintendency cannot illumine. -- Look
back, and all is guilt -- look forward, and all is dread. -- When the history
of the present times shall be recorded, the names of Galloway and Cunningham
will not be omitted; and posterity will wonder at the extreme obduracy of which
the human heart is capable, and at the unmeasurable distance between a traitor
and a WASHINGTON.

TWO LETTERS [Published in 1776.]
MR. PRINTER,
I AM a Tory, the son of a Tory, born and bred in the pure principles of
unconditional submission, and a true friend to the Hanoverian family -- right
or wrong and at all events. The king of England, is in my humble opinion,
entitled, jure divino, to govern absolutely, not only the British empire, but
the East and West Indies -- not only the East and West Indies, but the
continent of North America -- not only these, but even the whole of this paltry
world.

BUT the infatuated people of this most vile portion of this most vile planet,
have been moved by the instigation of the Devil to oppose the earnest desire of
George III. -- God bless his Majesty! -- to govern them in all cases whatever,
according to his good will and pleasure, For my own part, I truly abominate and
abhor their rebellious obstinacy. His Majesty has been pleased, in his great
goodness, and to my unspeakable satisfaction, to send over his fleets and
armies to conquer and subdue this horrible country. Now, it is the
indispensable duty of all those who would be called the friends of arbitrary
government and of the said George III. to render all the assistance in their
power to the aforesaid fleets and armies, and to the worthy Lords and Generals,
whom this just and benign monarch has commissioned to direct and manage them.

AMONGST the implements of war, the Pen and the printing Press are not the most
insignificant. It is true, they can break no bones -- can shed no blood -- but
they can instigate men to do both: and by their influence over the minds of the
multitude, can, perhaps, do more toward gaining a point, or opposing a
purpose, than the sword or the bayonet. For this reason, I have anxiously
desired to see a printing press in this city subservient to the purposes of
Lord and General How; and it is with great satisfaction I find they have at
last got a printer to their mind -- one perfectly disposed to forward their
humane designs. I was boasting, in the fullness of my heart, of The Pennsylvania
Ledger, printed by Mr Humphreys, to a friend whom I supposed to be a tory like
myself: but I had quite mistaken my man. He had the assurance to address me on
the subject in the following manner. I will give it nearly in his own words,
that you may see what dangerous characters we have amongst us.

IT has been the policy of every government, (said he) from the beginning of
time to this day, when the honor, safety, and existence of that government
depended on the fate of war, to use every possible means to forward and
strengthen the efforts of its citizens and friends, and to counteract the force
and subtlety of its enemies.

FOR this end, even under the most popular constitutions, many of the sacred
rights of the people have been hard pressed, and even suspended, and that
without endangering the constitution, provided such extraordinary exertions of
government be manifestly sanctioned by the necessity of the case. The British
king, without even the plea of necessity impresses men for supplying his navy
in time of war; a practice not authorized by the constitution, and a high
infringement of the personal rights of the subject.

THE liberty of the press has ever been justly esteemed as one of the most
important popular privileges in a free government. It is indeed highly
reasonable that the channels of information should be kept open and uncorrupted
-- and no man holds this right in more sacred estimation than I do. But when
this privilege is manifestly abused, and the press becomes an engine in the
hands of an enemy for sowing dangerous dissentions, spreading false alarms, and
undermining the defensive operations of government in an hour of danger, ought
not that government upon the undeniable principles of self-preservation, to
silence, by its own authority, such an internal enemy to its peace and safety?
-- I have now in view The Pennsylvania Ledger, a paper manifestly in the
interests of the enemy: whether we consider the complexion of the paper itself,
or the known political character of the editor. Why should a dangerous lenity
protect a man in the abuse of that very lenity which is his only security, and
on which he so ungratefully presumes? or why should he, under the sanction of
one right, be permitted to aim at the subversion of all the other rights of his
country? Would not our council of safety be very justifiable in silencing a
press, whose weekly productions insult the feelings of the people, and are so
openly inimical to the American cause?

DID you ever hear such a fellow? For my part I was so shocked at his
principles, that I left him abruptly, and am determined to have no more
communication with him.

MR. PRINTER,
IT is not easy to conceive how much I was surprised and disappointed at the
discourse of my friend, as communicated to you in my last. There are indeed
some whom we confide in with safety in these precarious times: and people
should be very cautious in opening their minds before persons of a doubtful
political character.

IT is a rule in our tory society to be very circumspect in this particular --
But I confess that, in this instance, I was not as prudent as I should have
been; and I have had the mortification of being reprimanded for my indiscretion
before a full meeting.

YOU can hardly imagine what regularity prevails in our board of tories. We are
all formed into committees of various denominations, and appointed to various
duties. I have myself the honor to belong to the committee of wiles and
stratagems. It was I, Mr. Printer, who planned the scheme for stealing the mail
sent by General Washington to congress By this Mail (which was stole from off
the express horse, whilst he was refreshing himself at Bristol) Genesis How was
informed of the situation of the American army, and of the day on which most of
the troops would be disbanded by the expiration of their enlistments. He
accordingly came into Jersey with his whole force at the critical time and
drove Genesis Washington over the Delaware.
. -- And my design was so successfully executed, that whilst the committee of
congress were searching Bristol for those letters, they were then on their way
to our friend General How; where they safely arrived, as we have been since
informed. You may be sure that I gained great applause for this maneuver.

WE have also a committee of false reports; -- whose duty is to fabricate and
publish such articles of intelligence as may tend to alarm and terrify timid
whigs, and distract the minds of the people. These are circulated at such times
as the situation of public affairs may make them most probable. Sometimes they
are thrown out in whispers, in so dark and secret a manner that their origin
cannot be traced; and at other times openly, by means of the Pennsylvania
Ledger.

WE have, moreover a committee of true intelligence; whose business it is to
employ a number of spies, who are directed to mix amongst the people in the
assumed character of zealous whigs; to hire themselves as servants and waiters
in houses and taverns frequented by members of congress. This committee holds a
regular correspondence with our friends in the British army; so that we are
certainly informed of what passes on both sides, from the best authority, and
are thereby enabled to take all advantages. Happily for us, the several ferries
and stages have as yet been left free and open, so that our messengers pass and
repass without examination, and of consequence this department has been
attended with little or no difficulty.

ANOTHER committee is called the committee of lies: whose duty differs from
that of false reports in this -- the latter is to circulate misrepresentations
of facts respecting the armies, and things of a public nature, on the large
scale: whilst the former only frame temporary lies for the use of this city:
particularly respecting the deliberations and intentions of congress. These
lies must be fresh and fresh every day; and always supported by a strong
assertion that the information came from some leaky member of congress;
generally without mentioning the name of any individual member; yet, in cases
of urgency, the real name of some leading character may be adduced; when the
lie may have had its operation before it can be contradicted.

THERE is likewise a committee of extortion; these are wealthy men, who
monopolize, as far as they can, the articles most wanted for the rebel army;
buy up the necessaries of life, and put on them the highest prices they can
with any appearance of propriety, in order to make the people discontented and
uneasy.

THE last committee I shall mention is the committee of depreciation -- as
important as any -- they are to take all possible pains, and to exercise every
subtle art to run down and depreciate the Continental currency. This committee
is very large, and composed chiefly of brokers and monied men. They get some of
this money, and run with it to discharge any debts they may have contracted,
with a seeming anxiety to get rid of it as fast as possible. If they have goods
for sale, they openly avow three prices: one, if the purchaser will agree to
pay in hard money; an higher price, if in provincial paper, under the old
government; and a still higher, if in the present continental bills of credit.
But we have many other ways of bringing that currency into disrepute, which I
am not at liberty to mention.

I would give a list of the men of most influence in our society -- at present
this would be improper: but I will be more explicit hereafter, when toryism may
be more safely and openly avowed.

SOME narrow minded people say, that we are doing all we can to ruin our
country, and entail a miserable slavery on our unborn posterity. We believe we
are doing the best we can for ourselves -- and pray what has posterity done for
us, that we should run the risk of confiscation and a halter for them? Our
fixed opinion is, that the British army must eventually subdue this country --
and setting the right or wrong of the thing out of the question, we think we
may as well have the reputation and advantage of assisting them in their
designs as not. It Is true, if the British Generals should succeed in their
enterprise we may see our neighbors and friends imprisoned by hundreds, and
hanged by dozens; their estates confiscated, and their children turned out to
beggary and want; but then we shall ourselve^ escape, and enjoy in safety our
lives and estates -- and, perhaps, be even promoted, for our present services,
to places of honor and emolument.

I am, etc. A TORY.

A LETTER TO THE EDITOR OF THE NEW JERSEY GAZETTE. [January 1778.]
MR. COLLINS,
WHEN necessity first compelled us to take up arms in defense of our country,
we thought our only business would be to oppose strength to strength, in the
usual course of war: and accordingly, we provided ourselves with guns,
bayonets, powder, ball, etc.

BUT experience shows that we were mistaken. Other weapons of less mortal, but
not less dangerous effect, are exercised against us by the enemy, and we are
very deficient on our parts. It is now high time that congress should enable us
to meet the foe with equal arms. In short, Mr. Collins, we want men of
abilities to serve the United States in the capacity of public Liars.

HOWEVER strange such an appointment may appear at first view, we find that the
experienced commanders of the British army have not thought it unworthy of
their attention. It is manifest that our enemies depend much on their
superiority in the art of lying. In the very commencement of the war, the
British minister was at the trouble and expense of sending over a whole ship
load of lies in a pamphlet, entitled An Address to the People of America, to be
dispersed among the people. After this, many other lying pamphlets and papers
were discharged from the royal batteries. Lord How sent a lie to congress by
Genesis Sullivan, requesting a conference for the establishment of peace --
knowing, at the same time, he had neither the intention nor the power to make
peace. But this was only priming the cannon -- his principal aim was to send a
thundering lie to Europe, and particularly to France, informing that congress
was about to submit, and had actually entered upon a treaty with the British
generals for that purpose. And Sir William How let off another lie, not long
since, by means of the unfortunate John Brown -- but that missed its aim.

AS soon as the Howes got to New York, they appointed their liar general, who
played off innumerable lies from the batteries of Rivington and Gain Printers
of Newspapers.
to our great annoyance. They have now an able officer of this kind in
Philadelp^^^, who has taken charge of Fort Humphreys Printers of Newspapers.
and Fort Town Printers of Newspapers.
. For it cannot be supposed that Mess. Humphreys and Town are the original
authors of those elegant and well constructed lies which they publish every
week.

I have heard of a man in England, some years ago, called a Ventriloquist, who
had the extraordinary faculty of making his voice seem to come from where he
pleased. This man kept a great dog, and for the entertainment of his visitors,
would throw his voice into the dog's belly; and then wagging the poor beast's
jaws with his hands, made him seem to say any thing he pleased. Thus it is with
Humphreys and Town. The liar general is the man with a wonderful voice, and
they are only his dogs, whom he causes to utter what he thinks proper. Thus, in
a late Evening Post, Mr. Town seems to address the public, in propria persona,
in a long declamation on congressional tyranny and British clemency -- All lies
-- in order to introduce two greater lies, sanctified by the name of Joseph
Galloway -- whom, to tell the truth, I do suspect to be the very liar general
himself.

NOTHING would be more vain than to attempt to counteract these productions of
the British lying offices in New York and Philadelphia, with serious answers of
truth and reason: like must be opposed to like -- and therefore I hope that
congress will no longer delay to establish lying offices on our side of the
question, with handsome salaries annexed: and would earnestly recommend this my
project to their serious consideration. Let there be an advertisement forthwith
published by authority, to the following effect:

WANTED, for the continental service, a person well qualified for the office of
liar general to the United States: Also three assistants or petit-liars, in
said office. Those who are willing and able to serve their country in this
department, are requested to send in their names to **** on or before the first
day of March next.

AS it is supposed there may be a number of persons well versed in this art
amongst the tories, free pardon and good encouragement will be given to such as
will exert their lying faculties in favor of their country.

N. B. Specimens of ability will be required of the candidates.

AN ANSWER TO GENERAL BURGOYNE'S PROCLAMATION. When General Burgoyne undertook
his unsuccessful expedition from Canada, he addressed the inhabitants of the
country through which he was to march in a most absurd and ridiculous
proclamation: thinking to overawe them by a pompous parade of his titles and
honors, and to terrify them by an inflated and bombastic style. In this
ironical answer, the lines distinguished by Italics are literal quotations from
the general's famous proclamation.

To John Burgoyne, esquire. lieutenant general of his majesty's armies in America;
colonel of the queen's regiment of light dragoons; governor of Fort-William in
North-Britain; one of the representatives of the commons of Great Britain; and
commanding an army and fleet employed on an expedition from Canada, etc. etc.
etc.
Most high! most mighty! most puissant, and sublime lieutenant general!

WHEN the forces under your command arrived at Quebec, in order to act in
concert and upon a common principle with the numerous fleets and armies which
already display in every quarter of America, the justice and mercy of your
king; we the reptiles of America, were seized with unusual trepidation and
confounded with dismay. But what words can express the plenitude of our horror
when the colonel of the queen's regiment of light dragoons advanced toward
Ticonderoga. The mountains trembled before thee, and the trees of the forest
bowed their lofty heads: the vast lakes of the west were chilled at thy
presence, and the stupendous cataract of Niagara bellowed at thy approach. --
Judge then, oh! ineffable governor of Fort-William in North-Britain! what must
have been the consternation, terror, and despair of us miserable Americans,
whilst in your irresistible advances you laid all waste with fire and sword,
more fully to display the justice and mercy of your king. Dark and dreary was
the prospect before us, till, like the sun in the east, your most generous,
most sublime, and inimitable proclamation shed abroad the cheering rays of
protection and mercy, and shone upon the only path that could lead us from the
pit of annihilation.

WE foolishly thought, ignorant as we were, that your gracious master's fleet
and armies were come to destroy us and subdue our country; but we are most
happy in hearing from you -- and who can doubt what one of the representatives
of the commons of Great Britain asserts? that they were called forth for the
sole purpose of restoring the rights of the constitution to a froward and
stubborn generation.

AND is it for this, oh, sublime lieutenant general of his majesty's armies in
America! that you have left the commons of Great Britain to shift for
themselves, and crossed the wide Atlantic; and shall we most ungratefully
decline the proffered blessing? To restore the rights of the constitution, you
have collected an amiable host of savages, and turned them loose to scalp our
wives and children, and to desolate our country. This they have actually
performed with their usual skill and clemency; and we yet remain insensible of
the benefit -- we yet remain unthankful for such unparalleled goodness.

OUR congress has declared independence -- and our assemblies, as your
sublimity justly observes, have most wickedly imprisoned some of the avowed
friends of that power with which we are at war. If we continue thus obstinate
and ungrateful, what can we expect, but that you should in your wrath give a
stretch to the Indian forces under your direction, amounting to thousands, to
overtake and destroy us; or which is still more terrible, that you should
withdraw your fleet and armies, and leave us to our own misery; without
completing the benevolent task, of restoring to us the rights of the
constitution.

WE submit -- we submit -- most puissant colonel of the queen's regiment of
light dragoons, and governor of Fort-William in North-Britain! We humbly offer
our heads to the tomahawk, and our bellies to the bayonet -- For who can resist
the power of your eloquence? Who can withstand the terror of your arms?

THE invitation you have given, in the consciousness of Christianity, your
royal master's clemency, and the honor of soldiership, we thankfully accept.
The blood of the slain -- the cries of violated virginity, and slaughtered
infants -- the never-ceasing groans of our starving brethren now languishing in
the jails and prison-ships of New York, call upon us in vain, whilst your
sublime proclamation is sounding in our ears. Forgive us, oh, our country!
Forgive us, dear posterity! Forgive us, all ye nations of the world, who are
watching our conduct in this important struggle for the liberty and happiness
of unborn millions, if we yield implicitly to the fascinating eloquence of one
of the representatives of the commons of Great Britain. Forbear then, thou
magnanimous lieutenant general -- forbear to denounce vengeance against us. --
Give not a stretch to those restorers of constitutional rights -- the Indian
forces under your direction. -- Let not the messengers of justice and wrath
await us in the field: and desolation, famine, and every concomitant horror bar
our return to the allegiance of a prince who has taken so much pains for our
reformation. We are domestic -- we are industrious -- we are infirm and timid
-- we shall remain quietly at home, and not remove our cattle, our corn, or
forage, in anxious expectation that you will come at the head of troops in the
full powers of health, discipline, and valor, and take possession of them for
yourselves.

BEHOLD our wives and daughters, our flocks and herds, our goods and chattels,
are they not at the mercy of our lord the king, and of his lieutenant general,
member of the house of commons, and governor of Fort-William in North-Britain,
etc. etc. etc.

A. B. C. D. E. F.
Cum multis aliis.
Saratoga, July 1777.
For the Pennsylvania Packet. A long and malignant contest in the public
papers, of too personal a nature to be generally interesting, and continued to
a most unreasonable length, occasioned this publication; which was successful
in putting an immediate end to that disagreeable altercation.

MR. PRINTER,
HAVING observed with real concern, that our newspapers have for a long time
past been filled with private contests and personal calumny, to the great abuse
of the liberty of the press, and dishonor of our city; I, who have ever been
ambitious of devising something for the public good, never before devised or
thought of by any schemer whatever, set my wits to work to remedy this growing
evil, and to restore our gazettes, advertisers, journals, and packets to their
original design, and make them the vehicles of intelligence, not the common
sewers of scandal.

TO convince you that I am not altogether unqualified for this purpose, you
must know that I have had a tolerable education in the charity-school belonging
to our university. My parents being poor bound me to a scrivener. My master
soon discovered in me an aptitude for business; and as I wrote a good hand, he
took me from the menial labors of the kitchen to assist him in his office;
where I engrossed deeds, leases, wills, etc. and after a little practice, was
able to do the chief part of his business for him.

WHEN I had completed my apprenticeship, I left the scrivener and set up for
myself. I served as clerk in the offices of several successive mayors,
aldermen, and justices of the peace -- and, to my honor be it recorded, my
employers frequently applied to my judgment in difficult cases -- and I
venture to say -- but with all due deference -- that my advice contributed not
a little to support their worship's official reputation.

NOW for my project -- which after much laborious study I have completed, and
generously give to the public without any prospect of reward; save only the
reputation of being the author of so ingenious and salutary a scheme.

LET there be a new court of justice established, under the name and style of
The High Court of Honor: To consist of twelve impartial and judicious men,
annually elected by the freemen of the state. In which election all persons of
what degree or quality soever (slaves excepted) shall be entitled to vote --
strangers also excepted, who have not resided one year in the city or county
where they would vote. This court when met shall choose one of their body for
president, and also appoint some suitable person to serve as clerk: and shall
have jurisdiction in all matters of controversy between man and man, of what
kind soever they be, provided no property real or personal shall come in
question, so as to be affected by the final judgment of the said court. It
shall determine on differences in opinion -- points of honor -- ceremony --
rank and precedence in all cases of affronts -- flights -- abuse -- scandal,
slander, and calumny -- and in all other matters of contest; except as before
excepted. Nine judges shall make a quorum, and a majority of voices shall
determine the judgment of the court -- and from their decision there shall be
no appeal.

THE clerk shall keep a large bound book, to be entitled The Rascal's Record.
In which shall be fairly entered, in alphabetical order, the names,
occupations, and places of residence of those on whom the judgment of the court
shall fall; which book shall at all times be open to inspection, on paying the
clerk sixpence specie for every search, and one shilling for a certified
extract. And if after the establishment of this court, any person or persons
shall presume to decide any point of honor, contest, or squabble, by duel, or
by appeals to the public, in any newspaper, hand-bill, or pamphlet, such
offense shall be deemed a contempt of the high court of honor: and the party
or parties so offending shall be rendered infamous, by having their names
respectively entered in the Rascal's Record.

AND the form or process of the court shall be as follows -- If any man has
cause of offense against another, he shall apply to the clerk of the court for
a declaration. These declarations shall be fairly printed on good paper, with
suitable blanks for the names of the parties, dates, etc. And the plaintiff
applying shall pay eighteen pence for the blank and six pence for filling it
up, attesting it, and entering the action on the docket. And the party shall,
in the presence of the clerk, sign the said declaration with his own hand; or
if that cannot be, shall make his mark. After which the clerk shall number and
file the said declaration.

ON notice from the clerk that such a declaration has been filed, the judges
shall meet and agree on a time and place for hearing the cause; to which the
accusers and accused shall be summoned to attend, with their respective
witnesses. No council shall be admitted in this court; but the parties shall
personally plead their own causes. After a full hearing, the court shall give
their final sentence or decree. If judgment shall be against the accusee, his
name, etc. shall be entered on the rascal's record, with a number, in a column
for the purpose, referring to the number of the declaration filed. But if the
accuser shall fail to make good his charge or charges against the accusee, his
name, even the name of the accuser, shall be entered as aforesaid, on the
rascal's record. And thus shall all controversies be instituted, conducted, and
determined in the high court of honor.

AND the form of the declaration shall be as follows, viz.

KNOW ALL MEN, by these presents, that I A. B. of the city of Philadelphia --
do announce, pronounce, attest, and declare, that my friend and fellow citizen
C. D. of the same city -- is a rogue, a rascal, a villain, a thief, and a
scoundrel: that he is a tory, a traitor, a conspirator, and a rebel: That he is
a forestaller, a regrator, a monopolizer, a speculator, and a depreciator: That
he is a backbiter, a slanderer, a calumniator, and a liar. That he is a mean,
dirty, stinking, sniveling, sneaking, pimping, pocket-picking-d -- d son of a
bitch. And I do further declare, that all and every of the above appellations
are intended, and ought to be taken, construed, and understood in the most
opprobrious sense of the words. An expression used by one of the writers in the
quarrel alluded to.


IN testimony whereof, I have hereunto set my hand at Philadelphia this -- day
of -- in the year --.

NOW THE CONDITION of the above declaration is such, that if the aforesaid A.
B. the accuser, shall well and truly support, maintain, and verify before the
judges of the high court of honor, any one or more of the aforesaid charges
against his friend and fellow citizen C. D. accusee as aforesaid, then the said
A. B. shall be saved harmless, and remain justified in his procedure. But and
if the said A. B. shall fail to make proof as aforesaid, then he, the said A.
B. does, by these presents, submit, admit, and permit that his name, that is to
say, the name of him the said A. B. accuser as aforesaid, shall be entered in
the book of record of the said honorable court, called the rascal's record;
there to remain from generation to generation. World without end. Amen!

"SIGNED and attested the day and year aforesaid." etc. etc. etc.

SUCH, Mr. Printer, are the out lines of my scheme; which I acknowledge may
admit of considerable improvement. It would ill become me to expatiate on the
many and great advantages that would accrue to my country from such an
establishment. How much bloodshed -- how much inkshed, would be spared? How
many difficult points of honor, and nice questions of ceremony would be
judicially determined? How many private animosities would be checked in the
first stage, and brought to issue before the blood became heated by argument
and altercation? These sources of panegyric I leave to the judicious pens that
will doubtless be employed hereafter, if my project should be adopted, in
dissertations on the rights, limits, and advantages of the high court of honor.

I cannot, however, forbear pointing out one benefit that will arise from my
project, which is, that when a gentleman finds himself so disposed; he may
vilify and abuse his friend and neighbor at the very reasonable expense of two
shillings; whereas it costs the Lord knows what to get a column or two of
scandal inserted in your paper: but modesty forbids my saying any thing more on
the subject.

CALAMUS.
December 1780.
JAMES RIVINGTON, printer of the Royal Gazette at New York, whilst the British
troops were in possession of that city, had been exceedingly virrulent,
abusive, and illiberal in his publications against the Americans, their
congress, their army, their officers, and their measures: Every paper abounded
with the grossest falsities, misrepresentations, and insults; till at last,
facts repeatedly contradicting his positive intelligence, the Royal Gazette
lost all credit, even in Europe, where his accounts of the events of the war
were chiefly intended to operate. This conduct of Mr. Rivington, and of those
who countenanced and assisted him, provoked some sarcasms in return -- amongst
which were the following publications.

ADVERTISEMENT.
New York, Nov 1, 1781.
THE late surrender of Lord Cornwallis and his army, together with a variety of
other circumstances, having rendered it convenient for the subscriber to remove
to Europe, all those who are indebted to, or have any demands against him, are
earnestly requested to make as speedy a settlement of their accounts as
possible.

NOTICE is also hereby given, that the subscriber will dispose of his remaining
stock in trade by public auction. The sales to begin at his store on Monday,
the 19th instant, and will be continued from day to day (Sundays excepted) from
the hours of ten to one in the forenoon, until the whole shall be disposed of.

IT is well known that his store is furnished with not only an extensive
library of the most approved authors, but also a greater variety of curious and
valuable articles than has ever been exhibited in one collected view on this
side of the Atlantic. The scanty limits of an advertisement are by far
insufficient to admit of an adequate display of his extraordinary and
miscellaneous collection. The subscriber must, therefore, content himself with
selecting, for the present, a few articles for public attention: but a complete
catalogue is now under the press, and will be distributed at the time and place
of sale.

BOOKS.
THE History of the American War: or, The glorious exploits of the British
Generals, Gage, How, Burgoyne, Corwallis, and Clinton.

The Royal Pocket Companion: being a New System of Policy, founded on rules
deduced from the nature of man, and proved by experience: whereby a prince may
in a short time render himself the abhorrence of his subjects, and the contempt
of all good and wise men.

Select Fables of Aesop, with suitable Morals and Applications -- Amongst which
are, The Dog and the Shadow -- The Man and his Goose, which laid a golden Egg,
etc. etc.

A New System of Cruelty; containing a variety of Modern Improvements in that
Art. Embellished with an elegant Frontispiece, representing an Inside View of a
Prison Ship.

The Right of Great Britain to the Dominion of the Sea -- a poetical Fiction.

THE State of Great Britain in October 1760 and October 1781, compared and
contrasted.

A Geographical, Historical, and Political History of the Rights and
Possessions of the Crown of Great Britain in North America. This valuable Work
did consist of thirteen Volumes in Folio: but is now abridged by a royal Author
to a single Pocket Duodecimo; for the greater convenience of himself, his
successors, and subjects.

The Law of Nations, revised and amended. To which is added, by way of
Appendix, a full and true account of the Capture of the Island of St. Eustatia,
by Admiral Rodney.

The Conquest of the four Southern rebel Colonies, with Notes critical and
explanatory by Earl Cornwallis.

A narrative of the Ship-wreck of Lord Rawdon, in his voyage from Charlestown,
South Carolina, to London.

Miracles not ceased: or, an instance of the remarkable Interposition of
Providence in causing the Moon to delay her setting for more than two hours, to
favor the retreat of General Joshua and the British Army after the battle of
Monmouth.

Tears of Repentance: o^, ^he present state of the of the loyal Refugees in New
York, and elsewhere.

The political Liar: a weekly Paper, published by the Subscriber, bound in
Volumes.

PLAYS.
WEST Point Preserved: or, The Plot discovered.

Miss M'Crea: A Tragedy.

Burgoyne's Address to the people of Saratoga. The sleeveless Errand: or, the
Commissioners of Peace. The march to the Valley Forge; or much ado about
nothing. The unsuccessful attempt by Gov. Johnson. The amorous Hero and
contented Cuckold, by Genesis How and Mr Loring -- Comedies.

The Meschianza: a pantomime.

The Battle of the Keggs: a Farce.

Who'd have thought it? or, the Introduction of 24 Standards to the rebel
Congress. A procession.

MAPS AND PRINTS.
AN elegant Map of the British empire in North America, upon a very small scale.

AN accurate Chart of the coast of North America from New Hampshire to Florida;
with the Soundings of all the principal Inlets, Bays, Harbors, and Rivers.
This work was undertaken and completed by his Majesty's special command; and at
a national expense of many millions of Guineas, thousands of Men, and hundreds
of Merchantmen and royal Ships of War.

A Survey of Lord Cornwallis's Rout through the Southern Colonies: beginning at
Charlestown, in South Carolina, and terminating at York in Virginia. As the
preceding Chart gives an accurate description of the Sea Coast, so it was
intended to form a correct Map of the interior parts of this Country; but the
rude Inhabitants grew jealous of the operation, and actually opposed his
Lordship's progress.

The Battle of Saratoga, and the Surrender at York; two elegant Prints, cut in
Copper, and dedicated to the King.

British Representations of the principal Transactions of the present War,
highly colored by eminent hands. These pieces are so ingeniously contrived,
that by reversing any one of them, it will exhibit an American or a French view
of the same subject uncoloured.

A very humorous Representation of the memorable Procession of Brigadier
General ARNOLD; with his Friend and Counselor, through the streets of
Philadelphia After the Discovery and Failure of General Arnold's treasonable
design to betray the whole garrison of West-point, with the person of Genesis
Washington, the minister of France, Baron Stuben, and other principal
Characters, into the hands of the Enemy; an effigy of the General, as large as
the life, was constructed by an able artist at Philadelphia, and seated in, a
cart, with the figure of the Devil, at his elbow, holding a Lanthorn up to the
face of Arnold to show him to the people. The cart was paraded a whole evening
through the streets of the City, with Drums and Fifes playing the Rogue's
march, and other marks of Infamy, and attended by a vast concourse of People.
.

The Times: A satirical Print, representing the British Lion blind in both
Eyes, thirteen of his Teeth drawn, and his Claws pared off; with Lord North, in
the character of a Farrier, bleeding him in the Tail for his recovery.

PHILOSOPHICAL APPARATUS.
A curious new invented magic Lanthorn: very useful for these who are at the
head of affairs. This Machine was constructed by an able Artist, under Lord
North's immediate direction, for the amusement of the good people of England.
The Spectators are gratified with an illuminated view of the fictitious objects
presented, but kept totally in the dark with respect to the real objects around
them.

Multiplying Glasses; whereby the numbers of an Enemy may be greatly increased
to cover the disgrace of a Defeat, or enhance the glory of a Victory.

Microscopes, for magnifying small objects, furnished with a select set ready
fitted for use. Amongst these are a variety of real and supposed Successes of
the British Generals in America.

A complete Electrical Apparatus, with improvements, for the the use of the
King and his Ministers. This Machine should be exercised with great caution;
otherwise, as experience has shown, the operator may unexpectedly receive the
shock he intends to give -- Pocket glasses for short-sighted Politicians.

PATENT MEDICINES.
Aurum Potabile. This preparation was formerly supposed to be a never failing
Specific; but has been found not so well adapted to the American Climate,
having been frequently tried here without effect: But its reputation is again
rising, as it has lately been administered with success in the case of General
Arnold.

Vivifying Balsam: excellent for weak Nerves, Palpitations of the Heart, over
Bashfulness and Diffidence. In great demand for the Officers of the Army.

Sp. Mend.: Or the genuine spirit of Lying, extracted by distillation from many
hundreds of the Royal Gazette of New York. Other papers have been subjected to
the same process, but the success did not answer the Expense and Trouble of the
operation, the produce being of an inferior quality -- Therefore beware of
Counterfeits. The Ink and Paper of the Royal Gazette can alone furnish this
excellent Sp. Mend. in its greatest perfection. By administering due
proportions of this admirable Medicine, Lies may be formed which will operate
for a day, a week, a month or months; near at hand or at a distance; in
America, or in Europe; according to the design of the party. N. B. The true Sp.
Mend. is authenticated by the Seal of the Subscriber, who is the Inventor and
Patentee thereof.

Cordial Drops for low spirits, prepared for the special use of the Honorable
the Board of loyal Refugees at New York.

Anodyne Elixir, for quieting Fears and Apprehensions: very necessary for
Tories in all parts of America.

WITH a great variety of other Articles too tedious to enumerate.

N. B. To every Purchaser to the value of five Pounds, will be delivered
gratis, One Quire of counterfeit Continental Currency* Also two Quires of
Proclamations, offering Pardon to Rebels.

JAMES RIVINGTON.

A REPLY: IN MR. RIVINGTON's OWN STYLE.
To the printer of the Pennsylvania Packet. SIR,
YOUR paper of the 10th instant, No. 805, reached this city, and an
Advertisement therein inserted, and signed with my signature, has attracted
universal notice and particular attention, and has, moreover, rendered me the
subject of much satirical stricture.

THE author of this most wicked forgery, whoever he is, has most nefariously,
and with malice aforethought, made use of my name as a vehicle to impose on the
judicious public the nugatory productions of his own flimsy brain, as the
genuine offspring of my prolific pen. But I do assure you, upon the word of a
gentleman, that said advertisement is in toto spurious and fictitious. Was the
ultimatum of the jejune performance nothing more than a little risible satire,
I had borne the indignity with taciturn patience: But it is most patent to
sense, that an emphatic injury is intended by this attrocious calumniator. The
manifest design is to draw upon me the resentment of a people for whom I have
the most profound veneration, and whose virtuous and heroic struggles for
constitutional liberty I have beheld with astonishment and secret admiration.

YOU may perhaps, Mr Printer, be surprised at this manifesto, and exclaim, that
there is no concatenation between such a declaration and the uniform tenor and
tendency of the Royal Gazette of New York. In answer -- you are to consider,
that it was my lot to remain with a people who had power in their hands, and
money in their purses. In such a situation, you must concede, it was the part
of a wise man to evade the power, and to possess as much of the money as he
could. This I have done: I have written and published for them to the extremest
verge of invention -- the English language has been tortured, and truth
expired on the rack, in their behalf. By this I have gained their confidence
and blinded the Argus eyes of power -- As to money, let the salary I enjoy, and
the baubles I have sold at extortionate prices, evince that my labor has not
been in vain. Have I done this to the injury of America and advantage of her
enemies? -- by no means -- By overacting my part, I defeated the very purposes
I seemed to intend: and the political lies I daily fabricated, only served to
gull for a time, the fools who thought I was exerting myself in their service;
till, by repeated confutations they lost all credit, even in the cities of New
York and London -- In the mean time my hopes were rivetted to an event which I
foresaw must sooner or later take effect; and I felicitate myself in the
prospect of spending in America, amongst heroes and patriots, the cash which I
have seduced from the unbuttoned pockets of cockaded coxcombs -- in America,
the land of liberty, when the storm of war shall cease, and every man may enjoy
the fruits of his ingenuity under his own vine and his own fig tree.

I am well aware, Mr Printer, that the voice of your multitude is against me.
They judge from appearances only, and appearances are generally delusive --
They suppose that I am the sole author of the inveterate falsehoods, gross
misrepresentations, and stigmatic appellations which I so frequently publish
against them and their cause -- Alas! I am but a poor printer His own words.
! subjected by my vocation to the execrable task of bringing into the world the
monstrous conceptions of weak and disordered minds. But I am deemed a tory --
malevolent tory -- and why? truly because I have published tory news, tory
lies, and tory essays in my gazette. Granted. But will any one pretend to say
that I have ever refused to publish whig news, whig lies, or whig essays; I
challenge all Philadelphia to produce a single writer who ever sent me a whig
piece for publication which I refused or neglected to print -- I am confident
no such instance can be found. -- The truth is, I am a great friend to liberty;
and have actually felt the sacred flame glow in my breast -- first, about the
time, or rather just after the affair of Saratoga; and now again on the
surrender of Lord Cornwallis and his army. And if the brave Americans should
pursue their success, and confirm their independance, of which indeed there now
seems to be little doubt, you may depend upon it, there is not a flaming
patriot in the Thirteen United Sates that will garrulate the charms of liberty
with more loquacious zeal than myself.

IT is most undubitably the duty of every good citizen to serve his king and
country. I am desirous to fulfill this duty to the ^oint of punctuality. I have
already served my king -- my sovereign GEORGE III. -- God bless him! to the
best of my poor abilities; and now I am ready to wheel to the right-about and
serve my country; for I call this my country, wherein I have partook of the
viands of luxury, and risen to a height of opulent importance, which I had no
hopes of attaining in England, that land of debts, creditors, and intolerable
oppression.

FINALLY, Mr. Printer, I rest the evidence of my whiggism on two immovable
pillars. First, the declaration I voluntarily signed, and which was published
in the newspapers of the year 1776: wherein I solemnly asserted my attachment
to the American cause, and engaged my sacred honor that I would do nothing
inimical thereto: The mob had taken him in hand in 1776, and to pacify them he
published such a declaration.
and, secondly, my address to congress lately forwarded by Mr. John Moody; A
spy sent from New York; detected, and hanged at Philadelphia.
a copy of which I subjoin, for your satisfaction.

To the honorable the congress of the United "States of America: THE petition
of James Rivington, of the city of "New York, printer, and nick-nack seller:
Humbly shows,
THAT your petitioner, under the sacred influence of the most exalted
predilection for the glorious cause of liberty, in which you have so nobly, so
wisely, and so effectually contended; begs leave, with all due submission, to
throw himself at the feet of the most venerable, most august body on the
surface of the earth.

THAT your petitioner has, from a most unfortunate arrangement of
circumstances, been compelled, most unwillingly compelled, to remain with the
enemies of your virtuous cause, and even assist in the promotion of their
unjust designs. But he most solemnly assures your honors, that he has done
this with ineffable compunction and sorrow of heart: having often exclaimed, in
private, with the royal poet: Woe is me that I am constrained to dwell with
Mesech, and to have my habitation among the tents of Kedar!

THAT your petitioner having given unquestionable proofs of his eminent
abilities in the art of political deviation from truth in support of a bad
cause, humbly conceives that the same talents may be of singular utility in
defending a good one: and therefore offers himself, with all his rare and
superior accomplishments, to the congress of the free and United States of
America; only praying such protection and rewards as his future services may
justly merit.

SUBMITTING the premises to the candid consideration of your honors, he only
waits a favorable answer to appear a first rate whig in the city of
Philadelphia. And, in the mean time, has the honor to subscribe himself, with
all possible veneration, humility, and respect, etc. etc. etc.

SUCH, Mr. Printer, is my address to congress. I have only to request that you
will not admit into your paper any more of the false and wicked insinuations of
the author of the aforesaid advertisement.

I flatter myself with an agreeable answer from congress; and hope Mr. Thomson
will not be dilatory in forwarding it. Soon after which I shall expect to take
you by the hand, and salute you with the endearing names of brother whig, and
brother puff.

J. RIVINGTON.
New York, Nov. 17, 1781.
CONGRESS had, from some disgust, suddenly removed from Philadelphia to
Princetown in New Jersey: but, finding themselves but ill accommodated there,
they took into consideration the fixing upon some suitable place for their
permanent residence In canvassing this question, the eastern and southern
delegates could not agree on a situation equally convenient for both. On motion
of Mr. G -- it was at length determined, that congress should have two places
of alternate residence: one on the banks of the Potowmack, and the other on the
banks of the Delaware: and it was resolved, that congress should not remain
less than six months, nor more than two years at either of these places at one
time. But as there was no town on the Potowmack fit for their reception, they,
for the present, adjourned to Annapolis. This circumstance gave occasion for
the following publication.

INTELLIGENCE EXTRAORDINARY.
THE great revolution that has taken place in America, will undoubtedly
involve many circumstances of considerable importance and curious speculation.
None, perhaps, more remarkable than this, that the philosophical world may
expect to be entertained with a phenomenon in mechanics, altogether new, and
which cannot fail to engage universal attention.

THE Americans having observed the great irregularities to which the political
systems of Europe are liable, have invented a method of regulating the affairs
of their empire by ACTUAL MECHANISM. For this purpose an immense pendulum has
been constructed, of which the point of suspension is fixed somewhere in the
orbit of the planet Mars, and the Bob is composed of certain heterogeneous
matter of great specific gravity, called the American Congress.

THIS miraculous pendulum is to vibrate between Annapolis, on the Chesapeak,
and Trenton, on the Delaware; a range of about 180 miles.

IT will require the most subtle mathematical investigations to ascertain the
true path of this political bob: for it is pretty certain that it will not move
in a straight line, nor in a cycloid, nor in a parabola, nor in an hyperbola,
nor in any other known curve; but will have a motion peculiar to itself,
forming a crooked line, the properties of which cannot be reduced to any of the
rules within the present system of mathematics.

ALTHOUGH the oscillations of this pendulum will not be performed in, yet they
will average equal times. Two vibrations must be made in two years: but these
vibrations may bear no determatine proportion to each other; for their relative
proportions will depend entirely upon the specific gravity of the bob: which
being, from the nature of its composition, very variable, will render the
oscillations equally variable with respect to each other: and, which is very
extraordinary, although in all other instances, the more ponderous a body is,
the more it is disposed to rest, and the shorter and slower will its vibrations
be when suspended, it will be the reverse in the present case; for the bob will
be inclined to motion more or less, in proportion as the matter of which it may
be composed shall happen to be more or less dull and heavy.

BY the oscillations of this pendulum and its heavy bob, are thirteen wheels of
the American machine to be regulated. And, it is expected, that the different
combinations of motions, the actings, and counter-actings, the checks, and
counter-checks of the moving parts, will so correct and balance each other, as
to produce, in the final result, a movement so perfectly equable, that the
great desiderata, viz. the perpetual motion, and the discovery of longitude,
will no longer puzzle the brains and drain the purses of seekers in science.

BUT the most entertaining consequence of this improvement in politics will be,
that it will render visible the locomotive faculties of the several nations in
Europe; so far at least as the same may be ascertained by their respective
ambassadors and envoys. For, as they must all follow the movements of the
American bob, they will do this according to the genius of the countries to
which they respectively belong. The volatile and active will always keep within
reach of the object of pursuit: the careless and indolent will loiter by the
way; and the dull and phlegmatic be so distanced, that by the time they shall
have arrived at one of the limits of oscillation, they will find it necessary
to tack about and follow the pendulum in its return to the other.

IN order to render this alternate peregrination as convenient as may be to
their ministers, the several governments of Europe are to raise by contribution
the sum of four hundred thousand guineas for the purpose of levelling the roads
between Annapolis and Trenton, building bridges, and erecting houses of
residence in each of those towns, if those can properly be called houses of
residence wherein the inhabitants are to have no rest.

SOME have thought that when this monstrous pendulum shall be once set in
motion, it will not be possible to confine it within the proposed limits; but
that it will by its great weight (contrary to the usual laws of gravitation)
enlarge its field of action, and acquire a velocity which will cause it to
swing from New Hampshire to Georgia.

A further improvement has also been suggested; which is this -- Many
philosophers have been of opinion, that the most regular and proper motion of a
pendulum would be to cause it to swing in a horizontal circle, and not in a
vertical plane, as the common practice is, so that the string or rod may
describe a cone, of which the apex will be in the point of suspension, and the
base formed by the circumference of the circular plane in which the bob moves.

SHOULD this idea prove just (which Mr. Rittenhouse has been directed to
ascertain) the revolutions of America will be performed in a circle, whose
diameter, north and south, will be from a point in St. John's river,
Nova Scotia, to the mouth of the great river Missisippi, and west and east,
from the Lake in the Woods, to an unknown distance in the Atlantic ocean. The
only inconvenience will be the cutting a circular road through mountains and
forests for the accommodation of foreign ministers and the officers of
congress; and the providing sufficient ships at the point where the the said
line of circumvolution shall leave the continent, and enter on the waters of
the Atlantic, in order that their excellencies, and their honors, may be
attendant on this sublunary planet in every part of its orbit.

A. B.
Oct. 1783.
A SUMMARY OF SOME LATE PROCEEDINGS IN A CERTAIN GREAT ASSEMBLY.
-- A Member, in the course of debate, took occasion to mention the resolve
respecting the alternate residence of the house in two federal cities, and two
hundred miles distant from each other; and although he acknowledged himself out
of order, as the resolve had already been debated, and the votes thereupon
taken; yet he begged leave to draw their attention to a circumstance which had
probably escaped notice at the time, which was this: that the house had, some
months before, solemnly resolved, that a certain equestrian statue should be
erected in the place where the house should fix its permanent residence.
Congress had before resolved that an equestrian statue, in honor of General
Washington, should be erected in the place where their residence should be
fixed.
And he requested to know in what manner the House proposed to execute this
determination under the present system of a peregrinating instead of a
permanent residence.

THIS struck the house with great force, and many looked upon it as an
invincible difficulty; thinking that the two resolves were altogether
irreconcilable with each other. But the ingenious member, who had planned the
scheme of the two federal towns, soon relieved them from their embarrassment by
declaring -- That he had been well aware of this objection, and looked for it
at the time the resolve in question was under debate, when indeed he should not
have been so ready to answer as at present: That he was now prepared to obviate
the objection that had been started, and should in a day or two propose his
scheme at large, as he only waited for certain drawings to be completed, which
were already in great forwardness.

THE attention of the house being strongly drawn to the subject of this
promise, he was earnestly requested to give Instanter, some idea of his design.

THE ingenious member, thus urged, said that he was sensible his scheme must
greatly suffer in opinion by being exhibited in a partial, imperfect manner.
Nevertheless he could not refuse to gratify the impatience of the house,
trusting in their candor that they would not form too hasty a judgment of his
design, but wait till they should see the drawings, which would elucidate the
whole.

HIS design, he said, was this -- not only to comply with the resolve
respecting the equestrian statue, but to make that very resolve conducive to
the scheme of the two federal towns. The spirit and intention of the resolve
respecting the equestrian statue, he observed, was no more than this, that the
said statue should always be where the house should sit. To effect which,
nothing more was necessary than to adjourn the statue whenever and wherever
they should adjourn the house, which might easily be done by mounting it on
wheels. But this was not all; for if the horse should be constructed of a
suitable size, and framed with timbers, like the hull of a ship, it might be
made a most convenient vehicle to transport the members themselves, with their
books, papers, etc. from one federal town to the other: and added, that the
drawings he had mentioned were designed to exhibit such a construction of the
body of a horse, as might most conveniently answer this purpose: whereby would
be shown the seats intended for the respective members, the places for the
president and secretary, and a little closet in the intestinum rectum, for the
secret papers of the house: provision being also made for light and air, and
every other convenience suitable to so great a design.

HE confessed he had taken his idea from the famous Grecian horse, used at the
siege of Troy; and had been searching Homer with all his commentators,
annotators, and translators, in hopes of finding some description of the
internal construction of that memorable machine; but receiving no assistance
from these sources, he had been obliged to depend upon his own ingenuity, and
the advice of an able ship-wright, who was now making the drawings he proposed
to lay before the house.

THIS device of the ingenious member was received with great applause -- but a
still more ingenious member rose up, and said -- that the gentleman who spoke
last, had in some measure anticipated a project he had conceived, and was
preparing to offer. But as the design he had formed was upon a much larger
scale than that which had been suggested, he should not withold it from the
house, although he confessed it was planned on much the same principles.

THE difficulty respecting the statue, he said, had not indeed occured to him;
but one of at least equal importance had -- which was the enormous expense of
building two federal towns, when one might be sufficient for all purposes.

TO obviate this, he would propose that there should be two places of
alternate, permanent residence, agreeably to the late resolve, and but one
federal town; which town should be built upon a large platform, mounted on a
great number of wheels, and be drawn by a great number of horses.

THIS, he observed, would be productive of many great conveniences. It would
render the immence expense of building two federal towns unnecessary -- It
would spare the trouble and confusion of packing and unpacking, deranging and
arranging their books and papers at every adjournment -- and it would save much
precious time, inasmuch as there would be no interruption in their proceedings;
for the business of the house might be going on, whilst the house itself was
going on; and motions not only be made in the house, but the house itself make
motions -- so that, with the motions of the members, the motions of the house,
and the motions of the whole federal town, all the powers of government would
be in constant action for the good of the empire.

HE then proceeded to show that such a scheme was neither absurd in itself, nor
impracticable in in fact. It was not absurd, he said, because nature, who does
nothing improper, had furnished many instances of the kind -- as in the snail,
the tortoise, and several other animals -- neither was it impractible, as he
could fully prove. He asserted that he had himself seen in England an ingenious
tinker, who had mounted a small house upon wheels, which contained a bed, some
necessary furniture, and the utensils of his trade, and was drawn about by a
single horse: so that, when he had exhausted the custom of one village, he
removed, cum omnibus appurtenantibus, to another; and by that means secured a
constant circulation of employ.

BUT I have an instance, said he, more directly in point -- I mean that of the
empress of Russia; who, when she removes her court from Petersburgh to Moscow,
is accommodated with elegant apartments, built on sleds, and drawn by fifty
horses, over a tract of snow many hundred miles in extent.

BUT it may be objected, continued this more ingenious member, that these are
only examples of a single room, or two or three apartments being rendered
moveable by machinery; but to make a whole town -- a federal town -- an
imperial city -- thus transitory, must be totally impracticable, unless by the
help of art magic -- I am not unprepared, said he, to answer this objection. It
is certainly a mark of great weakness to conclude every principle false of
which we cannot conceive, and every purpose impossible, which we know not how
to effect. A fool often wonders improperly. He sees a jack-weight descend
without surprise, but exclaims with admiration at the movements of an orrery:
whereas, in truth, there is infinitely more mystery in the descent of a
jack-weight than in the most complicated movements of an orrery.

I shall not now undertake to describe minutely the means by which our federal
town may be rendered itinerant. This I reserve for a future day; but to show
that the thing is at least not impossible, I beg leave to read a passage from a
book I have in my hand. It is entitled, A Voyage to the Moon, by Cerano de
Bergerac, p. 112 and 114. At this our young host enquired from his father, What
was the hour? Who replying it had already struck eight, he very angrily asked
him, how he dared to neglect calling him at seven, as he had ordered; when he
knew very well the houses were to begin their journey next day, the walls of
the town being already gone? The good man told him, that since his sitting down
at table, a proclamation had been made, forbidding the houses to set out before
the day after tomorrow.

IN order to turn the discourse, I entreated him to inform me, what was meant
by the removal of the town, and if the houses and walls really traveled? Dear
stranger, said he, our buildings are of two sorts, the moveable and the
sedentary. The moveable, in one of which you are now, I am about to describe.
They are composed, as you see, of very light wood: and at the building of them,
the architect places four strong wheels under the foundations of the walls. Six
large pair of bellows are placed, with their noses horizontal to the wings of
the upper story; so that when a town is to be removed (which is always done as
the seasons change) several large s^ils are unfolded before the nose of these
bellows, which being set at work, discharge the wind so very forcibly upon
them, that the houses are set in motion, and by the violence of the gust which
drives them forward, are enabled to travel upwards of an hundred leagues in
eight days.

THE very ingenious member quoted this authority with no small marks of
triumph, and observed, in closing the book, that what had been done might be
done again. That he should, however, improve upon this device of his lunatic
brethren, by causing his town to move bodily, with all its rights, privileges,
and appurtenances, and not by single houses, which he apprehended would be apt
to occasion much confusion on the road.

HE concluded, with saying, that the only thing he should ask of the house
would be to proclaim a two days fast previous to every adjournment; not only
with a view to render the burden of so vast a machine as light as possible, but
also to avoid too great a complexity of motions during the journey.

THE house was astonished at the extensive genius of the projecting member; and
immediately adjourned; having first recommended it to each other to consider
against the next meeting, if any objections could possibly to be made to the
last proposed scheme.

Nov. 1783.
MR. OSWALD, the printer of the Independent Gazeteer, having published some
free strictures on the conduct of the supreme court, the judges ordered him to
be indicted for a libel. The grand jury, after a full enquiry, returned the
bill ignoramus. The judges, enraged at this refusal, attempted to overawe them
by severe reproofs in open court, and sent them back for reconsideration: but
the jury adhered to their verdict; and justified themselves in a public address
in the papers. Some essays on the subject of grand juries appeared in answer,
generally believed to be written by the judges themselves, Chief Justice M'Kean
and Judge Bryan.
under the signatures of JURISPERITUS and ADRIAN. And these occasioned the
following observations in return.

FOR THE PENNSYLVANIA PACKET.
January 1783.
FROM what has appeared in the public papers respecting the late contest
between the judges of the court of oyer and terminer, and the grand jury for
the city and county of Philadelphia, this subject has claimed the general
attention of the country, and the rights and duties of juries have been
discussed in almost every company -- ignorantly enough no doubt. But the
people, ever jealous of their liberties, are ready to take alarm on any
appearance of danger, without regarding the quarter from whence the invasion
arises, or the motives that induced it: the robes of office are not long enough
to screen the invader from censure, nor the seemingly harmless motive of pride
palliate the offense. Are our liberties safe or are they not? is the only
question with the people at large. Friends may explain, and sycophants may
flatter, but strict right knows neither friends nor flatterers.

FOR my own part, I confess I am no lawyer; and wonder how it should come to
pass that I should appear in the Pennsylvania Packet on a law subject -- but
the thing is unavoidable -- as I feel myself urged by what I conceive to be a
sense of duty.

I had, some how or other, acquired a notion that there were but two screens
between the subject and the rigor of the law. I mean the grand jury, and the
power of pardon, lodged somewhere in every system of government. The first, as
a security to the innocent accused, that he may not be brought to a
disgraceful, vexatious, and expensive trial; and the other, a merciful
interference to relax the rigid cords of conviction, in cases where, though the
crime may have been sufficiently ascertained, yet concomitant circumstances may
justify an extension of pardon.

I imagined that the grand inquest of the county, when duly returned, composed
a body of trust and power inferior to none but the legislature itself. That
they are constitutionally independent of every influence and control in the
line of their office, and not accountable for their decisions, unless in cases
of manifest corruption and breach of the laws. That they are superior to and
not the servants of the court, in as much as the court with all its powers
cannot proceed against a citizen, or any individual in the criminal line,
without the sanction and consent of this grand inquest (except in cases of
attainder or contempts in the face of the court). For, as to the doctrine of
proceeding by information, I do not fully understand it; yet know enough to
hope it, will never gain an establishment in this country.

I thought the power of a grand jury, independent as it is, could never give
any just cause of jealousy; because it is lodged in a kind of representation of
the people of the county, if the sheriff does his duty with integrity and
discretion -- in a number of men hastily drawn together, between whom there
could not have existed any previous collective connection, and, therefore, no
danger of collusion; and particularly because their office and power are so
temporary that there is not time to form any systematical abuses of either

I had further conceived, that as the grand jury were impannelled merely for
the purpose of protecting the innocent, by bringing the guilty, and none but
the guilty, to an open trial, they must of course have a right to make a strict
enquiry, according to the tenor of their official oath -- that is, to command
to be brought before them all manner of legal testimony, of what nature soever,
that may in any wise tend to the discovery of truth, and of the whole truth;
and that they may and ought to do this of right, uninfluenced, and unauthorised
by any interfering power. Because, if the grand jury were prohibited from all
testimony but such as the court should furnish, and obliged to receive as
authentic, nothing but the dictates of the judges or the attorney general (who
in truth ought to be no more than assistants and advisers of the grand jury in
matters of form only), they would be an unnecessary wh^el in the political
machine, and serve no purpo^^ but that of giving a legal sanction to the will
of ^he court.

THESE, and some other extravagant notions, found myself possessed of whenever
I conversed on the subject, but could not recollect the source from whence I
had drawn my ideas.

AT length I saw a piece in the Freeman's Journal of the 15th instant, signed
ADRIAN; and was horribly shocked to find sentiments and doctrines advanced on
this subject so very contrary to those which I had entertained. As I doubt not
but this performance must have been written by a very great man, from the
elegance of the style, and by a very great lawyer, from the subtlety of the
reasoning, I began to fear that I was all in the wrong. I thought of it night
and day, till at last I discovered tha^ the store from which I had taken all my
prejudices was close at my elbow. You must know that we have in the house an
old folio book which my grandfather had brought with him from England. My
father had made no other use of it but to strap his razor on the leathern cover
thereof when he had occasion to shave himself; and as it concerned the politics
of a distant country one hundred years ago, and as our family were no
politicians, it had lain for a long time neglected on the upper shelf of a
closet. I recollected, however, that about twelve or fourteen years ago, I had
in some idle hour, taken up this book, and read with some attention a piece
therein respecting the rights and powers of a grand jury.

I hope our new pope is not as infallible as his predecessor of the same name:
if he is, my author, and consequently myself, must be greatly mistaken. I shall
not pretend to say which is most to be depended upon; but as the doctrine
respects a very important right of the people, I shall contrast the two
authors, and leave the decision to abler judges.

THE book to which I refer is entitled STATE TRACTS, being a collection of
several choice treatises relating to government from the year 1660 to 1689. And
the treatise which had engaged my particular attention is entitled The security
of Englishmen's lives; or the trust, power, and duty of the grand juries of
England; explained according to the fundamentals of the English government, and
the declaration of the same made in parliament by many statutes.

IN the preface to this book we are told -- This is a collection that will in
general set forth the true and legal constitution of our ancient famous English
government -- In particular, here will be seen the trust, power, and duty of
grand juries, and the great security of Englishmens lives in their faithful
discharge thereof.

WITH respect to Adrian's performance, I am willing to suppose that his
narrative of the case in question may be true, not having had an opportunity of
informing myself more certainly. All that I know of the matter is that a writer
in Mr Oswald's paper had presumed to censure the conduct of the chief justice
in two instances: for which offense two indictments had been sent to the grand
jury against Mr Oswald as a publisher of libels. Had the testimony been
sufficient to support these indictments: had the jury returned them true bills,
and had a conviction ensued, the consequence would have been, at least this --
that one citizen having offended another, would have been thrown into the power
of the offended party to be punished according to that measure of resentment
which his wounded pride might instigate

ADRIAN is pleased to say -- "For these false and scandalous libels on the
court and the justice of the country, which ought not only to be above
imputation but free of suspicion, Mr Oswald was arrested." -- These libels,
says Adrian, were false; but nineteen honest and impartial men, declare, upon
oath, that they were not false Oswald's publication consisted merely of a
narrative of the conduct of the court in a particular case: the jury on
enquiry, found that the narrative was strictly true, and therefore could not
find the bill.
-- and not only upon oath, but according to Adrian's own assertion, after
keeping the bill two days, and hearing diverse testimonies. It appears then that
the grand jury did deliberately, and not hastily, or unwarily, reject those
bills.

NOTWITHSTANDING the oath of secrecy taken by the grand jury, Adrian thinks he
has fished out the reasons by which they were governe'd -- It is said, (says
he,) that upon examining several other persons it was made out, some how, that
the printer had been misinformed: thence it was inferred, that mistake merely
involved no guilt.

ADRIAN had just before observed,that the justice of the country should not
only be above imputation but free of suspicion. Now, I am inclined to think,
that the grand jury, for the time, more nearly represents the justice of the
country than even the learned judges themselves: and yet Adrian suspects that
they made out testimony some how or other -- an insinuation at least that they
had acted unfairly -- whether they did so or not, I leave to themselves to
answer -- I am not their champion in this particular instance -- I contend only
for general principles; and shall proceed to select from Adrian's performance
some doctrinal passages, which seem to be inconsistent with the tenor of my old
book.

WAS there not, (says he,) the usual probable evidence for an open enquiry by a
petit jury? If there was, why stifle the cause in the chamber of the grand
inquest? Probable evidence, and stifle a cause -- horrid language! are men's
lives, reputations, and fortunes to be hung upon the tenter-hooks of logical
probabilities: and is the fair acquittal of a fellow-citizen from a heinous
charge to be called a stifled cause? -- Oh, sovereign pontiff, have mercy upon
us! Upon this, the chief justice seemingly provoked at their irregularities (I
hope it was in appearance only) asked the grounds on which the grand jury had
proceeded, and how they came to receive witnesses not admitted by the court?
This, dilated into plain language, will stand thus: -- Gentlemen, you are
enjoined by your oath of office, diligently to enquire, and presentment make,
of the truth, the whole truth, and nothing but the truth. But, remember you are
to shut your ^ars against all testimony but such as I shall send you, otherwise
you may perhaps find this fellow innocent of the charge, when it is my desire
that he should be punished.

THEY declined (or one for the rest did so) giving any reasons for their
conduct, under pretense that they were sworn not to reveal the secrets of the
state, or their fellows; as if this oath restrained them. Adrian then promises,
that he will hereafter show the public -- the true nature and constitution of a
grand jury, that part of legal machinery, composed of unlearned men, (to use
the phraseology of the profession,) which is regulated and controlled by the
law, as other juries, at every step, and in every instance of their trust, and
submitted to the legal direction of the court. Observe, reader, how
irreverently his holiness speaks of one of the most respectable bodies in our
government -- little reverence, indeed, would be due, if they were no other
than what he represents them to be: I wish to know what trust can be said to be
committed to a body of men who are to be regulated and controlled at every step
and in every instance? But let us contrast these modern doctrines, and this
Adrianatic idea of a grand jury with select passages from an author of the last
century.

HE first speaks of the laws and government of England, in general, and gives
the construction of grand and petit juries, but says -- It is not designed at
this time to undertake a discourse of of petit juries: but to consider the
nature and power of grand inquests: and to show how much the reputation, the
fortunes, and the lives of Englishmen depend on the conscientious performance
of their duty.

IT was absolutely necessary for the support of government, that some should be
entrusted to enquire after all such, as by treasons, felonies, or lesser
crimes, disturbed the peace, that they might be prosecuted and brought to
condign punishment; and it was no less needful for every man's quiet and
safety, that the trust of such inquisitions should be put into the hands of
persons of understanding and integrity, indifferent and impartial: that might
suffer no man to be falsely accused or defamed, nor the lives of any to be put
in jeopardy, by the malicious conspiracies of great or small; or the perjuries
of any profligate wretches. For these necessary honest ends was the institution
of grand-juries.

OUR ancestors thought it not best to trust this great concern of their lives
and interests in the hands of any officer of the king's* or in any judges named
by him, or in any certain number of men during life, lest they should be awed
or influenced by great men, corrupted by bribes, flatteries, or love of power,
or become negligent, or partial to friends and relations, or pursue their own
quarrels, or private revenges, or connive at conspiracies of others, and indict
thereupon.

HE then goes on to show what sort of men a grand jury ought to be composed of,
and in what character the law considers them, viz. -- Men most honest and most
sufficient for knowledge and ability of mind and estate. -- And not, according
to the phraseology of ADRIAN, a legal machine, composed of unlearned men.

-- I knew too well, says my author, that the wisdom and care of our ancestors
in this institution of grand juries, has not been of late considered as it
ought, nor the laws concerning them duly observed, nor have the gentlemen, nor
other men of estates in the several counties, discerned how insensibly their
legal power and jurisdiction in their grand and petit juries is decayed, and
much of the means to preserve their own lives and interests taken out of their
hands. It Is a wonder they were not more awakened with the attempts of the late
lord chief justice K --, who would have usurped a lordly dictatorial power over
the grand jury of Somersetshire, and commanded them to find a bill of
indictment for murder, for which they saw no evidence; and upon their refusal,
he not only threatened the jury, but assumed to himself an arbitrary power to
fine them. Here was a bold battery made upon the ancient fence of our
reputations and lives. If that justice's will had passed for law, all the
gentlemen of the grand jury must have been the basest vassals to the judges,
and have been penally obliged jurare in verbo magistri, to have sworn to the
directions or dictates of the judges. But, thanks be to God! the late long
parliament (though filled with pensioners) could not bear such a bold invasion
of the English liberties; but upon the complaint of one sir Hugh Windham,
foreman of the said jury, and a member of that parliament, the commons brought
the then chief justice to the bar to acknowledge his fault, whereupon the
prosecution ceased.

GRAND juries are our only security, inasmuch as our lives cannot be drawn into
jeopardy by all the malicious crafts of the devil, unless such a number of our
honest countrymen shall be satisfied in the truth of the accusation.

THEREFORE every grand juryman is sworn as the foreman, in the words following,
viz. You shall diligently enquire, and true presentment make of all such
articles, matters, and things, as shall be given you in charge; and of all
other matters and things as shall come to your own knowledge, touching the
present service: the (king's) counsel, your fellows, and your own, you shall
keep secret: you shall present no man for hatred or malice, neither shall you
leave any one unpresented for favor or affection, for love or gain, or any
hopes thereof; but in all things you shall present the truth, the whole truth,
and nothing but the truth, to the best of your knowledge: SO HELP YOU GOD!

HENCE it evidently appears, that every grand jury is bound to enquire
diligently after the truth of every thing for which they shall indict or
present a man. -- When a grand jury is sworn to enquire diligently, it is
natural and necessary to their business to think of whom they should enquire;
and it is plainly and easily resolved that they ought to enquire of every man
that can or will inform them. -- It seems, therefore, from the words of the
oath, that there is no bound or limit set (save their own understanding or
conscience) to any number or sort of persons of whom they are bound to enquire.
They ought first and principally to enquire of one another, mutually what
knowledge each of them has of the matter in question before them. The law
presumes that some at least of so many sufficient men of the county must know
or have heard of all notable things done against the public peace. -- If the
parties, and the facts whereof they are accused, be known to the jury or any of
them, their own knowledge will supply the room of many witnesses. Next, they
ought to enquire of all such witnesses as the prosecutors will produce against
the accused. They are bound to examine all fully and prudently, to the best of
their skill. Every juryman ought to ask such questions (by the foreman at
least) as he thinks necessary to resolve any doubt that may arise in him,
either about the fact, or witnesses, or otherwise, if the jury be then
doubtful, they ought to receive all such further testimony as shall be offered
them, and to send for such as any of them do think able to give testimony in
the case depending.

NO directions can legally be imposed upon them by any court or judges. An
honest jury will thankfully accept good advice from judges, as they are
assistants; but they are bound by their oaths to present the truth, the whole
truth, and nothing but the truth, to the best of their own, not the judge's,
knowledge; neither can they, without a breach of that oath, resign their
consciences, or blindly submit to the dictates of others; and therefore, ought
to receive or reject such advices, as they judge them good or bad.

THE language wherein the oath is penned, is known and understood by every man,
and the words in it have the same signification as they have wheresoever they
are used. The judges (without assuming to themselves a legislative power)
cannot put a new sense upon them, other than according to their genuine common
meaning. They cannot magisterially impose their opinions upon the jury, and
make them forsake the direct words of their oath to pursue their glosses. They
are carefully to examine what sort of men the witnesses are. -- It is
undoubtedly law which we find reported in Styles, that though there be
witnesses to prove the bill, yet the grand inquest is not bound to find it if
they see cause to the contrary. -- St. Rep. 11.

MY author then considers the nature and intent of the secrecy imposed on the
grand jury by their oath; which is chiefly to prevent combinations of
witnesses, escapes of the guilty, and conspiracies against the accused: and
then says,

IF it should be said, that whatsoever reasons there are for this oath of
secrecy, yet it cannot deprive the king of the benefit of having the evidence
made public, if he desires it, and that the grand jury do not break their oaths
when the king, or the prosecutor for him, will have it so, it is not hard to
show that such notions have no foundation in law or reason, and seem to come
from men who have not well studied the first principles of the English
government.

IT ought to be taken for a scandal upon the king, when he is represented in a
court of justice, as if he were partially concerned; or rather inclined to
desire, that a party accused should be found guilty, than that he should be
declared innocent, if he be so in truth. Adrian says, why stifle a cause in the
chamber of the grand inquest?
Queen Elizabeth had a true sense of our law, when the lord Burleigh, upon sir
Edward Coke, her then attorney, coming into her presence, told her, this is he
who prosecutes pro domina regina: for our lady the queen; and she said she
would have the form of the record altered, for it should be
attornatus-generalis qui pro domina veritate sequitur: the attorney general who
prosecutes for our lady the truth.

NOW suppose a man perfectly innocent and in some measure knowing in the law,
should be accused of treason or felony: if the judges should deny unto the
grand jury the liberty of examining any witnesses except in open court, where
nothing shall be offered that may help to clear the prisoner, but every thing
aggravated that gives color for the accusation; such persons only produced as
the king's counsel or the prosecutor shall think fit to call: how can innocence
secure any man from being arraigned?

FEW men at first see the danger of little changes in fundamentals; and those
who design them usually act with such craft, as, besides giving specious
reasons, they take great care that the true reason shall not appear. Every
design, therefore, of changing the constitution, ought to be most warily
observed, and strictly opposed.

THERE are two vulgar errors concerning the duty of grand juries, which, if not
removed, will in time destroy all the benefit we can expect from that
constitution, by turning them into a mere matter of form, which were designed
for so great ends. Many have of late thought, and affirmed it for law, that the
grand jury is neither to make so strict enquiry into matters before them, nor
to look for so clear evidence of the crime as the petit jury; but that their
presentiments being to pass a second examination, they ought to indict upon a
superficial enquiry, and bare probabilities. Whereas, should either of these
opinions be admitted, the prejudice to the subject would be equal to the total
laying aside grand juries. There being in truth, no difference between
arraigning without any presentment from them at all, and their presenting upon
slight grounds. -- For the first, that grand juries ought not to make so strict
enquiry: it were to be wished, that we might know how it comes to pass, that an
oath should be obligatory unto a petit jury and not unto the grand. The truth
is, that grand juries have both a larger field for their enquiry, and are in
many respects better capacitated to make a strict one than the petit juries.
These last are confined, as to the person and the crime specified in the
indictment; but, they are at large obliged to search into the whole matter that
any way concerns every case before them. -- The petit jury are bound to move
within the circle of the indictment made by the grand jury. -- It Is true that
upon hearing the party or his witnesses, the petit jury may acquit or judge the
facts in the indictment to be less heinous or malicious than they were
presented by the grand jury, but cannot aggravate them; which being considered,
it will easily appear, by the intent and nature of the powers given unto the
grand juries, that they are by their oaths obliged to keep all injustice from
entering the first gates of courts of judicature, and to secure the innocent
not only from punishment, but from all disgrace, vexation, expense or danger.

IT is necessary to know what they mean by a probable cause or evidence, who
say that our law requires no more for an indictment. Probable is a logical
term, relating to such propositions as have an appearance, but no certainty of
truth. These may be allowed in rhetoric, which works upon the passions: but
courts of justice are not erected to bring men into condemnation, but to find
who deserves to be condemned; and those rules are to be followed by them, which
are least liable to deception. If the word probable be taken in a common,
rather than a strict logical sense, it signifies no more than likely, or rather
likely than unlikely. When a matter is found to be so, the wager is not even --
there is odds upon one side. And this may be very good betting in a
Tennis-court or at a horse race; but he that would make the administration of
justice to depend upon such points seems to put a very small value upon the
fortunes, liberties, and reputations of men; and to forget that those who sit
in courts of justice have no other business there than to preserve them.

IT has been said (in a book entitled the grand juryman's oath and office)
that their work is no more than to present offenses fit for trial, and for that
reason give in only a verisimilar or probable charge: And others have affirmed
that a far less evidence will warrant a grand jury's indictment, than a petit
jury's verdict. But nothing can be more opposite to the justice of our laws
than such opinions. All laws, in doubtful cases, direct a suspension of
judgment, or a sentence, in favor of the accused person: but if this were
hearkened to, grand juries should upon their oaths affirm him criminal, when
the evidence is upon such uncertain grounds, that they cannot but doubt whether
he is so or not.

IT IS scarcely credible that any learned in our laws should tell a grand jury
that a far less evidence will warrant their indictment (being but an
accusation) than the petit jury ought to have for their verdict -- There is no
real difference between affirming in writing that an indictment of treason is
true, as is the practice of grand juries, and saying that the party indicted
thereupon is guilty of the treason whereof he is indicted, as is the course of
petit juries. They are both upon their oaths, which are equally obligatory unto
both. The one therefore must expect the same proof for their satisfaction as
the other, and as clear evidence must be required for an indictment as for a
verdict.

-- WHATEVER ground this doctrine of indicting upon slight proofs may have got
in our days, it is (as we have seen) both against law and reason, and contrary
to the practice of former times. My lord Coke, in his comment on Westminster. 2d.
tells us, that in those days (and as yet it ought to be) indictments taken in
the absence of the party, were formed upon plain and direct proofs, and not
upon probabilities and inferences. Herein we see that the practice of our
forefathers, and the opinion of this great and judicious lawyer, were directly
against this new doctrine; and some that have carefully looked backwards
observed that there are very few examples of men acquitted by petit juries,
because grand juries of old were so wary in canvassing every thing narrowly,
and so sensible of duty in proceeding unto truth upon satisfactory evidence,
that few or none were brought unto trial till their guilt seemed evident.

THEREFORE let the grand juries faithfully perform their high trust, and
neither be cheated nor frighted from their duty. Let them pursue the good old
way, since no innovation can be brought in, that will not turn to the prejudice
of the accused person and themselves. Let them not be deluded with frivolous
arguments, so as to invalidate a considerable part of our law, and render
themselves insignificant ciphers, in expectation that petit juries will repair
the faults they commit; since that would be no less than to slight one of the
best fences that the law provides for our lives and liberties, and very much to
weaken the other.

SUCH are the quotations I have thought fit to make from this valuable old
book; and wish the whole treatise on this subject were reprinted.

I shall be told, I suppose, that this is not law, and is of no authority -- Of
this I do not pretend to judge -- but sure I am that it is reason; and if it is
not law, it ought to be. What is generally called law authority is the opinion
or decision of some learned judge on the point in question; but it should be
observed* that grand juries are not like to have any contests, nor have they
ever had any that I know of, except with the learned judges themselves: now, if
the judge's opinion is to determine the point and become law authority, there
can be little doubt but he will do it as much in favor of his own power, and
that of his successors, as possible.

IT does not appear by my old folio book, who was the author of this treatise
on grand juries; it contains, however, the sentiments of a freeman one hundred
years ago; and has been deemed so judicious a performance as to gain a place
amongst a valuable collection of authentic papers; and to be particularly
pointed at and strongly recommended in the preface to this collection.

HOW very different are the opinions and doctrines of this writer from those of
Adrian! He is for giving the accused all possible chance for his vindication,
even before he is brought to the test of a petit jury -- Adrian is for giving
him no chance at all, in the first instance, but seems to think that nothing
less than the absolute impossibility of procuring even probable proof against
him should acquit him there, and justice will be done afterward by the petit
jury. And that he may be thankful for his final escape, after having been
ruined in health, reputation, and estate by confinement, infamy, fees and costs
-- my good old author seems to be of opinion, that it should be a cause of
satisfaction and joy when a fellow-citizen is acquitted of a crime laid to his
charge; but Adrian thinks a man accused, and not hanged, is a cause stifled.
Lastly, my author esteems the grand inquest for the county as a most
respectable body, in which the law has placed the highest trust and
confidence; but our new pope declares that it is no more than a legal machine,
to be governed and controlled in all its movements by the judges of the court
-- which of these doctrines is most likely to be founded in truth, to promote
the administration of justice, and secure the liberty of the subject, let the
public determine.

ONE OF THE PEOPLE.
January 1783.
TO THE PEOPLE.
THE rights and duty of a grand jury and the prerogatives of the bench, are
subjects now fairly brought before you: and as they are of high importance to
good order in government, on the one hand, and to the security of the lives and
liberties of the people, on the other, I hope they will be attended to with the
circumspection they deserve.

IT is precisely the time to investigate this subject. We know not what sort of
judges we may have hereafter. Our struggles for liberty are not yet over. Our
apprehensions have been roused by the war, and are yet feelingly awake. If
under these circumstances you tacitly submit to the doctrines lately advanced
from the bench of the supreme court, and in the publication of Adrian and
Jurisperitus, it will be difficult for a future patriot to encounter so strong
a precedent, as he will be told that there was neither corruption, force, or
inadvertency in the case; but the people, after warning given, voluntarily
submitted to and acquiesced in the doctrine.

WHILST our heroic officers and brave citizens are in the field fighting for
our liberties and defending our rights, let us who remain at home, at least
take care of the household -- Observe the following FABLE.

A CERTAIN man had an undoubted right to a valuable farm. It was his living --
it was his all. A powerful lord wished to possess this farm, and sent his
servants to take the title deeds by force. The good man locked up his papers in
his closet, and arming himself at all points, went forth to combat his
adversary: but, alas! whilst he was in the field, the rats were gnawing his
deeds in the closet.

THE common people are afraid of the word law. They think it is full of
inexplicable mystery. It is not so in the text; it is too much so by the
exposition. All law is, or ought to be, founded in reason, and has for its
object the administration of general justice or the promotion of general good.
Every man of common sense is capable to judge of law, provided all
circumstances and all consequences are made known to him. Let any one be asked,
For what purpose do you think grand juries were instituted? He will say, I do
not understand the law, but I suppose they must have been instituted to bring
the guilty, and none but the guilty, to a further trial by a petit jury. There
is no mystery in this -- the greatest lawyer could not give a better answer.
Ask this plain man further -- Why he thinks so? and he will probably reply --
for three reasons: First, because it is highly necessary that the innocent
should have this security against false or malicious prosecutions. Secondly,
because a grand jury cannot possibly be of any other use. And, thirdly, because
their oath of office is full to this purpose, and to no other. But stop, my
friend, says a learned judge, your first reason is good for nothing, your
second is no better, and your third is flatly contradicted in 4th Blackstone,
page 300. Let us see how this matter stands -- a grand-jury-man's path is in
these words:

YOU shall diligently enquire, and true presentment make, of all such articles,
matters, and things as shall be given you in charge: and of all other matters
and things as shall come to your own knowledge, touching this present service:
the state's council, your fellow's, and your own, you shall keep secret; you
shall present no person for hatred or malice, neither shall you leave any one
unpresented for favor or affection, for love or gain, or any hopes thereof:
but in all things you shall present the truth, the whole truth, and nothing but
the truth, to the best of your knowledge: SO HELP YOU GOD!

THIS is certainly very plain English, and incapable, one would suppose, of
misconstruction. But, let us observe how Jurisperitus, with the help of
Blackstone, can translate these very intelligible words out of common sense
into common law. The oath in English says, you shall diligently enquire: in
law, you shall sit and receive indictments, and only hear evidence on the part
of the prosecution. You shall diligently enquire, and true presentment make,
says the oath -- You are to consider your presentment only in the nature of an
accusation, says the law, or rather the lawyer. You shall present the truth,
the whole truth, and nothing but the truth, says the oath -- You are only to
enquire, says the judge, whether there be sufficient cause to call upon the
party to answer. Now some have said, that sufficient cause means probable
cause; and probable means likely; and every thing that is likely, is at least
possible: and so, by an irrefragible chain of reasoning, we may be hung in
chains, according to the good pleasure of the judges and learned expounders of
the law.

FOR my own part I honor judge Blackstone as a profound and liberal expositor
of law, except only where prerogative comes in question. The rays of
prerogative are apt to warp the bench of justice, make it or what stuff you
please.

LET us see how far the authority of this same judge Blackstone will carry us:
-- Turn to vol. i. p. 107, 108 -- Our American plantations, (says he,) being
obtained either by right of conquest and driving out the natives, or by
treaties, the common law of England, as such, has no allowance or authority
there; they being no part of the mother country, but distinct dominions subject
to the control of parliament. And in p. 109: -- And because several of the
colonies had claimed the sole and exclusive right of imposing taxes upon
themselves, the statute of the 6th of Geo. III. chap. 12, expressly declares,
that all his majesty's colonies and plantations in America, have been, are, and
of right ought to be, subordinate to and dependent upon the imperial crown and
parliament of Great Britain: who have full power and authority to make laws and
statutes of sufficient validity to bind the colonies and people of America,
subjects to the crown of Great Britain, in all cases whatsoever.

NOW, good people, you have thought it essentially necessary to your happiness,
to deny the authority of judge Blackstone, vol. i. p. 108; although fortified by
the statute of the 6th of Geo. III. -- But you have only done your business by
halves, unless you will as firmly reject the authority of the said judge
Blackstone, vol. iv. p. 300, although supported by the authority of
Jurisperitus the first.

WHY did Jurisperitus stop just where he did, when he was quoting Blackstone?
-- Answer. -- Because the very next sentence, which is but a short one, and
concludes the paragraph, unfortunately, does not support the doctrine of
probable testimony he wishes to establish. -- The sentence stands thus: -- a
grand jury, however, ought to be thoroughly persuaded of the truth of an
indictment, so far as their evidence goes, and not to rest satisfied merely
with remote probabilities; a doctrine that might be applied to very oppressive
purposes. -- State Trials, vol. iv. p. 183.

THIS device of picking out a part of a sentence, is like Lord Peter's method
of expounding his father's will.

BUT what says judge Adrian? He tells us that a grand jury is -- that part of
legal machinery composed of unlearned men, to use the phraseology of the
profession, which is regulated and controlled etc. etc. yet judge Blackstone,
vol. IV. page. 302. says that to form a grand jury the sheriff of every county
is bound to return etc. twenty-four good and lawful men of the county. That
they ought to be freeholders, but to what amount is uncertain -- however, they
are usually men of the best figure in the county.

I have thought a good deal of this same idea of a legal machine, and am of
opinion that Adrian must have drawn his idea from the pillory, which is, in
truth, a legal machine, and very like his notion of a grand jury. A poor devil
is fixed neck and hands in this engine of the law by his accuser. The court
furnishes rotten eggs, and the attorney general pelts him secundum artem;
whilst the sufferer is not permitted to wipe away even the slime of a single
egg. After he has been sufficiently besmeared to the entire satisfaction of his
enemies, he is taken in this filthy condition to the petit jury, who may, if
Adrian pleases, represent another legal machine, called a gallows -- there he
is to make himself clean, if he can, and if he cannot, he is (...) clear off to
be hanged. If, however, he should be so fortunate as to escape, he is to fall
down upon his knees, cry out God save the commonwealth and the honorable
court! pay all costs and charges, and go about his business: and this is called
justice. But if this is indeed justice, it is so manufactured that the original
simple is lost in the compound.

BUT, my good fellow citizens, let us not be deceived by a parade of idle
authorities, and more idle reasonings upon them. You must all see and know that
the use of grand juries is to guard the first entrance into the law, to prevent
any one's being unnecessarily exposed to its rigor. If grand juries do their
duty, an enemy shall not have it in his power to come behind a man and push him
unawares into that pool of perdition, from which it is so difficult to escape,
that the clerk of the court, when he has arraigned the prisoner, always adds,
God send you a good deliverance!

THOUGH judge Mansfield, judge Blackstone, judge Jurisperitus, judge Adrian,
and all the judges since the reign of Chares I. should, with one voice, tell
you that, after a grand jury has taken the oath above recited, they may indict
a man upon slight grounds and probable testimony -- believe them not. That they
will have made diligent inquiry, when in fact they have made no inquiry at all,
but only received such evidence as the prosecutor shall offer -- believe them
not. That a grand jury is nothing more than a legal machine, contrived to give
a formal sanction to the will of the judge -- believe them not. But rather
watch those who dare to advance doctrines so dangerous to the lives, estates,
and reputations of the citizens of a free government.

CAUTION.
February 1st. 1783.
A DESCANT ON ADRIAN'S Assertion, that a grand jury is nothing more than a
legal machine, subject to the direction and control of the court.
"I HAVE A THOUGHT -- WHAT IS IT LI^E?"
'TWAS winter -- round the social hearth
Devoted all to glee and mirth,
A social few, in humor gay,
Were sporting half the night away;
And still some quaint device was found,
As laughter, wit, and wine went round.
ATTEND, says DIDIUS, if you will,
I Will make a trial of your skill;
A thought has just popp'd in my mind,
Let every one a likeness find;
And he that cannot a likeness fit
Shall take a glass to whet his wit.
For wine is known to be specific
In making barren brains prolific:
And it is past doubt, a bumper will him ease
Who is hard bound in making similies.
A thought does now my fancy strike;
Pray tell me what my thought is like.
It Is like a broom, a door, a lock,
A wagon, lute, a barber's-block.
QUOTH Didius, what a medley's here!
Things so dissimilar, I fear,
Cannot by any skill be shown
Like to a single thing unknown.
But now the group's together brought,
I Will tell you what it was I thought.
A learned author, ADRIAN hight,
Did late in Bailey's Printer of the Freeman's Journal.
journal write,
And plainly proved, by dint of law,
That jurymen are men of straw;
And for no other use designed
But to confirm the judge's mind;
That they have no conscience of their own,
But from the bench must take their tone;
And have no eyes to see what is right,
Unless the court affords them light;
And though their doings may seem tragic,
They Are phantoms raised by legal magic;
Whom conj'ring judges take to court,
To show their skill in making sport;
To toss about like any jack-stone,
And for authority quote Blackstone;
Referring us to page three hundred;
As if judge Blackstone never blunder'd*
All this did Adrian in his fury,
Pronounce against a late grand jury;
And proved that animal rationale
With jurymen will never tally:
Because it is plainly to be seen
A jury's but a mere machine.
My thoughts thus on grand juries ran;
Make out a likeness if you can.
TITIUS. THAT juries are like brooms, I trow,
Is not so very hard to show: --
Pray does not Betty with her broom
Sweep dirt and dust from every room,
And though the floors are trod by many;
Will keep them clean as any penny:
But should the wench a slattern prove,
Not willing all the dirt to move,
She heaps it in a corner sly,
And hides it snug from every eye;
Where with the broom it is covered over,
No mortal can the fraud discover.
So a grand jury's but a besom,
Which judges use as it may please 'em
To sweep poor rogues and felons great
From all the precincts of the state;
Or else to cover over a flaw
From the sharp notice of the law.
Further, should Dick, with saucy tongue,
Do madam Betty any wrong,
She lays the broom-stick over his back,
'Till one or t'other's sure to crack:
So should a base plebeian censure
The conduct of the learned bench, or
Laugh at their worships of the quorum,
The culprit soon is brought before 'em;
When by the means of broom-stick jury
Their honors vent their rage and fury;
And by instructive bonds and fetters
Teach him to reverence his betters.
But should this seem too round-about
To make a real likeness out,
With your good leave, I Will try again,
And make the matter still more plain.
DOUBTLESS you have often heard it told,
Or may have read in stories old --
A witch, when she would take an airing,
Has neither coach, or chaise, or chair, in
Which she can with convenience ride,
But on a broom-stick sits astride:
Thus mounted, she through wind and weather
Will scud away, like any feather:
And so by means of blasts and breezes
Will any mischief do she pleases.
Now the broom-stick, it is well known,
Has no such virtue of its own,
Nor can it do or harm or good
More than another stick of wood,
Until it is warmed by magic breech
Of powerful super straddling witch.
So jurymen, placed side by side,
Are sticks whereon the judges ride;
But have no power to speak or budge
Until inspired by tail of judge.
For when his honor's fairly seated,
The bench will thereby soon be heated,
Conveying sympathetic fury,
From tail of judge to head of jury:
Who, though they torpid stood before,
And dead as any nail in door,
Are animated to obey
Whatever their honors please to say;
And ignoramus, or true bill, find
According to the judge's mind.
SO necromancers raise the devil
To answer questions good or evil.
BUT should his honor raise bum-fiddle,
The charm would break off in the middle,
And jurymen be left of course
In former plight, if not much worse.
A feather thus, by learned instructor,
Fixed nicely on the prime conductor,
Will swell its plumage in a minute,
And start as if the devil was in it:
But let the electric spark be drawn,
And all its animation's gone.
OF juries it is a known law canon,
The judge is causa sine qua non:
And this must be what Adrian means,
In saying they are MERE MACHINES.

SEMPRONIUS. A jury's like a door, no doubt,
The hardship is to make it out;
Yet by the help of tongue and brain,
I hope to make the likeness plain.
JURIES, like doors, empannel'd are,
And both secured by a bar:
Exactly balanced doors should be,
On equal hinges, turning free:
So juries right from wrong divide,
Not leaning false to either side;
But on two hinges justly act,
The one called law, the other fact.
A door is made to turn about,
To let folks in, or shut them out;
And with a lock and key made certain,
To keep the door and post from parting.
So to the duties of his station,
A jury's bound by admin'stration
Of oath, or solemn affirmation;
Which like a lock should keep them tight
To posts of justice fixed upright;
But then the judge still keeps in pocket
A key to lock or to unlock it;
Knows all the wards, and springs, and screws
That bolt it fast, or let it loose;
For by the law, expounding conscience,
He Will make an oath, or sense, or nonsense;
Extent of affirmation measure,
Most learnedly by will and pleasure:
And prove that words in sense may vary,
And two opposed meanings carry;
The one for those of common sort,
The other for the learned court:
And so warp juries to that side
Which most shall please his wrath or pride,
Surrounding them with legal fences,
Until they have almost lost their senses:
Then blind their eyes, that he may show
The way in which they ought to go.
And this explains what Adrian means,
By calling juries mere machines.

EUDOCIUS. IT IS well -- if this is reasoning right,
I Am not in such a woeful plight;
But in few words can make it clear
That jurymen like clocks appear.
A clock is formed with curious a^t,
And wisdom shown every part:
And weights, and wheels, and springs combine
To prove that motion's the design:
But whether it shall go or stop,
Depends upon the winding up:
For of itself it has no power
To point the time, or strike the hour,
The master's overruling hand
Has all its movements at command:
He turns a screw to make it go,
Just as he pleases, fast or slow:
To STRIKE, or SILENT, sets a pin
According to the humor he is in.
The poor machine, without dispute,
Or dins our ears, or stands quite mute.
The clock presumes to point at four.
The master says, it is false I Am sure;
And by his arbitrary power,
Soon makes it tell another hour.
And thus the clock the time shall measure,
Not by the sun, but his good pleasure.
And what is a jury but a sort
Of passive time-piece for a court;
A clock, the key of which in trust is
Of learned judge, or unlearned justice.
A jury's power exists or ceases,
According to the court's caprices,
Nor dare, or to release, or damn us,
By a true bill, or ignoramus;
Unless the judge first gives the cue,
T'inform them what they ought to do.
That this is law I do aver,
And for authority refer
To Bailey's journal, where you will find
The doctrine clear, by Adrian signed.

DION. WHO cannot make his likeness fit,
Must take a glass to help his wit;
Because, it is said, Madeira wine
Will sharpen wit, or make it shine,
Just like a shaving in a blaze, or
A hone or strap, will whet a razor,
But I Am in hopes to drive my wagon,
Without the help of glass or flaggon,
If you will allow six horses strong
To drag my simile along.
Does not a jury's foreman seem
Just like the fore-horse of a team?
Where ever he leads, up hill, down hollow,
The rest can do go less than follow.
The judge the driver may resemble,
With whip in hand, to make them tremble,
To lash them well with points of law,
Should they presume to GEE or HAW;
Or stand stock still, or change their station,
Against his honor's inclination.

QUOTH Didius, stop! -- you drive so fast,
You Will find yourself bemir'd at last.
Can things inanimate compare
With those that living creatures are?
A mere machine be found at all
Like a self-moving animal?
A horse has each essential part
Like us -- as brains, and lungs, and heart;
Has tendons, sinews, muscles, nerves,
And each an equal purpose serves
In him and us -- the intent the same,
Nor varied ought in form or name.
Philosophers of nice discerning
Have searched the very depths of learning,
And held the most profound disputes
About the mortal souls of brutes;
Yet cannot to this hour determine
What animates the meanest vermin.
SOME will insist, that each dumb creature
Is ruled by the instinct of his nature;
That what they do is done of course,
Not by volition, but per force;
Nature impelling them to do
What looks like reason at first view:
But, what is this instinct, what their mind,
No metaphysics yet could find.
Whilst others boldly reason thus;
That brutes have souls as well as us;
That when a horse remembers where
He has been fed and nursed with care,
His memory is the same with ours,
The same in kind, though not in powers:
Aver a dog can form a project,
And argue shrewdly in dog logic,
And show more wisdom in his plan,
Than an untutored stupid man;
Will say, the lowest of our race
Should to the best of their's give place:
Reason with instinct blending so,
That none their real bounds can know.
But I shall not presume to say,
In this dispute, which should give way.
Doubtless there many cases are,
Where men with brutes may well compare.
But mere machines cannot at all
Be liken'd to an animal;
Nor can a man, unless in drink,
Say clocks or juries ever think;
Their movement may deceive our eyes,
And look, indeed, like something wise,
But it is -- and such is Adrian's notion,
A foreign force that gives them motion,
Deriving all their power to budge
From gravity of the earth or judge.
So that, although your simile's bold,
I find the likeness will not hold:
Besides, you first a wagon brought,
Alleging it was like my thought,
And now attempt to show, which worse is,
A jury's like a team of horses;
You Have changed your ground, artful indeed,
But though your labor cannot succeed,
At least we thank you for your rhyme,
And wish you luck another time.
CETERA DESUNT.
A NEW GAME WITH CARDS FOR THE IMPROVEMENT OF ORTHOGRAPHY.
LET a pack, consisting of 104 cards, be prepared, by printing on each card --
(with engraved ornaments, if you please) a letter; so that there may be four
sets of the alphabet viz. 1st. a set of red capitals; 2d. red small letters;
3d. black capitals; 4th, black small ^etters -- Thus there will be four suits,
as in common playing cards; each suit consisting of 26 cards, or letters, of
one color and kind.

AS many as please may play at this game: but the number cannot conveniently be
less than five.

BEFORE the cards are dealt, every player should take a number of counters,
suppose a dozen, which must all be thrown into a saucer or pool.

THE pack having been well shuffled, is set on the table, and the dealer takes
from the top as many as he may judge sufficient for a deal (because it may be
inconvenient to handle so large a pack), and then deals round by twos till each
person has got 10 cards. The remainder, if any, he must again lay on the pack.
This done, each person sorts his hand. The cards rank according to the rank in
which the letters they respectively bear stand in the alphabet -- Thus, an (a)
is superior to a (b), and to any subsequent letter of its own class. Capitals
bear alike rank amongst themselves; but the lowest capital is superior to the
highest small letter of its own color -- Therefore a capital Z will win a
small (a) of the same color; but it should be observed that the red letters
are always superior to the black; so that a small red (Z) will take a capital
black (A). The red letters are to be considered as trumps. There is no other
distinction of powers in the letters, except this viz. that the capital red (W)
(which should be distinguished by particular ornaments in honor of the name of
WASHINGTON) is superior to any other card or cards whatever; it may be played
down at any time the possessor pleases, without regard to the lead, and always
wins the trick in which it is played; answering to the spadil in quadril, or
pam in lu.

THE cards being dealt, the eldest hand plays; suppose a small black letter,
the next, and all the rest, must play a black letter also, but it may be either
a small or a capital letter. If the person to play cannot follow the color, he
may trump, that s, play down any red letter he has got. When all have played,
he wins the trick, who has played the letter of the highest rank; the trick
must then be gathered up and laid by itself, not mixing it with other tricks
that may be won afterward.

TO avoid confusion and disputes, it will be best for every person, when he
plays, to lay his card down before him, and not throw the cards together in the
middle of the table as at whist; in order that it may be certainly known what
card each person has played, and who has won the trick.

THE first trick being gathered up, the winner leads, and the play goes on as
before.

WHEN all the 10 cards in each hand have been played out, the eldest, if he
has been a winner, begins by spreading one of his tricks open on the table. If
there should be six players, each trick will consist of six cards or letters;
if seven, of seven, etc. He is then, out of the letters of each trick, to
compose as many well spelled English words as he can; but he must not use or
mix the letters of one trick with those of another, should he have more than
one: And for every word so composed he is to draw a stake or stakes from the
pool.

No word, however, must consist of less than three letters, and the names of
persons and places are not to be admitted.

IN forming the words, no regard is to be had whether the letters are black
orred, capital or small -- all the letters of a single trick may be used
promiscuously, except that if the party can make out a word with all red
letters, he is to draw double stakes tor it. Lastly, a stake is to be drawn for
every syllable of which the word consists -- always drawing double for what is
performed with red letters only.

AFTER a winner has examined his trick, and drawn from the pool, or thrown it
aside as affording nothing, if any other player can discover a word in that
trick which the winner did not observe, the discoverer shall draw the stakes
due for that word for himself.

THE tricks being all examined, the whole pack must be well shuffled, and the
next in turn dealing, the game goes on as before. When the pool is exhausted
those who have gained more than their first deposit are the winners, and those
who are deficient are by so much losers.

OBSERVATION.
AS the cards are not all dealt out in one hand, no one can tell what letters
will be against him in each round, he will, therefore, be cautious or bold,
according to circumstances, in risking his best letters. As success does not
depend on the number of tricks won, but on the words such tricks will furnish,
each player will be careful of his vowels, without which no word can be formed,
and of such consonants as experience shall show to be most serviceable in the
composition of words. If, therefore, he is likely to lose the trick, he will
throw down such a letter as he shall judge, from a view of the cards played,
may lead benefit the winner; but, if he thinks he shall make the trick his own,
he will enrich it with a vowel, or some valuable consonant, as far as the rules
of the game shall permit.

THE letters having these powers assigned to them, according to their rank,
color, and size, will admit of great varieties and improvements in play; but
as this game is chiefly intended for children, a too great intricacy is
purposely avoided.

N. B. The same letters in any one trick may be used again and again, provided
they can be made to form different words. For example; suppose the letters of a
trick should be P, S, E, T, R, C, E, -- they will compose the following words,
viz. set, pet, specter and scepter; and would draw 8. stakes, or 16 if they
should be all red letters.

TWO persons may play, if they agree before hand how many cards shall make a
trick; for instance, 4 or 5; otherwise there would be but two letters to a
trick, which would not do.

SOME ACCOUNT OF A NEWLY DISCOVERED AND MOST COMMODIOUS METHOD OF WRITING;
WHEREBY AN AUTHOR OF LITTLE OR NO GENIUS WILL BE ENABLED TO EXPRESS HIMSELF
WITH MECHANICAL PROPRIETY. INVENTED AND FIRST MADE KNOWN BY A. B. GENT.
GENIUS is the gift of heaven, and manifests itself by emanations altogether
unexpected and surprising. Its powers are not to be obtained by application and
study, but they may be assisted by art. When genius has brought forth, art
takes up and nurses the child, and carefully consulting its features, deduces
rules for a happy conception.

SUCH being the connection between genius and art, it is but reasonable that a
mutual intercourse of good offices should subsist between them. For my own
part, I must confess that nature has not been over bountiful to me in the
article of genius; but I am desirous of exerting the little she has given in
behalf of those who may have no more than myself. For this purpose I have
devised a method of writing on any subject; in which not only the sound may be
an echo to the sense, if any sense there be, but the eye also shall be
gratified with an exhibition of mechanical elegance and propriety; the only
elegance perhaps to which such writers can attain.

BY this scheme the construction of a paragraph, the progress of a line, and
even the disposition of the words, may all contribute to enforce the idea
intended.

IT would be a tedious talk to form a system of rules for this new method of
writing, or to give a description at large of my useful device; one example
will fully explain the whole, so as to enable an author of the meanest capacity
to understand and profit by the design; and a little practice will make it
familiar to him.

A SAMPLE OF GOOD WRITING.
AN author who wishes to height to the rise of excellence of good writing, must
condescend to call in mechanical propriety to his aid. He cannot be sublime:
all at once but gradually descending to the profound, should as gradually rise
to elegance, frequently forming a serpentine line, in which, according to
Hogarth, the beauty of all things consists.

AND whether he writes in plain prose;

Or would in verse his thoughts convey,
His rhyming talents to display;
and the diction strict propriety should prevail, and the sense run parallel to
each other; pleasing as well the eye as the ear.

SOME have a happy talent for expression, whereby they compensate for the want
of sentiment by the enchanting melody of their style. Their language ever
flowing like the waves of the sea, and their periods closing in such musical
cadence, that the ear is fascinated by the magic of sound, and the mind lulled
in a pleasing repose.

OTHERS, without giving to grammar rules offense, shall arrange so unskilfully
their words; breaking as it were, and interrupting the sense (or rather
nonsense) they mean to communicate, by frequent (and often times unnecessary)
parenthesis, that the ear stumbles over their rugged paragraphs, as the feet
would stumble in scrambling through a street, when the pavement had been broken
up; over stones bricks, and posts, mixed together confusedly.

THE mind of the reader is more fa -- ti -- gu -- ed by traveling through a
sentence so constructed, than it would be in gliding through a whole page of
harmonious phraseology.

YOUR precise grammarians are most apt to write in this style, thinking that
they have well acquitted themselves, if the strict rules of syntax are in no
instance violated. The labourer who mixes the mortar, and he who carries the
hod, may as well pretend to skill in architecture, as these haberdashers of
moods and tenses may pretend to taste and elegance in composition.

OTHERS there are who affect a singularity of style above the vulgar. It is
indubitable verity, that their phrases are collated from the most approved
authors, and applied with the most becoming aptitude, even to the very point of
precision in propriety; every period is polished and rounded off as round aye,
as round as a robin. Whilst others scorn the ORNAMENTS of language, deal in
demonstration and write, and act ever on the square.

BY the foregoing example it is evident, that not only an author's sentiments
may be more forcibly impressed on the mind, but the reader's memory will also
be greatly assisted, if happily any thing so written should be worth
remembering.

ANOTHER advantage is, that such performances may with great ease be reduced to
a kind of short hand. For instance, the above example will stand thus:

AN act of assembly passed in April 1782, directing all the trees in the
streets of Philadelphia to be cut down and removed; the following publication
appeared in opposition. THE law was never executed, and soon after repealed.

For the Pennsylvania Gazette.
LOOKING over a file of papers, which lay on my table, I found a very
extraordinary speech, delivered by a very extraordinary orator, in our house of
assembly in April last, which I had taken down in short hand, but not from the
mouth of the speaker. I much wonder that this oration, with the surprising
circumstances that attended it, have not been noticed in any of the public
prints: I hope the following account of that transaction will not be thought
unworthy of a place in the Pennsylvania Gazette.

ON the 12th of April last, the house took into consideration, and debated by
paragraphs, a bill entitled, An act for regulating party-walls and
partition-fences, in the city of Philadelphia, etc. when, to the amazement of
all present, the business was interrupted by a voice, perfectly articulate,
proceeding from the capital of one of the columns which supported the ceiling
of the room.

THIS voice claimed a right to be heard on the subject of the bill then before
the house.

AFTER the first surprise at such an unusual prodigy had a little subsided, the
right of a column to interfere in the business of the house was considered and
objected to; and it was urged, that no instance had ever occured where a wooden
member -- a blockhead -- had presumed to speak in that assembly: that this
column could, by no construction of law, be admitted as the representative of
any part or district of Pennsylvania, having never been ballotted for, elected,
or returned as a member of assembly -- That the house, when fully met,
necessarily consisted of a certain number of members, and no more, and that
this number is full and complete, by the returns from the several counties, as
appears by the records of the house: therefore, if this column should be
allowed a voice, there must be a supernumerary member somewhere, which would be
an absolute violation of the constitution. And lastly, that it is contrary to
the order of nature that an inanimate log should interfere in the affairs of
rational beings; providence having been pleased to distinguish so obviously
between men and things.

TO all this the column firmly replied -- That he was, properly speaking, a
standing member of that house, having been duly fixed in his station by those
who had the right and power to place him there -- That he was the true
representative of a numerous race, descended in a direct line from the
aborigines of this country -- those venerable ancestors who gave the name of
Pennsylvania to this state, and whose posterity now inhabit every county in it
-- That he was not only a member of the house, but one of its principal
supporters, in as much as they could never make a house without him -- That he
had faithfully attended the public business, having never been fined as an
absentee -- And that those very members who now opposed him, had confided in
his wisdom and intregrity, by constantly appealing to him The rules of the
house are framed and hung up against one of the columns.
in every contest about the rules and internal economy of the house. And,
lastly, that as the bill under consideration so nearly concerned his fellow
creatures; and as he found himself miraculously endowed with the power of
speech for this occasion, he was determined to make use of it in behalf of
those who could not speak for themselves. After much debate, it was determined
that the house would hear what this importunate post had to say respecting the
bill before them: but peremtorily refused to allow him a vote on this or any
other business in that assembly.

THE columnar orator, having obtained leave, addressed the house in the
following and words.

"I am happy, oh! fellow citizens that speech has been given me on this
important occasion: and that I have your permission to exercise a power, thus
wonderfully obtained, in the cause of truth and justice.

"I stand here this day an upright advocate for injured innocence. What fury --
what madness -- oh! deluded senators! has induced you to propose the
extirpation of those to whom you are indebted for so many of the elegancies,
comforts, and blessings of life? If the voice of justice is not to be regarded
within these walls, let your own interests influence your conduct on this
occasion. For I hope to show that your safety and happiness are much more
deeply concerned, in the business you are upon, than you are at present aware
of.

"By the 12th section of the bill now depenpending, it is proposed to cut down
and remove all the trees standing in the streets, lanes, or alleys of this city
-- What! do we then hold our lives on such an uncertain tenure? Shall the
respectable and inoffensive inhabitants of this city stand or fall according to
the caprice of a few ignorant petitioners? And will this house without remorse,
without even the form of trial, give its sanction to an edict, which has not a
parallel since the sanguinary days of Herod of Jewry! But I hope to convince
this honorable house that trees, as well as men, are capable of enjoying the
rights of citizenship, and therefore ought to be protected in those rights --
that having committed no offense, this arbitary edict cannot constitutionally
pass against them -- and that your own, and the welfare of your constituents,
is nearly concerned in their preservation and culture.

"THE superiority which man has assumed over what he calls the irrational and
inanimate parts of the creation, is a superiority only founded in in his own
pride and ignorance of our nature and faculties -- The same divine hand that
formed you formed us; also the same elements that nourish you nourish us like
you; we are composed of bones, blood vessels, fibers, and, for ought you know,
muscles and nerves -- Witness the whole class of sensitive plants, wherein
involuntary motion is made sensible even to your gross vision -- like you, we
die, and return to the earth from which we sprang, and then even the wisest
amongst you cannot distinguish between the dust of an elm and of a emperor.

"BUT I go much farther, and assert from your own authorities, that we sleep
and wake; that we are male and female; that we are married and given in
marriage; and that we propogate our species to fuller effect, and in a manner
somewhat similar to what you do yourselves. In support of these doctrines, I
could cite many respectable authorities from the ancients; and amongst the
moderns Grew, Millington, Ray, Camerarius, Moreland, Geoffroy, Vaillant, and
above all, your favorite Linnaeus.

"WHEREIN then does the vast difference between men and the vegetable kingdom
consist? I am bold to ask, wherein does it consist? Oh! cries yonder loquacious
lord of the creation, we can converse, we can reason: Oh! cries yonder restless
and fidgetting member, we can move from place to place. To the latter I answer,
so can an ass, an owl, an Eel, and to much better advantage than he can, with
all his locomotive faculties. The former requires a more serious reply.

"WE can converse, we can reason. Be it so, Man, arbitrary man, has affixed
certain ideas to certain sounds. If these sounds or noises are adapted to his
miserable apprehension, they are called language, reason, music, and what not.
But if the man should not be wise enough to understand the meaning of the noise
he hears, he does not hesitate to pronounce it jargon, nonsense, unintelligible
stuff -- Thus, for instance, a man stands up and makes a long noise, called
philosophy, divinity, law, etc. an ass lifts up his head, and makes a much
greater noise, and it is called braying: yet to his own species, the ass is an
intelligent creature, and his language is well understood by them. If then man
can thus mistake the matter with respect to brutes, although he sees that
nature has given them the apparent organs of speech, and daily hears them
exercise these organs for the purposes intended, may he not also be mistaken
with respect to the language of plants? a language too refined to make any
impression on his gross and callous senses? That such a language does actually
exist, might be proved from the authority of holy writ; wherein we are
frequently told, that the valleys rejoice and sing, and the cedars of Lebanon
praise the Lord. But I shall content myself with reading to your honors a
passage to this purpose from that ingenious author Cyrano de Bergerac -- Voyage
to the Moon p. 91.

-- THIS fancy of eating by himself made me curious to know the reason of it. I
was answered, that he chose not to taste either the odor of meats or of
herbs,unless they had died spontaneously: because he imagined them beings
capable of grief. I am not much surprised, replied I, that some orders of
people here abstain from flesh and things that have sensitive life; yet it
seems to me ridiculous to fear hurting a cabbage in the cutting. For my part,
replied the demon, I must own there appears to me good reason for such an
opinion. For is not a cabbage a being existing in nature as you are? Have you
not both her equally for your mother? and she is more immediately so to the
vegetable than to the rational production. The generation of the latter she
has left to the whim of a patent: a rigor she does not extend to the former,
in as much as she obliges one to produce another. And whilst one man is
scarcely able to get more than a score of his species at best, a head of
cabbage shall produce four or five hundred of its own sort. Should we say that
nature has a greater esteem for a man then she has for a cabbage, it would be
only with a view to make us laugh; for nature is in incapable of passion, and
can neither love nor hate. If she was susceptible of love, she certainly would
have a greater tenderness for the inoffensive cabbage, than for the unrelenting
man who destroys it. And again p. 95.

-- Who has given us the knowledge of certain beings superior to us, to whom we
are neither related nor proportioned, and whose existence we find it as
difficult to conceive, as the manner in which a cabbage can address itself to
its own species? To understand which communication our senses are too weak,
remember, if you can, amongst all the species of animals one more proud than
the cabbage: who, while you destroy him, is above complaining; yet though he
disdains to murmur, he thinks, nevertheless, the more. If he wants such organs
as you are master of, formed for wailings and tears, yet he has others
wherewith to implore heaven to revenge the injury done him, and expects it
will not be withheld. It is not unlikely but you may ask, how I know the
cabbage has these fine thoughts? but inform me first, can you prove it has not?
or that, at the close of the night, the Russia cabbage does not say to the
savoy, good savoy, your most humble servant!

"BUT still, says man, we have rationality and risibility to distinguish us
from the rest of the creation; that is, when nature gave one man the power to
reason, she gave another the power to laugh at him. For our parts, we confess,
we never reason; we are satisfied with being directed by the laws of nature,
which fully enable us to answer the end of our creation. We pretend not to be
wiser than the hand that made us, and therefore we are guilty of no follies or
excesses. We employ none of our powers in devising means for the more speedy
and effectual destruction of our species: we do all the good we can; and when
we can do no more, we retire from our present form of existence to make room
for our successors.

"THIS rationality, on which you so much value yourselves, is, in my opinion, a
striking mark of imbecility and disgrace, a punishment inflicted on your race,
doubtless, for some heinous offense heretofore committed. The intelligent
beings of the spiritual world never reason; they see truth intuitively; they
know the whole chain of causes and effects; they see, that in a triangle, the
greatest angle must be subtended by the longest side, without any reasoning
upon the problem. And in terrestrial nature there is no creature but man that
is obliged to reason. They all perform their respective functions with
precision and certainty under the influence of a law that cannot err; whilst
your reason is ever involving you in difficulties and absurdities; is ever
deducing false conclusions from false premises; and the wiser you think
yourselves the more mischief you generally do: what is reason one day is not
reason another. About thirty years ago you reasoned upon the disease called the
smallpox; and thousands in every city and country fell sacrifices to your
rational system. But you have now discovered that your system is no longer
rational, and have adopted a quite different mode of practice. Accident, not
reason, discovered your error; and fact and nature contradicted the learned
arguments of many a lengthy treatise on the subject: and this has been the case
in every art and science; the solid reasonings of one age have been disputed,
found fallacious, and despised by another.

BESIDES this, your reason teaches you to square all nature by your ideas of
truth, and you know not what truth is: For instance, you eat, and drink, and
walk, and you say I have life: but yonder willow can do none of these,
therefore it is inanimate. Deluded man! Can your weak intellects discover all
the nice gradations of life -- from the stone to the moss that grows upon it;
from the moss to the sensitive plant, so called; from the sensitive plant to
the polypus; from the polypus to the oyster; from the oyster to the ape; from
the ape to the man; from the man to the angel; from the angel to an infinite
series of beings whom you know nothing of? Do you not see that all the
exhibitions in nature are but so many different modifications and
manifestations of one original essence or principle? Is not the gravity which
retains Jupiter in his orbit, the same gravity which operates on a grain in the
scales of a Jew? The intelligent beings above you amuse themselves with the
ridiculous blunders your rationality is continually making. They despise the
wretch, who, stretches every faculty of his mind to amass a hoard of wealth,
which he has not the spirit to enjoy; they pity the inevitable fate of the
voluptuous, and the vain toils of ambition; but they laugh incessantly at the
folly of him who ransacks the earth to gather sticks and stones, shells and
bones, and after spending years in arranging them to his mind, makes a
raree-show of his collection, and struts a philosopher, full of self-importance
and vain conceit.

"IF follies, absurdities, and mistakes, were the only effects of your boasted
reason, they might be patiently borne with; but when you exercise it to
overreach, ruin, and destroy each other; when you exert its powers to conceal
or embarrass truth; to establish falsehood and injustice; to lead the blind out
of his way, and the lame into a ditch; to render yourselves more ingeniously
wicked, and more effectually mischievous; those divine intelligences look down
with disgust and horror on your boasted reason. They turn aside from the
hateful object, and contemplate with pleasure the stately oak and the wide
spreading beech; the water-loving willow, and the fruitful vine; even all the
vegetable creation, which from the pine that waves on the mountains' height, to
the herb that drinks the dew of the valley, fill with exact propriety their
respective stations, and are invariably governed by the laws of nature, which
are the laws of truth and wisdom.

AFTER all, your reason is but instinct broke lose; or rather instinct is
reason confined within proper limits, and directed to the proper objects. Do
not then presume upon a faculty which, upon the whole, will be found to be the
curse of your species. To prove this, you need only look into history for the
facts and characters of former times; or to look round you for those of the
present.

"I might now, may it please your honors, point out many circumstances wherein
nature has evidently and most advantageously distinguished the vegetable part
of her works from man, by giving them a real and substantial superiority. But,
lest I should wander too far in so large a field, and encroach upon your
patience, I will confine myself to one instance only -- when a man dies, when
he can no longer perform the functions of life, his body becomes, in a few
hours, a loathsome mass of corruption, which his nearest friends hurry away,
and put out of sight forever. It is not so with us, witness my appearance here
this day. It is now many years since I lost my vegetable life by the fatal ax
-- my skin was stripped off, and my limbs lopt away -- and yet you see my body is
still of use, and I stand here firm, sound, and hearty. And, barring an
accident from all consuming fire, I shall attend future debates in this house,
when those whom I have the honor now to address shall be no more.

"HAVING, as I hope, fully proved that trees, as well as men, are capable of
citizenship, I shall now proceed to consider the crimes with which the trees of
this city have been charged, and which the 12th section of the bill before the
house is intended to punish.

The preamble to this section sets forth -- Whereas trees growing in the public
streets, lanes, and alleys of the said city of Philadelphia do obstruct the
prospect and passage through the same, and also disturb the watercourse and
foot-ways, by the extending and increase of the roots thereof, and must tend to
spread fires when any break out within the said city: Be it therefore enacted,
etc.

"YOUR honors have an old saying, called a proverb, which naturally occurs on
this occasion: It is easy to find a stick to beat a dog. That is, a man is
never at a loss for a reason for punishing those who are in his power, and whom
he wishes to oppress. But these trees, it seems, obstruct the prospect -- of
what? of many wretched buildings and some dirty alleys. For I deny that any one
elegant street or building in this city is more obstructed by trees than is
necessary to the comfort of the inhabitants, and to give beauty to the
prospect. Men of taste have always thought that a due mixture of trees and
buildings -- the beauties of nature and art harmonizing with each other --
elegant architecture discovered through luxuriant foliage, compose an
exhibition truly delightful and sublime. But it seems your honors think
otherwise. This preamble, therefore, should have stood thus -- Whereas a
moderate proportion of trees is supposed to be a great ornament to (...) city,
and whereas we have no taste whatever for elegance and ornament: Be it
therefore enacted, etc.

"IT is said, that these trees obstruct the passage: but surely this charge is
not supported by fact. They have modestly ported themselves as close to the
gutters and watercourse as they can, leaving both foot-way and cart-way free
and open. If, however, any straggler should be found so obstructing the
passage, let him die the death -- I have nothing to say in his behalf: but it
is farther urged, that the aforesaid trees disturb and disorder the
watercourse and foot-ways by the extension of their roots -- if so, cut off
the offending roots, but do not destroy the whole tree. When justice exceeds
her limits, she forfeits her name. Lastly, trees communicate fire -- Now, a
tree has no greater enemy in nature than fire: cut him into inch pieces, grind
him into dust, it will still exist as wood for many, many years. Fire alone can
suddenly separate its component parts, and destroy its name. How then can it be
apprehended that we should unite with our most inveterate foe for the
destruction of the city, or join in the mischievous purposes of a common
incendiary, whose power we have most reason to dread?

"BESIDES the charges laid in the bill, two others have been suggested against
these devoted trees, viz. that they obstruct the operation of the engines in
case of fire; and that they are not well affected to the present government,
because they remained with the enemy when they had possession of the city.

"AS to the first, little need be said in answer. When the case occurs, let the
obstacle be removed. It is as easy to procure an ax as an act of assembly; and
the removal may be easily and speedily accomplished. But to depopulate a whole
city, for the possible offense of a few individuals, is surely neither law nor
reason.

"IN reply to the second charge, I would ask, Will any one pretend to say, that
the leaving or not leaving the city on the approach of the enemy marks the true
line of distinction between whig and tory? It is confessed that we remained
when others fled; we stood our ground, and heroically suffered in our country's
cause. Turn, worthy senators! Turn your eyes to yonder fields! Look toward the
banks of the Schulkyl! Where are now those verdant groves that used to close
the prospect and enrich the scene? Where are now those venerable oaks, that
over the evening walk of sober citizen, of musing bard, of sportive youths, and
sighing nymphs and swains, were wont to spread their hospitable shade? Alas!
naught now remains but lifeless stumps that moulder in the summer's heat and
winter's frost -- the habitations fit of poisonous funge, toads, and ever
gnawing Worms. Hinc illae Lachrymae! These were thy feats, oh, How! Excuse,
great Sirs, this weakness in a post, or rather join your sympathetic tears with
mine -- the loss is yours -- a loss, the importance of which you have not,
perhaps, duly considered; which I shall now endeavor to present to your
attention.

"HAVING shown, and I hope to the satisfaction of my hearers, the rank my
fellow-trees hold in the scale of beings: their capacities of pleasure and
pain, having also obviated the charges brought against them, and touched upon
their sufferings in the great political revolution in this country, I come now
to the last argument intended for their defense, I mean the great life and
importance they are of to mankind. And here I shall be very concise, avoiding
to mention those numerous circumstances in which trees obviously contribute to
the pleasure, convenience, and profit of men, confining myself to one serious
consideration, viz. How far the healths and lives of the citizens of
Philadelphia may be concerned in the business you have now in hand. A few hours
will be sufficient to execute this fatal law; but it will take many years to
repair the damage when you shall have discovered your error. Consider,
therefore, oh! rash and capricious mortals, what you are about to do; whilst
consideration may be of any use, caution is never too late, repentance may be.
Know that these trees, whom you are about to extirpate, are your best, your
safest physicians; the health of your citizens depends upon their preservation
and growth; and you are now to decide, not only upon the existence of a few
trees, but possibly on the lives of hundreds of your fellow creatures. I say,
these trees are your best, your safest physicians. They have published no
books, therefore they have no systems to defend. Their practice is ever
uniform, dictated by nature, and established by success, and, therefore, they
make no whimsical experiments, uncertain in every thing but misery and death.
In a word, they have no occasion to kill one hundred in order to learn how to
cure one.

"IN the autumn they modestly drop their foliage, to admit the comfortable rays
of the sun to your dwellings, their leaves being then of no farther use to you.
But no sooner does the spring advance, but they arm themselves in your defense;
they see the enemy approach -- innumerable little deaths, in various subtle
forms. These are by the fermenting heats of summer, generated in every pool,
gutter, and common sewer, and in all the murky filth of your city. No sooner
have the poisonous atoms acquired sufficient malignity, but they leave their
native cells and float in air. One of these inhaled, infects the blood; and
soon a husband, son, or father falls. To prevent this, the friendly tree
spreads its broad and numerous foliage. Every leaf is expanded to intercept and
absorb the floating mischief. And thus receiving and digesting the noxious
particles, they purify the ambient air. For this important philosophy, you are
indebted to Priestley, Ingenhouse, and Fontana. The enemy had studied these
authors, when they cut the trees from yonder plain: hoping thereby to leave the
atmosphere poisoned for your destruction. Is it not obvious that diseases most
prevail when vegetation begins to cease? About the middle of August most leaves
have acquired their utmost growth; they are then saturated with the noxious
vapors, and can no longer perform their friendly office: and from that time,
to the first frost of the season, (which concludes the generation of these
pernicious airs,) sickness and deaths are most frequent.

"AND will you then, oh, guardians of the people! will you, by a fatal decree,
banish from among you, those salutary citizens, to whom you are so much
indebted for the blessings of health, without which, every other temporal
blessing is of little value? And what advantage do you propose to yourselves by
the execution of this law? your streets and alleys, indeed, will not be
obstructed by trees, but they may be obstructed by frequent funerals and
mournful processions. -- I will not prolong the subject -- If your honors will
but balance the imaginary good with the real dangers that will attend your
present purpose, I am confident, that your zeal for the public safety, will
induce you to remove -- not the trees from the streets of this city, but the
12th section from the bill under consideration.

"I have but one thing more to add; and that is, that by the 15th section of
your constitution, you are enjoined not to pass any law, except on occasions of
sudden necessity, until the next session after the same has been proposed and
published for consideration. No such necessity appears in the present case --
the roots and branches of these devoted trees will not increase to such a
ruinous and enormous size, between this and the next session of assembly, as to
render immediate amputation necessary.

"I would be far from supposing this honorable house capable of malice or
partiality; yet I must observe, that this bill has been hurried through the
forms of legislation with unusual speed. You have spent much precious time in
determining whether A. or B. should sit for a certain time in a certain chair;
but do not hesitate to doom to death a number of quiet, harmless, and
beneficent citizens, without remorse, without enquiry, without even the common
forms of justice."

HERE the orator ceased, and was dumb. The house was more surprised at the
manner, than attentive to the matter of this curious speech. The question was
put, and the clause passed without a dissenting voice; notwithstanding the
importunate eloquence of this philosophic post.

SILVESTER.
August, 1782.
DESCRIPTION OF A MACHINE FOR MEASURING A SHIP's WAY THROUGH THE SEA.
THE errors and uncertainties incident to the mariner's log, are too obvious
not to be universally acknowledged. Were it not for the observations navigators
are accustomed to make of a ship's progress by the apparent passage of the
water along side, and the signs that usually present on approaching the land,
the log alone would be a very unsafe dependence.

SEVERAL attempts have therefore been made to improve the log, and render its
indications more accurate, but without success. All the machines of this kind,
that I have heard of, were composed of a number of wheels, which were to be put
in motion by the twisting of a line let out astern, having a drag at the end,
so constructed, as to whirl round, faster or slower, according to the
progressive motion of the ship.

THE objections to a machine so constructed are; first, if the line is not very
long, the drag will be considerably affected by the ship's wake; and if it is
very long, the twistings will be irregular, and the line liable to kink.
Secondly, if the drag is so heavy as to sink below the bottoms of the waves,
when the ship sails fast, it will be too heavy, and sink too deep, when she is
under little way: or otherwise, if the drag is of a proper weight when the ship
is under little way, it will skip from wave to wave when she sails with a brisk
gale, and so be of no use. And, thirdly, it will be liable to most of the other
irregularities to which the log in common use is exposed.

THE machine now proposed, will, it is hoped, be free from at least some of
these objections. And although it may not be able to ascertain a ship's way
through the sea to perfect precision, yet if it should be found to answer the
purpose better; than any instrument hitherto contrived, it may be admitted as
an acquisition to the art of navigation.

THIS machine, in its most simple form, is represented by fig. 1. -- AB is a
strong rod of iron, moveable on the joint or fulcrum; CD is a thin circular
plate of brass, rivetted to the lower extremity of the rod; E an horizontal
arm, connected at one end with the top of the rod AB by a moveable joint F, and
at the other end with the bottom of the index H by a like moveable joint; GH is
the index turning on its center I, and traveling over the graduated arch K;
and L is a strong spring, bearing against the rod AB, and constantly
counteracting the pressure upon the palate D. The rod AB should be applied
close to one side of the cut-water or stem, and should be of such a length that
the palate D may be no higher above the keel than is necessary to secure it
from injury when the vessel sails in shoal water, or is aground. As the bow of
the ship curves inward toward the keel M, the palate D will be thrown to a
distance from the bottom of the ship, although the perpendicular rod to which
it is rivetted lies close to the bow above, and therefore it will be more
fairly acted upon. The arm E should enter the bow somewhere near the
hawser-hole, and lead to any convenient place in the forecastle, where a smooth
board or plate may be fixed, having the index H, and the graduated arch K, upon
it.

IT is evident from the figure, that as the ship is urged forward by the wind,
the palate D will be pressed against the water with a greater or less force,
according to the progressive motion of the ship; and this will operate upon the
levers, so as to immediately affect the index; making the least increase or
diminution of the ship's way visible on the graduated arch. The spring L always
counteracting the pressure upon the palate, and bringing back the index on any
relaxation of the force impressed.

A ship going through the sea opens a passage for herself, making a hole in the
water equal to her imerged bulk. As she passes on, this vacancy is filled up by
the tumbling in of the water from each side, and at the stern with great
violence; so that there is a strong current of water from her bow to her stern,
passing under the bottom and at the sides of the ship; and the force of this
current is in direct proportion to the velocity of her progressive motion. This
machine is therefore advantageously placed at the bow of the ship, where the
current first begins, and acts fairly on the palate, in preference to the
stern, where the tumultuous closing of the waters causes a wake visible to a
great distance. The palate D is sunk nearly as low as the keel, that it may not
be affected by the heaping up of the water, and the dashing of the waves at or
near the water-line. The arch K is to ascertain how many knots or miles she
would run in one hour, at her then rate of sailing: but the graduations on this
arch must not be equal; because the resistance of the spring L will increase as
it becomes more bent; so that the index will travel over a greater space, from
one to five miles, (which I suppose to be a medium) than from five to twelve.
Lastly, the palate, rod, spring, and all the metallic parts of the instrument
should be covered with a strong varnish to prevent rust from the corrosive
quality of salt water and sea-air.

IMPROVEMENT OF THIS MACHINE.
LET the rod or spear AB, fig. 1. be a round rod of iron or steel; and instead
of moving on the fulcrum or joint, as at C, let it pass through and turn freely
in a socket, to which socket the moveable joint must be annexed, as represented
in fig. 2. The rod must have a shoulder to rest on the upper edge of the socket
and prevent it from slipping down. The rod must also pass through a like socket
at F, fig. 1. The joint of the lower socket must be fixed to the bow of the
ship, and the upper socket must be connected with the horizontal arm E. On the
top of the uppermost socket let there be a small circular plate, bearing the 32
points of the mariner's compass, and let the top of the rod AB come through the
center of this plate, so as to carry a small index upon it, as represented in
fig. 3. This small index must be fixed to the top of the rod on a square: so
that by turning the index round the plate, the rod may also turn in the
sockets, and of course carry the plate D round with it, the little index always
pointing in the direction of the face of the palate. The small compass-plate
should not be fastened to the top of the socket, but only fitted tight on, that
it may be moved at pleasure.

SUPPOSE then, the intended port to bear south-west from the place of
departure, the plate must be turned on the socket till the south west point
thereon points directly to the ship's bow, so that the S. W. and N. E. line on
the compass-plate maybe precisely parallel with the ship's keel: and in this
position the plate must remain during the voyage. Suppose then the ship to be
sailing in the direct course of her intended voyage, with her bow sprit
pointing S. W. let the little index be brought to the S. W. point on the
compass-plate, and the palate D will necessarily present its broad face toward
the port of destination: and this it must always be made to do, be the ship's
sailing course what it may. If, on account of unfavourable winds, the ship is
obliged to deviate from her intended course, the little index must be moved so
many points from the S. W. line of the compass-plate, as the compass in the
binnacle shall show that she deviates from her true course. So that, in
whatever direction the ship shall sail, the palate D will always look full to
the S. W. point of the horizon, or toward the port of destination; and,
consequently will present only an oblique surface to the resisting medium --
more or less oblique as the ship deviates more or less from the true course of
her voyage. As, therefore, the resistance of the water will operate less upon
the palate in an oblique than in a direct position, in proportion to its
obliquity, the index H will not show how many knots the vessel runs in her then
course; but will (it is expected) indicate only how many she gains in the
direct line of her intended voyage. Thus, in fig. 5. if the ship's true line of
her intended course is AB, but she can sail by the wind no nearer than AC:
suppose then her progressive motion such as to perform AC, equal to 5 knots,
yet on account of the obliquity of the palate D, the index H will only point to
4 on the graduated arch, showing that she gains no more on the true line of her
voyage, viz. from A to B. Thus will the difference between her real motion and
that pointed out by the index, be always in proportion to her deviation from
the port of destination, until she sails in a line at right angles therewith,
as AD; in which case the palate would present only a thin sharp edge to the
resisting medium, the pressure of which should not be sufficient to overcome
the bearing of the spring L, and the friction of the machine. So that at
whatever rate the ship may sail upon that line, the index will not be affected,
but point to O, showing that she gains nothing on her true course. For in this
case, and also when the vessel is not under way, the action of the spring L
should cause the index to point to O; as represented by the dotted lines in
fig. 1. and 4.

AS the truth of this instrument must depend upon the equal pressure of the
water against the palate D according to the ship's velocity, and the
proportionable action of the spring L, there should be a pin or screw at the
joints C and F, so that the rod may be readily unshipped and taken in, in order
to clean the palate from any foulness it may contract, which would greatly
increase its operation on the index H, and thereby render the graduated arch
false or uncertain.

FURTHER, the spring L may be exposed too much to injury from the weather and
salt water if fixed on the outside of the ship's bow. To remedy this, it may be
brought under cover by constructing the machine as represented by fig. 4: where
AB is the rod, C the fulcrum or center of its motion, D the palate, E the
horizontal arm leading through a small hole into the forecastle, M is a strong
chain, fastened by one end to the arm E, and by the other to a rim or barrel on
the wheel G, which by means of its teeth gives motion to the semicircle I and
index H. The spring L is spiral, and enclosed in a box like the main spring of
a watch: A small chain is fixed to, and passing round the barrel, is fastened
by the other end to the fuzee W; this fuzee is connected by its teeth with the
wheel G, and counteracts the motion of the palate D; NN are the two sockets
through which the rod AB passes, and in which it may be turned round by means
of the little index R; S is the small compass-plate moveable on the top of the
upper socket N. The plate S has an upright rim round its edge, cut into teeth
or notches, so that when the index R is a little raised up, in order to bring
it round to any point, it may fall into one of these notches and be detained
there: otherwise the pressure of the water will force the palate D from its
oblique position, and turn the rod and index round to the direction in which
the ship shall be then sailing.

SHOULD it be apprehended that the palate D being placed so far forward, may
affect the ship's steerage, or obstruct her sailing, it should be considered
that a very small plate will be sufficient to work the machine. I should
suppose that one of three or four inches diameter, or less, might be sufficient
for the purpose.

THE greatest difficulty, perhaps, will be in graduating the arch K (if the
machine is constructed as in fig 1.) the unequal divisions of which can only be
ascertained by actual experiment on board of each ship respectively; in as much
as the truth of these graduations will depend on three circumstances, viz. The
position of the fulcrum C, with respect to the length of the rod, the size of
the palate D, and the strength of the spring L. When these graduations,
however, are once ascertained for any one vessel, they will not require any
future alteration, provided the palate D be kept clean, and the spring L
retains its elasticity.

BUT the unequal divisions of the graduated arch will be unnecessary if the
instrument be made as at fig. 4. For as the chain goes round the barrel L, and
then winds through the spiral channel of the fuzee W, the force of the enclosed
spring will operate equally, or nearly so, in all positions of the index, and
consequently the divisions on the arch K may in such case be equal.

AFTER all, it is not expected that a ship's longitude may be certainly
determined by this instrument. The irregular motions and impulses to which a
ship is continually exposed, make such an accuracy unattainable by any
machinery; but if it should be found, as I flatter myself it will, on fair
experiment, that it answers the purpose much better than the common log, it may
be considered as an acquisition to navigation.

IT should be observed that in ascertaining a ship's longitude by a time piece,
this great inconvenience occurs, that a small and trifling mistake in the time
will make a very great and dangerous error in the distance, run, or longitude;
whereas the errors of this instrument will operate no further than their real
amount, which can never be great or dangerous, if corrected by the usual
observations made by mariners for correcting the common log. An ingenious
mechanic would probably construct this machine to better advantage in many
respects. The author only meant to suggest the principle, experiment alone can
point out the best method of applying it. He is sensible of at least one
defect, viz. that the little index R, fig. 4. will not be strong enough to
retain the palate D in an oblique position when a ship is sailing by the wind;
more especially as the compass-plate S, in whose notched ^im the index R is to
fall, is not fixed to, but only fitted tight on the socket N; some means,
however, might be contrived to remedy this inconvenience.




A like machine made in its simple form, (as at fig. 1.) so constructed as to
ship and unship, might occasionally be applied along side, about mid-ships, in
order to ascertain the lee-way. As to sea currents, this, and all other
machines hitherto invented, must be subject to their influence: for these the
usual allowances must be made, according to the skill of the navigator.

LASTLY. Some discretion will be necessary in taking observations from the
instrument to be entered on the log-book. The most favorable and equitable
moment should be chosen for the observation. Not whilst the ship is rapidly
descending the declivity of a wave, or is suddenly checked by a stroke of the
sea, or is in the very act of plunging. In all cases, I suppose, periods may be
found, in which a ship proceeds with a true average velocity; to discover
which, experience and attention will lead the skilful mariner.

October. 1782.
AN IMPROVED METHOD OF QUILLING A HARPSICHORD.
THE strings of a Harpsichord are made to vibrate by the impulse of small
pieces of a crow-quill: these, from the manner in which they are applied, are
compelled to perform their office to such disadvantage that many become weak
and fail, with little use, and what is called the touch of the instrument,
becomes thereby unequal and disagreeable both to the performer and hearer;
unless frequently repaired, which is one of the most troublesome and difficult
operations in keeping the instrument in order.

I attempted, two or three years ago, to remedy this imperfection. My first
idea was to increase the length of quill, that it might act more like a spring
than it can do in the way it is now applied. I effected my purpose, by mounting
the quill in the manner represented by fig. 1. By this means the spring of the
quill was advantageously increased without its horizontal length, which from
the construction of the instrument cannot be more than about 1-4th of a inch.
AB fig. 1. is the tongue of the jack in profile, C is the quill fixed tight in
a hole punched slanting downwards through the tongue according to the dotted
line. The quill is then bent upwards and made to pass through another hole D,
punched through the upper part of the tongue, and then proceeds horizontally
the necessary length. This last hole is made large enough for the quill to have
free play in it, so that the spring of the quill may be in the curve CD; which
will not break or fail by any service it has to perform.

THIS contrivance seemed to answer very well; but it was objected, that the
quill being thus forcibly bent, was apt to spring back, in some instances, so
that not only the point of the quill became too short to reach the string it
should strike, but the curved part would interfere with the string next behind
it. And although, in the experiment, this inconvenience rarely occured, and was
rather a fault in the execution than in the design, yet the project was not
adopted because of the uncertainty.

MY next device was to throw aside the quills altogether; and taking hard and
well seasoned soal leather, I cut therefrom the intended tongues What is
commonly called the tongue, I shall now call the palate, and my substitute for
the crow-quill I shall denominate the tongue.
which I mounted on springs as in fig. 2. Where A is the palate seen in
profile, having a mortoise cut through it for the reception of the leathern
tongue B, which is moveable in the mortoise on a small pin; C is aback view of
the same palate, showing the zig-zag spring by which the tongue is governned.
The spring is of fine wire, and is fastened by one end to the root of the
tongue, as at D, and by the other to a small staple at E.

THIS contrivance produced in effect an admirable fullness of tone, and promised
permanency, because the elasticity required is not in the tongue which gives
the stroke, but in the wire spring, which, if properly annealed will not be
likely to fail.

THE objection was, that the touch was not so lively and agreeable as that of
the common quill; but principally that the machinery was too complex and
delicate for general use.

BOTH these methods are fully described in the second volume of the
transactions of the American philosophical society of Philadelphia.

ENCOURAGED by at least a partial success, I again endeavored to attain the
object I had in view, and flatter myself that I have now fully succeeded.

THE desideratum is, a substance to supply the place of the crow-quill,
sufficiently elastic for the purpose, which shall afford an easy and brilliant
touch, shall draw a full and pure tone from the string, be applied with as much
simplicity as the common quill, and be permanent in itself.

AFTER fair experiment and long trial, the following method of tongueing a
harpsichord has been found to answer all the above requisites.

I took what is called velvet-cork, of the best kind, free from dolts, cracks
or blemishes. I cut this cork into plates, about one quarter of an inch thick,
and glued upon them thin and well polished leather; from these plates I cut the
tongues, and pressed them tight into mortoises cut for the purpose through the
palates, in the same manner, and with the same ease that the common quill is
fixed in the little hole punched for its reception. The cork must then be
shaved off underneath, slanting from the point, where it must be very thin, to
the face of the palate, and then nibbed like a pen to the proper length. The
touch may afterward be nicely regulated by shaving away more of the cork from
underneath, if requisite, with a sharp penknife or a fine file.

REMARKS.
I. THE cork (as before observed) must be of the kind called velvet-cork, of an
elastic substance, and free from imperfections of every kind.

II. THE Leather should be thin, well stretched, and of a polished surface --
That which I used was stripped from the cover of a bound book, which answered
very well, after I had scraped and well washed its under surface.

III. THE paste or glue. In my first experiment I made common glue pretty thin,
and with this I glued the leather on the cork; but found afterward, that in
very dry and frosty weather, the touch became harsh and disagreeable, because
glue in such weather becomes as hard as horn. I then dissolved a little
Isinglass, or fish glue, in hot water, and with the addition of some flour I
made a moderately thin paste; and with this I pasted the leather upon the cork,
putting the plates under a press till dry: and I found it to answer well.

IV. IN cutting the tongues from these plates of cork faced with leather, care
must be taken that the grain of the cork shall run lengthwise from end to end,
and not a cross the tongue. The reason is plain.

I have found these tongues to answer every requisite. The cork is sufficiently
elastic for the service it is to perform, and affords a lively and pleasant
touch. The polished leather presents a most agreeable surface of contact with
the metal string, and shields the cork, which would be soon cut through by the
string. The tone produced is full, and very pure, being perfectly free from
that clicking noise which the strokes of a quill unavoidably produce, and which
has been justly complained of in the best harpsichords. And lastly, the tongue
thus made will be durable, I may judge if from the experience of eighteen
months and almost daily use, very few having failed in that time, and those
only where there was some imperfection in the cork, or the grain lay across the
tongue. But when this happens, nothing is easier than to cut and shape a new
tongue from the plate of cork and leather, which may be fitted to the m^rtoise
and adjusted in as little time as a common quill, and with as little trouble,
Harpsichords, quilled in the usual way, may be furnished in the manner now
recommended, by dismounting the palates and cutting mortoises of a proper size;
the little hole in which the quill had been fixed serving for the upper limit
of the mortoise in which the cork tongue is to be fitted.

1787.
DESCRIPTION OF A CANDLE-CASE.
THE design of this machine is to screen the flame of a candle from being
flaired by the wind in summer, or drawn by the current of air toward the
chimney in winter.

THE flame of a candle is at all times much agitated by the air. Every person
must have observed, in reading or writing by candle light, that the light will
sometimes acquire a rapid, vibratory motion, which occasions the letters on the
book or paper to appear and disappear in quick succession. This twinkling is so
painful to the eye, that the person is frequently obliged to look from the book
or paper for a moment, or to stroke his eyes with his hand. The sensation is
very disagreeable; and no wonder, when it is considered, that the iris of the
eye contracts and dilates in correspondence with every moti^^ of the flame.

THE machine I have contrived will shield the flame from the undulations of the
air, and cause it to burn with a steady and uniform light, Fig. 1. represents
this machine fastened by screws to a common candlestick. A, the candlestick; B
B, two semicircular plates of brass which embrace the top of the candlestick;
these are furnished with cheeks on each side, which are drawn close together by
means of the screws,C C; and thereby the machine is firmly fixed to the
candlestick, and may be removed at pleasure by taking out the screws. (See the
semicircular plates represented separate at fig. 2.) One of these plates has an
arm, D, connected with a crotchet E E. In the two ends of this crotchet there
are square holes, for the reception of the long square wire F. This square wire
slips easily up and down through the square holes; and that it may stand
supported in all positions, and slide with an uniform friction, there is a
small piece of watch-spring, G, rivetted to the middle of the crotchet, and
pressing with its two ends against the square wire. H is an arm fixed to the
long wire, bearing a small ring, I; this ring is a little larger than a common
candle, and its use is to keep the candle upright, and prevent its falling
against the glass, hereafter mentioned, if it should be too loose in the
socket, or not set perpendicular in the candlestick. K is another arm fixed on
the top of the long wire, and carrying another ring, L, larger than the one
just mentioned. This ring is for the reception and support of the glass, M,
which surrounds the flame of the candle, and causes it to burn with a steady
light. The glass, M, is one of those used for the new patent lamps: it is a
tube, open at both ends, of 2 inches diameter, and about 4 inches long, and has
a rim round the top, by which it hangs on the ring, L. As the candle wastes,
the glass must be slipped down by means of the knob, N; or if it should require
to be snuffed, the glass may be raised or lowered so as to expose the wick for
the purpose. Fig. 3 represents the machine detached from the candlestick, and
without the glass. The same letters of reference are put to the corresponding
parts with fig. 1.

OBSERVATION.
THIS contrivance fully answered the purpose intended, of keeping the flame
steady and the light uniform; but an inconvenience occurred which was not
expected. It occasioned the candle to gutter; that is, the melted wax or tallow
would collect in an undue quantity round the bottom of the wick, and run down
the sides of the candle. This was not owing to the heat of the glass, as I at
first imagined; for a strong current of air occasioned by the flame, kept the
glass so cool, that pieces of wax or tallow would adhere to it without melting,
and the glass might be handled without inconvenience. I know not the reason of
this, unless it be, that the inner circular surface of the glass concenters the
heat to a focus in that place by reflection, or that the current of air bears
up the flame, so that it does not consume the wax as fast as it melted. It was
observable that the flame was considerably elongated, and that it did not
follow the waste of the wax as close as common, but left an unusual portion of
wick between it and the melted wax.



FULL AND TRUE ACCOUNT OF A TERRIBLE UPROAR WHICH LATELY HAPPENED IN A VERY
EMINENT FAMILY.
IT is not long since the lady Pennsylva, a person of high distinction, and
much esteemed for her wisdom, wealth, and importance, was, to the surprise of
every one, delivered of fine boy. She was dotingly fond of this infant; and the
more so as the tongue of slander had endeavored to cast infamy on her and the
child, by plainly calling her a whore and the boy a bastard. But it was well
known to her intimate acquaintance that she had been privately married to
Patriotism, a very worthy and honorable gentleman, who was indeed the father
of the child. But Patriotism unfortunately died soon after the lady Pennsylva
was brought-to-bed.

THE untimely death of the father greatly endeared the son to the disconsolate
widow; and more especially, as the boy bore a striking likeness of her lost
husband.

SHE called him Independence; she nursed him with care and attention, and
endeavored to procure such servants in her family as would feed and tend him,
rather from motives of real affection than from mercenary views. But such
disinterested persons were not easily found. Jealousies had already taken
place. Some envied others for their stations and wages, and hatred and contempt
infected the family, till at last the jarring views and interests of the
servants broke out into an open rupture -- The case was this --

THE lady Pennsylva had hired a wet-nurse for her child -- her name was Reedina
-- and no one doubted but that she had a sincere affection for the baby.
Nevertheless, she had but an uneasy time of it. Having not the best temper in
the world, she not only had many quarrels of her own upon hand, but she took
part also in those of the other servants; in which she did not exercise upon
all occasions an impartiality becoming the station she filled in the family. In
short, she suffered herself to be influenced by those who were not her equals
in abilities; and who made use of her power and influence to gratify their own
ambitious views.

IN due course of time, Reedina's milk dried away, By the constitution of
Pennsylvania, a new president must be elected every three years.
and it became necessary to get another nurse for the infant.

REEDINA, though necessarily removed from her station, was not willing to
resign her sway in the family; but wishing to have it still in her power to
show favor to those whose party she had espoused, and to punish those who had
been too free in their strictures on her conduct, she found out one madam
Potterini, and strongly recommended her as a fit person to supply her place.

MADAM Potterini was a very good sort of woman, and truly attached to young
Independence; but then she was altogether unskilful in the affairs of a
nursery. She knew not how to dress the baby with propriety; and in case of
teething, lax, belly-ach, or other disorders incident to the tender state of
infancy, she was ignorant of the treatment proper on such occasions; having
never had the opportunity of acquiring that kind of knowledge. Reedina,
nevertheless, recommended her in the strongest terms as a suitable nurse for
the child, and got all those servants who were in her interest to join in the
recommendation; not that she thought madam Potterini equal to the task, for she
well knew to the contrary: but expected that Potterini's ignorance in the
business of a nursery would render her dependent upon her for advice in all
things, so that she in fact might govern the family as heretofore, although out
of place.

THOSE who hated Reedina, saw through this design, and opposed a Mrs.
Richardson to madam Potterini, as a person better qualified to do honor to the
station.

NO sooner was this rivalship known, but Reedina's party became outrageous --
every thing that calumny could invent, or malice insinuate, was poured forth
against Mrs. Richardson, and high panegyrics wrought up in favor of madam
Potterini. These were all answered with equal malignity by the partisans of the
other side against Reedina and her adherents. Nothing but railing and reviling
was heard in the house -- abuse was answered by abuse, and slander balanced by
slander.

AT length the good lady Pennsylva, hoping to put an end to these disgraceful
altercations, made her election, and committed the care of her son, and the
superintendency of her family to Mrs. Richardson. But this determination had
not the desired effect: scolding, lying, and abuse were carried to greater
heights than ever; the servants were all formed into parties, and the peace of
the family was entirely broken up.

NOW the principal partisans had arranged themselves in the following order:

ON one side, was Mrs. Richardson, the wet nurse: to her adhered Kitty Oswald,
one of the chamber-maids; miss Jackson, the seemstress; Peggy ^us^, the cook;
her brother Jacob, the clerk; Tom Fallon, the scullion, with many others.

ON the side of the malcontents, appeared Reedina, the late nurse; Thomas, the
chief steward; George, the under steward; Fanny Belly, the second chambermaid;
cock-eyed Moll and Doll Frowsey, her understrappers; together with Jonathan,
the late coachman; Wilkins, the footman; Henry, the lick-spit, and several more.

THESE persons, however, opposed to each other, equally professed a warm
attachment to young Independence, and to the interests of the family; but
neither side would allow that the other had any sincerity in these professions.
They mutually charged each other with disaffection, and terms of obloquy and
reproach were dealt about without the least regard to common decency.

THEIR disputes and animosities were at length wrought up to such a pitch of
rancour and inveteracy as to break out in actual warfare: -- but all things in
order -- Before a poor mortal undertakes a task so arduous, he should, out of
decency and in compliance to ancient custom, invoke supernatural help: and, if
he should have credulity enough to believe that assistance has been granted,
and even fancy that he feels himself inspired, there is no doubt but he will
perform his task with a vigor and spirit proportionable to the strength of his
faith.

COME then, thou heavenly muse! who have assisted in describing the bloody
frays of wrangling mortals, from the famous siege of Troy in ancient times, to
the more famous siege of York-town in Virginia, of recent date! Or, if there
should be two of your divinityships, one more skilled in the mortal contests of
the field, and the other better versed in private broils and warfare of the
fist and tongue -- even thou, who heretofore did guide the pen of Butler,
when he sang the frays of Hudibras, with rabble rout -- thou, who did thy aid
afford when Fielding, in exalted prose, described the valorous feats of Molly
Seagrim, in the field of death, or Mrs. Partridge, in domestic strife -- refuse
me not thy help! but teach me how to scold! -- Alas! my invocation is in vain
-- the goddess hears me not -- I must therefore try what mere mortal strength
can do; and with no other help or inspiration, but what Kitty Oswald and Fanny
Belly can afford, must venture to proceed.

IT was on a Friday morning -- a day of the week branded with ill fortune from
the earliest times; the lady Pennsylva had gone abroad on some occasion or
other. Kitty and Fanny, the two chamber-maids, were about their ordinary
occupation, when Kitty's brush, in sweeping the room, happened to strike
against Fanny's heel, as she was making up the bed: whereupon the following
dialogue ensued.

I think, miss Kitty, it would be well for you to learn to handle a brush
before you pretend to the business of a chambermaid in a gentlewoman's family:
and I think it very hard that people, who have served as I have done, should be
insulted by every upstart hussy that comes into the house.

UPSTART! (exclaimed Kitty with some heat) and pray who are you? you six-penny
retailer of scandal and lies. -- You were in high luck, to be sure, when
George, the under-steward, and Jonathan, the coachman, sent for you out of the
country to do their dirty work. F -- B --, a printer at Lancaster, was sent for
to the city, to serve the purposes of a party, and set up a newspaper filled
with personal scandal and abuse. After some time, E -- O -- set up a like paper
in opposition, and soon out-did B -- in his own way. Between the two, calumny
and slander were carried to greater extent that was ever known, perhaps, in a
civilized city.
I think nurse Reedina had little to do when she suffered such a mischievous
baggage to come into a decent family; I know of no good you and your
understrappers, cock-eyed Moll and Doll Frowsey, have done, unless setting the
servants together by the ears, and disturbing the peace of the whole family,
may be called doing good.

"GET out, you b -- ch!" replied Fanny --

BUT, gentle reader, to avoid trouble to myself, and not to offend nice ears, I
propose to omit the flowers of scurrillity which bloomed on this occasion; yet
for the benefit of those who wish to have this dialogue seasoned according to
the taste of the times, I shall direct this narrative, in the future editions
thereof, to be printed with blanks in the proper places, which the reader may
fill up according to his fancy out of Tom Brown, Ned Ward, or the more modern
eloquence of the FREEMAN'S JOURNAL and INDEPENDENT GAZETTEER.

-- GET out, you b -- ch! (replied Fanny) you had better not mention nurse
Reedina, George, the steward, and Jonathan, the coachman: -- pray who are Jenny
Richardson, Pegg Rush, and all the gang of you? -- Did not nurse Richardson
call young master a bastard before he was born? -- Yes, you jade -- and after
he was born, she would have seen him starve before she would have given him a
pannykin of pap; and yet she must be set up, to be sure, over the heads of
better people than and herself: as for Peggy, the cook, she had better by half
attend to her business, and not employ her time in fomenting quarrels in the
house, and setting mistress against her best servants: for it is well known,
that Pegg told my lady, that all those who assisted at her lying-in, were
rabscallions and tatterdemallions: This alludes to a particular publication.
and so, miss Kitty, before you set about abusing other people, please to look
at home at your own troop of trumpery.

SINCE you come to that, madam Trollop, (answered Kitty,) I can soon be even
with you. -- Did not George, the steward, and Jonathan, the coachman, your
great patrons and friends, cabal and rail against general Worthy, our master
Patriotism's chief friend, and now his executor? and did not he say he ought to
be turned out of the house? for which Jonathan got a good flogging with his own
horse-whip! and, moreover, did not nurse Reedina treat with a villain about
poisoning young master soon after he was born? -- yes, she did -- and Peggy
Rush knows, or at least says she knows, that Reedina would strangle him this
moment if she could.

THERE is such an intimate sympathy between the tongue and the hands, that when
the former is in full exercise, the latter cannot long remain inactive: for
words like trumpets are but preludes to battle. Fanny replied only by spitting
full in Kitty's face: and so to fisty-cuffs they went without further ceremony,
and with as keen an appetite as ever Dr. ***** sat down to a turtle feast.

AS a dog, which has not only a natural hatred, but a contempt for the cat,
(who, though the weaker animal, excels in cunning and malice,) should puss
presume to lift her paw against him, seizes and shakes her until his mouth is
filled with hair, the spoils of the enemy: just so the enraged Kitty fell
furiously upon poor miss Belly, and tore from her head, not only her gauze cap,
but a handful of those ornaments, in which, like Sampson's, her chief strength
lay: for Fanny was proud of her locks, as they were very pliable, and would set
any way her admirers chose they should: she, however, like grimalkin aforesaid,
flew upon her adversary, and in a moment imprinted eight lines of vengeance on
Kitty's cheeks, which lamented the injury in tears of blood.

SOME authors have inadvertently mentioned ten marks of retaliation: but it
should be observed that the thumbs seldom do execution on these occasions. Be
it as it may, this is certainly a very ancient method of wiping off old scores
by making new ones.

THE noise of this battle soon brought the family together. Kitty being Fanny's
superior in strength, and finding her strength increased by pain and rage,
grasped her antagonist round the waist, lifted her from the floor, and in the
presence of the whole household, turned up her coats, and spanked her right
soundly with the dust-pan. Cock-eyed Moll and Doll Frowsey seeing their
principal thus exposed, and in the hands of the enemy, soused the contents of
two chamber-pots in Kitty's face.

THE company immediately arranged themselves according to their respective
parties, and the battle became general. Peggy, the cook, emptied a hot
dripping-pan on Reedina's head, whilst Jacob, the clerk, spattered her with a
bottle of ink; Felon, the scullion, threw a quart of slush on George, the
steward's old scarlet cloak; but George avoided fighting openly, and only slily
pinched his adversaries as opportunities offered; Reedina attacked nurse
Richardson with a carving knife, with which she not only slashed her clothes,
but gave some ugly wounds in the flesh: whilst Mrs. Richardson endeavored to
defend herself with a pillow snatched from the cradle. All was uproar and
confusion, and in the tumult, the cradle was overset, and little Independence
lay sprawling and bawling upon the floor, unnoticed and unpitied by the furious
combatants.

IN the midst of the storm, up rose Thomas, the chief steward, and with great
solemnity commanded silence in the name of the lady Pennsylva. Hostilities
being suspended, he called upon Kitty, and severely reprimanded her as being
the author, or at least the encourager, of all this animosity: he reproached
her as a virago, a common scold, and threatened to have her well ducked and
turned out of doors: he emphatically rebuked her for abusing poor Fanny, the
chambermaid, and swore that she should answer for her conduct to her mistress.

KITTY, who had spunk enough, could not bear this: -- Yes, Mr. Thomas, (said
she,) you may well stand up for poor Fanny the chambermaid, as you call her,
and good reason why, truly, for all the house knows she is your whore. How long
is it, pray, since she brought forth a bastard in the shape of a law-book? The
new edition of the laws of Pennsylvania.
Its features are too like its precious father to be mistaken: you are a fit
person, truly, to preach up order and decency -- you, who have secretly
encouraged your trollop in all her provoking insolence, and scandalous lies.
Fanny may say what she pleases -- it is all proper -- it is all right -- she is
a girl of spirit, and will make people know their places: -- but, if I open my
mouth, it is all calumny, slander, and breach of the peace -- and what not. As
to your threats, I scorn them; nature gave me a tongue, and I will make use of
it in spite of you or your pitiful whore -- You silence me! -- you duck me, and
turn me out of doors! -- I hope we are not come to that pass yet, that no one
is to be allowed freedom of speech in this family, without your gracious
license: but I will ask my lady when she comes home, whether or no, she has
thought proper to put the keys of our mouths into your pocket. I know you think
yourself a very great man, Mr. Thomas -- and you are a very great man, Mr.
Thomas, to be sure; but for all that, I hope poor servants may perform the
functions of nature without waiting for your permission -- and so for the
future, Mr. Thomas, -- Her tongue was running on at this rate, like the din of
a brass candlestick tumbling down stairs, when a thundering rap at the door
announced the arrival of lady Pennsylva: having heard of the terrible uproar in
her family, from some of the neighbors, she had hurried home, and was no
sooner admitted into the house, but she rushed to the scene of action.

THE first object that drew her attention, was the poor infant kicking and
screaming under the cradle, which had been turned topsey-turvey over him. She
took him up from the floor, and soothed him in her bosom with maternal
tenderness: she then took a survey of the belligerent powers, as they stood
before her, reeking hot with the fury of battle, and exclaimed with horror: --
Heaven preserve me! what do I see? can these be the servants of my house? can
these be the chosen few in whom I have placed so much confidence, and to whose
nurture and care I have entrusted my darling child? -- the hope of my family?
-- Go, miserable wretches; go, and cleanse yourselves from filth, and repair
your disordered dress; for I will not hold converse with you in your present
tattered and bespattered condition: and see that you all meet me an hour hence
in the great hall: -- but first, Reedina, give up that carving knife; would you
make a slaughterhouse of my apartments? -- oh, shame! shame! Saying this, she
hurried away to her chamber, oppressed with grief: and the combatants silently
stole off, some one way, some another, to prepare as well as they could, for
the meeting in the great hall.

AT the appointed time, the lady Pennsylva repaired to the hall, and seating
herself in an armed chair, with her little son in her lap, she rang the bell; a
summons which soon brought all the household into her presence. After a few
moments of serious and expressive silence, she thus addressed them.

WHERE is now that heroic ardour which once animated my friends in the defense
of my righteous cause, against a cruel and powerful foe? Where is now that
disinterested zeal -- that divine enthusiasm, which once determined you to
brave every extremity, in support of me and my infant son, when a cloud, black
with vengeance, hung heavy over the fortunes of my house! Where is now that
virtuous magnanimity, which, like a tower of strength, stood firm against the
most severe attacks? -- But, why do I ask where? alas! I know too well, that
they all lie buried in the sacred tomb of my departed lord.

YOU, for your abilities and supposed attachment to me and mine, have been
selected to be the special guardian of my honor and interests; but yon have
most ungratefully exercised those abilities in sowing discord in my family, and
distracting my affairs. When you thus attack each other with all the rancour
and malice of mutual enemies, you weaken my strength, and forward the views and
wishes of those who seek the downfall of my house. Look at this darling infant,
and consider for a moment, how nearly his life is connected with your conduct.
-- Would you wish to see him branded with infamy? -- cast out, and torn by
dogs? -- Here the good lady shed tears in abundance. -- I believe you would not
-- or do you wish to see him live, and grow to a state of manhood, and become a
protector and a blessing to you and yours? -- If so, for heaven's sake, cease
these intestine broils -- he lives in your union -- he dies in your discord.

BUT should these base and vulgar quarrels be productive of no such serious
consequences; they at least affect, nay, deeply wound, the reputation of my
family. What must my friend the French nobleman think of us? What must the
Dutch merchant next door, or the Spanish don over the way, think of us? Perhaps
you care not -- But, I ask, what do you think of yourselves? I appeal to your
own consciences, whether in these inveterate altercations, you find your
passions raised by a zeal for me, and a jealousy for my welfare, for this is
what you all pretend -- or, whether ambition, revenge, or avarice is not the
true source of these animosities? It is easy to gild a foul design with a fair
motive; but the touchstone of adversity will expose the baser metal; and God
only knows how soon your sincerity may be brought to the test. My heart is full
and heavy; I shall not enlarge -- I love you all; and my warmest wish is, that
those whom I love, may love one another.

WHAT I had principally in view in ordering your attendance here, was to inform
you, that my dear deceased husband has directed by his will, that at the end
of every seven months, proper persons shall be appointed to enquire into the
economy of my family, and the conduct of my servants; The council of censors.
they are to be severe and impartial judges. The time of this enquiry is now
near at hand; I shall, therefore, not investigate the occasion and
circumstances of this day's uproar; but resign you to those judges, who will
not fail to punish the guilty, and rectify all abuses: in the mean time,
however, I would earnestly and most pathetically recommend it to you, Mrs.
Richardson, and to you, Mr. Thomas, to exert yourselves in preserving the peace
of the family, by discouraging all acrimonious altercations, reconciling
jarring interests, and distributing justice with moderation and impartiality.
-- Away! and leave me to the digestion of that sorrow, from which you alone can
relieve me by your future harmony and good conduct.

SHE ceased, and the company immediately dispersed in silence; but, in going
out, Fanny could not resist an opportunity that offered of treading upon
Kitty's toes; and then, with great formality asked her pardon for the accident.
The above was written with a view to check the rage of party, during Mr.
Dickenson's presidentship.


A REMARKABLE HISTORICAL FACT, Mentioned in the records of the empire of CHINA,
to be found in the great library of the royal city of PEKING, vol. 3458:
translated from the original, by an English gentleman who resided many years in
that country, and now first published in the English language.
IN the reign of HOANG-TI, who was co-temporary with Noah, a cacoethes, or
malignant distemper, raged amongst the officers and servants of the emperor's
court. The symptoms by which it mamanifested itself, were a most licentious
delirium, and a virulent apathy, without any apparent cause of phrenzy, or
visible diminution of health and strength: the infected violently attacked each
other, and even strangers, if they crossed their way, by discharging,
periodically, a black corrosive saliva, which always stained and sometimes
infected those on whom it fell, to the great annoyance of the whole court.

WHEREUPON the great emperor HOANG-TI, ever careful for the good of his people,
issued his royal mandate, commanding Cu-tan-sla-ash, his chief surgeon, and
Pois-on-al, his chief physician, and Whim-sic-al, his chief metaphysician, to
take the infected parties under their care; and after examining into the cause
of this extraordinary disease, to apply the proper remedies, and then make
report to him of the whole matter.

IN pursuance of this mandate of the emperor HOANG-TI, many persons were
apprehended, and carried to the grand infirmary. Amongst these were
Chink-Chink, the poet, who was one of the royal council; Twing-Twang, the
musician, who was also a mandarine; Fee-fa-fum, of the military; Quil-king-gum,
the scribe; Rush-Tush, the politician; Tsang-hu, and Van-ho-ai, men of letters;
with Fal-fool-fi-reb-rand, Van-hoc, and many others of inferior note.

AFTER Cu-tan-sla-ash, the surgeon, Poi-son-al, the physician, and Whim-sic-al,
the metaphysician, had duly considered the case, they were unanimously of
opinion, that this disease was occasioned by obstructions in the pori belarii,
ductus hypaticus, and ductus pancreaticus: that in consequence of these
obstructions, the bile not being duly elaborated by the liver, or sweetened and
corrected by the pancreatic juice, was extravasated into the abdomen, from
whence, ascending through the epigastric region into the thorax, it soon
reached the salival glands, and so mixed with the chyle: that a great part was
usually discharged through the mouth by spitting and sputtering; but the
remainder being swallowed into the stomach, pervaded the whole circulation of
digestion, and finally went off in foetid urine, or in a clammy and offensive
sweat.

HAVING thus discovered the diagnostic symptoms, the curative indications
readily presented, viz. to deterge the intestines by potent cathartics, to
dislodge the obstructions by vigourous concussions, and to open a way for the
virulent matter, by promoting sensible and insensible perspiration: and after
much deliberation, it was concluded, that all these purposes might be affected
by one simple operation, viz. THE BASTINADO; provided it should be administered
to the patient usque ad sudorem and putorem.

AGREEABLY to this determination of Cu-tan-sla-ash, the surgeon, Pois-on-al,
the physician, and Whim-sic-al, the metaphysician, the patients were forthwith
bound hand and foot, and the operation administered with great alacrity.

THE effect was truly astonishing: some, indeed, required more, and others
less, of the salutary exercise, according to the strength of the disease, and
obstinacy of the patient: but in the end, all recovered and were released;
except only the unfortunate Quil-king-gum, in whom the distemper was so
inveterate, that he died under the operation, before any favorable symptoms
appeared: this being the case, it was agreed between Cu-tan-sla-ash, Pois-on-al
and Whim-sic-al, that the body of the deceased should be opened, in order to a
more certain discovery of the nature of this extraordinary disease.

THIS was accordingly done, and these learned men having made the investigation
with great skill and attention, formed a report of the case, and laid the same
before the emperor, in obedience to his royal mandate.

THE report was in these words.

"TO the great and mighty HOANG-TI, emperor of CHINA, governor of the world,
the inventor of arts, and the father of his people:

"THE report of Cu-tan-sla-ash, his chief surgeon; and of Pois-on-al, his chief
physician, on inspecting the body of Quil-king-gum, the scribe, deceased.

"IN obedience to the royal command, we have attended to the cacoethical
disease which had seized many persons belonging to your imperial court; and we
are most happy in informing your majesty, that we have by proper applications
restored all the patients that fell under our care, to composure, health and
harmony, except the scribe Quil-king-gum, who, unfortunately expired under the
operation necessary to his cure. This circumstance, however, has afforded us
an opportunity of discovering, by occular testimony, the nature and seat of his
disease.

"THE deductions from these facts we leave to the learned Whim-sic-al, your
majesty's chief metaphysician.

"WE have only to add, that in order to confirm the cure of those patients,
whom we have been so fortunate as to restore, we have prepared emollient
cataplasms of spices and aromatic herbs, to be applied to the breast, with a
view to soften, sweeten, and correct any remaining malignity about the region
of the heart."

SIGNED, Cu-tan-sla-ash, with the signature of a human skull. Pois-on-al, with
the signature of leaf of hemlock.

"TO the great H^ang-ti, emperor of China, governor of the world, the inventor
of arts, and the father of his people.

"THE report of whim-sic-al, the metaphysician, on considering the case of
Quil-king-gum, the scribe, as set forth in the report of Cu-tan-sla-ash, the
surgeon, and Pois-on-al, the physician.

"YOUR majesty's chief surgeon and chief physician, having carefully and
judiciously represented the remarkable circumstances, which occurred in opening
the body of Quil-king-gum the scribe; it is my duty to explain to your majesty
how this derangement in the corporeal system became the efficient cause of that
obliquity of conduct and acrimony of temper so conspicuous in the life and
manners of the deceased.

"EVER zealous to gratify the desires of my sovereign, it is with great concern
I find myself under the necessity of praying your majesty's indulgence in this
particular, until I shall have completed a work which has been the attention
and study of my whole life.

"THIS work which I shall have the honor of laying at the feet of the great
Hoang-ti, will contain a full and satisfactory account of the original elements
of the spiritual and material kingdoms: It will trace the various phenomena
that arise from the innumerable combinations of these elementary principles.

"I shall show that in this visible world all things are but so many different
exhibitions of one original essence; as the leaves, flowers, and fruit of a
plant are only varied displays of the same nutritious juice.

"I shall show that fire is only condensed light, air is condensed fire, water
condensed air; that earth is condensed water, and that metals, stones, and all
the fossile kingdom are different modifications of condensed earth.

"SO also with regard to spirit; I shall convince your majesty, and I hope, the
whole world, that spirit or mind, abstracted from all adjuncts, is a simple
essence or unity; not compounded of parts, but of powers only: That there can,
therefore, be no original difference between souls; inasmuch as one unity
cannot differ from another, except only in identity, and their powers being all
essential must therefore be all equal.

"THAT to accomplish the inscrutable purposes of the great Creator, spirit
became connected with, and enclosed in material organs: and being so
incorporated cannot exhibit or exercise any of its powers, but such as the
organization of the body with which it is connected is capable of making
manifest.

"THAT, upon these principles, differences in temper and abilities are not
occasioned by an original difference of souls, but are the consequences of a
different organization of bodies. Inferring from this system, that the soul of
an idiot, when disengaged from the faulty body with which it was united, has
all the powers and faculties of the soul of a philosopher. And, further, that
the soul of an horse is as truly spiritual as the soul of a man.

"I shall have the honor also to show, that, notwithstanding this hypothesis,
virtue and vice are not merely the effect of mechanism; but that the soul
having an innate sense of right and wrong, and a power of control over the
body, can at pleasure, restrain or encourage its mechanical propensities; of
which I shall give a variety of convincing examples. The body is the slave of
an active soul, but may by inattention and indulgence become the master. When
the will of the soul is strong, it is in vain for the body to plead lassitude,
weakness, or pain. Hence it is that the sailor braves contending elements, the
soldier faces fire and sword, and the martyr smiles amidst surrounding flames.
For Volition is an essential quality of the soul, and however poorly it may
exhibit its powers, according to the circumstances of the material engine with
which it is so intimately connected, it is always free to will.

"IN this work I shall also explain to your majesty's comprehension all the
mysteries of voluntary and involuntary motion; and trace the spirit from her
first pantings in the punctum saliens, to the last struggles of animal life.

"YOUR majesty will then plainly see, that the character and conduct of the
late Quil-king-gum was perfectly consonant with the frame and constitution of
his body, as represented by Cu-tan-sla-ash, your chief surgeon, and Pois-on-al,
your chief physician; and you will know also how far he might, and how far he
could not, have counteracted the propensities of his mechanical nature.

"FOR the present, I can do no more than give a short abstract of deductions
from his case.

"BUT the physical and metaphysical laws by which the temper of the soul
becomes thus consonant with certain arrangements and derangements of body, are
so subtle, and so deeply involved in the great arcana of nature, that the most
simple and common phenomenon cannot be fully accounted for without developing
the whole wonderful system.

"THUS when I shall explain to your majesty the cause by which a philosopher in
a fever becomes a madman, and in a lethargy a fool, you will know all the
mysteries of spirit and matter, separate or conjoined: you will fully
comprehend the cause of waking, sleeping, and dreaming: you will see the source
from whence the artist derives his fancy, and the poet his fire.

"IN all these points I shall have the honor to give the great Hoang-ti full
satisfaction, when I shall have completed the arduous work I have in hand.

"IN the mean time, I pray your majesty to suspend that ardent thirst for
knowledge which characterises your auspicious reign, and extend your royal
indulgence to your faithful slave."

Signed WHIM -- SIC -- AL With the signature of an Air Bubble.

SOME ACCOUNT OF A NEW WORK ENTITLED DIALOGUES OF THE DEAD.
THIS manuscript was not found in digging the vaults of the new Quaker meeting
house in Arch Street; nor was it discovered in a leaden box by the laborers
employed in the regulation of Seventh Street; neither was it washed out by a
flood through the subterraneous aqueducts of the city into that place of
general contribution the D^ck; but it was found, where it might naturally be
expected, in the pocket of the author.

LUCIAN, in an^ient, and Lord Littleton in modern times, with many others,
wrote dialogues of the dead; and the piou^ Mrs. Row established a regular post
between the spiritual and temporal kingdoms. Aesop also cau^ed ^irds, beasts,
and fishes, to hold ^^miliar conversations, like so many christians, in good
decent language. These were bold strokes in literature. But our author
outstrips them far. That intelligent beings, under any form of existence,
should be capable of a mutual communication of ideas, is not an absurd or
improbable supposition. That the brute species, manifestly possessed of ideas
and furnished with at least apparent organs of speech, might maintain a
friendly conversation is not difficult to conceive: but that dead carcases
should utter sentiments, and hold reciprocal intercourse, seems to be a
shocking violation of the bounds of probability. Our author, however, attempts
to justify the ground he has chosen by a system of philosophy, whimsical
enough, of which the principal outlines are these.

HE states the position, that whatever exists has identity, or that which
distinguishes it from another being however similar. That bodies are sensible
of their identity, which is manifested by the resistance they make to any
change of form, or to any diminution or addition of substance. That all
material bodies have atmospheres adhering to their superficies, or rather that
those atmospheres are the component parts of the bodies themselves, expanded
and rarefied to an imperceptible degree of fineness. So that bodies have, in
fact, no perceptible out-lines. What appears to us, he says, to be the external
outlines of any body, is nothing more than that line of division in its
atmosphere which separates those particles which are gross enough to become the
objects of vision, from those which are too refined for that purpose. And
therefore, he infers, to no two men does the same object appear of equal
magnitude, unless their eyes should be formed exactly alike, and possessed of
precisely equal powers. From which he concludes, that no one can certainly say
here this body is, but there it is not.

HE asserts further, that these atmospheres, surrounding not only the whole,
but every molicule of a body, must ever prevent an actual contact of parts
however closely pressed together; and therefore, there is not to be found in
all nature a truly solid body. That when bodies lie so near each other that
their atmospheres interfere, there must be an actual intercourse of parts
between them, of which they are more or less sensible according to the vigor
and activity of their respective atmospheres. And that by such an interference
of atmospheres, sentiments may be communicated, especially if the component
parts of the effluviae have been highly sublimated.

ON this hypothesis our author founds his work, entitled Dialogues of the Dead.
One of these dialogues is selected as a specimen of his manner. It is the third
dialogue of the second book; supposed to pass between the carcases of a dog and
a cat lying in one of the streets of this city.

DIALOGUE III.
CAT. So neighbor! you are welcome into our fraternity. Which of the street
commissioners, pray, ordered you here?


DOG. I know nothing of the street commissioners -- not I -- I had got a bad
cold, which occasioned a defluxion from my nose. This was soon perceived. The
cry of mad dog was raised, and the boys knocked me in the head -- Street
commissioners, indeed! I suppose if one of them should pass this way, he would
soon order both you and me into a dirt cart, and pack us off to the commons.


CAT. I perceive that you are very ignorant. You seem to know nothing of the
late improvements in the police of this city. Don't you know that I lie here by
express order of the street commissioners, those guardians of the health and
convenience of the citizens of Philadelphia? and that these streets are
regularly supplied with dead cats at a very considerable expense?


DOG. You surprise me very much! -- Pray, to what purpose?


CAT. I will inform you. It has been discovered, and proved, particularly by a
Doctor Alexander, professor in Edinburgh, that filth, nastiness, and
corruption, are the only sure preservers of health. He made numberless
experiments to ascertain this truth. He procured some of the liquor from a pool
near Edinburgh, into which the carcases of dogs, cats, horses, etc. and the
general filth of the city are usually thrown. This he put into a glass,
viscous, green, and frothy, as he found it: he took also some fair spring water
and put it into another glass. Two pieces of fresh meat were suspended in these
waters, and placed in the same degree of heat. In a few hours, the meat
immersed in fair water began to smell offensive, and soon after became
putrescent; whilst the other remained sweet for several days; and, being
broiled on the coals, made an excellent steak for the curious doctor to regale
himself withal. Convinced by this experiment, our commissioners have directed
as many carcases, and as much filth as can be collected, to be dispersed
through the streets of this city. And it is owing to their attention that there
is now no street or alley without at least a reasonable supply of putrescent
matter.


DOG. Well! but I am sure there is a law for cleansing, pitching and paving the
streets of this city, and a pretty heavy tax levied for the purpose. I am sure
I have heard my master curse and swear bitterly whilst he paid it. Pray, what
becomes of all that money?


CAT. What becomes of it! The commissioners pay it away in premiums to boys who
kill cats for the supply of this large city. Only consider -- there are at this
time not less than three hundred dead cats lying in our streets and alleys.
But, alas! what is a poor cat? -- not made of steel -- she cannot last forever
-- continually run over by wagons laden with cord-wood -- by drays, carts,
coaches, and and chains, and perpetually kicked about by horses' hoofs. I
suppose the oldest and toughest ram-cat that can be got will not wear more than
a month. Well! three hundred cats per month make three thousand six hundred
necessary for the annual supply of this city -- and these are not to be had
gratis. The time is not far off when the legislature will find it necessary to
pass a law for encouraging the breed of cats, and even allow a handsome bounty
on their importation. Our worthy street commissioners already find cats so
scarce, that they are sometimes obliged to put the city to an allowance. But
they make up the deficiency, by encouraging housekeepers to throw into the
streets, all the offals of their kitchens; such as guts, garbage, bones,
feathers, oyster-shells, etc. And they allow the soap-boiler to pile up before
his door, the dregs of his trade -- the stinking skimmings of putrid fat, and
the caput-mortuum of a whole winter's firing.


DOG. This system of police is entirely new to me, and I believe not generally
understood. I have known many to curse the commissioners for the dirtiness of
our streets, and pay with grudging a tax for which they say there is not value
received.


CAT. Mere effects of ignorance and prejudice! It is now known to the learned,
that the volatile salts arising from putrescent substances are the most
powerful antiseptics in nature. It must be owing to the extreme cleanliness of
Constantinople that it is so often visited with the plague. For cleanliness is
part of the religion of a Mohammedan -- but Christians know better. The king of
Spain once undertook to cleanse the streets of Madrid, by ordering the
inhabitants to accommodate themselves with necessaries; but this had well nigh
caused an insurrection in that great city. And the physicians, one and all,
joined in a remonstrance to the crown, declaring that the health of the
inhabitants depended upon there being a sufficient quantity of human ordure
spread over the streets of Madrid.

MANY of the good people, who live on the east side of Front Street, between
Arch and Vine Streets, hold the same philosophical creed. Whoever will stroll
through that neighborhood, from ten to twelve o'clock at night, (whether he
goes along Front or Water Streets) will not fail to see the nymphs rush
suddenly out, and pour forth plentiful libations to the goddess Cloacina from
their sacred urns. And whoever walks that way early in the morning, might
suppose that Jupiter, enamoured with the Danaes of that district, had again
descended in a golden shower. Delicate constitutions, subject to nervous and
hysterical affections, are sure of finding relief by taking the air of that
neighborhood. And it is said the street commissioners frequently direct their
morning walk that way to procure an appetite for breakfast. Moreover, it is
expected, that as the season advances, the urinous salts will be so sublimed by
the heats of the summer sun, as to generate a natural phosphorus: in which case
that neighborhood will apply for an exemption from the lamp-tax as an
unnecessary imposition on that part of the city, whose inhabitants, like the
frugal fire-fly, can furnish light from their own tails.


DOG. And is this new doctrine of health the the only reason why our
commissioners suffer the streets to remain in so nasty a condition?


CAT. No -- there are even pleasures and conveniences as well as real
advantages arising from it. I shall only give you one instance. The streets
being covered three or four inches thick with soft mud, and semi-fluid filth,
the carriages pass easily and silently along, without disturbing the sick by
the rattling of their wheels, or jarring the teeth out of the jaws of the
riders, as is the case in driving over a clean stone pavement. Besides, a coach
cannot run far without encountering the body of a cat: the wheels must
unavoidably break three or four ribs of the carcass, and this will afford an
agreeable crash, to the great amusement of the ladies and gentlemen within.


DOG. From what you have said, I begin -- [at this instant a dray laden with a
hogshead of sugar came along, and one of the wheels rolled directly over the
head of the dog.]


CAT. Ha! ha! ha! What a cursed figure you make! why your head is as flat as a
pancake.


DOG. Yes. That booby, who has gone whistling along, little thinks how
wonderfully the machine was constructed which he has so carelessly destroyed.
If all the rational powers of his whole genealogy, from the first of his name,
who was got behind a hedge in Ireland, to the last of of his family who will be
hanged in America for a robbery, could be united in one individual, he would
not be able to combine matter to such astonishing effect, as it was arranged in
the little casket he has now crushed to pieces. Good God! what work he has
made! Cerebrum, cerebellum, pia matter, dura matter, pineal gland, medullary
substance, nerves, lymph, venal and arterial blood, ostium and peri-ostium, all
confounded together. Thanks, however, to bountiful nature, who has so ordered
it, that no derangement of the machine, after what is called death, shall
occasion pain. But I was saying, from what you have observed, I begin to see
things in a different light.


CAT. Ha! ha! ha! -- You may well see things in a different light, truly --
Why, your eye balls are turned out of their sockets into open sunshine.


DOG. No matter; let me ask you -- was there not an attempt made to have this
city incorporated, with a view to its better government, and for the removal of
what are called nuisances, abuses, and impositions?


CAT. Yes, but the cry of mad dog was raised against the bill, as in the case
of your worship; and it was knocked on the head.


DOG. Don't you think the thing may be again attempted with success?


CAT. Doubtless; provided the principal opposer be recommended as mayor; the
next in vociferation recorder; and the rest aldermen. For, depend upon it, this
is a true republican maxim: "Power is a very dangerous weapon; yet if you will
put it into my hands, I shall use it with so much lenity and discretion, as to
make it a public blessing: but no man else ought to be trusted."


DOG. Have you any thing more to say, for in truth I grow tired of your
conversation?


CAT. Only this: it is whispered that the street commissioners hold a monthly
feast; at which the principal dish is two large ram-cats, smothered in onions.
Numbers observed, or might have observed, two skinned cats, lying in
Chesnut-street, near Third-street: these had been prepared for this same
love-feast: but as the gentlemen are very nice in their eating, they were
thought not fat enough for their table, and so were thrown into the common
stock in the street, and a brace of better fed cats provided for the
entertainment.

YOU grow impatient, or I meant to say something of the dock, that great
ornament of our city: I could also give you a hint of a ^emarkable revolution
in politics, which is even now working its way, and will shortly show itself --
a revolution, which --

A carriage passing swiftly along at this instant, ran across the cat, and
turned her fairly over; so that the side which had been next the ground was now
uppermost, which circumstance totally changed the subject of conversation: for,
as was before observed, this dialogue was maintained by an interference of
atmospheres. Now, the volatile particles which had been for many days
sweltering next the earth, were of a very different nature from those which
emanated from a surface exposed to the open air, and of course had a very
different effect.

SOMETHING like this may be observed in animal life. If a man, when he goes to
bed, indulges a train of thoughts, lying on his left side, when he turns on his
right side, the whole train of ideas vanishes; and he can scarcely by any
efforts of the mind, recover the same thread of cogitation, unless the subject
was of a very interesting nature. So, in dreaming, a change of position in the
body never fails to change the whole scenery in which the imagination had been
engaged.


A. B.
March 1784.
MODERN LEARNING: EXEMPLIFIED BY A SPECIMEN OF A COLLEGIATE EXAMINATION.
METAPHYSICS.
Prof. professor; Stu. student; gov. governor of the institution.
PROF. WHAT is a SALT-BOX?


STU. It is a box made to contain salt.


PROF. How is it divided?


STU. Into a salt-box, and a box of salt.


PROF. Very well! -- show the distinction.


STU. A salt-box may be where there is no salt; but salt is absolutely
necessary to the existence of of a box of salt.


PROF. Are not salt-boxes otherwise divided?


STU. Yes: by a partition.


PROF. What is the use of this partition?


STU. To separate the coarse salt from the fine.


PROF. How? -- think a little.


STU. To separate the fine salt from the coarse.


PROF. To be sure: -- it is to separate the fine from the coarse: but are not
salt-boxes yet otherwise distinguished?


STU. Yes: into possible, probable and positive.


PROF. Define these several kinds of salt-boxes.


STU. A possible salt-box is a salt-box yet unsold in the hands of the joiner.


PROF. Why so?


STU. Because it has never yet become a salt-box in fact, having never had any
salt in it; and it may possibly be applied to some other use.


PROF. Very true: -- for a salt-box which never had, has not now, and perhaps
never may have, any salt in it, can only be termed a possible salt-box. What is
a probable salt-box?


STU. It is a salt-box in the hand of one going to a shop to buy salt, and who
has sixpence in his pocket to pay the grocer: and a positive salt-box is one
which has actually and bona fide got salt in it.


PROF. Very good: -- but is there no instance of a positive salt-box which has
no salt in it?


STU. I know of none.


PROF. Yes: there is one mentioned by some authors: it is where a box has by
long use been so impregnated with salt, that although all the salt has been
long since emptied out, it may yet be called a salt-box, with the same
propriety that we say a salt herring, salt beef, etc. And in this sense any box
that may have accidentally, or otherwise, been long steeped in brine, may be
termed positively a salt-box, although never designed for the purpose of
keeping salt. But tell me, what other division of salt-boxes do you recollect?


STU. They are further divided into substantive and pendant: a substantive
salt-box is that which stands by itself on the table or dresser; and a pendant
is that which hangs upon a nail against the wall.


RROF. What is the idea of a salt-box?


STU. It is that image which the mind conceives of a salt-box, when no salt-box
is present.


PROF. What is the abstract idea of a salt-box?


STU. It is the idea of a salt-box, abstracted from the idea of a box, or of
salt, or of a salt-box, or of a box of salt.


PROF. Very right: -- and by these means you acquire a most perfect knowledge
of a salt-box: but tell me, is the idea of a salt-box a salt idea?


STU. Not unless the ideal box has ideal salt in it.


PROF. True: -- and therefore an abstract idea cannot be either salt or fresh;
round or square; long or short: for a true abstract idea must be entirely free
of all adjuncts. And this shows the difference between a salt idea, and an idea
of salt. -- Is an aptitude to hold salt an essential or an accidental property
of a salt-box?


STU. It is essential; but if there should be a crack in the bottom of the box,
the aptitude to spill salt would be termed an accidental property of that
salt-box.


PROF. Very well! very well indeed! -- What is the salt called with respect to
the box?


STU. It is called its contents.


PROF. And why so?


STU. Because the cook is content quoad ho^ to to find plenty of salt in the
box.


PROF. You are very right -- I see you have not misspent your time: but let us
now proceed to


LOGIC.
PROF. How many parts are there in a salt-box?


STU. Three. Bottom, top, and sides.


PROF. How many modes are there in salt-boxes?


STU. Four. The formal, the substantial, the accidental, and the topsey-turvey.


PRO. Define these several modes,


STU. The formal respects the figure or shape of the box, such as round,
square, oblong, and so forth; the substantial respects the work of the joiner;
and the accidental depends upon the string by which the box is hung against the
wall.


PROF. Very well -- And what are the consequences of the accidental mode?


STU. If the string should break the box would fall, the salt be spilt, the
salt-box broken, and the cook in a bitter passion: and this is the accidental
mode with its consequences.


PROF. How do you distinguish between the top and bottom of a salt-box?


STU. The top of a box is that part which is uppermost, and the bottom that
part which is lowest in all positions.


PROF. You should rather say the lowest part is the bottom, and the uppermost
part is the top. -- How is it then if the bottom should be the uppermost?


STU. The top would then be the lowermost; and so the bottom would become the
top, and the top would become the bottom: and this is called the topsey-turvey
mode, which is nearly allied to the accidental, and frequently arises from it.


PROF. Very good -- But are not salt-boxes sometimes single and sometimes
double?


STU. Yes.


PROF. Well, then mention the several combinations of salt-boxes with respect
to their having salt or not.


STU. They are divided into single salt-boxes having salt; single salt-boxes
having no salt; double salt-boxes having salt; double salt-boxes having no
salt; and single double salt-boxes having salt and no salt.


PROF. Hold! hold! -- you are going too far.


GOV. We cannot allow further time for logic, proceed if you please to


NATURAL PHILOSOPHY.
PROF. Pray Sir, what is a salt-box?


STU. It is a combination of matter, fitted, framed, and joined by the hands of
a workman in the form of a box, and adapted to the purpose of receiving,
containing, and retaining salt.


PROF. Very good -- What are the mechanical powers concerned in the
construction of a salt-box?


STU. The ax, the saw, the plane, and the hammer.


PROF. How are these powers applied to the purpose intended?


STU. The ax to fell the tree, the saw to split the timber.


PROF. Consider. It is the property of the mall and wedge to split.


STU. The saw to slit the timber, the plane to smooth and thin the boards.


PROF. How! Take time! Take time!


STU. To thin and smooth the boards.


PROF. To be sure -- The boards are first thinned and then smoothed -- go on --


STU. The plane to thin and smooth the boards, and the hammer to drive the
nails.


PROF. Or rather tacks -- Have not some philosophers considered glue as one of
the mechanical powers?


STU. Yes; and it is still so considered, but it is called an inverse
mechanical power: because, whereas it is the property of the direct mechanical
powers to generate motion, and separate parts; glue, on the contrary, prevents
motion, and keeps the parts to which it is applied fixed to each other.


PROF. Very true -- What is the mechanical law of the saw?


STU. The power is to the resistance, as the number of teeth and force
impressed multiplied by the number of strokes in a given time.


PROF. Is the saw only used in slitting timber into boards?


STU. Yes, it is also employed in cutting boards into lengths.


PROF. Not lengths: a thing cannot properly be said to have been cut into
lengths.


STU. Into shortnesses.


PROF. Certainly -- into shortnesses. Well, what are the mechanical laws of the
hammer?


GOV. The time wastes fast; pass on to another science.


MATHEMATICS.
PROF. What is a salt-box?


STU. It is a figure composed of lines and surfaces.


PROF. What are the external figures of a salt-box?


STU. Four parallelograms and two squares.


PROF. How are these disposed?


STU. The four parallelograms are thus disposed: The superior, or top; the
anterior, or front; the inferior, or bottom; and the posterior, or back; and
the two squares from the two ends.


PROF. Very good -- Let us now consider one of the squares at the end of the
salt-box. Suppose then a diagonal line to be drawn from one of the angles of
this square to the opposite angle of the same, what will be the consequence?


STU. It will divide the square into two equal and similar triangles.


PROF. Very true. -- But can you demonstrate that these two equal and similar
triangles are equal to each other?


STU. I draw the square ABCD, whose sides are all equal, and the contained
angles, all right angles. I then draw the diagonal BC, dividing the square into
two equal parts. Then I say, that one of those equal parts, viz. the triangle
ABC is equal to the other equal part or triangle BCD; and further, that those
two triangles are not only equal, but similar. For by the 105th proposition of
the 49th book of Euclid, if in two triangles, all the lines and angles of the
one, are equal to all the corresponding lines and angles of the other, those
two triangles will be equal and similar. But the leg AB of the triangle ABC, is
equal to the leg CD of the triangle BCD, because they are two of the sides of
the square ABCD, equal by construction: and the leg AC is equal to the leg BD
for the same reason; and because the hypothenuse BC is common to both
triangles, therefore the hypothenuse of the triangle ABC is equal to the
hypothenuse of the triangle BCD. Now, because by the 115th proposition of the
same book, equal legs subtend equal angles of the same radii; it follows, that
all the angles of the triangle ABC are equal to the corresponding angles of the
triangle BDC: ergo, those two triangles are equal and similar: and ergo, if a
square be cut by a diagonal line into two equal parts, those parts will be
equal. QCD.


PROF. Very well! very well indeed! -- Suppose now a right line to be let fall
from a given point above a salt-box, till it shall touch the superior
parallelogram, and another right line to be let fall from the same point till
it should touch the inferior parallelogram of the same salt-box, can you
demonstrate that these two lines must be unequal: Or, in other words, can you
prove that a line of 12 inches is shorter than a line of 18 inches in length?


STU. If two lines --


GOV. We have just received intelligence that dinner is almost ready; and as
the medical class is yet to be examined, we cannot afford time for this
demonstration. Let the medical gentlemen come forward.


ANATOMY.
PROF. What is a salt-box?


STU. It is a body composed of wood, glue, nails and hinges.


PROF. How is this body divided?


STU. Into external and internal.


PROF. Very good -- external and internal -- very proper indeed -- And what are
the external parts of a salt-box?


STU. One fundamental, four laterals and one superlateral.


PROF. And how do you find the internal parts of a salt-box?


STU. Divided by a vertical membrane or partition into two large cavities or
sinusses.


PROF. Are these cavities always equal?


STU. They used to be so formerly; but modern joiners have thought it best to
have them unequal, for the more convenient accommodation of the viscera or
contents; the larger cavity for the reception of the coarser viscera, and the
smaller for the fine.


PROF. Very true -- thus have modern joiners, by their improvements, excelled
the first maker of salt-boxes -- Tell me now what peculiarity do you observe in
the superlateral member of a salt-box?


STU. Whereas all the other members are fixed and stationary with respect to
each other, the superlateral is moveable on a pair of hinges.


PROF. To what Purpose it is so constructed?


STU. For the admission, retention, and emission of the saline particles.


GOV. This is sufficient -- Our time is short -- dinner must not wait -- let us
now proceed to


SURGERY, AND THE PRACTICE OF PHYSIC.
PROF. Mention a few of the principle disorders to which a salt-box is liable.


STU. A cracked and leaky fundamental; a gaping of the joint in the laterals;
luxation of the hinges; and an accession and concretion of filth and foulness
external and internal.


PROF. Very well -- How would you treat those disorders? -- begin wiih the
first.


STU. I would caulk the leaky fundamental with pledgets of tow, which I would
secure in the ^^ssure by a strip of linen or paper pasted over. For the
starting of the lateral joi^^s, I would administer powerful astringents, such
as the gluten corneum; and would bind the parts together by triple bandages
until the joints should knit.


PROF. Would you not assist with chalyb^ates?


STU. Yes -- I would at -- tack the disease with prepared iron, in doses
proportioned to the strength of the parts.


PROF. How would you manage the luxation of the hinge?


STU. I would first examine whether it was occasioned by the starting of the
points which annex the processes to the superlateral or its antagonist, or to a
loss of the fulcrum, or to an absolute fracture of the sutures. In the first
case, I would secure the process by a screw; in the second, I would bring the
sutures together, and introduce the fulcrum; and in the last, I would entirely
remove the fractured hinge, and supply its place, pro tempore, with one of
leather.


PROF. Very will, sir! -- very well! -- Now for your treatment in case of
accumulated foulness, external and internal -- But first tell me, how is this
foulness contracted?


STU. Externally, by the greasy hands of the cook; and internally, by the
solution and adhesion of the saline particles.


PROF. True -- And now for the cure.


STU. I would first evacuate the abominable vessel, through the prima via. I
would then exhibit detergents and diluents; such as the saponaceous
preparation, with great plenty of aqua fontana.


PROF. Would not aqua coelestis do better?


STU. Yes -- Plenty of aqua coelestis with the marine sand. I would also apply
the friction brush, with a brisk and strong hand, until the excrementitious
concrete should be totally dissolved and removed.


PROF. Very proper -- What next?


STU. I would recommend the cold bath, by means of a common pump; and then
apply lintal absorbents; and finally exsiccate the body by exposition either in
the sun, or before the kitchen fire.


PROF. In what situation would you leave the superlateral valve during the
exsiccating operation?


STU. I would leave it open to the extent, in order that the rarefied
humidities might freely exhale from the abominable cavities or sinusses.


CHEMISTRY.
PROF. You have mentioned the saponaceous preparation -- Pray, how is that
procured?


STU. By the action of a vegetable alkaline salt upon a pinguidinous or
unctuous substance.


PROF. What is salt?


STU. It is a substance sui generis, pungent to the taste, of an antiseptic
quality, and is produced by crystallization on the evaporation of the fluid in
which it is suspended.


PROF. How many kinds of salt occur in a salt-box?


STU. Two -- coarse and fine.


PROF. You have said that the saponaceous preparation is produced by the action
of a vegetable alkaline salt on a pinguidinous or unctuous substance --
describe the process.


STU. If a great quantity of strong lie be procured by passing water through
wood ashes, and if a very large body of a pinguidinous habit should be immersed
in this lie, and exposed to a considerable heat, the action of the lie, or
rather of the salts with which it abounds upon the pinguidinous body, would
cause the mixture to coagula^^ and


[Here the examiner looked very sour, for he was very fat.] AT this instant a
servant announced that dinner was on the table -- The examination was
concluded, and the parties separated -- One rejoicing in the anticipation of a
feast, and the examined happy in finding the fiery trial over.

May 1784.
AN ADDRESS TO THE AMERICAN PHILOSOPHICAL SOCIETY. HELD AT PHILADELPHIA, FOR
PROMOTING USEFUL KNOWLEDGE: (Delivered January 16, 17^4.)
Gentlemen,
HAVING observed, with real concern, the state of supineness and neglect into
which this society seems to have fallen, I cannot suppress the zeal that urges
me to attempt something that may draw your attention to the important purposes
for which the legislature has incorporated you as a philosophical society, and
to propose some regugulations which may, in my opinion, prove beneficial to
this institution.

PREVIOUS to the late war our society was making considerable progress toward
becoming useful and famous: it had already attracted the notice of learned men
in Europe. The communications, by members at home and abroad were frequent and
valuable; so that in its infant state, it was enabled to publish a volume of
transactions which stamped a credit on the society, and made it an object
worthy of public encouragement.

THIS fair prospect, however, was totally overcast by the dreary tempest of
war. The still voice of philosophy could not be heard amidst the hostile din of
arms, the thunder of the cannon, and the horrible confusion of ravaged
countries and plundered cities.

BY the blessing of Almighty God, the prudent and heroic conduct of the
citizens and soldiers of America, and the friendly assistance of a powerful
ally, this war, which threatened so loudly, has terminated in the
establishment of our independance, and a peace highly honorable and
advantageous to us.

IT is now time -- it is high time -- that philosophy should again lift up her
head. Political sovereignty being thus secured to us, the eyes of Europe are
turned toward America -- And with what view? Not altogether to contemplate the
peculiarities of our government. If our systems should be bad, we shall be the
chief sufferers; if they are wise and good, we shall reap the chief advantage
-- foreign nations are not directly interested in this speculation. But they
look toward us as a country that may be a great nursery of arts and sciences
-- As a country affording an extensive field of improvement in agriculture,
natural history, and other branches of useful knowledge. They look to those
future philosophers, who shall search nature in her hidden recesses; in regions
yet unexplored; in depths and caverns, which the light of day has never yet
illumined.

NO sooner were the glad tidings of peace announced, but many of the literati
of Europe were hasty to encourage our pursuits by their friendly notice. The
many letters, with presents of useful and curious books we have lately
received, evince this.

IN what an interesting situation, then, are we placed? And in this interesting
situation permit me to ask, what are we doing? I am truly sorry that the answer
to this question should amount to little more than this -- we are returning
very civil acknowledgements for the letters and presents so received.

IT may, indeed, reasonably be supposed, that every citizen of America must
find himself intimately interested in the political concerns of his country;
left in an unsettled state by the confusions of war; and deeply engaged in the
arrangement and establishment of a new empire, to which the late important
revolution has given birth.

BUT these excuses, however substantial, cannot avail us long. If it shall be
perceived, that year after year elapses, and nothing interesting is produced,
no discoveries made, or even attempted to be made: when it shall be perceived,
that our barrenness must be occasioned, either by a want of abilities, or which
is, indeed, the truth, by a shameful want of attention, we must unavoidably
sink into contempt: and when this shall be the case -- I will venture to
prophesy -- this society will never regain its lost ground. Some other future
philosophical society, better modelled, and composed of more zealous members,
may rise into notice, and become useful: but this society will sink into
oblivion.

I hope we are yet at a considerable distance from such disgrace; but as I
apprehend we are rather verging toward it, my concern would not suffer me to
withhold this warning.

To prove that my fears are not altogether without foundation, I appeal to
three notorious circumstances; our shameful neglect of the stated meetings of
the society, the great scarcity of philosophical communications, and the tenor
and complexion of our book of minutes.

NEVER was there an era in which philosophical pursuits were more encouraged,
or pushed with more success, than the present. The discoveries which have been
made in every part of Europe, are most interesting and important. Some have
contrived means to separate the different kinds of air, compounded in bodies,
and to investigate and prove experimentally their respective properties: others
have plunged, as it were, into the element of fire, to search out its subtle
powers, and develope that great secret of nature, the generation of animal
heat: some are pursuing electrical experiments, with the most promising
assiduity: others are adding new worlds to our system: and others, on
principles hitherto undiscovered, send up the vast balloon, and float in
regions deemed inaccessible to man.

THE door to knowledge seems to be wider open than ever it was: the authority
of the schools is daily giving way to the authority of nature. It is now
perceived, that it is not absolutely necessary that a man should be what is
called learned in order to be a philosopher. A judicious and careful
examination of the phenomena of nature, and experiments, simple and easily
made, may, and often do, lead the attentive enquirer to most important
discoveries; even without any knowledge of what are called the learned
languages, or of the systematical doctrines of the schools.

MANY, I am persuaded, have suppressed strong inclinations for experimental
pursuits, from a notion than none can be a philosopher, or ought to meddle with
philosophical enquiries, unless he has had what is generally called a learned
education. The position is not true in reason or in fact: -- it is not true in
fact; for, many of the greatest advances in philosophical knowledge have been
made by men not eminent for their learning: and many of the most useful
improvements in mechanics have been produced by men of the most scanty
education. That deservedly and universally admired philosopher the worthy
president of this society, Dr. Franklin.
made some of his most important discoveries before he had acquired any
considerable knowledge in school learning; for he had not a liberal education
his youth. The position is not true in reason; for the language of nature is
not written in Hebrew or Greek; the understanding thereof is not involved in
the contemptible quirks of logic, nor wrapped in the visionary clouds of
metaphysical hypothesis. The great book of nature is open to all -- all may
read therein -- and who can read and understand, without worshipping the God of
nature, who thus manifests himself in the simplicity and power of his works?

THE idolatrous veneration heretofore paid to the theoretical philosophy of
those sages, who derive half their reputation from the gross ignorance of the
ages in which they lived, is now in a great measure done away: men begin,
without fear of condemnation, to lay aside faith in philosophy, and bring
doctrines to the test of fact. The impenetrable mysteries and supernatural
influences of chemistry have vanished with the smoke of the furnace, and we see
that chemical processes are governed by the unalterable mechanical laws of
nature, which want nothing but fair investigation to be understood. The fatal
fabric of systematical physic -- that slaughterhouse of one-fourth part of the
human species, is now falling to ruin. The modern physician simplifies his
practice, by attending to nature and fact, and following their indications in
preference to the dictates of Galen. In a word, men do not now, as heretofore,
act peremptorily on what may appear to be reason; but reason cautiously on what
appears to be fact: and this must surely be the right and safe road to the
knowledge of truth.

WHAT a glorious era for the advancement of true philosophy! The road to
knowledge laid open, and the fashion of the times leading into it.

IN the midst of such advantageous circumstances, shall I again ask the
mortifying question -- What are we doing? -- I avoid the answer -- I would not
offend -- my design is only to rouse the society from that state of supineness
and lethargy into which it seems to have fallen, and to stimulate its members
to a more active attention.

OUR deficiency, I am confident, is not owing to a want of men of strong
natural abilities, or a sufficiency of acquired learning amongst us. America
has been noted for the sagacity of her citizens. The very climate is
favorable to the production of genius; and the uncultivated abilities of the
lowest class of the natives of this country, seem to be as keen and discerning
as those of any country whatever. Our deficiency, then, must be owing merely to
a want of attention, which, in our situation, is unpardonable.

BUT, as I have presumed to point at the evil, it is but a reasonable
expectation that I should also attempt to suggest a remedy. This I will readily
do according to my ideas of what may be beneficial to the society.

IN the first place, I think it requisite that this corporation should have a
building of its own, properly constructed for the accommodation of our library,
natural curiosities, and philosophical apparatus, with a convenient hall for
the meetings of the society, public orations, lectures, etc. To this building
there should be annexed an observatory, a small chemical laboratory, and a
botanical garden. To accomplish so great a design, the situation of our
treasury is certainly far inadequate. A moderate revenue would serve all the
purposes of the institution, if we were once provided with a building and
apparatus; to effect which, I know of no way, but that of a general
subscription, and an application to the legislature for some assistance. This
once accomplished, our annual income might be augmented, by obliging every new
member (honorary members in distant countries excepted) to pay eight dollars
for his certificate, and to sign an obligation to contribute twenty shillings
per annum, to the support of the funds; At this time new members paid nothing
on their election, and the annual subscription was only ten shillings from the
members, and that far from being punctually paid.
and to be prohibited from voting, or being voted for to any office, unless all
arrears be paid up: and if any member should refuse or neglect to pay his
annual subscription for three years successively, it should be deemed a
voluntary withdrawing himself from the society, unless in case of absence from
the country beyond sea, or other manifestly reasonable excuse.

I would propose, that in the election of counselors, particular respect
should be had to choose such as would probably duly attend the stated meetings
of the society; and that the counselors so chosen, should understand, that
however other members may be at liberty to attend or not, as inclination or
convenience may permit, it will be expected of them, that they shall regularly
assemble at the stated times for promoting the purposes of the institution;
and, therefore, they shall be noticed by written or printed tickets, at least
twelve hours before the time of meeting.

THIS particular notice, however, should not imply the exclusion of any other
member or members, summoned only by public advertisement, who may choose to
attend.

THE counselors, besides the stated meetings, may hold meetings on their own
adjournments, or may call themselves together, whenever it shall be thought
necessary; but shall do nothing decisive concerning the society, in their own
adjourned meetings, but only digest and plan mere matters of business, to be
recommended and determined upon at the next stated meeting of the society.

MY object herein is, that all matters of business, being duly considered and
prepared, the attention of the society may not be too much engaged in matters
of little importance to philosophy; so that the conversations at the stated
meetings, may be mostly employed in philosophical subjects with as little
interruption as possible.

BUT above all, and as a principal object, I would recommend that at every
stated meeting of the society, or at least as often as may be convenient, one
or more philosophical experiments should actually be exhibited. The particular
experiment to be determined upon at the preceding meeting, in order that the
curators, whose special duty it should be, may provide the requisites, and see
that the necessary apparatus be in order for the purpose: and if any experiment
be suggested by a member, it shall be performed at the expense of the treasury,
provided a majority of members present when it is proposed shall so determine:
and every experiment made, with the view in making it, and the final result
should be fully recorded in a book to be kept for that purpose.

SUCH are the outlines of a reform, which I think would remedy the evils
complained of -- and for the following reasons: -- first, as to the neglect in
attending the meetings of the society. The exhibition of curious, and sometimes
new experiments, with the conversations and reasonings which such experiments
would naturally occasion, must, I think, unavoidably engage the attention of
many who now absent themselves for want of inducements of entertainment or
instruction. Secondly, the scarcity of philosophical communications: this would
also probably be remedied, as the seeing experiments performed, and the
possessing convenient opportunities of bringing conceived truths to the test of
fact, would incite and produce essays on many useful and curious points, which
now live only in idea, and die in neglect. And, thirdly, our book of minutes
would show that they record the proceedings of a philosophical society.

TO conclude, I wish this address may be considered as preparatory to a motion
I shall now make -- which is --

"THAT a committee may be appointed to take into consideration the
constitution, laws, and regulations of the society; and to propose such
alterations, amendments, and additions thereto, as they may think most likely
to advance this society, and promote the good purposes for which it was
instituted: and that the said committee propose the most promising means by
which a building, and a complete philosophical apparatus, may be procured; and
report at the next meeting, or as soon as may be convenient."

ACCOUNT OF A WORM IN A HORSE'S EYE. (Read in the Philosophical Society, Sept.
26, 1783.)
HAVING been myself a witness to the following curious fact, I thought it
should not pass unrecorded, especially as it occured in this city, under the
immediate notice of the philosophical society.

A report prevailed last summer, that a horse was to be seen, which had a
living serpent in one of his eyes. At first I disregarded this report; but
several of my acquaintance, who had been to see the horse, confirming the
account, I had the curiosity to go myself, taking a friend along with me.

THE horse was kept in Arch-street, and belonged to a free negro. I examined
the eye with all the attention in my power, being no ways disposed to credit
the common report, but rather expecting to detect a fraud or vulgar prejudice;
but was much surprised to see a real living worm within the ball of the horse's
eye. This worm was of a clear white color, in size and appearance much like a
piece of white bobbin; it seemed to be from 2 to 3 inches in length, which,
however, could not be exactly ascertained, its whole length never appearing at
one time, but only such a portion thereof as could be seen through the iris,
which was greatly dilated. The creature was in a constant, lively, vermicular
motion, sometimes retiring so deep in the eye as not to be seen at all, and at
other times approaching so near to the iris as to become plainly and distinctly
seen; at least so much of it as was within the field of the iris. I could not
distinguish its head, neither end being perfectly exhibited whilst I viewed it;
and, indeed, its motion was so brisk and constant as not to admit of so nice an
examination.

THE horse's eye was exceedingly inflamed, swollen, and running; I mean the
muscles contiguous to the eye-ball, and he seemed to be in great pain; so that
it was with difficulty the eye could be kept open for more than a few seconds
at a time: and I was obliged to watch favorable moments for a distinct view of
this tormentor.

I believe the horse was quite blind in that eye, for it appeared as if all the
humors were confounded together, and that the worm had the whole orb to range
in; which, however, was not of a diameter sufficient for the worm to extend to
its full length, as far as I could discover. The humors of the eye were
beginning to grow opake, like a chilled jelly, and soon afterward became
altogether so, as I was informed.

AS this is an uncommon circumstance, and may affect some philosophical
doctrines, it is much to be lamented, that the horse had not been purchased,
and the eye dissected for better examination.

THAT there was a living, self-moving worm in the ball of this horse's eye,
free from all deception or mistake, I am most confident. How this worm got
there, or (if bred in so remarkable a place) where its parents came from, or
how they contrived to deposit their semen, or convey their egg into the eye of
an horse, I leave for others to determine.

AN OPTICAL PROBLEM, PROPOSED TO MR. RITTENHOUSE, AND SOLVED BY HIM.
Philadelphia, March 16, 1785. DEAR SIR,
I TAKE liberty of requesting your attention to the following problem in
optics. It is, I believe, entirely new, and the solution will afford amusement
to you, and instruction to me.

SITTING at my door one evening last summer, I took a silk handkerchief from my
pocket, and stretching a portion of it lightly between my two hands, I held it
before my face, and viewed through the handkerchief one of the street lamps,
which was about one hundred yards distant, expecting to see the threads of the
handkerchief much magnified. Agreeably to my expectation, I observed the
threads were magnified to the size of coarse wires; but was much surprised to
find, that although I moved the handkerchief to the right and left before my
eyes, the dark bars did not seem to move at all; but remained permanent before
the eye. If the dark bars were occasioned by the interposition of the magnified
threads between the eye and the flame of the lamp, I supposed that they would
move and succeed each other as the threads were made to move and pass in
succession before the eye; but the fact was otherwise.

TO account for this phenomenon, exceeds my skill in optics. You will be so
good as to make the experiment; and if you find the case truly stated, as I
doubt not you will I shall be much obliged by a solution on philosophical
principles.

I am, Sir, with all sincerity Your affectionate friend, And very humble
servant, FRANCIS HOPKINSON.
David Rittenhouse, Esquire.



MR. RITTENHOUSE'S ANSWER.
DEAR SIR,
THE experiment you mention with a silk handkerchief, and the distant flame of
a lamp, is much more curious than one would at first imagine. For the object we
see is not the web of the handkerchief magnified, but something very different,
as appears from the following considerations.

1st. A distinct image of any object placed close to the eye, cannot be formed
by parallel rays or such as issue from a distant luminous point; for all such
rays passing through the pupil, will be collected at the bottom of the eye, and
there form an image of the luminous point. The threads of the handkerchief
would only intercept part of the rays, and render the image less brilliant.

2dly. If the cross bars we see were images of the silk threads, they must pass
over the retina, whilst the threads are made to pass over the pupil; but this,
as you observe, does not happen for they continue stationary.

3dly. IF the image on the retina was a picture of the object before the eye,
it must be fine or coarse according to the texture of the handkerchief. But it
does not change with changing the silk, nor does it change on removing it
farther from the eye. And the number of the apparent threads remains the same,
whether ten, twenty, or thirty of the silk threads pass across the pupil at the
same time. The image we see must, therefore, be formed (...) this can be no
other (...) of light in passing (...) surfaces of bodies as described by Newton.

IT is well known in optics, that different images, of the different points of
objects without the eye, are formed on the retina by pencils of rays, which
before they fall on the eye are inclined to each other in sensible angles: and
the great use of telescopes is to increase these angles regularly, in a certain
ratio, suffering such rays as were parallel before they enter the telescope to
proceed on parallel after passing through it. The extended image which we see
in this experiment must therefore be formed by pencils of rays, which before
they entered the eye, had very considerable degrees of inclination with respect
to each other. But coming from a small distant flame of a lamp, they were
nearly parallel before they passed through the silk handkerchief. It was
therefore the threads of silk which gave them such different directions.

BEFORE the silk is placed to the eye, parallel rays of light will form a
single lucid spot as at A in the figure, and this spot will still be formed
afterward by such rays as pass through the little meshes uninfluenced by the
threads. But suppose the perpendicular threads by their action on the rays to
bend a part of them one degree to the right and left, another part two degrees;
there will now be four images formed, two on each side of the original one at
A. By a similar action of the horizontal threads, this line of five lucid spots
will be divided into five other lines, two above and two below, making a square
of 25 bright spots, separated by four perpendicular dark lines and four
horizontal ones; and these lucid spots and dark lines will not change their
places on moving the web of silk over the eye, parallel to any of its threads.
For the point of the retina on which the image shall fall, is determined by the
incidence of the rays with respect to the axis of the eye, and not by the part
of the pupil through which they pass.

IN order to make my experiments with more accuracy, I made a square of
parallel hairs about half an inch each way; and to have them nearly parallel
and equidistant, I got a watch maker to cut a very fine screw on two pieces of
small brass wire. In the threads of these screws, 106 of which made one inch,
the hairs were laid, 50 or 60 in number. Looking through these hairs at a small
opening in the window shutter of a dark room, 1-30th of an inch wide and three
inches long, holding the hairs parallel to the slit, and looking toward the
sky, I saw three parallel lines, almost equal in brightness, and on each side,
four or five much fainter, and growing more faint colored and indistinct the
further they were from the middle line, which I knew to be formed of such rays
as pass between the hairs, uninfluenced by them.

THINKING my apparatus not so perfect as it might be, I took out the hairs, and
put in others, something thicker; of these 190 made one inch, and therefore the
spaces between them were about the 1-250th part of an inch. The three middle
lines of light were now not so bright as they had been before, and the others
were stronger and more distinct; and I could count six on each side of the
middle line seeming to be equally distant from each other, estimating the
distance from the center of one to the center of the next. The middle line was
still well defined and colorless, the next two were likewise pretty well
defined, but something broader, having their inner edges tinged with blue, and
their outer edges with red: the others were more indistinct, and consisted each
of the prismatic colors, in the same order, which, by spreading more and more,
seemed to touch each other at the fifth or sixth line, but those nearest the
middle were separated from each other by very dark lines, much broader than the
bright lines.

FINDING the beam of light which came through the window-shutter divided into
so many distinct pencils, I was desirous of knowing the angles which they made
with each other. For this purpose I made use of a small prismatic telescope and
micrometer, with which I was favored by Dr Franklin. I fastened the frame of
parallel hairs before the object glass, so as to cover its aperture entirely:
then looking through the telescope, I measured the space between the two first
side lines, and found the angular distance between their inner edges to be 13
15; from the middle of one to the middle of the other 15 30; and from the outer
edge of one to the outer edge of the other 17 45. In the first case, I had a
fine blue streak in the middle of the object, and in the last a red streak. The
other lines were too faint, when seen through the telescope to measure the
angles they subtended with accuracy; but from such trials as I made, I am
satisfied, that from the second line on one side, to the second on the other
side, and so on, they were double, triple* quadruple, etc. of the first angles.

IT appears then, that a very considerable portion of the beam of light passed
between the hairs without being at all bent out of its course; that another
smaller portion was bent, at a medium, about 7 45 each way; the red rays a
little more, and the blue rays a little less; another still smaller portion 15
30; another 23 15, and so on. But that no light, or next to ^one, was bent in
any angle less than 6, nor any light of any particular color in any
intermediate angle between those which arise from doubling, tripling, etc. of
the angle in which it is bent in the first side lines.

I was surprised to find that the red rays are more bent out of their first
direction, and the blue rays less, as if the hairs acted with more force on the
red than on the blue rays; contrary to what happens by refraction, when light
passes obliquely through the common surface of two different mediums. It is,
however, consonant to what sir Isaac Newton observes with respect to the
fringes that border the shadows of hairs and other bodies; his words are --
And, therefore, the hair, in causing these fringes, acted alike upon the red
light, or least refrangible rays, at a greater distance, and upon the violet or
most refrangible rays, at a less distance; and by those actions disposed the
red light into larger fringes, and the violet into smaller fringes.

BY pursuing these experiments, it is probable that new and interesting
discoveries may be made respecting the properties of this wonderful substance,
light, which animates all nature in the eyes of man, and perhaps, above all
things, disposes him to acknowledge the Creator's bounty. But want of leisure
obliges me to quit the subject for the present.

I am, dear sir, your affectionate friend, and very humble servant, DAVID
RITTENHOUSE.
Vide Am. Phil. Transact. Vol. II. p. 201.



END OF VOLUME FIRST.
THE MISCELLANEOUS ESSAYS AND OCCASIONAL WRITINGS OF FRANCIS HOPKINSON, ESQUIRE.

VOLUME II.

PHILADELPHIA: PRINTED BY T. DOBSON, AT THE STONE-HOUSE, NO 41, SECOND STREET.
M, DCC, XCII.

CONTENTS. VOLUME II.
ORATIONS.
On a learned education, Page 1 On peace, liberty, and independence, Page 13 On
duelling, Page 24 On public speaking, Page 34 On the learned languages, Page 41
In reply to the former, Page 49 In verse, Page 58 On the the new constitution,
Page 62
Dialogue on the address of the philosophical society to Dr. Franklin, Page 69
On a law limiting the time of the general election to 8 o'clock, Page 76 The
Pennsylvania assemblyman's vade mecum. Page 84 Observations on the bill for
amending the penal laws, Page 93 On the same subject, Page 106 A suit in the
high court of honor, Page 112 To the Rev. Dr. White on Church Music, Page 119
Surveying applied to portrait painting, Page 127 New sources of amusement, Page
138 On white washing, Page 146 Nitidias' answer, Page 161 The cobbler No. 1.
Page 169 A typographical method of conducting a quarrel, Page 179 Observations
of a foreigner on the jury trials of England, Page 194 Remarks of uncommon
sense on a pamphlet respecting the affairs of the bank, Page 225 Specimen of a
modern law suit, Page 247 The new roof, Page 282 The new roof, a song, Page 320
An intercepted letter from the sentinel, Page 325 Objections to the new
constitution, Page 329 Thoughts on the diseases of the mind with a scheme for
purging the moral faculties of the people of Pennsylvania, Page 336 A full
account of the grand procession at Philadelphia, on the 4th July 1778, Page 349
ORATIONS, WRITTEN FOR, AND AT THE REQUEST OF YOUNG GENTLEMEN OF THE
UNIVERSITY, AND DELIVERED BY THEM AT PUBLIC COMMENCEMENTS IN THE COLLEGE HALL.
LADIES AND GENTLEMEN,
HAVING gone through the usual course of education in this seminary of
learning; having passed the ordeal trials of private and public examinations, I
am now in full expectation of receiving those parchment honors, which are to
testify the success of my studies, and prove, to a believing world, that my
labor has not been in vain.

BUT it has been insinuated to me, that before my temples can be crowned with
collegiate laurels, it is expected that I should address you, ladies and
gentlemen, in an elegant speech on this grand occasion.

UNREASONABLE as this demand seemed to be, nevertheless, being long accustomed
to submit, I earnestly endeavored to comply with it. I had recourse to books,
to solitary walks, ardent invocations, and all the usual provocatives to good
writing. I chose for my subject the dignity of the sciences, and the excellent
mode of attaining them in this university. I began with a warm apostrophe to
this building, in manner and form following: -- Oh, ye sacred walls! ye
venerable stools and benches! and thou, expanded arch! that have so often
echoed back the sweet effusions of those aspiring youths who have, in times
past, been nurtured within your hallowed precincts -- hear! oh hear! one of
your latest sons testify the ardour with which he feels himself inspired! --
Thus far, all was well -- but what to say next was the difficulty. Whilst I was
making every possible effort to proceed, an unlucky line of a distressed poet,
who was composing new year's verses, popped into my head, viz. What can I say,
that ha'nt been said before?

THIS ridiculous question quenched all my enthusiasm in a moment -- like a
spark drawn from the prime conductor, the electrometer fell instantly, and I
gave up the point.

NOTHING could be more unfortunate: I certainly proposed, ladies and gentlemen,
to have made you a very fine speech, in the customary style, but my good
intention having been thus unhappily frustrated, I must even depend upon the
chance of the moment for what I shall say; and I doubt not, but that you, my
benevolent hearers, will at least wish me good luck, and a happy escape from my
my present difficulty.

ALTHOUGH I am under a necessity to change the intended style of my speech, I
shall not entirely abandon the subject I had chosen; but shall endeavor to
give this polite audience some juvenile strictures on the present system of
what is called a learned education: in doing which, I hope I may be allowed the
privilege of speaking freely without giving offense. Although I shall never
think myself discharged from the obligations I owe to these my kind and
reverend instructors, for their care and attention to me; yet, being now
emancipated from their immediate control, I shall take the liberty of giving a
free scope to my sentiments, without regarding how far they may run foul of the
stated opinions and prejudices of the schools.

TO begin, then, the detail of our instruction. -- After the youngster has
been taught to spell, read, and write, in his mother tongue, he ascends the
first step of learned education. -- The Latin language is the object, to attain
which, a Latin grammar is put into the poor boy's hands. This grammar is called
the rudiments or foundation of that language: by which one might suppose, that
the grammar had been given by inspiration, and the Romans derived their
language from it. But the fact is just the reverse; for in every language, the
grammar is, and must necessarily be, the result, and not the origin of that
language: but notwithstanding this undeniable truth, the Latin must be
inculcated according to the method and discipline of the schools, a posteriori,
in more senses than one. -- Well! through this grammar, at all events, the
bewildered pupil must wade, groping for a year or two in utter darkness, and
learning by rote a complicated system of rules, the propriety or application of
which it is impossible for him to see in any instance.

THESE rules are framed partly in elegant prose, and partly in much more
elegant verse, in order, I suppose, to insinuate to the student some taste for
Latin poetry, whilst he is learning the rudiments of the language. If I had
not, ladies, a respectful regard for your ears, and no small tenderness for my
own teeth, I would give you a sample of our grammar versification.

AFTER these rules have been got by rote, as I said before, it may be thought
that there is nothing more necessary to the knowledge of the Latin tongue --
But Alas! this is only the beginning of troubles -- The rules must not only be
got by memory, but the exceptions also to those rules -- Now, good people, you
must know that these exceptions, are so very numerous, that, in many cases, it
is immaterial which you choose for a standard, the rule itself, or the
exception.

THE excellency of this method of teaching a language by means of its grammar,
may be illustrated by a familiar parallel. You must know, ladies, that when a
man stands, or walks, or performs any motions of the body, such positions and
motions are all reducible to mathematical principles. In all cases, it is
necessary that what is called the center of gravity should be supported, were
it othermise, the person must unavoidably fall to the ground: and thus are all
our movements reducible to system. Now, if the present mode of education is
right, and who dares assert it is not, you should not suffer your children to
walk, or even attempt to walk, before they have learned these rules, for which
purpose you must necessarily provide mathematical nurses and geometrical
dancing masters. Oh the excellence of learning! What delight must it afford the
fond parent, to see young master standing like the rafters of a house, and miss
dancing in triangles, rhomboides, and trapeziums.

BUT to proceed. We will suppose the young student has made some advances in
the knowledge of the Latin language, according to the method proposed. The
first observable consequence is, that he loses, or at least gains, no ground in
a taste for the elegancies of his native tongue. His diction becomes stiff and
awkward, and his hand writing intolerable. So that whilst he is studying the
anatomy of a dead language, he remains a stranger to the beauties of the living.

IT is probable that there are many amongst the ladies, whom I have now the
honor to address, who have never studied grammar, or know any thing of its
rules; and yet I venture to affirm, that a few lines, written by your fair
hands, and dictated by gentle nature, shall convey more lively sensibilities,
and shall find a shorter way to the heart, than a whole page -- aye, or forty
of them -- composed by the most learned grammarian, with Dilworth on his right
hand, and Entick on his left.

IN the mean time the assiduous youth reads Ovid's Metamorphosis, for the
improvement of his morals; and learns from Horace, to be chaste and temperate.
That time which might usefully be employed in studying the histories of those
nations with whom we are, or may be connected, is consumed in reading the
delectable and lamentable story of Aeneas and queen Dido. The one, a hero of so
insignificant a cast, that all the laudable ingredients of his character may be
comprised in the words Pius Aeneas; and the other, to speak delicately, not the
most shining example of female virtue and moderation. The one, a discourteous
knight, and the other a furious enamorata.

IT just occurs to me, that Dido's greatest misfortune was, that she lived in a
barbarous age, when lawyers were not to be had for love or money. Had her
famous amor happened in our day, she might have recovered at least L. 750
damages; This alludes to a circumstance of the time something like the case of
queen Dido.
which, all things considered, would have been much better than cutting her
throat upon a woodpile -- As desperate Dido did -- This by the bye.

THE young student is at length fitted for the higher classes of science. He
learns mathematics, geography, natural philosophy, logic, ethics, and
metaphysics.

WITH respect to the three first, I would only say -- That if they were
divested of some scientific pedantry (I mean as they are taught in the
schools), they are worthy the attention of a rational mind, inasmuch as they
advance the knowledge of truth; for of all valuable things, truth is the most
valuable.

BUT of all the systems of complicated nonsense, that ever puzzled the busy
brains of mortal man, logic is surely the most insignificant. An art which no
ingenuity can apply to any one useful purpose of life. Imagine to yourselves,
gentle hearers, a society of logicians, whose conversation in the common
occurrences of life should be conducted in syllogistic mode and form. The
learned housekeeper goes to market, and endeavors to persuade the butcher to
lower the price of his mutton in celarent; the butcher enforces his demand in
barbara. The logical lover also attacks his dulcinea in form. He assures her,
in particular affirmatives, that he is enamoured of her charms; and from these
premises, draws an artful conclusion, that she ought to encourage his passion,
and return his love. The lady replies, in universal negatives. The gallant then
plays off his whole battery in a compacted sorites. The lady answers only in
the simple form -- a weakness is discovered in her middle term -- she is
reduced to a dilemma, and surrenders at discretion.

IN such a process, what is to become of Cupid and his darts! What is to become
of the logic of the eyes, and a thousand nameless expressions of the feelings
of the heart, which nature alone can dictate? What is to become of them! Why
they are entirely out of the question. Syllogisms -- invincible syllogisms,
must supply their place. What is learning good for, unless it makes us wiser
than nature?

BUT I may be told that logic never was designed for such purposes; and that
its use is the discovery of truth, and the detection of error -- Here I join
issue -- and am bold to assert, that from the days of Aristotle to the present
moment, mankind are not indebted to logic for the discovery of any one useful
truth, or the detection of any one dangerous error -- and further -- that no
man ever was convinced by a syllogism -- But I observe their reverences begin
to frown -- I shall, therefore, not urge this subject any further.

ETHICS and metaphysics bring up the rear of a learned education. It would tire
your patience, my indulgent hearers, should I enter upon a detail of all the
whimsical absurdities with which these sciences abound. If a man should conduct
himself through life, according to the strict rules of ethics, he would be just
as ridiculous as the knight of La Mancha, governing himself in the most common
occurrences by the solemn formalities of chivalry.

AS to metaphysics, it is a visionary system, wherein uncertain conclusions are
drawn from uncertain premises, and in which the very terms used have no
determinate meaning. The whole is an ingenious fabric built in air; having no
real, known foundation, whereon to rest: not unlike the Pagan creed, that the
world stands upon the horns of a bull; the bull on the back of an elephant; the
elephant on a great tortoise; and the great tortoise upon nothing.

IT must be owned, however, that we are indebted to metaphysics for some very
curious and entertaining riddles: such as -- that infinite carried beyond
infinity becomes finite -- that one infinity may be twice as long as another
infinity -- that soul is not matter, and that matter is not soul; and in short,
that it is no matter whether there be any soul or not -- Oh! the heighths and
the depths of learning!

THUS, ladies and gentlemen, I have given you the outlines of a scholastic
education. My first intention was to have discussed this subject in high
strains of panegyric; but as this will be better done by some of my
fellow-students, I refer you to them for those sublime flights of imagination
which please the ear, but have nothing to do with the understanding or with
truth.

I shall conclude my address with one reasonable request, which is, that you,
my benevolent auditors, may extend the same indulgence to me you usually do to
the orators of this place, by forgetting every word you have heard as soon as
you have left this hall There is a pulpit on the stage, and the hall is
frequently used as a place of worship.
.

AS our design looks no farther than present entertainment, it would be unfair
to make us responsible for the opinions we sport with, which should never after
rise up in judgment against us. I urge this, not merely for my own sake, but in
behalf of my fellow-students also, who will doubtless, in the heat of their
zeal, advance many things, which they would no more undertake to support than
I, if called upon, would defend the observations and strictures I have just had
the honor to deliver.

The arguments used in this speech are manifestly ironical; but the professors
considered it as burlesquing the subject, and would not permit it to be
delivered.
ON PEACE, LIBERTY, AND INDEPENDENCE.
THE present topic of conversation, the object of universal attention, and the
idols before which the unthinking multitude prostrate themselves in
superstitious adoration, are the late most glorious peace, as it is called, and
the freedom and independence of the United States of America established
thereby. Peace, liberty, and independence, have been echoed from one end of
this great continent to the other, and their praises set to every note in the
scale of music: they have been beprosed, and be-rhymed, and be-fiddled out of
all measure, and out of all tune, as if the prosperity -- nay, the salvation of
our country, had no other foundation whereon to rest.

FOR my part, I do not find myself disposed to throw my judgment into the
common stock, to be carried down by the undistinguishing current of popular
opinion -- Peace, liberty, and independence! Very pretty words indeed; they
look exceedingly well on paper; whether they be written in round hand, Italian
hand, square text, German text, or any other text, provided they be fairly
written. This may please the eye; but let us consider a little how they will
satisfy the understanding; how far they are calculated to meet the approbation
of an inquisitive, penetrating mind: and this will best be ascertained by
taking a view of the consequences and effects which they are likely to produce.

AS to the first -- Can any thing be more absurd than to suppose that peace is
really productive of happiness? Is not the contrary demonstrable? Let us, for a
moment, imagine that all the inhabitants of the world should remain for a whole
century in perfect peace and harmony. That no such thing as public war, or
private quarrels, should exist in that period, a situation, to be sure not
possible, nature having wisely ordered matters otherwise; but suppose it to be
so, What would be the consequence? The uninterrupted friendly intercourse
between nations by commerce, and between individuals by contract, would soon
reduce the wealth of the world to a level. All emulation would cease, and every
spur to industry be blunted, or done away. Luxury and insolence would, like a
general plague, infect communities, and spread their baneful influences every
where. The course of human life, running on in even channels and an unbroken
calm, would become insupportably tedious, and engender green melancholy, and
four discontent, unless accidental discoveries of artificial gratifications,
for artificial appetites, should now and then occasion some slight variations
in the disgusting scene, by affording a temporary but fatal relief. A miserable
corruption of morals, debauchery, and consequent languor and disease, would
reduce the human species to a state of degeneracy; insomuch, that for aught I
know, a second deluge would be necessary to purge the earth of its filthy
inhabitants. No, it is war -- spirited war, the clashing of interests,
interfering passions, public contests, and private animosities, that give
energy to the pursuits of men, and furnish a theater whereon the heroic virtues
of the heart, and the active powers of the mind, may exhibit themselves to
advantage. Look round, and you will find that nature, in all her works, shows a
fondness for contest, having made opposition the life of the world. What is
animal health but a due mixture of contending qualities? Solids melting into
fluids, and fluids coagulating into solids; acids and alkalies maintaining
perpetual war, and rushing together in esserves^ing conflict; violent intestine
motions from fermentation and digestion; muscles contracted by muscles, pulling
in opposite directions, and every property balanced by another of a contrary
nature: let all this internal conflict be composed; let the animal microcosm be
in perfect peace, and the certain consequence will be death and putrefaction.
So also in the elements: showers of rain, storms of wind, thunder and
lightning, are absolutely necessary in the economy of our atmosphere. Without
these, the healthful air would soon become a pestilential vapor, and the vast
ocean, a stagnant pool of corruption. It is manifest, therefore, that nature
delights in contest; and never intended that either the moral, or material
world should remain in uninterrupted peace.

AS to liberty, it is difficult to say in what it really consists. Men having
not yet affixed any precise idea to the word. The people of different countries
have very different notions of it. What a European would call liberty, a
Cherokee Indian would consider as a most cruel restraint. If the word be taken
in its fullest extent, viz. a right and power to do whatever we please, it is a
privilege which no man ever did or could enjoy; an imaginary state of nature,
in which men are supposed to have lived without control, and in which every
individual was a sovereign, has served as the foundation of many ingenious
systems, and learned dissertations, by civilians, moralists, and
metaphysicians; but even these profound philosophers are so far from esteeming
such a state a blessing, that they derive all the advantages of civil society,
and the good of mankind from a resignation of this natural liberty, which they
assure us is altogether incompatible with the security and happiness of the
individual.

BUT if we take the word in a more limited sense, as it is generally
considered, when the terms civil or political liberty are used, I would ask,
what are the great advantages derived from it? or, rather, what inconveniences
does it not bring with it? Civil liberty consists, chiefly, in a people's being
governed by no laws, but such as they have themselves made or assented to; in
not being obliged to part with their property without their consent; and in
holding their lives and estates secure from the capricious resentments of
arbitrary power, or the grasping hand of overweening avarice: but should not a
prudent man consider that all this liberty brings with it a deal of trouble and
expense?

HAD Great Britain succceded in her views with respect to this country, we
should not have been put to the laborious task of framing laws for our own
government, a task which we seem but indifferently qualified to perform; we
should have been rid of the intolerable plague, the heart-burnings, feuds,
cabals, and chicaneries attending popular elections, and we should have been
eased of the enormous expense of assemblymen's wages, commissions, fees and
salaries to the officers of government, and a thousand other charges and
inconveniences to which we must now be subjected: we should have had nothing
more to do, but to pay when called upon, and obey when commanded. This further
consideration ought also to have some weight, that if we had been cruelly and
unjustly oppressed by a people three thousand miles off, all the world would
have pitied our situation, which is no small consolation in trouble, and
exclaimed against the tyranny of our oppressors: whereas, should things go
wrong now, we shall have none to blame but ourselves* and when we complain, the
natural answer will be, if you have placed men in power who abuse their trust,
it is your own fault: -- why did you not make a better choice? Your sufferings
are the effect of your own folly, and therefore you deserve no pity. These are
serious considerations. As to property being secured by political liberty, I
would observe that this is a position more specious perhaps than true. The
payment of no taxes, but such as are levied by our own consent, form a pretty
arrangement of words and ideas; but, strictly speaking, the fact is seldom
really so. No man pays a tax with his own consent, that is, he would rather not
pay it, if he could refuse with honor and safety. The payment of taxes is
always attended with some reluctance of mind, and often with open murmurings
and complaints, either as to the time, purpose, or proportion of the tax. The
case is quite otherwise when money is taken from us by the strong hand of
arbitrary power: all reasoning, all deliberation is out of the question -- we
have nothing to do but pay -- and so the mind is saved a deal of trouble and
vexation. This paying may, indeed, have a tendency to poverty -- and so much
the better; for poverty incites industry, and industry is the mother of health
and contentment.

TO illustrate my meaning by a familiar instance: suppose a traveller meets a
friend on the road, who requests him to give or lend him a small sum of money
for a present purpose: the traveller hesitates; he cannot decently refuse; and
yet he would rather the request had not been made: in this conflict his mind
suffers no small anxiety. But should a highwayman present a pistol to his
breast, and with oaths and imprecations demand his cash, with what
cheerfulness, with what expedition will he produce his purse? and think himself
happy in coming off so well.

WITH respect to life's not being secure under a despotic government, I have
only to observe, that no one can justly complain of an injury he never
suffered; and that after the evil has happened, the party will not be in a
condition to complain. So much for civil liberty.

BUT independence, cries the American; What have you to say against
independence? The glory of our country, the reward of our valor, and the fruit
of our seven years sufferings, and bloody contest. This is mere popular
exclamation. Let us view the thing in its true light, and we shall find that
all the disadvantages attending civil liberty, some of which I have enumerated,
are applicable to independence, together with many additional consequences.

WHILST we were dependent upon Great Britain, we had no trouble in studying the
characters, customs, and manners of foreign nations; the English were so kind
as to furnish us with all their ideas on these subjects. They told us, that the
French are a trifling and contemptible nation; that the Spaniards are proud,
sullen, and revengeful; the Germans, ostentatious; the Holanders, boors; the
Russians, savages; and, in short, that the English were themselves the only
people fit to live and govern the word, as if all other nations held their
dominions by usurpation. How easy was it to believe all this? Implicit faith
saves an infinity of trouble. How happy were we in submitting to the
government, adopting the prejudices, and aping the manners of a nation, which
we conceived to be the glory of the world, and the perfection of human nature?

WHEREAS, now, we are under the painful necessity of altering our sentiments.
We are compelled by actual experience to acknowledge, that the French are a
brave, generous, and polished people: and that none of the other nations are,
in truth, such as they have been represented to us. Our commercial connections
will convince us that human nature is fundamentally the same in every country.
That good and bad men are to be found in every climate; and that the people of
England have not actually monopolized all the virtue and wisdom of the world.
Every conviction of error, is a violence done to the mind, inasmuch as the
forcible eradication of a prejudice must be attended with a painful sensation.
The blind man is happy in his blindness, and the ignorant content with his
ignorance. The wisest of men, has some where told us, that the increase of
wisdom is the increase of sorrow.

ANOTHER inconvenience attending our independence is this -- The imposts and
duties heretofore laid on our commerce, contributed to the revenue of a prince
three thousand miles distant, it was therefore not thought disreputable for the
merchant to evade the payment of those duties, if he could. How delightful was
it to exercise every species of ingenuity and craft in bilking collectors and
customhouse officers! And how sweet was the enjoyment of the profits so
obtained! But our independence has deprived us of all these commercial
advantages; as it would be dishonourble, and even wicked, to evade the duties
laid by our own laws, and for the support of our own government.

I have now discharged my conscience, and shall leave the decisi^^ to your own
judgments. If, notwithstanding all I have said, and all I might have said, you
will be so blind as to prefer a state of freedom, with all its cares and
troubles, to a state of dependence and slavery, which requires nothing but
implicit faith, and implicit obedience: if you will persist in maintaining a
right to make your own laws, and levy your own taxes, although a foreign power
so kindly offers to take this trouble off your hands, you must even abide by
the consequence, and enjoy the event as well as you can.

AT a public commencement in the university, an argument was held for and
against the practice of DUELLING; the following speech was written for the
young gentleman who took the defensive side.
-- I Marvel my fellow-student did not ascend the pulpit, and deliver his pious
harangue from thence. You have been entertained, my worthy hearers, with a sort
of chapter against DUELLING: the orator has entrenched himself behind certain
texts of scripture, and some vulgar prejudices -- these make up the sum total
of his argument; for, as to the rest, it was mere declamation.

YOU may make what use you please of his fine speech; but if you imagine that
his private sentiments coincide with his public declamation, you may find
yourselves much mistaken. He has too much good manners to interrupt me, or he
would probably ask, -- how I came to know his private sentiments? I answer from
his own words just now delivered: "I hope, (said he) this polite audience will
give me a candid hearing upon this subject, and entertain no unfavourable
sentiments of my courage, though I should condemn it" -- meaning the practice
of duelling. This preparatory salvo may be paraphrased thus: "I am going, good
people, to give you a declamation against the custom of fighting duels. This
you must know is not an undertaking of my own choice, but has been imposed upon
me. I must, therefore, make the best of it I can. But if you, or any of you,
should conclude from what I shall now say, that I have not courage to defend my
insulted honor, I tell you before hand, you have mistaken your man." This
much, indeed, I can answer for the gentleman -- I have known him some
considerable length of time, and have not found him more meek and patient than
his neighbors: but I leave him to answer for himself, and only request your
kind attention, whilst I offer some arguments in answer to his fine speech, and
in justification of the practice of duelling.

THE gentleman has told us, that duelling derives its origin from the Goths and
Vandals, and those other barbarous nations which overran Europe, and
extinguished all the refinements of art, science, and morality: that these
savages, not having sagacity sufficient to determine in matters of private
controversy, referred the dispute to the decision of heaven, by bringing the
parties to mortal combat, under a belief that God would interfere in favor of
right and justice.

SUPPOSING this to have been the real pedigree of duelling, I think it no
dishonorable one: it was neither irreverend nor irrational to believe in a
particular, as well as a general providence, and to submit to his unerring
judgment and all-seeing eye, the detection of truth, and the administration of
justice.

BUT I shall delve much deeper for the root of this practice; and am confident
in asserting, that it is not founded in the customs of any particular age or
nation, barbarous or civilized; but is inherent in the nature of man; is part
of his original constitution, and coeval with his creation.

BEFORE laws were formed for restriction, or revelation given for instruction,
man walked in the paths of natural liberty: he had a right to every thing his
strength or wisdom could acquire, and to resent every injury according to his
power and magnanimity. This right was indelibly recorded in the texture of his
constitution: his Creator had given him such passions of the mind, and such
powers of body for the purpose, as could by no means be mistaken. The ultimate
object was the happiness of the individual, in its sustenance and security: but
the race of mankind greatly increasing, their intercourses and interferences
became more frequent. The weak and timid were not able to stand against the
strong and courageous: they lost their property, and had not strength to
recover it: they received insults and injuries, and had not spirit to resent.
At length they had recourse to cunning to obtain that security which they could
not accomplish by valor; and formed a device which should put the weakest upon
a footing with the strongest of their own species. This was the origin of civil
society. A solemn compact was made, wherein every individual, for himself, and
for his posterity, resigned his natural liberty, and natural rights, into the
hands of the collective body of the whole. -- And what did the individual
receive in return? Why a solemn assurance, that all his injuries should be
redressed, his property secured, and his personal rights and dignities
supported and defended by the whole.

IT is on this compact that I ground my arguments in defense of duelling. The
powers of this whole, or of society, are exhibited and exerted in the execution
of laws. To the laws, therefore, must every individual apply for justice. And I
do not hesitate to acknowledge, that in all cases, where the laws can give
compotent satisfaction, no man ought to attempt the redress of his own wrongs.
But if there should be cases wherein a man may suffer the most attrocious
injuries, and the most provoking indignities, for which the laws have made no
provision at all, or no adequate provision, I say recourse may and ought to be
had to original natural rights for redress; the compact between the whole and
the individual having been so far violated on the part of society.

FOR instance; if my neighbor should claim a title to my land, it would be
very absurd in me to send him a challenge to determine on titles by sword and
pistol. The laws of the country are quite competent to this business, and by
the social compact aforesaid, I, or my ancestors for me, agreed to submit the
determination to them. But if an adversary, either in my presence, or behind my
back, should load me with unmerited abuse, stain my reputation with injurious
falsehoods, and scandalize me with the approbrious terms of rogue, rascal,
scoundrel, villain, etc. how am I to obtain redress? I appeal to the laws; the
learned judge puts on his spectacles, and after turning over his common place
book, and referring to many folio authorities, he tells me, with phlegmatic
solemnity, that he can find no such words there: that the law has assigned no
meaning to these appellations; and that my action will not -- Heavens and
earth! what has my wounded honor to do with law meanings? Has not all the
world agreed in the obloquy of these terms? Do they not imply every thing that
is base, dishonorable, and contemptible? But they are not known in law. Very
well; I appeal then to those laws which are not too learned to understand, nor
reluctant in recognizing the manifest injury that has been done to me; I appeal
to the court of nature, where I am sure my action will lie. I say, that in such
instances, the compact with my progenitors has been broken by society; and
that neither they, or myself, ever gave up this right of appeal.

IT seems then sufficiently manifest, that I still retain a natural right to
resent those injuries for which the laws of society have made no provision. But
how am I to do this? By secret machinations! by poisons! by assassination! No
-- Heaven forbid! Neither the laws of nature, or of honor, justify such
treacherous practices. I reproach my adversary with the unprovoked wrong. I
call him forth to defend the licentiousness of his tongue by the valor of his
arm. I generously put myself upon the same footing with my foe. I expose my
life in defense of my reputation, which is dearer than life, and depend upon
Heaven, and the justice of my cause, for the important event.

IT is in vain to oppose a few sophistical reasons and vulgar prejudices, to a
custom authorized by nature, confirmed by the practice of every age and nation,
sanctified by divine permission, and avowedly established by the civil law.

IT may be thought that I have ventured too far in these assertions; but I have
ventured no farther than I can well justify.

THAT it is authorized by nature, I have already sufficiently shown. That it
has been the practice of every age and nation, will not be denied. History
abuduantly proves it. That it has been sanctified by divine permission, may be
shown in many instances. Not to be tedious, I shall only refer to the famous
duel fought between David and Goliath in the valley of Elah. But that this
custom, or at least the principle on which it is founded, is established by the
civil law, requires a little explanation.

I ask, then, in what law of nature is the law of nations founded which
justifies public war? What say the books? The most approved writers on this
subject? They tell us, that if a dispute happens between two princes, or the
nations over which they preside, there is no power on earth authorized to
determine the controversy. There are no degrees in sovereignty. Nations are to
be considered as individuals in a state of nature, and the civil law is nothing
more than the laws of nature respecting individuals applied to nations, so far
as that can be done with consistency. Therefore, say these authorities, as
there is no earthly judge empowered to determine a controversy between nation
and nation, the parties must, and have a right to, take up arms, and rest their
cause on the bloody arbitrament of war; trusting that Heaven will favor the
right. In fact, the contending nations fight a great and mighty duel. And are
not these the very principles upon which I have endeavored to justify private
duels? If all the powers of earth should agree to a form a national society,
and should resign their respective individual sovereignties into the hands of
the whole, and form a system of a general law for the adjustment of national
controversies, and the redress of national wrongs, public war would then become
unjustifiable, unless in cases where no provision had been made by the general
system: in such cases the contending powers would certainly go to war, and
fight a national duel.

HAVING been thus large in establishing a solid foundation whereon to rest my
argument, I shall not take up much of your time in what remains. I shall rather
suggest hints than dilate opinions on the uses and benefits which society
derives from the existence of this custom.

FOR these we need only look into the scenes of polite life, public assemblies,
the army, the navy, and the courts of princes. If every hot tempered,
over-bearing, ill-mannered fellow could indulge his surly humor, or vent his
capricious spleen without apprehending any consequences, but such as the heavy
paced law might bring on, our scenes of pleasure, urbanity, and politeness
would become bear-gardens of confusion, resounding with noisy broils, and
malicious altercations. A duel -- the fatal determination of sword or pistol is
a very serious business. Even the most passionate and imprudent caveller, will
be cautious how he involves himself in so troublesome an affair. And this
consideration keeps many a licentious spirit within the limits of decorum.

A prudent man will take every reasonable, every honorable, means to prevent a
quarrel from coming to so critical an issue, and will advance as far toward
explanation and reconciliation as may be consistent with his enjoyment of that
reputation and esteem, without which life itself is of little value.

I readily acknowledge, that duels sometimes happen upon too trivial occasions;
and that the rational and honorable means of clearing up mistakes, and
reconciling differences, are not always employed as they should be; but the
abuse of any principle or practice should not be admitted as an argument for
its abolition,

LASTLY, the rays of beauty ever gild the laurels of the brave. He who has not
spirit to defend his own honor, will make but a poor protector of the delicate
sex. The lovely nymph will turn aside from the sighing insignificance of the
perfumed coward; and rush to meet the hero, panting with love and the toils of
war. When an Alexander and a Thais unite, every voice is ready to join in
chorus with the poet.

"Happy! happy! happy pair!
"None but the brave deserves the fair."
The young lads of the college invited their friends to hear some public
speaking on the 4th of July 1785; this speech was delivered as introductory to
the entertainment of the day.
ON PUBLIC SPEAKING.
LADIES AND GENTLEMEN,
WE have invited you to this place, and you have condescended to accept of our
invitation. It is rather too late now to enquire what our abilities can furnish
for your entertainment; or, what your expectations ought to be. Here we are,
and notwithstanding much self-sufficiency and flattering hope, on the part of
my companions, it turns out just as I expected; that we must depend on your
good nature for a favorable reception, and not on the excellence of our
performances.

MY own opinion was much opposed to the whole scheme, being greatly
apprehensive, that we should only expose ourselves before so polite and
judicious an audience. But no -- it would be fourth of July -- every one had
something clever to say on the occasion -- the subject would recommend itself
-- the ladies would be pleased -- the gentlemen would have too much
complaisance to oppose their opinions with harsh criticisms -- and all would be
well: -- I wish it may be so with all my heart.

IT must be confessed, that this public speaking is but a dull kind of
entertainment, especially when administered by young and unexperienced orators,
on subjects which have been so frequently and fully investigated, as to leave
scarce a flower in the field for us to gather. In this situation what more can
we do than make a very good bow at the beginning of our speech, and a much
better one at the end of it; and ever this is more than we are all able to
perform, as you may have already observed.

IT is customary with professed and skilful orators to supplicate the candid
indulgence of their auditors. This is frequently, with them, only a ceremonious
compliment; but with us, you may depend upon it, it is a sincere and earnest
request. For it must certainly exercise the most practiced patience, to see a
lad stand, bolt upright for half an hour, like the definition of a
perpendicular line in Euclid, and utter what he calls a speech; or to see
another bounce about the stage, and vociferate a^ oration; as if eloquence was
the produce of agility of body and strength of lungs. The only apology that can
be made is, that we do the best in our power, and are in hopes of performing
better hereafter.

TO speak in public with propriety and effect, requires many talents, natural
and acquired. The object of all public speaking is persuasion: to make other
people believe or act according to the speaker's mind. For this purpose, it is
necessary that the orator should have a pleasing address, a lively imagination,
a thorough knowledge of his subject, and a good ear, with respect to the
language in which he is to deliver his sentiments.

FIRST impressions have an unavoidable influence on the mind. The most
judicious and impartial hearers conceive some predilection for, or prejudice
against, the speaker on his very first appearance. It is, therefore, of great
importance, that a genteel manner, and graceful address, should bespeak the
favorable attention of the audience; otherwise, the orator will not only have
to encounter the difficulties incident to his subject, but must also labor
against a foreign influence: whereas a genteel figure, graceful deportment, and
a pleasing address, sometimes operate in his favor to greater advantage than
all the force of his arguments; and what is of infinite importance, he is sure
of the good opinion of the ladies.

A lively imagination will enable the orator to throw an air of novelty over
his subject, and to present it in points of view in which it has not
frequently been considered. To enforce his arguments with apt allusions, and
embellish the whole with striking metaphors. To hear a dull and hackneyed
subject elaborately discussed by a dull and phlegmatic speaker, affords about
as much entertainment, as to hear a demonstration from Euclid, proving a
proposition, which cannot be denied; or a string of logical syllogisms, proving
nothing at all.

A thorough knowledge of his subject, I have laid down as the next requisite in
a public speaker. This, I confess, is not absolutely necessary; as there are
many who make a very tolerable figure without it. It might, indeed, be
extremely inconvenient to make this rule strict and general, inasmuch as there
would be danger of silencing one third of the gentlemen of the bar; one-half of
the orators of the pulpit; and three-fourths of the speakers in parliaments and
houses of assembly: yet it seems but reasonable, that an author should have
some knowledge of the subject he is handling; and, therefore, this rule is
rather recommended than insisted upon.

A good ear is the last mentioned, though not the least important qualification
of a good speaker. If his language is pure, his periods harmoniously arranged,
and his voice melodiously adapted to the construction of every sentence, the
orator will not fail to charm his hearers, even though there should be but a
very scanty portion of solid sense diluted in his flowing rhetoric. The mind is
insensibly captivated by pleasing sounds, and the most obdurate judgment yields
to the magic influence of sweet harmony. It is, therefore, absolutely necessary
that authors of little sense should pay great attention to the powers of sound;
for every hearer expects to be either instructed or pleased; and he has a right
ta expect it.

IT is next to impossible to lay down rules for harmonious composition. When
words and sentences are so arranged, as to produce a pleasing melody, all
acknowledge the effect, but none can point out that particular construction in
which the magic consists. Grammar rules have nothing to do with it; for a
sentence may be strictly grammatical, and yet as offensive to the ear as the
sharpening of a saw. For instance, observe the contrast between the two
following sentences; both of which are equally unexceptionable in point of
grammar.

"SOME have a happy talent of expression, whereby they compensate the want of
sentiment, by the melody of their style; their language, ever flowing like a
wave of the sea, and their periods closing in such musical cadence, that the
ear is fascinated by the magic of sound, and the mind lulled in a pleasing
repose."

"OTHERS, without giving to grammar rules offense, shall arrange so
unskillfully their words, breaking, as it were, and interrupting the sense, or
rather nonsense, they mean to inculcate, by frequent (and oft-times
unnecessary) parenthesis, that the ear stumbles through the rugged paragraph,
as the feet would stumble in scrambling through a street, when the pavement had
been broken up, over bricks, stones, and posts, mixed together confusedly."

A fine speech, like a fine lady, enforces attention, and captivates the heart.
When it describes pleasing objects, it is beautiful nature, dressed by the
graces; when it soars in the sublime, it elevates the soul, and animates the
nobler passions: it gives to persuasion irresistible force, and bids the tear
of pity fall, like the dew of heaven -- gently fall -- on virtue in distress.

ON THE LEARNED LANGUAGES.
LADIES AND GENTLEMEN,
I AM sensible of the dangers and difficulties to which an orator exposes
himself, who boldly adventures to oppose public prejudices, and contradict
established opinions, and yet without this literary heroism, philosophic truth
had never been brought to light. A rigid adherence to doctrines generally
admitted, would have fixed us at this day in the errors of ancient systems, or
have left us involved in the whimsical vortices of the modern Descartes.

THE generality of mankind receive for truth, whatever may be handed to them as
such, by those whom they have been accustomed to esteem as men of profound
learning. They are not anxious to enquire for themselves; because enquiry is
replete with trouble, and it is much easier for them to adopt the opinions of
others, than to form opinions for themselves. Had astronomers told the
multitude, that the sun is twice the distance, or but half the distance from
the earth, that he is now supposed to be, it would have been so believed; not
one in a million would have thought of detecting the error by calculation. But
woe to the man who attempts to unhinge the popular system! Galileo was
imprisoned and persecuted for asserting that the earth revolved on its axis,
and was compelled publicly to renounce a truth of which he was fully convinced,
and of which there is now no doubt remaining.

THESE preparatory observations I thought necessary, as an apology for the
manner in which I propose to handle the subject assigned to me: to wit, the use
and advantages of what are called the learned languages in the education of
youth.

THESE advantages ought, indeed, to be very great and manifest to compensate
for the precious time spent in acquiring them. Let us, for a moment, if
possible, lay aside former prejudices, and consider the subject with candor
and impartiality.

THE benefits to be expected from the study of the dead languages, must, I
think, flow from some or all of the following sources. It must either open a
door of knowledge, to which there is no other means of access, or will polish
the manners, and enrich the mind with ideas not otherwise to be acquired; or
will serve as a key to all other languages, and become a vehicle of universal
communication.

WITH respect to the first I venture to assert, and think it will hardly be
controverted, that there is no ancient author, Latin, Greek, or Hebrew;
philosopher, historian, or poet, of any reputation, whose existing works have
not been translated by able hands into most of the modern languages of Europe.
So that there can be no knowledge contained in those works to which the reader
of the present day may not have access by the easy medium of his native tongue.
The treasures of the ancients have been minutelv scrutinized, and every article
of value held up to public view, and faithfully reflected from the mirrours of
modern languages.

NEITHER can I see, in the second place, how an acquaintance with the Latin,
Greek, or Hebrew tongues should necessarily polish the manners, or enrich the
mind with ideas not otherwise to be acquired. Is there an inherent magic, a
supernatural fecundity, in those ancient languages which modern modes of speech
cannot boast? When a plain man reads in his Bible these words: In the beginning
was the word, and the word was with God; has he not the same ideas suggested,
and an equal comprehension of their meaning with the learned scholar when he
teads in loftier tone, "(...)." -- Surely there can be no difference. As to
polishing the manners, a minute and technical knowledge of the learned
languages has an effect so notoriously to the contrary, that to call a man a
mere scholar, is as much as to say, he has no manners at all.

BUT perhaps languages, like medals, acquire a value merely from their
antiquity. If so, we ought to establish schools for teaching the Chinese
tongue, which is certainly more ancient than either Latin or Greek, and, as
some contend, than even the Hebrew itself. Look where we will for a
distinguishing pre-eminence in these dead languages, such as may justify the
great expense of time and study necessary to acquire them, and candor must
acknowledge that such pre-eminence is not to be found.

BUT, says the third position, they serve as a key to all modern languages, and
may be made a universal means of communication.

THE only purpose of language is to convey ideas. If modern speech does this,
it is complete; if it does not, it is no language. What necessity then for a
key? When a person says a house, or a man, is he not as well understood as if
he should add, that the one was called domus, and the other homo, by the
ancient Romans? Terms are altogether arbitrary; and general consent alone
adapts them to the things they are designed to represent. And surely the
general consent of the moderns is as respectable and valid as the general
consent of the ancients. The truth is, there is no natural connection between
words and things.

IF such a connection was to constitute the perfection of a language, we must
acknowledge, that the infant excels in propriety when he calls a sheep baa, or
a dog bow-wow.

BUT the Latin tongue, it is supposed, may serve as a universal means of
communication between people of different nations. True; and so may any other
language, if universally admitted and taught. The Latin tongue does not seem to
be peculiarly and exclusively adapted to this purpose. For, notwithstanding
that it has been inculcated with so much assiduity by innumerable private
tutors, and public schools, for so many hundred years; yet the French, is at
this day, a more universal language than the Latin. The experiment has been
fairly made and urged to the extent; yet but few write in Latin, and fewer
still use it as a medium of conversation. As to Greek, it is no where in
fashion but in the schools; and none but the Jews make use of the Hebrew. To
what purpose then are so many years spent in acquiring these obsolete
languages? Why, truly, that one in ten thousand may read ancient authors in the
original, whilst the unhappy ten thousand must put up with faithful
translations.

AN observation or two on the method of teaching these learned languages shall
close my speech on this occasion, which I perceive some think is already longer
than it should be.

IT might seem strange to assert, that few teachers of a language, according to
the present mode of teaching, have any taste for its beauties or knowledge of
its powers. And yet this is manifestly a general truth; accustomed, as they
are, to treat it by detail, and hackneyed in a critical consideration of its
component parts, they, almost unavoidably, lose all sense of its general
effect, and become strangers to that spirit of expression, in which its
principal elegance consists.

FOR the same reason, the pupil never acquires a true taste for the learned
languages, till after he has been emancipated from the shackles of grammatical
investigation.

TO teach a language by means of its grammar is beginning at the wrong end; for
no language ever originated in a grammar: and what is worse, all the energy and
spirit of a language must necessarily evaporate in a grammatical construction.
Let us take an example from our own tongue. Suppose the following passage, from
Mr Pope, to be put into the hands of a boy learning English.

"Heaven first taught letters for some wretch's aid,
"Some banished lover, or some captive Maid.
"They live, they speak, they breathe what love inspires
"Warm from the soul, and faithful to its fires:
"The virgin's wish, without her fears impart,
"Excuse the blush, and pour out all the heart;
"Speed the soft intercourse from soul to soul,
"And waft a sigh from Indus to the pole."
FORTHWITH the learned grammarian, and his industrious pupil, fall to work on
these beatiful lines. They mince them without mercy into verbs and adverbs,
nouns and pronouns, substantives and adjectives, gerunds, participles, articles
and particles; and God knows what. But in this general laceration, What will
become of the melody of the verse, the delicacy of sentiment, the elegance of
expression, with many nameless graces, not defined in the rules of grammar?
Alas! all would vanish in the scholastic process. As well might an anatomist
dissect a living body, with a view to discover the nature and seat of the soul
that animates it, as a grammarian to investigate the powers of a language, by
resolving it into its component parts.

BUT what would this author say, could he be a witness of such a chemical
distillation of his charming lines? or what would Horace do, if he could be
present in a modern school, and hear one of his elegant odes frittered into all
the small ware of the syntax? What would he do? He would break the pupil's
head, and put the tutor to death.

BUT my zeal for truth is hurrying me beyond the bounds of discretion; the time
may come when teachers will be convinced that languages are not to be squared
by rule and compass, as lands are surveyed; and that it is not necessary to
search antiquity for the means of a reciprocal communication of ideas; and that
languages most in use, are, in truth, the most useful to be known.

A REPLY TO THE FOREGOING SPEECH.
LADIES AND GENTLEMEN,
MY fellow student has entertained you with a dissertation on the learned
languages, and added some strictures on the method of teaching them in modern
schools. He has handled the subject in his own eccentric way; and has, I doubt
not, obtained from this polite audience all the credit his ingenuity deserves.

BUT ingenuity is not truth; and false reasoning, however varnished with wit,
is false reasoning still.

I shall not attempt to imitate my friend in the vivacity of his style; but he
must excuse me, if I endeavor to expose the fallacy of his arguments* and
rescue so considerable a branch of modern education from the obloquy his
capricious humor has been pleased to throw upon it.

HAVING myself been duly fermented with grammatic froth; kneaded and molded by
the discipline of the schools; baked, and as it were, piping hot from the
classical oven, and incrusted with science, can I hear these slanders on the
learned languages, which I have been so long accustomed to respect, and which I
have acquired with so much painful study, and yet sit silent by? No! the fire
of old Rome, and the spirit of Athens, will not brook such indignity.

THE first assertion, and indeed the ground on which he chiefly rests, is, that
all ancient authors of any repute have been translated into the modern
languages; from which he infers, that the originals are of no further use. He
might with equal reason have said, because a shadow projects the true out lines
of the substance, it is of equal value, and will answer the same purposes.

BUT there are numberless beauties to be discovered by the scholar in the
original, and a force and propriety arising from what is called the idiom of a
language which no translation can convey: not only this, but the real meaning
of the author, even in the original, is not always precisely ascertained by the
learned themselves -- how then shall it be found in a translation?

TO prove this, we need only look at the voluminous notes upon Horace, or the
various readings of Virgil, in which the most profound scholars have differed
in opinion; and about which they have disputed, confuted, and refuted each
other time immemorial. What delightful obscurity! What glorious uncertainty!
Will a translation furnish any thing like this? Surely not. The terms of a
known and living language are too well understood to admit of much altercation.
All is a dead or languid precision. The system, the the doctrines, the
arguments of a modern author may be questioned and canvassed; but seldom his
meaning, if he has any meaning at all.

THE great and excellent use of the learned languages consists, in my opinion,
in the two following particulars.

FIRST, They afford the moderns an inexhaustible source of ingenious
altercation and profound conjecture: and,

SECONDLY, By deriving the technical terms of every art and science from these
languages, a mysterious obscurity is obtained which throws a veil over the face
of truth, and screens the rays of of knowledge from vulgar eyes.

AS to the first; in the various readings of ancient authors, in notes,
critical and explanatory, and in notes upon those notes, what a field is opened
for profound erudition! And when the modern commentator finds himself hard
pushed, it is but supposing an error to have crept into the text; it is but
altering a letter or two, as occasion shall require, and he can make the
original support his comment with all the seeming reason in the world. And
however a brother critic may dispute his conjectures, he is sure that the
author himself will never come back to decide the contest and put him to shame.
An obscene sentence will furnish a literary feast, and one half of a long Greek
or Hebrew word has been sufficient to occa^^on a schism, and give the world a
new religious sect.

I know of no modern author so rich in this kind of learning as Shakespeare. He
wrote on the verge of the old and modern English, and has so blended the idioms
of the writers of his day, with those of their grandfather's, as to occasion
much delightful uncertainty and ingenious commentating. This, together with the
incorrect manner in which his works have been handed to us, have afforded a
glorious opportunity for guess-work: and Pope, Warburton, Theobald, Johnson,
and many others have exercised their talents accordingly.

BUT I hasten to the second advantage I mentioned as peculiar to the dead
languages; to wit, that by deriving terms from them into the arts and sciences,
a mysterious obscurity is obtained, which throws a veil over the face of truth,
and screens the rays of knowledge from vulgar eyes.

WHEN the barbarous nations of the north overran Europe, they obliterated
almost; every trace of science: a few monks only were in possession of the
seeds of learning, contained in the remaining works of ancient authors. When
the day of knowledge again began to dawn, these manuscripts were held in great
repute; and when printing was invented, copies of them were exceedingly
multiplied. As these were then the sources of science, no man was esteemed
learned, who had not studied the languages in which they were written. Such was
their use at that time: very different, but not less important, is their use at
this day: by means of repeated translations, the treasures of the ancients have
been laid open to public view. Science, divested of mystery, would lose its
value, and men of learning forfeit that respect which the vulgar owe to
profound erudition, were it not that the philosopher, the scholar, the man of
science in every department, has taken care to borrow a profusion of technical
terms from the learned languages, which throws a mantle of mystery over his
profession, and covers the secrets of his art from the admiring multitude: so
that modern learning consists, not so much in the study of things, as in the
knowledge of terms. The author of Hudibras very justly observes, that

"All a rhetorician's rules
"Teach nothing but to name his tools."
AND so it is, for the most part, in every science -- and so it ought to be --
for if it were otherwise; if the terms used by men of learning were given in
the vulgar tongue, every body would understand them, and science soon become
contemptible. For instance; a grave and learned physician thus informs his
patient: Sir, your disorder is an anthrax, and I shall prescribe an emollient
cataplasm. The poor man is filled with fear, wonder, and respect: but had he
been told in plain English -- You have got a boil, and must apply a poultice of
bread and milk; he would despise both the doctor and the disease.

IT is the Greek and Latin languages that furnish these high sounding words, so
singular to the ear, when the sense is concealed.

SOUNDS have a delightful effect upon the human mind; especially articulated
sounds: and the effect is still more certain, when they have either no meaning
at all, or the meaning is not understood.

AN ignorant woman, weeping aloud under the influence of a powerful preacher,
was asked the cause of her lamentation: Oh, sir! said she, don't you hear those
charming words, Mesopotamia, Pamphylia, and Phrygia? And I knew a lady during
the late war, who did not possess one political principle, or had any precise
idea of the real cause of contest between Great Britain and America, and yet
was a professed and confirmed tory: merely from the fascination of sounds. The
imperial crown, the royal robes, the high court of parliament, the lord
chancellor of England, and so on, were words of irresistible influence. Whilst
captain A, the tailor; colonel B, the tavern-keeper; and even general
Washington, the farmer, only created contempt. But I am persuaded, if some
Indian chief, with a long Cherokee or Mohawk name, had commanded our armies,
she would have thought much more respectably of the American cause.

THIS being truth, and a truth founded in nature, will any one pretend to say,
that the Greek and Latin languages are of no use? What! shall we call things by
downright vulgar English names? Shall not the physician have his paregorics and
antispasmodics; his lenitives and sedatives; his antiphlogistics, cathartics,
and diuretics? Shall not the lawyer have his fieri facias, his scire facias,
and certiorares? Or the divine his latitudinarians, millenarians,
sublapsarians, and supralapsarians? Shall the chemist give up his hard words,
and the botanist his technical terms, in the knowledge of which his whole
science consists? Deplorable will be the state of erudition when this shall be
the case. Knowledge, indeed, might increase and become more universally
diffused; but learning would be no more. We might then say, such a man is a man
of genius, of wisdom, of understanding; but where should we find the man of
profound erudition: one who would spurn at the simplicity of nature's works,
and plunge in system, deeper than common sense could even fathom?

BUT thanks to our universities, colleges, academies, and schools; or rather
thanks to the learned languages, which they so laboriously inculcate; such as
era, it may be presumed, is yet far distant.

THE following lines were written for a young gentleman, who was to take his
degrees at a public commencement; but the professors would not permit him to
deliver them.
I MAKE a speech before so many ladies!
Not I indeed -- my genius but a jade is:
I Have tried her often, and I know too well,
In public spouting I shall never excel.
My fears and bashfulness would so prevail,
If I attempt it, I shall surely fail:
Of my fine speech, forget at least one half,
Stand quite confused, and raise a general laugh.
-- Go you of flippant tongues, and brazen faces,
And show the ladies how you have learned the graces.
Play well your parts, and suit them to the time,
-- Scholastic bows, and nonsense most sublime.
For me -- I Have no such talents to display,
But wit enough to keep myself away,
And not expose deficiencies today.
THUS I addressed my friend and fellow-student,
And then sat down, determined to be prudent.
WELL, ladies, you have heard each learned speech;
Good sense, no doubt -- but sense above your reach;
For instance -- first, a Latin declamation --
Are you not wiser made by that oration?
-- "Oh yes! -- doctrina universitatis;
High sounding words, all charming, and all gratis.
With sense and meaning what have we to do?
The words were fine, and well delivered too:
Merit today, we by amusement measure:
We came, not for instruction, but for pleasure."
It Is true, sounds more than sense enchant the ear;
There are but few that think, but all can hear.
A set of moral speeches followed next,
With bows and scrapes for prologues to each text.
English, it is true -- the things were well enough,
But how can ladies like such serious stuff?
PRAY did you mark the learned dissertation,
To prove that all the wonders of creation
Are only visions of imagination?
That what we see, and feel, and substance call,
Is nature's slight of hand -- deception all.
No matter whether things exist or no,
It Is quite sufficient if we think they do.
Alas, for pity! that yon beauteous maid
Should only be the shadow of a shade:
Her glowing cheek; her lips of deeper dye,
Her panting bosom, and her sparkling eye
Are all delusions; so we have been taught,
Existing only in her lover's thought.
WHY should that phantom of an amorous swain,
Sigh to the fair imaginary pain?
Since all his fancied joys would only prove,
Ideal raptures of ideal love.
Oh, rare philosophy! Oh! skill divine!
Pray, ladies, is not this extremely fine?
To such high learning none can make pretense,
But those who scorn the bounds of common sense.
Stretch wide the wings of seeming demonstration,
And soar in regions of their own creation.
IN truth, your patience has been tried, but say;
What shall we call the amusement of the day?
Is it a comedy? a farce? Oh, no!
For the whole world we must not call it so.
It Is a commencement; that is the proper name,
Or general goal delivery; much the same.
NOW you must know I Have had an odd conceit
About this tedious scientific treat;
I ask their pardons, but in my opinion,
It seems much like the peeling of an onion.
Skin after skin, and knowledge after knowledge,
All smelling rank of learning and the college;
If you peel on, in hopes a core to find,
Alas! there is little more than skin and rind.
BUT there is yet more to come; a matter serious;
A ceremony, solemn, and mysterious;
Degrees will be conferred -- the high reward
Of many a toilsome task, and study hard;
Honors to gratify ambitious hearts,
And dub each student bachelor of Arts.
You Will see professors sit with due decorum;
The lads all standing in a row before 'em;
Our provost then, will speak to each in Latin;
You Will be quite charmed, 'twill come so very pat in,
" Auctoritate qua fuit constituta --
You Have been good boys; of that there is no dispute -- a
In cujus rei; here it is my lad-o,
Hoc little scroll of parchment tibi trado."
THIS done, a speech concludes; a doleful ditty!
Called validictory, to move your pity.
You Will see the orator, with studied grace,
Screw up to seeming grief his rueful face.
-- "Adieu! ye dear companions of my youth,
With whom I trod the flowery paths of truth,
One parting tear!" -- and hear a tear should come;
Oh! sad I I Have left my handkerchief at home.
No matter; such will be the mournful style,
Weep if you please, for my part I shall smile.
BUT stop! methinks I see his reverence
At my unlicenc'd prattle takes offense;
Oh, ladies! did you know, how by his frown
A modest youth like me is taken down,
You would not wonder, if, to shun a fray,
Respect should take me suddenly away:
I go; but mark the sequel of our play.
This speech was was not delivered
ON THE ESTABLISHMENT OF THE NEW CONSTITUTION FOR THE UNITED STATES OF AMERICA.
LADIES AND GENTLEMEN,
YOU have lately been entertained with an exhibition, which, for novelty,
splendour, and decorum justly merited universal admiration and applause. If,
besides the magnificence of the thing itself, we take into consideration the
important occasion that induced it, it must be acknowledged to have been an
object most interesting and truly sublime.

YOU will readily suppose, that I refer to the grand federal procession,
performed in celebration of that memorable day which gave to our country
freedom and independence; and also of the late happy establishment of a liberal
and efficient government, on which the future dignity and prosperity of America
is to be founded.

TO give stability, energy, and respectability to government -- to concenter
the strength of a nation for national purposes; and at the same time leave to
the people at large a full security in, and enjoyment of, essential rights, is
a problem in politics which has employed the pens of the most enlightened men
in every civilized age and country; may we not hope that it was reserved for
the genius of America to solve this difficult problem; and show to the world a
system of government possessing all the requisites which theory demands, and
producing all the effects which can reasonably be expected from experiment?

THE circumstances under which our federal constitution has been framed and
established, are so new and unprecedented, that we may hope for new and
unprecedented good consequences in its operation.

THE first outlines of most of the political systems of Europe were originally
designated by the sword, not by the pen; were the fruits of conquest, or the
offsprings of rude necessity, not the production of deliberate choice, the
consequences are accordingly manifest. In some instances, an uneasy and
restless submission under a constant sense of mutilated rights; in others, a
total prostration of the majesty of the people, and adegradation dishonorable
to human nature.

BUT here, the case has been far otherwise. No successful hero has, by chance
of war, obtained a power to prescribe a mode of government to the people; but
the people have by their valor obtained the right and the opportunity of
framing a government for themselves: and this, not a barbarous and uninformed
multitude; but a people highly civilized, who know what government is, and what
it ought to be; and who had before their eyes the experience of ancient times,
and the present examples of the world.

THUS situated, and thus instructed, they selected, by a free choice, a
competent number of tried patriots and able statesmen, to frame for them a
system of general government. In this venerable body was concentered the wisdom
and integrity of a nation; not virtually only, but in truth and in fact, if we
consider individually the illustrious characters who composed the late general
convention.

THIS honorable band of patriots, after the most mature deliberation, and
after balancing all considerations, local and general, proposed a plan of
national government to the attention of the people at large. This plan, by
frequ^^t publications, and numerous displays of its component parts, was
brought, in effect, to the very door of every person interested in it. After
which, by a second free election, persons were appointed in each of the states,
to reconsider, and empowered to adopt or reject it, in the name, and on the
behalf of the states respectively. Under all these cautions, deliberations and
scrutinies, the present government of the United States of America has been
ratified and confirmed by ten states, and thereby gained a legal establishment
according to the terms proposed.

IT would be presumption in me to attempt to develope the properties, and
probable effects, of a system which is the result of so much ripened judgment
and combined wisdom; yet permit me to point out one striking feature in the
object of our present admiration, which is, that as our government originated
from, and has for its foundation, the people at large; so, in the periodical
renovations of all its component parts, recurrence is constantly had to the
people at large; and it contains within itself a constitutional right of
amendment, when ever experience and concurring opinions, shall deem amendment
necessary; circumstances sufficient in themselves to silence all objections.
For the people have not given up to their rulers all power, with only a scanty
reservation of enumerated privileges for themselves; but they have delegated
enumerated powers, reserving all their essential rights.

WHAT glory to our country, what happiness to the people, may not be expected
under a government so constituted! Already has the voice of freedom invited
many thousands of emigrants from nations beyond the seas: arts and manufactures
begin to raise their heads; and agriculture has already begun to smile in the
western wilderness. These are the effects of freedom only; but how will these
effects be increased when it shall be known, that that freedom is secured and
substantiated by a government whose essence is the rights of the people?

"^cience shall flour^sh genius stretch her wing;
"In native strains Columbian muses sing;
"Wealth crown the arts, and justice poise her scales,
"Commerce her pondrous anchor weigh,
"Wide spread her sails,
"And in far distant seas her flag display."
IF we consider the vast extent of our country, its variety of climate, its
hidden treasures, and innumerable resources, and to crown all, its now
established government, there seems to be no ingredient wanting to render us,
in time, a great and happy nation. Without virtue, however, all the rest will
be vain and fruitless. An abandoned and profligate people can never be happy:
but, as it is manifest, that in other countries, the nature of the government,
and the manners of the court, have a considerable influence on the morals of
the people, may we not hope that our excellent constitution will afford a soil,
on which the moral and christian virtues will grow, and flourish, and bring
forth fruit in abundance?

THAT this constitution is the genuine choice of the people themselves, and not
a government violently or fraudulently imposed upon them, has been evinced by
general and unequivocal demonstrations of joy on its establishment; by
processions and festivity, in numberless cities, towns, and villages,
throughout the United States; and by voluntary exertions of industry All the
machinery exhibited in this grand procession was begun and completed between
Monday morning and Thursday evening.
and magnificence, which no compulsion could have produced. A new era is born
to America, and the mighty voice of the people has fixed the date.

IT cannot, I think, be thought improper that an event so great, so
interesting, and so glorious, should be recognized in this annual solemnity of
the university of Pennsylvania: -- barely to recognize it, is all my
unexperienced abilities can pretend to; but it has been, and will be, the
subject of comment and admiration for those who are more adequate to the
pleasing task: and will, I hope, and doubt not, be the source of innumerable
blessings to the present and succeeding generations, and the pride and glory of
our rising empire.

For the Pennsylvania Packet.
I HAVE perused with some attention the several addresses made to the venerable
Doctor Franklin, by public bodies and private societies on his arrival in this
city. So far as they express a sense of gratitude and esteem for his integrity
and abilities as a public agent and a philosopher, they have my hearty
concurrence and approbation: but they also afford some literary amusement, when
considered merely as compositions, with a design of observing the various forms
which the same subject matter may assume, in passing through the varied
machinery of different pericraniums.

TALKING on this subject with Mr. B. the address of the American Philosophical
Society engaged our attention, as distinguished from all the others by a dearth
of sentiment, awkwardness of style, and obscurity of expression. I am
surprised, said I -- but it will be better to give it in the way of dialogue,
to avoid a number of said I's and said he is.

A. I am surprised that our Philosophical Society, from whom we might expect,
on such an occasion, at lea^^ ^a^e and propriety, if not something more, should
exhibit so ba^^^n, so stiff and costive a performance, as their address seems
to be: it must certainly have been seethed too long in the author's brain, and
so become hard like an over-boiled egg.


B. I perceive, sir, you are not a member of the Philosophical Society.


A. No sir, I have not that honor.


B. So I thought by your mentioning brains. Why, sir, we never make use of any
in writing letters, or drawing addresses: we manage these things in quite a
different way. How do you imagine our address was produced?


A. Some member, I suppose, was appointed to draft the address, which was
afterward read before the society; and being corrected, was finally approved
of, and so delivered.


B. When you shall become a philosopher you will know better: no, sir, we
conduct all our business by ballot, as they choose magistrates -- according to
the spirit of our excellent constitution.


A. No doubt -- when new members, or officers of the institution are to be
elected; but how an address can be composed by ballot, I confess, I cannot
comprehend.


B. Well, I will inform you. You must know we have four boxes: in one are put a
number of substantives, the best the dictionary affords; in the second, an
equal number of adjectives; in the third, a great number of verbs, with their
participles, gerunds, etc. and in the fourth, a still greater number of
pronouns, articles, and particles, with all the small ware of the syntax. The
secretary shakes these boxes for a considerable time, and then places them side
by side on a table, each bearing its proper label of distinction. This done,
the members proceed to ballot for the composition, whatever it may be; each
member taking out one substantive, one adjective, two verbs, and four particles
from the boxes respectively; and so they proceed, repeating the operation,
until they have drawn the number of words, of which, according to a previous
determination, the composition is to consist. Some ingenious member is then
requested to take all the ballots or words so obtained, and arrange them in the
best order he can. In the present ^e, this ta^k fell to *****; and you can see
how ^e has worked up the materials which chance threw in his way.


A. I^ this is your method it will sufficiently account for the short broken
sentences, the harshness of the periods, and general obscurity which
distinguish your address.


B. What do you mean by obscurity? I am sure our address, if not elegant, is at
least intelligible.


A. Pray, inform me then, what is meant by this paragraph? The high
consideration and esteem in which we hold your character, so intimately combine
with our regard for the public welfare, that we participate eminently in the
general satisfaction which your return to America produces: -- and of this --
We derive encouragement and extra-ordinary felicity from an assemblage of
recent memorable events: and while we boast in a most pleasing equality,
permanently ascertained, etc. etc.


B. The meaning of your first quotation is, that (...) high consideration for
the doctor, combining and intimately mixing with our regard for the public
welfare, occasion a kind of chemical solution or effervescence in our minds,
producing a tertium quid, which causes us to participate eminently; and so on
-- if you know any thing of chemistry, you would have understood it well enough.


A. Well! it appears to me something very like nonsense: but I confess I am no
philosopher.


B. As to the other passage you mentioned -- the truth is, we were a little
unlucky -- it would have been the most elegant paragraph in the whole
composition but for an unfortunate accident. You must know, that whilst *****
was arranging the ballots, a puff of wind blew away a number of excellent
explanatory words, and carried them out of the window; the whole sentence had
like to have gone: a careful search was made in the street, but no more could
be recovered than what you see. It was, indeed, proposed to ballot over again
for as many words as had been lost: but some members were of opinion, that this
might prove a dangerous precedent, and so the passage was suffered to pass as
it now stands.


A. I observe further, that you mention the growth of sciences and arts; would
it not have read better, the growth of arts and sciences, according to the
usual mode of expression? which has this to justify it, that arts were known
and practiced before sciences were investigated; and besides, the expression is
more musical and pleasing to the ear.


B. We had a long debate upon this subject; and the very reasons you now give
were urged in favor of the common way of placing those words; but the learned
compositor insisted, that as the sciences were more obstruse, and more eminent
in dignity than the arts, they ought to be mentioned first, especially by a
philosophical society.


A. This reminds me of what the town clerk says, in Shakespeare's Much ado
about nothing.

"To. Cl. Write down that they hope they serve God: and be sure to write God
first; for God defend, but God should go before such villians."


B. It is in vain to attempt explanation to a mind so prejudiced as yours. I
perceive you are determined to find fault, and so let us drop the subject.


A. Why, do you imagine I believe one word of your boxes and your ballots? You
are either ridiculing, or endeavoring to excuse, a performance, which would
indeed disgrace a school boy.

WHEN I compare this address with the president's short, but elegant, reply, I
cannot but observe how strongly the difference is marked between an author who
sits down to think what he shall write, and one who only sits down to write
what he thinks.


BY an act of assembly passed in August or September, 1785, it was directed
that at the general elections held in October, the poll should be closed
precisely at 8 o'clock in the evening, under a pretense of preventing
disorders; but, in fact, with a view to serve the purposes of a party Called
the constitutional party.
then in power. This occasioned the following publication. The law, however,
took place at the then ensuing election; but the effect turned out quite
adverse to the design of those who framed it, and the law was soon afterward
repealed.

TO THE FREEMEN OF PENNSYLVANIA.
FELLOW CITIZENS,
IN the 9th section of our constitution or frame of government it is written --
The members of the house of representatives shall be chosen annually by ballot,
by the freemen of the commonwealth, on the second Tuesday in October for ever.
And in the last clause of the same section, is also written, that the general
assembly -- shall have no power to add to, alter, abolish, or infringe any part
of this constitution.

NOW I say, and it is most manifest, that our late assembly have, not by
implication, but directly and expressly, violated the constitution, and have
abridged and infringed the essential right intended to be secured by the 9th
section.

THEY have passed a law declaring, that if a free man, however fully entitled
to vote, shall come on the second Tuesday in October at 30 seconds after eight
o'clock, and offer his ballot, it shall not be received; his right shall be
forfeited; his vote shall be illegal, and of no effect -- What! because I am
old and infirm -- because I have not strength to push through a crowd, and
force a passage through contending parties -- because I am a peacable, modest
man, and cannot kick constitutionalists, and elbow republicans, out of my way,
must I be disfranchised? must I be told -- "Sir, you are too late -- your vote
is good for nothing." -- I appeal to the constitution -- see, here it is! It
says I may vote on the second Tuesday in October -- this is the second Tuesday
in October -- I am qualified to vote, and here is my ticket -- You are
mistaken, (say the judges and inspectors) this is not Tuesday -- we are
advanced 30 seconds upon Wednesday morning. How can that be gentlemen? Is not a
day at least 12 hours long? -- some say 24 hours -- Ay! it used to be so
formerly; but the act of assembly has altered that matter, and made the second
Tuesday in October but six hours long, viz. from 2 The election seldom opened
before two.
to 8 o'clock. But, pray gentlemen, here are 40, here are 50, here a hundred
citizens want to give in their votes. We are come to exercise the right of
freemen; the right our constitution has given us, according to law -- according
to the 9th section of our frame of government; and we think the assembly cannot
deprive us of this right -- "No matter: what signifies what you think? Here is
the law; read it; you must be disfranchised for this year at least -- you have
committed an unpardonable offense -- you have forfeited your right -- you have
come 30 seconds after 8 o'clock -- Go! Go home! eat hearty, and become stout
and strong -- learn to box, to push, to kick, to swear, to wrangle and
scramble, and next year, perhaps, you may stand some chance, but you must not
complain now -- the law is equitable -- it is as good for constitutionalist
goose, as for republican gander -- either party may have the benefit of it; but
the strongest will prevail." But, gentlemen, for God's sake! I am neither a
goose nor a gander; I only want to vote. "Away! Away! we will hear no more; the
act of assembly shuts the door in your face."

BUT, seriously, I look upon this abridgement of the time of voting as a
dangerous innovation and direct violation of the constitution. It is calculated
to serve party purposes, and to secure the present reigning influence in the
seats of power.

LET me suppose a case, not impossible or extravagant -- may I not say, not
improbable -- Suppose a set of judges, or inspectors, or a majority of either,
to be strong in the interests of a particular party -- Suppose a number of
voters of the same party to be collected together, to go early to the place of
election, and take possession of all the avenues -- will it not be in the power
of these judges and inspectors to create what delays they please? to institute
scrupulous and tedious enquiries? to make many mistakes, and to be very nice
and acrate in rectifying these mistakes? in short, by a thousand artifices, not
easily detected, so to spend the time allotted, that others may have little or
no chance left? Let the proceedings of next Tuesday be well watched: for
myself, I am no party man; but I have impartially considered the conduct of
those in power, and have found it such as ought to alarm the cool and
dispassionate freemen of the commonwealth.

HAVE they not made the constitution a stalking horse to cover their sinister
designs? Have they not molded, and expounded, and twisted it every way (as
lord Peter did his father's will) for the advancement of their ambitious views?
Have they not reversed and abolished charters without legal cause? Have they
not passed ex post facto and partial laws, either to serve those they did, or
to punish those they did not like? And have they not by their late law
disfranchised many hundred citizens of their right to vote at the general
election? They certainly have -- for I am confident, that let the inspectors,
clerks, etc. be ever so industrious and impartial, it is impossible that a
contested election can be fairly completed within the time prescribed, viz.
from two to eight o'clock; and that, if an account should be taken throughout
the state, of those who will be necessarily excluded from voting by this law,
they will amount to many hundreds. Heretofore, elections have been known to
continue two or three days, and the closing of the poll was never attempted
till all had a full and fair opportunity. But it seems to be a general scramble
now -- first come first served -- and woe to your eight o'clock gentry.

THE charter and estates of the college were forcibly wrested from the rightful
possessors; because, as it was said, the trustees had many years ago passed a
rule which seemed to narrow the foundation of that institution: and yet the
same men, who were then such rigorous observers of original institutions, can
now abridge the time allowed by our frame of government for voting at general
elections, and arbitrarily cut away at least one half of that time -- and this
shall be no offense at all -- Lord Peter will expound the constitution, and
make all right.

IF my fellow-citizens see this matter in the light I do, they will bring this
law to the test, by making the following experiment: -- let three or four
respectable citizens (having an indisputable right to vote) in each or any of
the counties, reserve their tickets till some short time after eight o'clock,
and then offer them to the proper officers in the presence of witnesses. If
their votes should be refused, as they probably will, let a suit be instituted,
and so bring the question to a legal issue: I am persuaded there is no court
but will adjudge the act to be illegal and of no force, as to this clause,
because the constitution is paramount to any act of assembly; and it expressly
declares, that the freemen of the state may vote on the second Tuesday in
October for ever.

IF the assembly have a right to limit the time of voting to eight o'clock,
they have the same right to fix it at seven, or six, or three: and so some
future assembly may take from us the right of voting altogether, by making the
period so short, that, by the time the clerks have ruled their books and mended
their pens, the golden moments may elapse, and the minutes of grace pass away.

A curious question in law. -- Does the act mean true or apparent time? For the
sun will on that day be 12 minutes too fast: be this as it may, it will be very
proper that the state-house clock should be cleaned, and put under good
regulation, previous to the election, and that it should be set with great
accuracy on the morning of the day (if any morning can be allowed to a day of
six hours) by some sworn artist, and in the presence of the judges. But I don't
know what they will do in the country, where there are no public clocks: the
watches of the judges may happen to go a little too fast, or too slow,
according to their judgment of the run of votes. For, let me observe, that ten
or a dozen additional votes may be of the greatest importance in a contested
election, and change the political complexion of the state. The effect of this
law (as was before observed) turned out contrary to the expectation of the
constitutional party who framed it. At the ensuing election, it was manifest
when eight o'clock drew near, that the run of votes had been in favor of the
republican ticket: soon afterward a strong body of the constitutionalists came
up to vote, but the clock struck, and it was insisted that the election should
be closed according to the law. The chief justice (M'Kean) who was on the
ground, was consulted on the occasion, and he gave his opinion, that the
election might he kept open for another hour, to allow for the variation of
watches: but no attention was paid to such an absurd opinion: the doors were
closed with great shoutings, and the republican ticket was successful.


A.B.
Oct. 5, 1785.
A WORD OF ADVICE: OR THE PENNSYLVANIA ASSEMBLYMAN'S VADE-MECUM.
ALTHOUGH the constitution of Pennsylvania, amongst other good things, enjoins
that the people should choose men most noted for wisdom, to represent them in
general assembly; yet as electors are not always so attentive to this
injunction as they should be, it may be presumed that in so promiscuous a body
as our general assembly, composed of men collected from every part of the
state, there may be some, to whom a word or two of instruction may not be
amiss. To such, if any such there should be in our present assembly, the
following rules of legislative conduct are submitted.

1st. You are to consider your election into the general assembly of the state,
as one of the most important events of your life; because the powers with which
the constitution has invested you, and the duties of your station, are of the
most extensive and serious consequences: no less than to bear a part in the
framing and establishing of laws, which are to bind the citizens of this great
commonwealth: and therefore,

2d. You are to consider yourself not merely a member for the county which
elected you, but a representative of the state at large; consequently, should
the supposed particular interests of that county come in competition with the
general interests of the state, you should not hesitate in giving it up: for
the public good should be the polar star of your conduct. Members of assembly
are too apt to think, that if by their vote or influence they can screen the
county in which they live from a share of the public burden, or procure for it
some extraordinary privilege, they will merit great applause from their
neighbors, whom they suppose their only constituents. But such narrow
principles dishonor the seat of legislation. A commonwealth is one body
politic: its division into counties is artificial, and for convenience in the
administration of justice, and other good purposes; but the true interests of
each, and of the whole, are inseparable. Should members of assembly accustom
themselves to think otherwise, and boast of advantages gained for a particular
county at the expense of the general good, it would be, as if the left hand
should boast, that it had cunningly contrived to make the right hand do the
most work. If you ought not to consider yourself as the reprepresentative only
of a particular county; much less are you to suppose that it is your duty to
support, at all events, the interests and influence of a designated party. Such
a conduct would be a direct violation of your oath of office.

3d. THE people have vested you personally with the power of legislation, and
you cannot delegate or assign that power to any other person or persons
whatever. Your constituents look for the exercise of your judgment, and for
your vote founded thereon, and not for another's through you. Attend to
arguments and opinions, within and without; make full use of every means that
may inform your understanding: but when you come to give your vote, let that
vote be purely and strictly your own. It would be a wicked prostitution of the
trust reposed in you, should you, by any compact with a select number of your
brethren, bind yourself to give your voice contrary to your judgment: for
instance, should you hold private meetings with such select members, and engage
with them to give your aye or nay in the general assembly, on a question to be
agitated, according to the determination of a majority of this private
assembly, A known practice of the constitutional party.
this would be a very serious and dangerous offense -- an offense for which you
might ^e impeached and disgraced.

4th. As the people expect to be governed by laws of your making, it is highly
improper to apply to the judges of the supreme court to frame bills for you, or
to revise bills already framed; except in cases of mere technical knowledge.
Judges should have nothing to do with the making of laws, which they are
afterward to explain and execute. It is a determined maxim in politics, that
the legislative and executive powers of government should be kept carefully
separate and distinct. How very improper would it be, should a judge, in
explaining a disputed point of law, have it in his power to say -- I know the
intention of the legislature to have been thus, or thus, for I myself framed
and drew this law. It is always dangerous to suffer the judges to tamper with
the laws of the land, in any stage of their process, either in the making or
publishing them. Much better would it be for the people to receive the laws
pure from the source of legislation, even though a few technical errors should
sometimes occur, than to submit them to be revised, corrected, and amended by
the learning of the bench, especially in a constitution which admits but of one
branch of legislature. Should an occasion happen wherein the house would wish
to be informed on a mere point of law, the proper way is, to state queries in
writing, and send them to the judges for their answer: but on no account should
a bill of the house be submitted to their correction. The judges already have a
very formidable influence in the execution of the laws: if, by custom, they
should acquire a like influence over the making of them, the people would be
exposed to all the dangers of an absolute government, without even the small
security of responsibility. If the same officious hands are to cook the broth,
and make us sup it, we shall soon have reason to complain of scalded mouths and
sick stomachs.

5th. As it is of the greatest importance that the acts of the legislature, and
the minutes of the house, should be preserved pure and unadulterated, it may
not be amiss to keep a watchful eye over the clerk of the house, as it is much
in his power to play tricks with the laws, minutes, and papers of the assembly,
should he be so disposed. To prevent this, it is your duty to see that the
laws, as soon as enacted, are faithfully and immediately lodged in the
roll's-office, and upon no no account suffer the clerk to take them to his own
lodgings. After the seals have been affixed to a law, the house, or a committee
of the house, should never lose sight of it, till it is safely lodged with the
recorder.

You should also take care that the votes of the house are, in due time,
entered fairly on the book of minutes, and compared with the rough drafts; and
that the printed copies be compared with, and corrected by, the fair entries;
and not the fair entries made from the printed Minutes.

You should frequently inspect the files of the house to see that the papers
are properly arranged and endorsed; for this will enable you to detect the
clerk in case he should attempt to withdraw, secret, or destroy any of the
papers entrusted to his care. And it would not be a miss if you should now and
then take up a return, petition, or other paper, which the clerk has been
reading to the house, to see whether he has given it a faithful reading or not.
These attentions are proper, can give no just cause of offense, and will keep
the clerk strictly in his duty.

6th. There are some members in every assembly who are not qualified to make a
figure on the floor. These may nevertheless well answer the purpose of their
appointment, and discharge the trust reposed in them, by a conscientious
exercise of judgment, firmness of mind, and integrity in voting. There are
others who can add to these qualities the talents of eloquence, reasoning, and
persuasion. Should you be of the former description, give all possible
attention to the arguments urged for and against the point in question; but in
order to guard against the impositions of sophistry, the fallacy of which you
may not have ingenuity enough to detect, together with the arguments, take into
consideration the character of the speaker. If you have observed and know him
to be a man of an open, candid, and independent spirit, you may with the more
safety yield to the impressions his eloquence shall make; but if you have
reason to believe that he is subtle, selfish, and crafty, or that he is either
the tool or the ring leader of a party, hear him with jealousy, and risk no
more than what strong conviction will justify. At all events, let no reasoning,
however ingenious, induce you to give your vote contrary what you feel and
believe to be for the promotion of general justice and the public good. There
is in every good mind an internal sense of right and wrong, which you may
safely depend upon, even though your understanding should not be highly
illuminated: and it will be better to run the risk of an error of judgment
than not to vote according to this internal sense. There cannot be a more
contemptible situation, than for a man so highly entrusted to resign himself
implicitly to the government of another in the very business for which he was
so entrusted. Since the public voice has placed confidence in you, you ought to
have confidence in yourself.

SHOULD you be one of those who are accustomed to public speaking, and
qualified to take a part in the debates of the house, guard against a habit of
opposition, which may insensibly grow upon you. In questions of trivial
importance be content with voting according to your judgment, and reserve your
powers of elocution for great occasions. Let not the vigor of debate ever push
you beyond the bounds of civility, or induce you to infringe the rules of the
house; and never suffer your temper to be unhinged -- If you do, your opponent
will gain an advantage over you, which perhaps, neither the subject of debate,
nor his arguments thereupon, would have given him.

LASTLY -- Never suffer a desire of displaying your abilities, nor a thirst for
victory in debate, to lead you astray from what ought to be the ultimate object
of the official conduct of every member of the legislature -- The promotion of
general justice and of the public good.

A CITIZEN.
November, 5, 1785.
OBSERVATIONS ON THE BILL ENTITLED "AN ACT FOR AMENDING THE PENAL LAWS OF THIS
STATE."
THE bill published for consideration, entitled an act for amending the penal
laws of this state, will probably be taken up before long, in order to be
passed into a law.

So great a revolution in the municipal law of our country, ought not to take
place without due consideration on the part of the legislature, and such
attention to the subject by the citizens at large, as the importance of it
seems to require.

I have daily looked for some strictures on this bill in our public papers, and
am surprised to find that it has hitherto passed unnoticed. Whenever a public
act is likely to interfere with the interests or views of any set of men, or
party, all hands go to work, and we are distracted with arguments pro and con;
but measures which have not that immediate tendency, however replete with
remote mischief, are too frequently neglected, although a little timely
exertion might prevent evils which, when they arrive, cannot easily be removed.

A report has been lately made to the house, recommending an abridgement of the
fees and salaries of public officers. Immediately the whole fraternity is in an
uproar -- the craft -- the craft is in danger! At the head of the malcontents,
with solemn step and stately stride, appears the profound and formidable
Jurisperitus, sounding forth his own praise, as with a brazen trumpet, and
loudly descanting on his vast abilities and unparalleled services. One might
suppose, from his account, that if the gentlemen at present in office should be
affronted, and throw up their commissions, the whole commonwealth could not
furnish another set of equal wisdom, integrity, and sound whiggism.

THE lamentable outcry of Jurisperitus has led me to consider the bill under
consideration, only in one point of view, viz. the enormous power it will vest
in the judges of the supreme court, in addition to those other powers which
have been from time to time accumulating in their hands. Let us look at the
list which Jurisperitus has himself enumerated.

BESIDES the great power and influence necessarily attendant on the office of
chief justice -- he is, by vitue of that office, He should have said by virtue
of special acts of assembly, or an ordinance of congress.
judge in the high court of errors and appeals; a judge of the court of
admiralty sessions for the United States of America; a judge of the court of
admiralty sessions for this state, and a trustee of the uniuniversity. He is
also to decide upon all claims against estates forfeited to the commonwealth,
and the forfeiting persons; and has power to perpetuate testimony; take care of
the persons and estates of idiots and lunaticks; and is to determine all causes
relating to alimony and divorce. To this catalogue our present assembly have
added an act to empower the justices of the supreme court to supply defects in
the titles to lands, occasioned by the loss of deeds, etc. and the now proposed
bill for amending the penal laws, will give them a power to punish criminals
according to their discretion, within the limits of fourteen years cruel
servitude.

WHEN we consider the sum total of power, and of course of influence, thus
insensibly accumulating in the hands of two or three individuals, it seems
highly expedient that government should not only avoid further delegations of
special powers; but keep a watchful eye over the exercise of those already
delegated.

THERE is not, in our system of jurisprudence, a more formidable body of
operative power than that vested in the judges of the supreme court. The
executive council, and house of assembly, are composed of many individuals, and
these liable to annual changes; but the judges are few in number, and permanent
in office for seven years at least, and hold their commissions, as Jurisperitus
observes, in fact, during good behavior. The exact time at which a judge's
commission expires, is not matter of public notoriety: when this happens, it
may be renewed in so secret and speedy a manner by his friends in council, that
before those who may have been injured by mal-administration can make
complaint, or the people have an opportunity of expressing their disgust, if
any there should be, the judge is re-instated, and then no dog must bark.
Excessive power has a natural tendency to debauch the best disposition; but
when it falls into the hands of a proud, capricious, and ambitious man, its
operation should be watched with a jealous eye.

THE effect of the proposed alteration in the penal laws, will be to invest the
judges of the supreme court with a discretionary power to punish within certain
limits. This is, in fact, vesting them with legislative authority within those
limits. It is a distinguishing mark of a free government, that the people shall
know before hand, the penalty which the laws annex to every offense; and,
therefore, such a system is called a government of of laws, and not of men. But
within the scope of the present bill, no offender can tell what his punishment
is to be, till after conviction. The quantum, at least, is to be determined by
the particular state of mind the judge happens to be in at the time of passing
sentence. Vexations and disappointments may send his honor to court in a very
ill humor, and then woe to the culprits.

THE knowledge of this part of jurisprudence (says Blackstone, vol. IV. p. 2.)
which teaches the nature, extent, and degrees of every crime, and adjusts to it
its adequate and necessary penalty, is of the utmost importance to every
individual in the state. For, (as a very great master of the crown law Foster.
has observed upon a similar occasion) no rank or elevation in life, no
uprightness of heart, no prudence or circumspection of conduct, should tempt a
man to conclude that he may not at some time or other be deeply interested in
these researches. The infirmities of the best amongst us, the vices and
ungovernable passions of others, the instability of all human affairs, and the
numberless unforeseen events which the compass of a day may bring forth, will
teach us, upon a moment's reflection, that to know with precision what the laws
of our country have forbidden, and the deplorable consequences to which a
wilful disobedience may expose us, is a matter of universal concern -- The
criminal law (p. 3.) should be founded upon principles which are permanent,
uniform, and universal.

HOW seriously applicable these maxims and observations are in a government,
which, from the nature of its constitution, must ever be exposed to the
virulence of contending parties, will be obvious to every one. Under such a
government, no judge should be trusted with discretionary power in the
administration of penal law. There is sufficient reason to believe, that a
scarlet robe is not a certain security against the operation of party
influence, petulence of temper, or an ambitious thirst of power.

THERE is no reading the bill in question, without observing, that the burden
of the song is, the discretion of the court; such and such crimes shall be
punished with a servitude not exceeding fourteen years, at the discretion of
the court; such others, not exceeding seven years, at the discretion of the
court; and so on, in almost every section. And, finally, the 15th section gives
to these discreet judges a power to determine on the reformation of the
punished party, and to grant or refuse him, at their discretion, a certificate,
announcing to all men, that he is actually so reformed. Which certificate is to
operate as a legal discharge from all claims and demands of the party injured,
and also as a pardon of the guilt and infamy of the offense, and give the party
a new capacity and credit. The thing would have been complete if the act had
given these demigods a power of granting religious absolution, as well as
temporal restoration.

THERE are some crimes of such infamy, that the stain is not wiped off by the
party's suffering the penalty of the law. One who has stood in the pillory for
perjury, cannot afterward serve on a jury. But the effect of a pardon is to
restore him, in the eye of the law, to the same credit he had before the
accusation (except only in cases where the blood is attainted). The power of
pardon is lodged, in England, (other than in cases of impeachment) exclusively
in the crown: and, in Pennsylvania in the executive council. But, by this bill,
the power of pardon, after punishment, is vested in the same men who awarded
the penalty -- a power incompatible with the genius of the common law, or the
common rules of political prudence.

THE common law of England abhors the trusting judges with a discretionary
dispensation of punishments; most of the instances wherein they are so
entrusted are by virtue of special acts of parliament, and ought to be
considered as exceptions to the general rules of common law. This reliance on
the discretion of judges cannot safely be extended to matters of so serious
import, as the awarding a severe and disgraceful servitude within the large
limits of fourteen days to fourteen years; and afterward granting a pardon,
with all its legal operations, or withholding it, according to the caprice of
the judge, who, like our present chief justice, may be only a man, and not a
God, notwithstanding the inherent virtues of his commission.

I am far from objecting to the general intent of this bill: I think, with the
assembly, that the British criminal law, which has hitherto been our model, is
by much too sanguinary, and has annexed punishments to crimes in very undue
proportions -- proportions not drawn from policy, reason, or equity. But this
bill, if passed into a law, will make the matter worse than before. I
acknowledge, that under the system proposed by this bill, a discretionary power
must be lodged somewhere, and think it can no where be lodged so safely as with
the jury who find the fact. The proportion of punishment, equitably due
according to the nature of the offense, is not a question involved in the
technical subtleties of the law; but arises from the particular circumstances
of the case, all things considered; and an honest, impartial, and conscientious
jury, are as competent to this purpose, as the most profound judge. They will
necessarily have heard the state of the whole matter, with the arguments for
the prosecution, and in behalf of the prisoner; and being a temporary body,
accidentally brought together, and impannelled for the occasion, are more
likely to do substantial justice, than a judge who is so hackneyed in criminal
prosecutions, as to consider a citizen accused and not convicted, as a cause
stifled, Vide Vol. I. p. 202. -- Ibid. p. 205.
or lost to the commonwealth.

IF juries were so entrusted, they would probably hold their office in higher
estimation than they do now: they would spurn at the idea of their being Vide
Vol. I. p. 202. -- Ibid. p. 205.
legal machines, subject to the management of the court: and feeling themselves
competent to the business, would execute their duty with dignity, propriety,
and good conscience.

As juries determine the quantum of damage in a civil action, there seems to be
no reason why they should not also determine the quantum of punishment in a
criminal process, within such limits as the law shall prescribe.

WHY should the legislature assign so large and dangerous a field of power to
judges, because of their supposed law knowledge, in a matter where law
knowledge can be of no possible use? For, after the fact has been fairly found,
the subtleties of law are at an end, at least they have nothing to do with the
intrinsic demerit of the offense.

I have been told, and I believe it is so, that one of the judges framed this
bill; no wonder then that the chorus of the song should be -- at the discretion
of the court: I wish they would get the court of admiralty to set these
pleasant words to music; it would delight their honors much, if they have any
ears for music, but I am told they have none; they would, however, strain hard
to bear a bob in the burden of so charming a song.

REASONABLE objections may perhaps be made to the vesting even a jury with such
enormous power. If so, I cannot see why the general intent of the bill may not
be answered by annexing to the several crimes, as heretofore defined in law,
periods of servitude, fixed and ascertained according to enormities of their
respective offenses; and so make our penal laws less sanguinary. If the
portionment of punishment should not in all instances be strictly equitable,
they will at least be certain and known; and council may pardon or reprieve, in
particular cases, when circumstances shall make such an interference proper and
just.

I sincerely wish this subject may be taken up by some abler hand. It is time
^o be alarmed at the vast power gradually accum^^^ting in the hands of two or
three individuals. When we see judges becoming professed and busy partymen:
when we see them constantly interfering in the business of the legislature:
influencing members of assembly: drawing reports for committees, and framing
bills for the house: usurping jurisdiction not given them by law: expounding
acts of assembly with dictatorial authority at improper times, and in improper
At the general election in October last the chief justice, expounding the law
to the judges of the election, told them that although the law directed the
business to be closed, and the doors to be shut, at eight o'clock, yet they
might go on till nine, to allow for the variaion of watches.
places; and working every engine to promote their own power and influence -- I
say, when we see these things, we see symptoms of a growing tyranny, strong as
Bunbury's symptoms of horsemanship: we see that the discretion of such men
ought not to be so largely trusted. If this act should take place, the form of
our government will in effect be changed -- It will no longer be republican it
will be despotic, at least within the field of criminal jurisprudence, which is
a large and important field. For what is depotism? but a discretionary use of
power, without being legally amenable for the just exercise of it. In this
situation will our judges be by virtue of this act. For who shall call them to
account? If they should award one man four weeks, and another fourteen years
punishment for the same offense -- for a crime of the same enormity, under all
circumstances, will an action lie against them, or can they be impeached for
the injustice? Surely not -- The legislature having vested them with
discretionary powers, they will be the sole judges of that discretion.

IT is time to look about -- Our assemblies have been too much disposed to look
upon the supreme court as a reservoir for all power, which they knew not where
else to lodge. Let them take care that this reservoir does not overflow, and
deluge them, with their rights and liberties.

I hope my fellow citizens will see the danger of the proposed act for amending
the penal laws of the state: that these observations will induce some other
hand to take up the subject; and that every one will join in checking the
exorbitant power of the supreme court

JUS.
April. 1786.
For the Pennsylvania Packet.
I OBSERVE by the paper of this day, that Wednesday next is appointed by our
house of assembly for taking up the bill called the penal law, which has been
published for consideration, and is now ripe for the forms of legislation. This
bill seems to be of very serious importance in the jurisprudence of our
commonwealth. Innovations are always to be suspected, and prudence dictates
that novelties, under the guise of improvement, should be strictly scrutinized,
lest an ostensible benefit should serve as an introduction to many
overballancing evils. But I trust that our representatives will proceed with
proper caution in a measure which will not only change the long established
system of penal laws, but will, in effect, amount to a transfer of the great
power of apportioning punishments to crimes from the sovereignty of the state,
where it certainly ought to be, to two or three individuals, where it certainly
ought not to be.

I heartily approve of the general purpose of this bill, in making penal laws
less sanguinary, by substituting periods of disgraceful labor in the room of
fatal executions and corporal punishments; but in as much as it leaves the
apportionment of these periods to the discretion of the supreme court, it is a
bill pregnant with dangerous consequences, and establishes a despotic form of
government within the field of its operation. For, true despotism is nothing
more than a power to punish according to will and pleasure.

TRUE it is, that our legislature still reserves the right of ascertaining the
crime; but if the degree of punishment is to be determined by the will of the
court, it may not be long before some learned judge will enlarge on the
inconvenience of the legislature's troubling itself with such matters, and
prepare a bill for investing himself, and his brethren, with the whole
dispensation of criminal law.

IN a government like ours, it is highly necessary to be watchful over the
movements of those in whom we confide -- much more so than in governments less
free; because those in whom we trust have the all powerful sanction of the
people at large for whatever they do within the precincts of legal power, and
it is certainly within these limits to ruin us according to law.

OUR assembly have undoubtedly a right to enact this bill into a law -- Let us
indulge imagination in, at least, possible consequences should it be enacted.

OUR judges have unavoidably an official influence over the petit jury in
criminal trials. They also recommend to council for pardon, when they think
fit, and the council not only never execute against their recommendation; but,
as I am told, seldom pardon without it. And now, by this bill, they are to be
empowered by law to apportion punishments to crimes according to their own
discretion. By their means the severities of law and the high prerogative of
mercy will be vested in the same individuals -- In men subject to passions and
prejudices, are unfit to be so highly trusted.

SUPPOSE a case -- A and B have committed precisely the same offense, viz.
Burglary. A has respectable connections and friends; B has none. A's friends
are not only respectable, but they happen to be of the same party in the
politics of the state with his honor: or they belong to the same religious
congregation. B is a foreigner; he has no friends or connections; or, if he
has, they are of the adverse party to the judge -- may we not suppose the
discretion of the court would exercise itself very differently with respect to
these criminals, however equal their demerits? A few days may serve to expiate
the crime of A; but B must labor fourteen years for not having better friends
and more powerful influence in his favor. This may seem too strong a case; but
it is no more than what the law will justify. Any specious reasons for such a
discrimination will be sufficient to excuse the judges as men, for what they
may do as officers, under the law.

IF it did not appear from the face of this bill that it is a direct violation
of our constitution, by making our government a government of men, and not of
laws in criminal cases; yet the quarter from which it originated ought to raise
a virtuous jealousy in the minds of the people. It is a dangerous symptom when
we see men, already high in power, grasping still at more, and ever devising
ways and means to increase their official influence.

TO point out all the evils, and political solecisms of the bill under
consideration, would require more time, and more law knowledge, than I can
command; but I am confident that such an establishment will be injurious to the
security and justice intended by the common law, and subversive of the spirit
of our free constitution.

I hope our legislature will not hastily part with so high a prerogative of
sovereign power, or subject the citizens of this state, who may hereafter
offend, to be punished at the discretion of the judges.

I conclude with an extract to the purpose from 4 Black. chapter 29. pa. 377.

It is, moreover, one of the glories of our English law, that the nature,
though not always the quantity or degrees This respects pecuniary fines, which,
as the author afterward explains, cannot be fixed precisely by law, but must
vary according to the nature of the offense, the abilities of the offender, and
other circumstances.
, of punishment, is ascertained for every offense; and that it is not left in
the breast of any judge, or even of a jury, to alter the judgment which the
law has beforehand ordained for every subject alike, without respect of
persons. For if judgments were to be the private opinions of the judge, men
would then be slaves to their magistrates, and would live in society without
exactly knowing the conditions and obligations which it lays them under. And
besides, as this prevents oppression on the one hand; so, on the other it
stifles all hopes of impunity or mitigation with which an offender might
flatter himself, if, his punishment depended on the humor or discretion of the
court. Whereas, where an established penalty is annexed to crimes, the criminal
may read their certain consequence in that law which ought to be the unvaried
rule, as it is the inflexible judge, of his actions.

X.
August, 28, 1786.
A SUIT IN THE HIGH COURT OF HONOR. THIS piece of humor was founded on the
idea of establishing a high court of honor (See vol. I. page, 151), and
accidentally occasioned the following singular ANECDOTE.

THE piece had been enclosed in a cover, addressed to James Wilson Esquire. for
whom it was designed, and sent to his house. Mr Wilson not being at home, his
servant received the packet, and stuck it behind the parlour looking glass.
Cap. who was frequently deranged in his mind, and at such times full of notions
of plots and conspiracies, went into Mr Wilson's parlour without knocking when
none of the family happened to be there; and seeing the packet in the frame of
the looking glass took it down and went off with it.

THERE was at this time a cause agitated in the supreme court of great popular
attention, in which Mr Wilson, and most of the gentlemen of the bar, were
engaged.

THE next day I went to court, and happening to be seated near Mr. Wilson, I
asked him if he had received my packet; he told me he did not get home till
late in the evening; that the servant informed him there had been a letter for
him, and that he had put it behind the glass; but that it had all at once
disappeared, and no body could give any account of it, although enquiry had
been made through the whole family.

WHILST we were thus talking, a cry of, make way there! was heard in the court,
when capt., having pushed his way through the crowd, appeared before the bar
with papers in his hand. He interrupted the lawyer who was then speaking, and
informed the judges that he had papers in his hand which would immediately
clear up and determine the cause before the court; and that he had also
discovered a most horrible and dangerous plot, partly against the state, and
partly against the judge of admiralty: confessing that he had made this great
discovery by breaking into and robbing that gentleman's house, pointing to Mr.
Wilson; declaring that so far as he was amenable for the robbery, he stood
ready to submit to the laws.

THE papers, which I immediately knew to be mine, were handed up to the bench,
and the chief justice was preparing to read the contents aloud to the court;
but I forced my way to him, and and whispered him, that it was only a piece of
literary sport be- Mr. Wilson and me, and very unfit for the public ear on such
an occasion. The papers were then delivered to Mr. Wilson, and the audience
assured that they did not concern the present cause.



AT a court held on the 27th of April Anno Domini 1781. Present, the honorable
the judges of the said court, in their robes, and the officers in their
respective places -- A. B. clerk of the said court, notified to their honors,
that a libel had been filed by F. H. versus J. W. Esquire. and humbly prays the
leave of the court to exhibit the said libel: and then, with the consent of
their honors, he proceeded to read the same with an audible voice in manner and
form following; that is to say.

Philadelphia. ss. TO the honorable X. Y. Z. judges of the high court of
honor.
F. H. of the city of Philadelphia, gentleman, in all humble manner,
complaining, shows, and does by this present libel, aver, declare, and say,
that his worthy and esteemed friend J. W. of the same city, esquire, is a
rogue, a rascal, a villain, a scoundrel, a liar, a thief, a rabscalion, a
tatterdemallion, a ninkumpoop, and a skunk See vol. I. p. 155.
: that he is a basphemer of God, a reviler of man, a deist, an atheist, a Turk,
a Jew, and an infidel: that he ought to be whipped, croped, pillored, banished,
hanged, drawn, and quartered: that he is a tory, a speculator, a peculator, a
prater, and a traitor: that he ought not to live upon the face of the earth
amongst so many good, honest, and well disposed persons as this city is known
to contain. And your libellant does further declare and say, that all these,
the aforesaid appellations, asseverations, and declarations against him, the
said J. W. are meant and intended, and ought to be taken in the most
opprobrious sense of the words: The truth of which he the said F. H. libellant,
as aforesaid, is ready to verify and make manifest to this honorable court:
and thereupon he prays, that the said J. W. esquire. may, by the definitive
sentence of this honorable court, be condemned to have his name entered in the
book of record, called rascal's record, there to be and remain with infamy in
secula seculorum; so prays.

F. H.

WHEREUPON it is ruled and ordered, that a certified copy of the foregoing
declaration and libel be served on the said J. W. esquire. in order that he may
file his defense and answer thereto.

AFTERWARD, to wit, on the 23d day of April, in the year aforesaid, the said
J. W. esqr. comes and defends himself against all and every the manifo^^
^landers, defamations, appellations, and untruths in the said libel contained,
and does call upon, challenge, and demand of the said F. H. that he forthwith
prove and establish, by good and sufficient testimony before this honorable
court, some one or more of his slanders aforesaid; and the said J. W,
respondent as aforesaid, does further pray and demand, that if the said F. H.
shall fail in proof thereof, that the name of the said J. W. may be erased and
expunged from all and every part of the said libel, and of the record thereof,
and the name of him the said F. H. be inserted in the place or places thereof:
and that the name of him the said F. H. may be entered on the rascal's record,
according to the constitution and laws of this honorable court -- So
answers, J.W.

ET postea, scilicet 26mo Aprilis praedicta F. H. in curiam venit, et
sustentat, et probat declarationem ejus, et facit bonum asseverationes et
vilificationes ejus contra eundem J. W. et super hoc dat curiae haec honorabili
intelligere quod biennium, vel juxta, est quod commodavit praedicto J. W. unum
librum vel libellum intitulatum Epistolae obscurorum virorum plenum funni; et
quicunque legit in eodem libro ridebit multum et pinquescebit; et quod bonum et
necessarium est pro salute corporis et etiam mentis habere et legere in isto
libro: Et praedictus F. H. super verbum et honorem ejus declarat et dicit quod
frequenter et saepissime postulavit eundem librum intitulatum ut praedictum, a
praedicto J. W.: et quod praedictus J. W. non curans pro salute vel jucunditate
vel solamine praedicti F. H. non vult eundem libellum reddire ad eum, ut in
vera honestate debet facere; sed vi et armis, contra legem, contra bonam fidem
et justitiam detinet eundem, ad grave et terribile damnum praedicti F. H. Per
quam causam praedictus F. H. dicit et ostendit haec curiae honorabili, quod
valde macescit, et timet quod prius longum tempus erebit nil nisi pellis et
ossa et quod non potest ridere saepius quam semel vel bis in mense, et qui
nunquam ridet, nunquam pinguescebit; ergo, super fidem et veritatem credit quod
praedictus J. W. voluit ponere eum ad mortem. Ergo, damat in curia hac
honorabili contra praedictum J. W. et accusat eum, et dicit et protestat quod
iste J. W. est rabscallianus, tatterdemallianus, ninkumpoopus, et skunkus, et
quod opportet esse ita recordatus; ut omnes homines maledicant eum in secula
seculorum.

WHEREUPON, curia vult advisare, and now on the 27th of April aforesaid,
judgment is given against the respondent, Nisi, etc. That is to say, unless he
the said J. W. shall, bona fide, restore and deliver the said book, entitled
epistolae obscurorum virorum, to him the said F. H. on or before the 5th day of
May next ensuing. But and if the said J. W. shall, and do well and truly
restore the said book to the libellant in this cause, on or before the 5th day
of May, then the said parties shall withdraw their several pleas, replications,
and rejoinders from this court, so that the same may not be, or appear on the
records thereof.

WHEREUPON the court adjourned, sine die.

A LETTER TO THE REV. DOCTOR WHITE, RECTOR OF CHRIST CHURCH AND ST. PETER'S ON
THE CONDUCT OF A CHURCH ORGAN.
I AM one of those who take great delight in sacred music, and think, with
royal David, that heart, voice, and instrument should unite in adoration of the
great Supreme.

A soul truly touched with love and gratitude, or under the influence of
penitential sorrow, will unavoidably break forth in expressions suited to its
feelings. In order that these emanations of the mind may be conducted with
uniformity and a becoming propriety, our church has adopted into her liturgy,
the book of psalms, commonly called David's Psalms, which contain a great
variety of addresses to the Deity, adapted to almost every state and
temperature of a devout heart, and expressed in terms always proper, and often
sublime.

TO give wings, as it were to this holy zeal, and heighten the harmony of the
soul, organs have been introduced into the churches. The application of
instrumental music to the purposes of piety is well known to be of very ancient
date. Indeed, originally, it was thought that music ought not to be applied to
any other purpose. Modern improvements, however, have discovered, that it may
be made expressive of every passion of the mind, and become an incitement to
levity as well as sanctity.

UNLESS the real design for which an organ is placed in a church be constantly
kept in view, nothing is more likely to happen than an abuse of this noble
instrument, so as to render it rather an obstruction to, than an assistant in,
the good purpose for which the hearers have assembled.

GIVE me leave, sir, to suggest a few rules for the conduct of an organ in a
place of worship, according to my ideas of propriety.

1st. The organist should always keep in mind, that neither the time or place
is suitable for exhibiting all his powers of execution; and that the
congregation have not assembled to be entertained with his performance. The
excellence of an organist consists in his making the instrument subservient and
conducive to the purposes of devotion. None but a master can do this. An
ordinary performer may play surprising tricks, and show great dexterity in
running through difficult passages, which he has subdued by dint of previous
labor and practice. But he must have judgment and taste who can call forth
the powers of the instrument, and apply them with propriety and effect to the
seriousness of the occasion.

2nd. The voluntary, previous to reading the lessons, was probably designed to
fill up a solemn pause in the service; during which, the clergyman takes a few
minutes respite, in a duty too lengthy, perhaps, to be continued without
fatigue, unless some intermission be allowed: there, the organ has its part
alone, and the organist an opportunity of showing his power over the
instrument. This, however, should be done with great discretion and dignity,
avoiding every thing light and trivial; but rather endeavoring to compose the
minds of the audience, and strengthen the tendency of the heart in those devout
exercises, in which, it should be presumed, the congregation are now engaged.
All sudden jirks, strong contrasts of piano and forte, rapid execution, and
expressions of tumult, should be avoided. The voluntary should proceed with
great chastity and decorum; the organist keeping in mind, that his hearers are
now in the midst of divine service. The full organ should seldom be used on
this occasion, nor should the voluntary last more than five minutes of time.
Some relaxation, however, of this rule may be allowed, on festivals and grand
occasions.

3d. The chants form a pleasing and animating part of the service; but it
should be considered, that they are not songs or tunes, but a species of
recitative, which is no more than speaking musically. Therefore, as melody or
song is out of the question, it is necessary that the harmony should be
complete, otherwise chanting, with all the voices in unison, is too light and
thin for the solemnity of the occasion. There should at least be half a dozen
voices in the organ ^^llery to fill the harmony with bass and treble parts, and
give a dignity to the performance. Melody may be frivolous; harmony, never.

4th. The prelude which the organ plays immediately after the psalm is given
out, was intended to advertise the congregation of the psalm tune which is
going to be sung; but some famous organist, in order to show how much he could
make of a little, has introduced the custom of running so many divisions upon
the simple melody of a psalm tune, that the original purpose of this prelude is
now totally defeated, and the tune so disguised by the fantastical flourishes
of the dexterous performer, that not an individual in the congregation can
possibly guess the tune intended, until the clerk has sung through the first
line of the psalm. And it is constantly observable, that the full congregation
never join in the psalm before the second or third line, for want of that
information which the organ should have given. The tune should be distinctly
given out by the instrument, with only a few chaste and expressive decorations,
such as none but a master can give.

5th. The interludes between the verses of the psalm were designed to give the
singers a little pause, not only to take breath, but also an opportunity for a
short retrospect of the words they have sung, in which the organ ought to
assist their reflections. For this purpose the organist should be previously
informed by the clerk of the verses to be sung, that he may modulate his
interludes according to the subject.

TO place this in a strong point of view, no stronger, however, than what I
have too frequently observed to happen; suppose the congregation to have sung
the first verse of the 33d psalm.

"Let all the just to God with joy
Their cheerful voices raise;
For well the righteous it becomes
To sing glad songs of praise."
How dissonant would it be for the organist to play a pathetic interlude in a
flat third, with the slender and distant tones of the echo organ, or the deep
and smothered sounds of a single diapason stop?

Or suppose again, that the words sung have been the 6th verse of the vith
psalm.

"Quite tired with pain, with groaning faint,
No hope of ease I see,
The night, that quiets common griefs
Is spent in tears by me" --
How monstrously absurd would it be to hear these words of distress succeeded
by an interlude selected from the fag end of some thundering figure on a full
organ, and spun out to a most unreasonable length? Or, what is still worse, by
some trivial melody with a rhythm so strongly marked, as to set all the
congregation to beating time with their feet or heads? Even those who may be
impressed with the feelings such words should occasion, or in the least
disposed for melancholy, must be shocked at so gross in impropriety.

THE interludes should not be continued above 16 bars in triple, or ten or
twelve bars in common time, and should always be adapted to the verse sung: and
herein the organist has a fine opportunity of showing his sensibility, and
displaying his taste and skill.

6th. The voluntary after service was never intended to eradicate every serious
idea which the sermon may have inculcated. It should rather be expressive of
that cheerful satisfaction which a good heart feels under the sense of a duty
performed. It should bear, if possible, some analogy with the discourse
delivered from the pulpit; at least, it should not be totally dissonant from
it. If the preacher has had for his subject, penitence for sin, the frailty and
uncertainty of human life, or the evils incident to mortality, the voluntary
may be somewhat more cheerful than the tenor of such a sermon might in
strictness suggest; but by no means so full and free as a discourse on praise,
thanksgiving, and joy, would authorize.

I^ general, the organ should ever preserve its dignity, and upon no account
issue light and pointed movements which may draw the attention of the
congregation and induce them to carry home, not the serious sentiments which
the service should impress, but some very petty air with which the organist
has been so good as to entertain them. It is as offensive to hear lilts and
jiggs from a church organ, as it would be to see a venerable matron frisking
through the public street with all the fantastic airs of a columbine.

SURVEYING.
I HAVE been long urged by an invincible property to attempt some thing for the
public good, or public convenience, so as to render my name famous amongst the
benefactors of mankind. As my desire is much stronger than my abilities, I am
obliged to be content with humble attempts at discoveries of limited
importance; for I confess that my genius is not of the highest rank.

THE project which has lately employed my thoughts, and which I am now about to
communicate, will not be valued as conducive to the happiness of mankind in a
serious sense; yet I hope the novelty of the design, and its affording a
considerable gratification at a very small expense, will entitle me to some
reputation with the public: especially when it shall be considered, that I do
not, like other projectors and discoverers, make an emolument of my ingenuity,
but freely give the fruits of my speculations to my beloved fellow citizens, in
the first place, and through to them, to the world at large.

I have frequently thought that the arts and sciences might be extended beyond
the limits of their professed objects, and applied with advantage to other
purposes than those for which they seem directly intended. I remember that when
I was a boy, my father saw me boring a hole with the leg of my compasses, for
which he reproved me, and advised me never to use a thing in a way which it was
not designed -- But Dr. Franklin, who was present* declared himself of a
different opinion; and said he had often admired the dexterity of a servant who
would occasionally sweep the hearth with the bellows, and blow the sire with
the hearth-brush.

I once saw an elaborate work of an ingenious Frenchman, by which any person
was enabled to compose an infinite number of minuets without the least
knowledge of music, or any other instrument, but a box and dice.

THIS readiness in applying things to purposes for which they seem not designed
has often been of the greatest importance in cases of extremity. The adventures
of Robinson Crusoe, and the histories of perilous voyages and ship-wrecks,
afford innumerable instances of the great advantage of such a talent.

I am by profession a surveyer; not indeed of the first rate reputation, yet I
can execute my business with tolerable accuracy, and have given satisfaction to
my employers. I, not long since, surveyed a tract of land, the boundaries of
which were so singular, that when I came to plot the lines and courses from my
table book, I was surprised to find that the survey exhibited the lines of a
human face. This suggested to me the idea of applying the art of surveying to
the purpose of portrait painting -- Only consider, candid reader, what an
advantage this must be to the world -- Who is there that does not wish to see a
true and faithful likeness of those eminent personages he reads of in history?
Their actions indeed are recorded; but these may appear in very different
lights to different people, and admit of very various comments, for want of
knowing the secret motives which influenced those actions. Now there is no
better way known, of ascertaining a man's intrinsic character, than by the
indication of his countenance: hence the science of physiognomy, and the great
encouragement portrait painting has found. But painting on canvass is very
expensive, and original likenesses very scarce. As to engravings, they are by
no means to be depended upon; every copyist varies more and more from the
original: so that by the time a man has been dead forty or fifty years, however
eminent he may have been, the prints bearing his name, are no more like him,
than the sign of the king of Prussia in third street is like that monarch. The
thing should be brought to a mathematical certainty. And this, I flatter
myself, I have been so lucky as to accomplish.

THE operation is quite easy, both to the party and to the artist. There is
nothing more necessary that to take a correct outline of the person's profile,
by throwing the shadow of his face Or of his whole person.
upon a sheet of paper -- a familiar and well known practice, then let the
artist take his scale and dividers, and carefully measure all the courses and
distances of the lines which form the boundaries of the shadow. By the same
means of courses and distances, the situation, form, and size of the eye, eye
brow, mouth, etc. etc. may be precisely ascertained; and thus by the help of a
few letters and figures, may the exact likenesses of great personages be
transmitted to posterity, and made as public as a common advertisement, and at
as little expense.

WHAT satisfaction would it not afford us at this day to be possessed of an
accurate survey of the faces of Julius Caesar, Mark Anthony, Cicero, Virgil,
Horace, and other renowned characters, who are now only known by their works
and exploits.

MY project will, moreover, be particularly beneficial to private families; a
man may, in the division of his estate, so contrive it as to leave his likeness
in a tract of land. So that his grandson will have nothing to do but consult
his title deeds, take down the lines and courses of his farm, and by plotting
them on paper may at any time produce the portrait of his deceased ancestor,
and survey his ground and his grandfather at one and the same time; whose
resemblance will be thus secured to his family, subject to no variation, but
the variation of the needle.

MY scheme will be sufficiently manifested by an example. And this I shall give
by transcribing from my table book the courses and distances of the tract of
land which gave me the first idea of applying the practice of surveying to the
purposes of portrait painting.

THE following is an exact copy of the courses and distances, and the drawing
is plotted from them with as much accuracy as the subject would admit.

FROM an assumed point A, run a line S. 67 30 W. 52 perches, to a point B;
thence N. 5 W. 64 perches to C; thence N. 7 W. 36 perches to D; thence due
west, 60 perches to E; thence N. 48 E. 110 perches to F; thence N. 13 E. 60
perches to G; thence N. 45 E. 190 perches to H; thence N. 77 E. 108 perches to
I; thence S. 5 W. 240 perches to K; thence along the same course 120 perches to
L; thence S. 78 W. 180 perches to M; and thence 30 perches to the place of
beginning.

THESE lines form external boundaries of the tract. For a further description,
the following courses and distances must be observed.

FROM the point A continue the line B A, 100 perches to N; thence N. 29. E. 48
perches to a point. From the point C a soul ditch runs eastward 35 perches.
From the point D it is 25 perches to the edge of a circular hill bending
westward, and over D is an eliptical hollow 40 perches long, where it joins the
southermost part of the circular hill. The soil of this eliptical hollow is
very moist and unctuous: and fit for the cultivation of Tobacco -- From the
point F a piece of woodland runs N. 48 E. 59 perches to a point, and thence
tends south-easterly 45 perches. This copse of woods is of an eliptical form,
beginning very narrow at F and increasing to 10 perches in width at the
northernmost point of the curve, and thence decreases in width to the
south-easternmost point, where it is very thin.

IN a due north and south line passing through the point M, and at the distance
of 180 perches north of M, assume a point 0, and from that point draw a line N.
70 W. 30 perches. From a point in this line, a little to the westward of 0,
draw another line running southwestwardly 25 perches, forming an angle of 35
with the other line. About 20 perches from the angular point 0 draw a circular
line perpendicularly and looking westward. These three lines will form a mixed
triangle, whereof two of the legs will be right lines, and the third a portion
of a sphere. The northern leg of this triangle is fringed with rushes, being
the edge of a watery soil, it must therefore be penciled somewhat thicker and
stronger than the southern leg, which should be rather faintly sketched than
absolutely drawn.

FROM the point G run a line N. 60 E. 150 perches to a point P; thence South 46
E. 20 perches to Q; thence south 30 W. 130 perches to R; thence due south 20
perches to S; thence S. 62 E. 95 perches to T; and thence 70 perches to K.

FROM the middle of the line S T, there is a circular piece of rising ground,
being 45 perches on the line S T, and stretching south-westerly 25 perches. At
the foot of this rising ground is a copse, thick covered with wild brush and
coarse underwood, of a circular shape, whose diameter from N. E. to S. W. is 45
perches, and from N. W. to S. E. 40 perches.

ALL the space bounded by the lines G, H, I, K, T, S, R, Q, P, is a cold,
moist, and barren soil, producing nothing but a profusion of coarse reeds, rank
and long. These have been so blown down by westerly winds, that from G they
tend to the E. N. E; from P Q to the N. E. and from R S eastwardly. These reeds
run over the boundary line I K very straggling and irregular, so as to cover
and conceal that line: and therefore the line I K must not be drawn absolute,
but only dotted, or traced, being no more than the average course of the long
reeds. From the whole line T K, the reeds run due south, and are very thick and
long. All this must be expressed by the pencil. Lastly, all the sharp angles of
the figure must be moderately rounded off, and all the lines made somewhat
arching, but sparingly. The eye of the artist will best direct him how to dress
the lines and angles so as to answer the general design.

IF the above courses and distances are carefully laid down upon paper, and the
directions observed, they will produce the drawing of a human face: and if the
draftsman should have any tolerable judgment in things of this kind, and a warm
imagination, he may fancy that he discovers a likeness of some person or other.
I plotted my scale of inch to 100 perches.

I have it in contemplation to improve my device, by ascertaining, in fixed
terms, the manner in which a profile so drawn may be colored to the life, and
thereby make the likeness perfect. For this purpose I had recourse to heraldry;
and hoped by means of or, argent, gules, etc. to dictate precisely the
complexion, color of the hair, eyes, etc. but could not find terms sufficient
to express the necessary teints: and as to the termination ish, which some make
use of, as in blueish, greenish, redish, etc. it is too vague and indeterminate
for the purpose. Unless, therefore, I can find some known art or science which
will furnish definitions of colors as certain and intelligible, as surveying
gives us lines and courses, I shall be obliged to compose a set of appellations
answerable to all the principal colors, and as many of their gradations and
mixtures as are usual in portrait painting. These being once admitted, will
serve for ever after. Thus, in engraving, the directions of the strokes of the
engraver ascertain the colors or blazoning of a coat of arms. When it became
generally admitted that horizontal strokes should indicate blue, perpendicular
strokes, red; diagonal strokes, green; and so on, all uncertaintainty was
removed.

PERHAPS Mr. Pine and Mr. Peale may take it into their heads, that I have made
this discovery public, with a malicious intention to injure them in their
profession; but I protest before all men, that I have a considerable esteem for
those ingenious gentlemen, and would willingly have suppressed my project out
of tenderness to them, had not an urgent sense of the duty I owe to my
fellow-citizens at large, overbalanced the influence of private attachments.

IT will be in vain for any projector, in France, England, or elsewhere, to
dispute with me the honor of this invention, unless he can produce a
publication of a similar scheme, bearing date prior to this month of November
1784. But, to prevent all mistakes, I wish our philosophical society would be
so good as to make a minute of my discovery: and it would be still better, if
Mr. Patterson would give the foregoing survey, as a task to the lads of the
university under his tuition.

Some personal altercations in the public papers occasioned this (...) of
ridicule.
For the Pennsylvania Pack^t.
A Man who is disposed to be entertained may find amusement in the most common
occurrences of life. Objects strike the eye, and incidents affect the mind,
very differently in different persons. Some men accustom themselves to see
every thing in a ludicrous point of view; others, in a serious light; and, the
multitude are content with m^re perception; that is, barely seeing and hearing,
without making any other further use of their senses.

THIS diversity of disposition is founded in the original constitutions of the
parties. The humorist was funny and roguish when a boy; following the
propensity of his nature, he acquires an habitual facility in associating
ludicrous ideas with the most ordinary, and seemingly the most barren incidents
of life. His eye immmediately discovers any singularity of countenance, or
manner, because he is always loooking for singularities; and he finds something
to divert him in the most common transactions, because he is always hunting for
diversion.

I have myself, some tincture of this disposition; and, when disengaged from
more serious business, I sally forth with a design to seek for entertainment. A
variety of sources immediately present. For instance: it requires no great
effort of imagination to suppose that the major part of the inhabitants of this
great city are actually mad. Impressed with this idea, I observe the
countenance, gait, and manner of every one I meet, and endeavor to class my
lunatics under different species of frenzy.

ONE fellow drives along with such heedless impetuosity, that he treads in the
gutters instead of stepping over them, and runs against the posts, which he
might easily avoid. Another, has such strong marks of anxiety, expressed in
every feature of his face, that his whole soul seems to be absorbed in some
sale, purchase, or other pursuit. A third, is haranguing with great vehemence
to two or three ignoramuses who devour his politics with open ears. And, I see
a fourth, in a violent passion, cursing and swearing like a sailor in a storm.
But there is no end to the variety of characters that present, and consequently
no end to this source of observation and entertainment.

AT another time, I apply to the streets for a different species of diversion.
I walk round a square, and attend to all the scraps and fragments of
conversation I can pick up en passant. When I return home I write these on
separate pieces of paper: and then amuse myself with arranging them in such
order as to produce, if possible some apparent connection. If this cannot be
done, I make another excursion, and collect more materials, till out of a great
number, I am enabled to accomplish my purpose. For example --

What Is the price of butter today?

It will sell for 4s. per gallon by the hogshead.

Is your cousin married?

She will be launched next Thursday.

She is a good beast, and will carry you through thick and thin^

Ay! to be sure we must support the constitution.

Do you think the funding bill A bill for funding the public debt was at this
time before the house. Those who had contributed nothing in the late war, were
unwilling to be taxed for the payment of interest on the sums lent to
government for carrying it on: and therefore opposed the bill.
will pass?

No friend. The insurers must bear the loss: we have nothing to do with it.

They say Longchamp A Frenchman who had insulted the consul and minister of
France, and immediately took the oath of allegiance to the state of
Pennsylvania, and claimed protection as a citizen of the commonwealth: but the
minister of France demanded him as a French subject, and a deserter from the
army. This matter occasioned a great deal of confusion, and much trouble to
government.
will be given up.

That Is my man -- no, its mine -- I swear its mine: it rolled into the gutter;
it struck against that gentleman's foot, and he kicked it into the gutter. --
Didn't it Tom? Didn't it Jack? -- You lie! I say it didn't. -- Did it Cuff? Did
it Pompey? And here a boxing match.

BUT my present fancy is to suppose the public newspapers to be so many real
theaters, on which some comedy or farce is daily exhibited for my
entertainment. About nine o'clock the packet of the day is brought in: I take
my seat: the curtain rises, and the play begins.

For instance:

SCENE -- PHILADELPHIA. Enter a doctor of divinity, and a doctor of medicine. A
warm controversy between Dr. E -- and Dr. R --, respecting the university of
Pennsylvania, and the college at Carlisle: in which the broad bottom of the
university was too frequently mentioned to pass unnoticed.
A very familiar dialogue commences, in which each performer endeavors to
display the character of his antagonist in as striking a manner as possible to
my great satisfaction. I imagine I see the professional battle. The divine
throws text of scripture in the face of his adversary, and hampers him with the
cords of logical conclusions; whilst the physician squirts clysters at the
divine, and claps cantharides on his back.

BUT the most comical part of the scene is this. The learned divine hoists the
university, and exposing its naked skin, exclaims with admiration -- "Oh,
charming! behold and see what a broad bottom is here!" Whereupon the physician
immediately hoists Dickenson college, and with equal eloquence descants upon
its narrow bottom. -- "Look, says the divine, on this capacious disk -- on the
one side sits the pope; on the other side sits Luther; and see how snug Calvin
lies between them both." "Its all wrong, replies the physician, Calvin has no
business there: he will be choked -- he will be suffocated -- he will be
squeezed to death -- here is a fine narrow bottom more fit for his
accommodation. He can have it all to himself -- he is a usurper there, but this
is his own flesh and blood." From words they proceed to blows. The divine is
heated with zeal seven times hotter than Nebuchadnezzar's furnace: he
vociferates -- "The sword of the Lord and of Gideon!" and forthwith flogs away
on the narrow bottom of poor Carlisle. The physician is also enraged. "By the
bones of Boerhaave, and the dust of Hypocrates, says he, I will be even with
you:" and without further prelude, falls to scourging the pope, Luther, and
Calvin all at once upon the broad bottom of the university. -- But the scence
changes --

Enter two musicians. (Another battle.) A dispute between Mr. Brown, an eminent
performer on the flute, and Mr. Bentley, an organist.
Mr. Tweedledum begins the attack with a full discord in a sharp third, and
leaves it unresolved, which to be sure is very shocking. Mr. Tweedledee replies
in the natural key; but in a sharp third also. Tweedledum then changes the
modulation, and after running a rapid division, closes with a chromatic arpegio
in a flat third. There is no bearing this. The parties are enraged --
Tweedledum seizes the diapason pipe of an organ -- Tweedledee defends himself
with a silver mounted flute: and to it they go -- blasting away at each other
with astonishing vigor and dexterity. Methinks I hear the shrill tones of the
flute, now ranging through the upper octave, and maintaining acknowledged
superiority; and now descending into the ^^owery plains of the fruitful tenor,
and yielding to the powerful vibrations of the dreadful organ pipe.

THUS it is, that by the help of imagination, and a talent for considering
circumstances in a singular point of view, I am enabled to find entertainment
in occurrences which are scarcely noticed by others. But I never make sport of
matters really serious. The miseries, misfortunes, and sufferings of our fellow
creatures can never be proper subjects of ridicule; but the passions, follies,
and absurdities of mankind are surely lawful occasions of laughter.

A. B.
March, 1785.
A LETTER FROM A GENTLEMAN IN AMERICA, TO HIS FRIEND IN EUROPE, ON
WHITE-WASHING.
DEAR SIR,
THE peculiar customs of every country appear to strangers awkward and absurd,
but the inhabitants consider them as very proper and even necessary. Long habit
imposes on the understanding, and reconciles it to any thing that is not
manifestly pernicious or immediately destructive.

THE religion of a country is scarcely held in greater veneration than its
established customs: and it is almost as difficult to produce an alteration in
the one as in the other. Any interference of government for the reformation of
natural customs, however trivial and absurd they may be, never fails to produce
the greatest discontent, and sometimes dangerous convulsions. Of this there are
frequent instances in history. Bad habits are most safely removed by the same
means that established them, viz. by imperceptible gradations, and the constant
example and influence of the higher class of the people.

WE are apt to conclude that the fashions and manners of our own country are
most rational and proper, because the eye and the understanding have long since
been reconciled to them, and we ridicule or condemn those of other nations on
account of their novelty: yet the foreigner will defend his national habits
with at least as much plausibility as we can our own. The truth is, that reason
has little to do in the matter. Customs are for the most part arbitrary, and
one nation has as good a right to fix its peculiarities as another. It is of no
purpose to talk of convenience as a standard: every thing becomes convenient by
practice and habit.

I have read somewhere of a nation (in Africa I think) which is governed by
twelve counselors. When these counselors are to meet on public business,
twelve large earthen jars are set in two rows, and filled with water. The
counselors enter the apartment one after another, stark naked, and each leaps
into a jar, where he sits up to the chin in water. When the jars are all filled
with counselors, they proceed to deliberate on the great concerns of the
nation. This, to be sure, forms a very grotesque scene; but the object is to
transact the public business: they have been accustomed to do it in this way,
and therefore it appears to them the most rational and convenient way. Indeed,
if we consider it impartially, there seems to be no reason why a counselor may
not be as wise in an earthen jar as in an elbow chair; or why the good of the
people may not be as maturely considered in the one as in the other.

THE established manners of every country are the standards of propriety with
the people who have adopted them; and every nation assumes the right of
considering all deviations therefrom as barbarisms and absurdities.

THE Chinese have retained their laws and customs for ages immemorial: and
although they have long had a commercial intercourse with European nations, and
are well acquainted with their improvements in the arts, and their modes of
civilization, yet they are so far from being convinced of any superiority in
the European manners, that their government takes the most serious measures to
prevent the customs of foreigners taking root amongst them. It employs their
utmost vigilance to enjoy the benefits of commerce, and at the same time guard
against innovations that might affect the the characterestic manners of the
people.

SINCE the discovery of the Sandwich islands in the South Sea, they have been
visited by ships from several nations; yet the natives have shown no
inclination to prefer the dress and manners of the visitors to their own. It is
even probable that they pity the ignorance of the Europeans they have seen, as
far removed from civilization; and value themselves on the propriety and
advantage of their own customs.

THERE is nothing new in these observations, and I had no intention of making
them when I sat down to write, but they obtruded themselves upon me. My
intention was to give you some account of the people of these new states; but I
am not sufficiently informed for the purpose, having, as yet, seen little more
than the cities of New York and Philadelphia. I have discovered but few
national singularities amongst them. Their customs and manners are nearly the
same with those of England, which they have long been used to copy. For,
previous to the late revolution, the Americans were taught from their infancy
to look up to the English as the patterns of perfection in all things.

I have, however, observed one custom, which, for ought I know, is peculiar to
this country. An account of it will serve to fill up the remainder of this
sheet, and may afford you some amusement.

WHEN a young couple are about to enter on the matrimonial state, a never
failing article in the the marriage treaty is, that the lady shall have and
enjoy the free and unmolested exercise of the rights of WHITE-WASHING, with all
its ceremonials, privileges, and appurtenances. You will wonder what this
privilege of white-washing is. I will endeavor to give you an idea of the
ceremony, as I have seen it performed.

THERE is no season of the year in which the lady may not, if she pleases,
claim her privilege; but the latter end of May is generally fixed upon for the
purpose. The attentive husband may judge, by certain prognostics, when the
storm is nigh at hand. If the lady grows uncommonly fretful, finds fault with
the servants, is discontented with the children, and complains much of the
nastiness of every thing about her: these are symptoms which ought not to be
neglected, yet they sometimes go off without any further effect. But if, when
the husband rises in the morning, he should observe in the yard, a wheelbarrow,
with a quantity of lime in it, or should see certain buckets filled with a
solution of lime in water, there is no time for hesitation. He immediately
locks up the apartment or closet where his papers, and private property are
kept, and putting the key in his pocket, betakes himself to flight. A husband,
however beloved, becomes a perfect nuisance during this season of female rage.
His authority is superseded, his commission suspended, and the very scullion
who cleans the brasses in the kitchen becomes of more importance than him. He
has nothing for it but to abdicate, for a time, and run from an evil which he
can neither prevent nor molify.

THE husband gone, the ceremony begins. The walls are stripped of their
furniture -- paintings, prints, and looking-glasses lie in huddled heaps about
the floors; the curtains are torn from their testers, the beds crammed into
windows, chairs and tables, bedsteads and cradles crowd the yard; and the
garden fence bends beneath the weight of carpets, blankets, cloth cloaks, old
coats, under petticoats, and ragged breeches. Here may be seen the lumber of
the kitchen, forming a dark and confused mass for the fore-ground of the
picture; gridirons and frying-pans, rusty shovels and broken tongs, joint
stools, and the fractured remains of rush bottomed chairs. There a closet has
disgorged its bowels -- rivetted plates and dishes, halves of china bowls,
cracked tumblers, broken wine-glasses, phial^ of forgotten physic, papers of
unknown powders, seeds and dried herbs, tops of tea-pots, and stoppers of
departed decanters -- from the rag hole in the garret, to the rat hole in the
cellar, no place escapes unrummaged. It would seem as if the day of general
doom was come, and the utensils of the house were dragged forth to judgment. In
this tempest, the words of king Lear unavoidable present, and might with little
alteration be made strictly applicable.

" -- Let the great gods
"That keep this dreadful pudder over our heads
"Find out their enemies now. Tremble thou wretch
"That have within thee undivulged crimes
"Unwhipt of justice -- "
" -- Close pent up guilt,
"Rive your concealing continents, and ask
"These dreadful summoners grace."
THIS ceremony completed, and the house thoroughly evacuated, the next
operation is to smear the walls and ceilings with brushes, dipped in a solution
of lime called WHITE-WASH; to pour buckets of water over every floor, and
scratch all the partitions and wainscoats with hard brushes, charged with soft
soap and stone-cutter's sand.

THE windows by no means escape the general deluge. A servant scrambles out
upon the penthouse, at the risk, of her neck, and with a mug in her hand, and a
bucket within reach, dashes innumerable gallons of water against the glass
panes, to the great annoyance of passengers in the street.

I have been told that an action at law, was once brought against one of these
water nymphs, by a person who had a new suit of clothes spoiled by this
operation: but after long argument it was determined, that no damages could be
awarded; inasmuch as the defendant was in the exercise of a legal right, and
not answerable for the consequences. And so the poor gentleman was doubly
nonsuited; for he lost both his suit of clothes and his suit at law.

THESE smearings and scratchings, these washings and dashings, being duly
performed, the next ceremonial is to cleanse and replace the distracted
furniture. You may have seen a house-raising, or a ship-launch -- recollect, if
you can, the hurry, bustle, confusion, and noise of such a scene, and you will
have some idea of this cleansing match. The misfortune is, that the sole object
is to make things clean. It matters not how many useful, ornamental, or
valuable articles suffer mutilation or death under the operation. A mahogany
chair and a carved frame undergo the same discipline: they are to be made clean
at all events; but their preservation is not worthy of attention. For instance:
a fine large engraving is laid flat upon the floor; a number of smaller prints
are piled upon it, until the super-incumbent weight cracks the lower glass --
but this is of no importance. A valuable picture is placed leaning against the
sharp corner of a table; others are made to lean against that, till the
pressure of the whole forces the corner of the table through the canvas of the
first. The frame and glass of a fine print are to be cleaned; the spirit and
oil used on this occasion are suffered to leak through and deface the engraving
-- no matter! If the glass is clean and the frame shines it is sufficient --
the rest is not worthy of consideration. An able arithmetician has made a
calculation, founded on long experience, and proved that the losses and
destruction incident to two white-washings are equal to one removal and three
removals equal to one fire.

THIS cleansing frolic over, matters begin to resume their pristine appearance:
the storm abates, and all would be well again: but it is impossible that so
great a convulsion in so small a community should pass over without producing
some consequences. For two or three weeks after the operation, the family are
usually afflicted with sore eyes, sore throats, or severe colds, occasioned by
exhalations from wet floors and damp walls.

I know a gentleman here who is fond of accounting for every thing in a
philosophical way. He considers this, which I call a custom, as a real,
periodical disease, peculiar to the climate. -- His train of reasoning is
whimsical and ingenious, but I am not at leisure to give you the detail. The
result was, that he found the distemper to be incurable; but after much study,
he thought he had discovered a method to divert the evil he could not subdue.
For this purpose, he caused a small building, about twelve feet square, to be
erected in his garden, and furnished with some ordinary chairs and tables, and
a few prints of the cheapest sort. His hope was, that when the white-washing
frenzy seized the females of his family they might repair to this apartment,
and scrub, and scour, and smear to their hearts content; and so spend the
violence of the disease in this out-post, whilst he enjoyed himself in quiet at
headquarters. But the experiment did not answer his expectation. It was
impossible it should, since a principal part of the gratification consists in
the lady's having an uncontrolled right to torment her husband, at least once
in every year* to turn him out of doors, and take the reins of government into
her own hands.

THERE is a much better contrivance than this of the philosopher's: which is,
to cover the walls of the house with paper. This is generally done. And though
it does not abolish, it at least shortens the period of female dominion. This
paper is decorated with various fancies, and made so ornamental that the women
have admitted the fashion without perceiving the design.

THERE is also another alleviation of the husband's distress. He generally has
the sole use of a small room or closet for his books and papers, the key of
which he is allowed to keep. This is considered as a privileged place, even in
the white-washing season, and stands like the land of Goshen amidst the plagues
of Egypt. But then he must be extremely cautious, and ever upon his guard: for
should he inadvertently go abroad, and leave the key in his door, the house
maid, who is always on the watch for such an opportunity, immediately enters in
triumph with buckets, brooms, and brushes -- takes possession of the premises,
and forthwith puts all his books and papers to rights, to his utter confusion,
and sometimes serious detriment. I can give you an instance.

A gentleman was sued at law, by the executors of a mechanic, on a charge found
against him in the deceased's books to the amount of L 30. The defendant was
strongly impressed with a belief that he had discharged the debt and taken a
receipt; but as the transaction was of long standing, he knew not where to find
the receipt. The suit went on in course, and the time approached when judgment
should be obtained against him. He then sat down seriously to examine a large
bundle of old papers, which he had untied and displayed on a table for the
purpose. In the midst of his search he was suddenly called away on business of
importance. He forgot to lock the door of his room. The house maid who had been
long looking for such a opportunity, immediately entered with the usual
implements, and with great alacrity fell to cleaning the room and putting
things to rights. One of the first objects that struck her eye was the confused
situation of the papers on the table. These, without delay, she hudled together
like so many dirty knives and forks; but in the action a small piece of paper
fell unnoticed on the floor, which unfortunately happened to be the very
receipt in question. As it had no very respectable appearance, it was soon
after swept out with the common dirt of the room, and carried in a dust pan to
the yard. The tradesman had neglected to enter the credit in his book. The
defendant could find nothing to obviate the charge, and so judgment went
against him for debt and costs. A fortnight after the whole was settled, and
the money paid, one of the children found the receipt amongst the dirt in the
yard.

THERE is also another custom, peculiar to the city of Philadelphia, and nearly
allied with the former. I mean that of washing the pavements before the doors
every Saturday evening. I at first supposed this to be a regulation of the
police; but, on further enquiry, I find it is a religious rite preparatory to
the Sabbath: and it is, I believe, the only religious rite in which the
numerous sectaries of this large city perfectly agree. The ceremony begins
about sunset and continues till ten or eleven at night. It is very difficult
for a stranger to walk the streets on those evenings. He runs a continual risk
of having a a bucket of dirty water dashed against his legs; but a
Philadelphian born is so much accustomed to the danger that he avoids it with
surprising dexterity. It is from this circumstance that a Philadelphian may be
known any where by a certain skip in his gait. The streets of New York are
paved with rough stones. These, indeed, are not washed, but the dirt is so
thoroughly swept from between them that they stand up sharp and prominent, to
the great annoyance of those who are not accustomed to so rough a path. But
habit reconciles every thing. It is diverting enough to see a Philadelphian at
New York. He walks the street with as much painful caution as if his toes were
covered with corns, or his feet lamed by the gout: whilst a New Yorker, as
little approving the plain masonry of Philadelphia, shuffles along the pavement
like a parrot upon a mahogany table.

IT must be acknowledged that the ablutions I have mentioned are attended with
no small inconvenience; yet the women would not be induced by consideration to
resign their privilege.

NOTWITHSTANDING this singularity, I can give you the strongest assurances that
the women of America make the most faithful wives, and the most attentive
mothers in the world. And I don't doubt but you will join me in opinion, that
if a married man is made miserable only for one week in a whole year, he will
have no great cause to complain of the matrimonial bond.

THIS letter has run on to a length I did not expect; I therefore hasten to
assure you that I am as ever.

June 1785. Your, etc. etc. etc.

The preceding publication made no small clamor amongst the ladies; to make
amends, the author wrote this answer.
TO THE EDITOR OF THE COLUMBIAN MAGAZINE.
SIR,
I HAVE seen a piece in the Pennsylvania Packet, and republished in Mr. Carey's
Museum, upon the custom of White-washing, in which that necessary duty of a
good house-wife is treated with unmerited ridicule. I should probably have
forgot the foolish thing; but the season approaching, which most women think
suitable for cleansing their apartments of the smoke and dirt of the winter, I
hear this saucy author dished up in every family, and his flippant performance
quoted whenever a wife attempts to exercise her reasonable prerogative or
execute the duties of her station.

WOMEN generally employ their time to better purpose than in scribbling. The
care and comforts of a family rest principally on their shoulders. Hence it is
that there are but few famale authors; and the men, knowing how necessary our
attentions are to their happiness, take every opportunity of discouraging
literary accomplishments in the fair sex. We hear it echoed from every quarter
-- My wife cannot make verses, it is true; but she makes an excellent pudding
-- She cannot correct the press; but she can correct her children, and scold her
servants with admirable discretion -- she cannot unravel t^^ intricacies of
political economy and federal government; but she can knit charming stockings.
And this they call praising a wife, and doing justice to her good character.

I say women generally employ their time to better purpose than in scribbling;
otherwise this facetious writer had not escaped so long unanswered. We have
ladies who sometimes lay down the needle and take up the pen; I wonder none of
them have attempted some reply. For my part I do not pretend to be an author: I
never appeared in print in my life, but I can no longer forbear saying
something in answer to such impertinence.

ONLY consider, Mr. Editor, our situation. Men are naturally inattentive to the
decencies of life; but why should I be so complaisant? I say they are naturally
nasty beasts. If it were not that their connection with the refined sex
polished their manners, and had a happy influence on the general economy of
life, these lords of the creation would wallow in filth, and populous cities
would infect the atmosphere with their noxious vapors. It is the attention and
assiduity of the women that prevent men from degenerating into swine.

HOW important, then, are the services we render! And yet for these very
services we are made the subject of ridicule and fun -- Base ingratitude!
nauseous creatures! Perhaps you may think I am in a passion -- No, Mr. Editor,
I do assure you I was never more composed in my life; and yet it is enough to
provoke a saint to see how unreasonably we are treated by the men -- Why, now,
there is my husband, a good enough sort of a man in the main, but I will give
you a small sample of him. He comes into the parlour, the other day, where, to
be sure, I was cutting up a piece of linen. "Lord, says he, what a clutter here
is -- I cannot bear to see the parlour look like a taylor's shop -- besides, I
am going to make some important philosophical experiments, and must have
sufficient room." You must know my husband is one of your would-be
philosophers. Well -- I bundled up my linen as quick as I could, and began to
darn a pair of ruffles, which took up no room, and could give no offense. I was
determined, however, to watch my lord and master's important business. In about
half an hour the tables were covered with all manner of trumpery -- bottles of
water, phials of drugs, pasteboard, paper and cards, glue, paste and
gum-arabic, files, knives, scissars and needles, rosin, wax, silk, thread,
rags, jags, tags, books, pamphlets and manuscripts. -- Lord bless me! I am
almost out of breath, and yet I have not enumerated half the articles. Well! to
work he went, and although I did not understand the object of his maneuvers,
yet I could sufficiently discover that he did not succeed in any one operation:
I was glad of that -- yes, I confess, I was glad of that, and good reason too.
After he had fatigued himself with mischief, like a monkey in a china shop, and
had called the servants to clear every thing away, I took a view of the scene
before me. I shall not even attempt a minute description -- suffice it to say,
that he had overset his inkstand, and stained my best mahogany table with ink;
he had spilt a quantity of vitriol upon my carpet, and burned a hole in it; my
marble hearth was all over spotted with melted rosin; he had broken three china
cups, two wine glasses, a tumbler, and one of my best d^^^nters; and after
(...), as I said before, I perceived that he had not succeeded in any one
operation. By the bye -- tell your friend the white-wash scribbler, that this
is one way by which our closets become furnished with -- halves of china bowls,
cracked tumblers, broken wine glasses, tops of tea pots, and stoppers of
departed decanters. I say, I took a sober view of the dirt and devastation my
philosophical husband had made; and there I sat, like patience on a monument,
smiling at grief; but it worked inwardly -- yes, Mr Editor, it worked inwardly,
I would almost as lieve the melted rosin had been in his throat, and the
vitriol upon his skin, as on my dear marble hearth and my carpet. It is not
true that women have no command over their own feelings; for not withstanding
this gross provocation I said nothing, or next to nothing; I only observed,
very pleasantly, that a lady of my acquaintance had told me, that the reason
why philosophers are called literary men, is because they frequently make a
great litter -- not a word more -- However, the servant cleared away, and down
sat the disappointed philosopher. A friend dropped in soon after -- "Your servant
Sir, -- how do you do?" "Oh Lord! I am almost fatigued to death -- I have been
all the morning making philosophical experiments." I was now more hardly put to
it to smother a laugh, than I had been just before to contain my resentment. My
precious went out soon after with his friend -- And I, as you may well suppose,
immediately mustered all my forces -- brushes, buckets, soap, sand, lime-skins,
and cocoa-nut shells -- all the powers of house-wifery were employed. I was
certainly the best philosopher of the two, for my experiments succeeded, and
his did not -- all was well again, except my broken ware and my carpet -- my
poor vitriolized carpet, which still remains a mournful memento of philosophic
fury; or rather of philosophic folly.

THIS operation was scarce over, when in came my experimental dear, and told me
with all the indifference in the world, that he had invited six gentlemen to
dine with him at three o'clock -- it was then past one -- I complained of the
short notice -- "Poh! Poh! says he, you can get a leg of mutton, and a loin of
veal, and a few potatoes, and it will do well enough -- Heaven's! what a chaos
must the head of a philosopher be! -- A leg of mutton, a loin of veal and
potatoes! I was at a loss whether I should laugh or be angry. But there was no
time for determining -- I had but an hour and a half to do a world of business
in. My carpet, which had suffered in the cause of experimental philosophy in
the morning, was destined to be shamefully dishonored in the afternoon by a
deluge of filthy tobacco juice -- Gentlemen smokers and chewers, love segars
and pigtail better than carpets.

THINK, Mr Editor, what a woman must endure under such circumstances; and then,
after all to be reproached with her cleanliness, and to have her
white-washings, her scowrings and scrubbings made the subject of public
ridicule, is more than patience can put up with.

WHAT I have now exhibited is but a small specimen of the injuries we suffer
under the boasted superiority of the men. But we will not be laughed out of our
cleanliness. A woman would rather be called ***** than slut; as a man would
rather be called a knave than fool.

I had a great deal more to say, but I am called away -- We are just preparing
to white-wash -- Yes, I say to white-wash -- the brushes are ready, the buckets
are paraded -- my husband is gone off -- so much the better -- When one is
about a thorough cleaning, the first dirty thing to be removed is one's husband
-- I am called for again -- adieu!

Yours NITIDIA.

The hall of the philosophical society was begun without a sufficient fund for
completing it, and, indeed, without the any reasonable prospect of procuring
one. The cellars, however, were finished, and the building remained a long time
without any further advancement. One of the invalid soldiers, whose quarters
were adjoining this building, had fitted up a cobler's stall in these cellars,
he having formerly been a shoemaker, and he is supposed to be the author of
this paper. A course o^ numbers was intended for the use of the Columbian
Magazine. But a well known and singular character being too strongly marked in
this first number, the editor of the magazine declined publishing it, and so
the whole design was laid aside.
THE COBBLER. No I.
WHETHER it is owing to some solitary hours I pass in my subterraneous shop, or
to the overflowings of a large accumulation of ideas, acquired in a life of
travel and adventures; or that the incessant motion of my elbows, necessary in
my occupation, which, for reasons unknown, may irritate and provoke the mind to
discharge its contents, as the motion of a ship operates upon the stomachs, or
that by some secret influence of the philosophical walls that surround me I am
induced, or rather compelled to become an author, I know not -- But so it is --
If any fortune tellers had foretold that in the year 1787 I should make my
appearance as an essayist, before the respectaable public, I should have
laughed at the prophet, and despised his art. And yet I remember I had a dream,
some twenty years ago, the interpretation of which seems now to be plain
enough, although at the time I could make nothing of it.

I thought I had lost myself in a thick wood, without any road or path to
direct my way. Whilst I was considering what course I should take, a wild goose
and a parrot descended from a large tree, and after several circuitous flights,
alighted, the one on my right shoulder, and the other on left. These birds were
certainly figurative of my authorship and genius.

WHEN a writer makes his first appearance on the public stage, he is like an
unknown stranger introducing himself into a large assembly: all eyes are turned
toward him, and the whisper goes round Who is he? Who is he? Do you know him?
Do you? Not I, sir, not I, madam: whereby it becomes necessary that he should
give some account of himself. I shall endeavor to satisfy this reasonable
expectation in as few (...) I can.

I was born in an obscure village in England. My father could neither read nor
write, but had a most profound veneration for men of genius and learning. He
carried this blind passion so far, that he was frequently the subject of
ridicule; and sometimes suffered real loss by sharpers who imposed themselves
upon him for scholars, and authors neglected by the ungrateful world, or men of
genius, on the point of producing the most important discoveries.

MY father resolved to do better by me than his father had done by him; and
therefore put me to a charity-school as soon as I was eight years old. After
two years cruel persecution, I was whipped through the spelling-book as far as
words of five syllables. It took me three months and a half to spell the word
liberality; in which time I received 97 strokes of the ferule on my right hand,
and 53 on my left; 8 times I wore the dunce's cap; and 5 times publicly whipped.
Besides these, I received one hundred and thirteen stripes with a rattan across
my shoulders, and suffered two hundred and twenty five pinches of my right ear.
At last I could spell the word liberality. But being no longer able to bear
this cruel discipline, I took to my heels and ran off.

I was running enough to elude the search my father made for me for two years,
and subsisted by hiring myself occasionally as a servant. At last, I offered
myself to a farmer, who had seen an advertisement answering my description. He
secured me, and sent me back to my father, who loaded me with reproaches and
abuse. He gave overall expectation of making me a scholar, and fixing his hopes
upon my brother Dick, bound me apprentice to a shoemaker.

I was almost as unsuccessful here as at the free school. I acquired a
tolerable knack at botching and patching, but could never arrive at the skill
of making a whole shoe.

AFTER I had in vain tried for four years to make myself master of the
business, I conceived a thorough dislike to the trade, and throwing down my
strap and last, I once more threw myself into the hands of fortune.

My father died soon after, and my mother did not think me worth enquiring
after.

I went through various scenes of employ for seven years: In which time I had
great opportunities of making observations on men and manners. I contracted
many prejudices; I stored up many opinions, and learned many words: but the
word liberality was never out of my mind; it had been impressed on my memory,
and, I may say, engraved on my flesh.

AT length I engaged in the service of a man very famous in the learned world;
a celebrated author in theology and natural philosophy. I lived with him many
years. I adopted all his principles, not because I understood them, but because
I lived with him, and they were his principles, and because I derived no small
credit from this connection; as the moon is admired for the light she affords,
not that she is luminous in herself, but because she is within the influence of
the sun's rays. I was more than the servant, I was the companion of this great
man; and as the multitude are apt to think that knowledge may be taken, like
the itch or smallpox, by contagion, I acquired a considerable literary
reputation amongst illiterate men. I turned the electric wheel for my patron; I
kindled his fire; I brought him water; I handed him books from the shelves, and
bottles from the closet; and so I became a philosopher. Moreover, I carried his
manuscripts to the printer, and brought back the printed sheets for correction;
and so I became a theologist. It is true, I was often unlucky in my zeal to
serve him; I inadvertently discharged his accumulated electricity; I cracked
his jars, and broke his bottles; I burned his clothes with vitriol, and his
flesh with aquafortis; and frequently stumbled in my way to the printer's, and
plunged his manuscript in the kennel. But he was a philosopher, and bore all
with patience.

STILL the word liberality pressed upon my mind. My master and I differed in
opinion about dephlogisticated air: I thought he was very illiberal; and so we
parted, and I determined to travel far and near in search of true liberality.

I ran through most of the countries in Europe, in hopes of finding this
precious jewel. But, alas! to no purpose. In Spain and Portugal they believe in
transubstantiation and the pope's infallibility, and the people of France
believe in nothing at all; of course there could be no liberality in those
countries. In Italy, they prefer the philosophy of Ingenhouzen, to that of my
master and friend; this I thought very illiberal, notwithstanding our
difference. In Geneva, they believe in predestination, a doctrine I abhor: and
in Switzerland, the citizens make a practice of hiring themselves as soldiers
to foreign princes.

I once thought I should find what I was in search of, amongst the rude but
uncorrupted inhabitants of the Alps: but after sojourning with them many days,
I discovered that they esteemed the large wens which most of them had hanging
to their chins as very ornamental, for my part I thought them extremely ugly,
and so I concluded, that there could be no liberality on the Alps.

IT would be a useless task to enumerate all the particulars in which the
people of every nation differed from me in opinion, and disappointed me in the
object of my pursuit. True genuine liberality was not to be found amongst them.

AT length I returned to England. Here I found things worse than ever. My
friend's theology was publicly contested, and some of his doctrines even
reprobated. Not only this, but the nation was engaged in a war with the people
of America, on principles which I could not approve. Convinced, that there was
no liberality in England* I determined to cross the Atlantic, and seek for it
in America.

ON my arrival in this country, I was much chagrined to find that the doctrine
of the Trinity was generally received and professed; a doctrine against which I
had acquired the strongest antipathy from my master, the great philosopher.
However, as war raged in the country, there was no time for theological
disquisitions; and as the justice of the war was clearly on the side of the
Americans, I resolved to take an active part in their cause, and enlisted
myself a soldier in the Pennsylvania line. I went through inexpressible toil
and danger, in marches, counter-marches, skirmishes and battles, and was
finally wounded at the siege of York-Town, when lord Cornwallis and his army
surrendered to the allied forces of France and America.

After the peace, I supported myself by cobling and patching, and employed my
leisure hours in combating the doctrine of the Trinity, and devising grand
schemes for public utility.

AT length government thought fit to establish a corpse of invalids, and sitted
up the east wing of the state-house for their accommodation, and I now belong
to this corpse. As we have no great deal to do, our duty being very slight, I
have spent much time in watching the progress of a building near our quarters,
intended as a hall for the Philosophical Society. Although it is not quite a
year since the first stone was laid, the cellar is already completed; but when
the roof will be raised, can be known only to men of profound erudition and
nice calculation -- to finish my history, of which but little now remains --

As I stood looking on, whilst the laborers were digging this philosophical
cellar, I took particular notice of the several stratums of loam, sand and
graas they appeared. I procured samples of each, and submitting them to
hyperstratical experiments, I found that they were all of different pacific
gravities. This extraordinary circumstance strongly prejudiced me in favor of
the society and their proposed hall, and I concluded that I should certainly
find true liberality in the bottom of this scientific cellar.

As soon as it was completed, and covered with rough boards, I conveyed my
bench and cobling tools to this subterraneous temple of Minerva. And here I may
be seen daily toiling for public utility in the double capacity of cobbler and
author.

MY situation, so contiguous to the seat of legislation and other offices of
state, has made me of no small use in the commonwealth. And the truth is, that
I am now oppressed with public business -- I have heeltaped counselors; patched
the upper leather of judges; examined the soles of assembly men, and given some
of them better understandings.

NOTWITHSTANDING that the care of the state is thus daily pressing upon me, I
enjoy good health, owing to the sallibrity of my philosophical work-shop: for,
it is so ingeniously constructed, that the atmospheric air is compelled to
descend and displace the memphitic air common in cellars and confined places.

FROM this profound habitation I shall date my future essays, and expect that
my performances will procure me no small credit with the public, if the people
have any liberality.

A warm dispute had taken place between Mr. Moore, a merchant, and Mr. Lewis, a
lawyer. The parties attacked each other with great acrimony in the public
papers; and the contest drew in friends on both sides, who soon became
principals in the quarrel. Private challenges began to pass; and what are
called the rules of honor were publicly discussed. One gentleman went so far
as to publish a general challenge in the newspaper, undertaking to defend Mr.
Lewis's side of the question against all persons whatsoever. It seemed very
probable that this quarrel would have had a fatal issue amongst some of the
parties, when the following piece of ridicule made its appearance, which turned
the laugh of the town upon the combatants, entirely crushed the whole affair,
and laughed the rules of honor out of countenance. The parties forgave each
other sooner than they forgave the author.

FOR THE PENNSYLVANIA PACKET.
I Mentioned in a former essay that my greatest ambition is to become famous by
the invention of some ingenious or useful project which shall be generally
approved and adopted. At the same time I communicated to the public, a device,
which, from its novelty and convenience, I thought could not fail of success.
In vain, however, have I looked for that applause which I still think justly
due to the fruit of genius, ripened by the labors of the understanding. The
author and his contrivance are no more thought of.

I have at different times, published several other devices of rare invention,
which have all found the same fate. Whether the fault lies with me, or with the
public, I shall not presume to say; but as my love of fame is invincible, I
shall go on projecting and contriving in hopes some lucky hit may accomplish my
purpose, by procuring me the honor I so ardently desire.

As I am now growing old in the business, experience and frequent
disappointments have taught me to be less sanguine in my expectations; and,
like other authors, to depend more on a fortuitous possession of the public
caprice than on the intrinsic merits of my own performance.

MY present design, which I offer with great modesty, respects an improvement
in the art of printing; and is a device to ender it not only expressive of an
author's narrative, opinions, or arguments; but also of the peculiarities of
his temper and the vivacity of his feelings.

As I have as due a regard to literary honesty as to any other kind of honesty,
I heartily confess that I took the hint from an ingenious work of a Mr. Steel
of London, who has contrived and published a scheme for noting down, in certain
musical characters, the risings, fallings, and various inflections of the voice
in common conversation or in public speaking. So that not only the matter of an
oration, but even the manner of the orator may be secured and transmitted to
posterity.

MY contrivance has this advantage over his, that no new characters are
necessary to it. Those commonly used in printing are sufficient for the
purpose. Besides, his project is only calculated to ascertain the fortes and
pianos, and various slides of the human voice in speaking; whereas mine is
contrived to designate the fortes and pianos, and various slides of the temper
in writing.

MY system is founded in a practice which nature herself dictates, and which
every one must have observed, I mean that of elevating the voice in proportion
to the agitation of mind, or earnestness of the speaker. Thus a reprimand is
given in a higher tone than admonition: and a person in a fright or in passion,
exerts his lungs according to the quantum of terror or rage with which he is
affected.

NOW I would have the degrees of vociferation -- such as pianissimo, piano,
forte, fortissimo, with all the intermediate gradations designated by the size
of the letters which compose the emphatic words. And for this the various
species of types from (...) Pearl (...) up to Five Line Pica, will afford an
ample scale.

THE ingenious authors of advertisements have I confess, in some sort
anticipated my design. We often see.

stop thief! stop thief! bawled out in double Pica Italics. The name of a ship
to be sold, or some choice article to be disposed of, in English Roman.

AND as a further enforcement to attention, I have seen the figure of a hand,
with a crier's bell in the act of ringing, advertising an auction of household
furniture. Every one striving to be heard in preference by a superior magnitude
of types. At present there are none who roar out in louder, or blacker
characters, than the printers themselves for Rags.

THERE is no looking at the first page of the daily advertiser without
imagining a number of people hallowing and bawling to you to buy their goods or
lands, to charter their ships, or to inform you that a servant or a horse has
strayed away. For my part I am so possessed with this idea, that as soon as I
take up the paper of the day, I turn over to articles of Intelligence as quick
as possible, lest my eyes should be stunned by the occular uproar of the first
page. For I am a peaceable man, and hate nothing more than the confused noise
of a mob.

MY project, then, consists in this, that the printer in composing any work
should adapt the size of his types to the spirit of his author, so that a
reader may become, in some degree personally acquainted with a writer whilst he
is perusing his work. Thus an author of cool and equable spirits might take
Bourgeois Roman for his medium, and would probably never rise higher than Great
Primer; whilst a passionate man, engaged in a warm controversy, might thunder
away in French Canon.

IT follows of course that authors of great vigor, should be charged higher
than meek writers for printing a work of the same length, on account of the
extraordinary space their performances must necessarily occupy; for these
gigantic, wrathful types, like ranters on a stage, or Burgoyne at Saratoga,
will demand sufficient elbow room.

For example -- suppose a newspaper quarrel to happen between M and L Lest some
ill disposed person should maliciously misapply these initials I think proper
to declare that M signifies merchant, and L Lawyer.


M begins the attack pretty smartly in Long primer.

L replies in Pica Roman.

M advances to Great Primer.

L retorts in Double Pica; and at last the contest swells up to Rascal,
Villain, Coward, in five line pica; which indeed is as far as the art of
printing or a modern quarrel can conveniently go.

A philosophical reason might be given to prove that large types will more
forcibly affect the optic nerve than those of a smaller size, and therefore
become mechanically expressive of energy and vigor; but I leave this
discussion for the amusement of the gentlemen lately elected into our
philosophical society. It will satisfy me if my scheme should be adopted and
found useful.

I recollect a case in point; some few years before the war, the people of a
western county, known at that time by the name of the Paxton boys, assembled on
account of some discontents, and came down in great numbers, with hostile
intentions against the peace of government, and with a particular view to some
leading men in the city. Sir John St Clair, who had assumed military command
for the defense of the city on this occasion, met one of the obnoxious persons
Israel P^m^^^^o^.
in the street, and told him that he had seen the manifesto of the insurgents,
and his name particularized by letters " as long as my fingers." The gentleman
immediately packed up his most valuable effects and sent them with his family
across the Delaware for security. Had Sir John only said, that he had seen his
name mentioned in the manifesto, it is probable he would not have been so
seriously alarmed; but the unusual size of the letters was to him a plain
indication that the insurgents were determined to carry their resentment to a
proportionable extremity

I could confirm my scheme by innumerable instances in fact and practice. The
title page of every book is an example. It announces the subject treated of in
conspicuous characters; as if the author stood at the door of his edi^ier,
calling out to every one to enter and partake of the entertainment he has
prepared; and some even scream out their invitation in red letters.

THE journeymen printers have also a custom founded on the same principles.
They distinguish every sheet of printing by a letter of the alphabet, which may
be seen at the bottom of the first page of every sheet in any book. When they
have proceeded in this alphabetical enumeration as far as the letter O, they
are sure to send the editor a proof sheet with an O! as big as a dollar;
intimating, that the fatigue and labor they have gone through is so great, as
to make them cry aloud for some gratuitous refreshment.

IT was reserved for me to improve these hints into a project of general
utility. It is indeed high time that such a system should be formed and
divulged. For what, alas! are a few Capitals and Italies in the hands of a
vigorous author? and yet these are the only typographical emphatics now in use.
In personal altercations, nature has furnished ample means of expression. The
muscles of the face; the motion of the eyes; the action of the body; the limbs,
and even the hands and fingers -- all unite in enforcing the feelings of the
soul, and giving additional expression to language -- Let art do the best she
can in cases where these natural signs of sentiment cannot be displayed.

IT is truly lamentable, and has given me much concern, to observe with what
languor a late religious dispute, and also a late law controversy, have been
conducted; not for want of a proper spirit in the combatants, but merely for
want of sufficient vehicle of rage and resentment.

FOR these reasons I hope my proposed improvement in the art of printing will
be eagerly adopted by gentlemen disputants, and no less so by the gentlemen
printers: as the one will find a new and comprehensive field opened for the
exhibition of their refined sentiments, exquisite sensibilites, and energy of
thought; and the other derive no small emolument from the advanced prices which
they may reasonably charge for printing the controversial essays, and vigorous
effussions, of men of spirit and high education.

I am, I confess, enamoured of my project, and heartily wish some quarrel, may
soon take place and swell even high as high as Five Line Pica, that the whole
system of typographical expression may be displayed in one energetic example,
and the utility of my project fully manifested -- Just as Mr -- of the humane
societ^ ^ously waited* and I believe secretly wished that an accident might
happen to evince the efficacy of a grappel he had contrived for discovering and
drawing up drowned bodies.

LEST, however, such a quarrel should not speedily occur I hereby give public
notice (in English Roman No ^) that having nothing else to do, and having no
wife or child to lament the consequences of my folly, I propose to take up any
gentleman's discontent, animosity or affront, and to conduct the same in public
contest against his adversary as far as Great Primer, or even French Canon, but
not further, without the special leave of the original proprietor of the
quarrel, provided; however, that the dispute began in Bourgeois Roman for if it
originated only in Pearl, Nonparei^, or minion, I shall hardly think it worth
my notice.

To show that I am in earnest in this offer, I shall leave my address with the
printer of this publication, that any gentleman quarreller may readily find a
champion for the cause which he does not choose to championize himself.

I axious^y wait the issue of this my proposed scheme; not without sanguine
hopes that it may prove the lucky hi^ I have been so long pursuing, and procure
me that public renown and popular favor, which, hitherto, I have in vain
labored to acquire.

July 1786. PROJECTOR.

OBSERVATIONS OF A FOREIGNER ON THE JURY TRIALS OF ENGLAND. COMMUNICATED IN A
LETTER TO HIS FRIEND.
London, Feb. 15, 1784. DEAR COUNT,
I Informed you in my last of the rout I took to arrive at this great city. I
described as well as I could, the places I passed through; the manners of the
people; the incidents that occurred; and the impositions to which I was obliged
to submit. I hope my letters got to hand; not only because they cost me no
small trouble to write -- by trouble, I mean confinement, which you know I hate
-- but because I think they will afford you some amusement.

WELL -- here I am, and here I have been since the beginning of December last.
I have several times attempted to continue my narrative and opinions for your
entertainment, according to promise, but could not find myself disposed to sit
long enough for the purpose. At present I am necessarily confined by a severe
cold; and to this indisposition you are indebted for the letter I am now going
to write. You will sincerely wish me better health, when you shall know the
dullness of the subject I have undertaken.

YOU will reasonably expect some account of the polite amusements of this
metropolis -- the manners and taste of the fashionable world -- their theaters,
concerts, R^^elagh, Pantheon, etc. etc. etc. But no; I will give you these some
other time. At present I have a very different object in view, which has
happened to engage much of my attention; and, as I always sit down to write
what I think, not to think what I shall write, I must take the subject which
impresses my mind at the time, or not write at all.

THE great question -- " What is the best form of government?" seems as far
from being determined as ever; the politicians of different nations not having
come to any compromise on this important subject. The reason, I suppose is,
because no form of government can be devised that shall necessarily involve in
itself the happiness or unhappiness of the people. There is, in fact, no
mechanical affinity between these two objects. The multitude are happy or not,
according to their ideas of the government by which they are restrained; and
these ideas are not the produce of speculative knowledge, but are derived from
the prejudices of education: whilst the more enlightened judge of government by
the manner in which its powers are exercised and justice administered. So that
instead of determining on the happiness of a people by the nature of their
political constitution, we should reverse the position, and judge of their
political constitution by its effects on the people; or, in other words, that
is the best government which is best administered. This truth seems to be
generally admitted by writers on the subject. The pursuit now, is not for a
form of government that shall necessarily and mechanically make the people most
happy; but for such a constitution as may be most effectual in securing them
from being made miserable.

GREAT BRITAIN is, I believe, the only nation that has fairly tried the
experiment. All other governments, that I know of, have certain designated
characters: they are either despotic, monarchical, aristocratical, or
democratical. But the English constitution is none of these, and yet partakes
of the nature of each. Their writers tell us, that by mixing the forms, they
enjoy all their respective advantages, and that they reciprocally check each
other, so as to counteract all their peculiar dangers and inconveniences.

ALL this is made very clear in theory; but if we attend to facts, we shall
find that the scheme does not fully answer the great purposes it seems to
promise. Their history is a proof; wherein we see perpetual struggles between
the crown and the people for encroachments of power on the one hand, or an
extension of privileges on the other: and their annual publications, and
frequent changes of men in office, in modern as well as ancient times, show
them to be subject to all the evils of faction and instability. The truth is,
that so nice an adjustment of so complicated a machine -- such a due proportion
of strength in the component parts that they shall not interfere with or impede
each other -- such an accurate disposition of heterogeneous powers, that each
shall naturally find out its own specific gravity, and rest in quiet, can only
exist in theory; the passions of mankind will ever prevent its continuance in
fact.

DON'T be alarmed: I am not going to discuss this intricate subject at large; I
wonder how I got so far into it: I have neither leisure, inclination, or
ability to pursue it. I had fixed my attention only on one particular part of
the English constitution, on which I mean to give you my sentiments; and
respecting this, I have been for some weeks past making assiduous and minute
enquiries -- I mean the administration of justice by grand and petit juries.

I must first give you as concise a detail as I can of this establishment, that
you may the better understand my observations upon it.

GRAND JURIES are only made use of in cases of criminal process, or public
offense; petit juries in all cases of trial, whether for a breach of the laws,
for private wrongs, or property in dispute. There are some species of trials in
England, where juries are not concerned; but it is not necessary to enumerate
them here, as my present object is only the trial by juries.


THE sheriff of the county or district, in pursuance of a writ directed to him
by the judges, makes out a list of 24 honest and substantial freeholders, that
is men of character, who possess a real or landed estate in the county. To each
of these he sends a written or printed notice to attend the court on a certain
day. If the sheriff does his duty, these ought to be men most respectable for
property, integrity, and abilities; so that poverty may not induce them to a
corrupt abuse of their office, or ignorance lead them to an absurd exercise of
it.

NOT less than twelve, or more than twenty-three, are competent to the
formation of a grand jury. Generally from fifteen to eighteen are considered as
a suitable number.

WHEN these are convened in court, the oath of office is administered to them,
which is a very strict one. They swear that they will not accuse any person for
hatred or malice; or suffer any offender to escape unaccused from any favor or
affection, or hope of reward. Thus qualified they retire to any apartment they
please to perform the duty the law has assigned to them.

THEY are called the grand inquest for the county: because it is their business
to enquire of all offenses that may have been committed within that district,
and present them to the notice of the court. They are to receive information
from every source; but particularly from the officer called the king's
attorney, or the prosecutor in behalf of government. The bills of accusation
are all framed by this officer, who sends them to the grand jury for enquiry,
together with the witnesses in support of the bills.

THE jury then proceed to make a careful investigation of the charge, to
examine the witnesses, and consider the whole matter in a large and liberal
view; but the accused person is not suffered to appear and make his defense,
this not being the time assigned for that purpose.

IF the grand jury, or a majority of them, find sufficient cause to believe
that the party is guilty of the crimes alleged against him, their foreman, in
behalf of the whole body, endorses on the bill billa vera, or a true bill; if
otherwise, he endorses the word ignoramus, as much as to say, this charge may
be true, but we do not know that it is so. The rejection of a bill by the grand
jury does not operate as an acquittal; for the party may be again indicted for
the same offense, if fuller testimony in support of the accusation can
afterward be procured.

THE bills, thus endorsed, are brought into court and delivered to the judges.
The party against whom the bill is found (as it is called) must be then sent
for, and personally appear in court. If this cannot be done, the trial must be
put off till he can be taken and brought to answer.

WHEN the accused person appears, the bill, now called an indictment, is
distinctly read to him by the clerk of the court, who peremptorily demands of
him whether he is guilty or not guilty of the charge as laid in the indictment.
If the party absolutely refuses to answer, the court cannot, according to the
strict rules of common law, proceed against him; because he does not
voluntarily submit his cause to that jurisdiction, by assenting to or denying
the accusation: for the law does not allow that any court has an official
power to determine on a man's life or property, unless by his own act he
consents, or seems to consent, to submit himself to its jurisdiction; and this
is supposed to be done by his entering his plea, that is, by acknowledging or
denying the charge brought against him.

THERE have been instances in former times of persons standing mute, and
refusing to plead to the indictment; to remedy which, a most absurd and
barbarous practice was admitted to enforce an answer. The party was taken to
prison, and laid upon his back, naked, on the floor of a dungeon, his arms and
legs were tied by four cords to the four corners of the dungeon: he was
sparingly fed with the most coarse and ordinary bread that could be got, and
drink brought him from the nearest kennel; a weight was also laid upon his
breast, and a like weight daily added, until, by his intolerable situation, he
was compelled to answer guilty or not guilty. This operation is called in their
books pain forte and dure. But this savage process is now obsolete: and it is
declared by statute, that standing obstinately mute shall be an equivalent to a
confession of guilt, and sentence shall be passed accordingly. The case never
occurs now. The prisoner generally pleads not guilty, and is thereby said to
join in issue, and put himself upon his trial. If he is a stranger, or so poor
that he cannot engage an advocate to assist him in his defense, the judges
always assign him council, and allow him some short time for preparation.

WHEN the day of trial comes, the prisoner is again sent for to court; for it
is essential to the process that he should be personally present during the
whole business. The sheriff has previously summoned a number of persons to
serve on the petit jury. Twelve persons, and no more, are necessary for this
purpose; but he generally returns forty-eight or more names to the court,
according to circumstances, because the accused has a right to make many
objections. These names are called over in court, and the persons who appear
are presented one by one before the prisoner, who is desired to look at him,
and say whether he has any objection to his being one of the jury which is to
determine his fate. If the crime charged is capital, the prisoner has a legal
right to challenge peremptorily twenty of the persons offered for jurymen, that
is, to set them aside from caprice, from a dislike to their countenances, or
any other secret motive, without giving any reason for his so doing; and he
has, moreover, a right to challenge or object to as many more as he ran give
sufficient reasons for rejecting: such as the person offered being in any
degree interested in the event; his having prejudged the matter, by declaring
his opinion in conversation; his having heretofore been convicted of perjury,
with many other causes of legal disability.

WHEN this investigation is gone through, and twelve unexceptionable persons
appear, who have all been sworn, well and truly to try the cause depending, and
a true verdict give according to the evidence, they are put together in a
convenient place, to hear the whole matter, and must not separate until a final
decision is given; nor must any person whisper or speak to them (except when
they ask questions of the court or of the witnesses) or deliver any message or
writing to them; any of these happening would vitiate the whole process. Yet
the judges, the lawyers employed, or the prisoner, may address them aloud in
open court. If a juryman should have occasion to retire during the trial, he
must ask leave of the court, and a constable must attend him the whole time of
his absence, and the proceedings must be suspended till his return.

THE trial commences by the king's attorney Or the clerk of the court for him.
reading the indictment aloud to the jury: after which he produces his
witnesses in support of the accusation. These witnesses must all be examined on
oath, and deliver their testimony viva voce in the presence of the prisoner,
and of the whole court. After the king's attorney has done with a witness, the
advocate for the prisoner cross examines him: he asks him questions which may
tend to embarrass him: he presses him as to the certainty of his knowledge: he
endeavors to make him contradict himself; or say something that may indicate
passion or interest; and exercises every art that may tend to invalidate his
testimony, or weaken its force. If these maneuvers, however, are carried too
far, the judge will, or ought to, interfere, and check a too great
licentiousness in the treatment of a witness. When the king's attorney has
produced all his testimony, he addresses the jury; he recapitulates what the
witnesses have advanced; he enforces the law, and applies it to the present
case; and supports his arguments by authorities from the books respecting cases
of the like nature.

THE council for the prisoner then produces his witnesses in behalf of the
accused, who are also severally cross examined by the king's attorney. When the
whole of the testimony has been exhibited, of which the judges and the council
take notes in writing, the lawyer for the prisoner begins his defense: he
dwells upon, and enforces every favorable circumstance: he endeavors to
invalidate or throw doubts upon the proofs against him: he labors to explain
away the law, and finally addresses himself to the tender feelings of the jury.
He must now display the whole of his abilities, for he is not allowed to speak
again. The king's attorney then replies; he obviates the objections that have
been made, either to the testimony or to his statement of the law; he points at
the weakness of the defense; and enlarges upon the proof against the prisoner;
and, lastly, submits the whole matter to the determination of the jury.

THERE is then a customary, but not a necessary, indulgence allowed to the
prisoner in capital cases: and this I think a very pathetic part of the
process. The accused person has been all this time a silent spectator of the
proceedings; but he is now permitted to address the jury himself, and tell his
own story in his own way.

THIS, considering his critical situation, is certainly a very interesting part
of the ceremony; especially if the party is indeed innocent of the crime
alleged, but laboring under a combination of unlucky circumstances and
untoward appearances. I have been more affected by the simple narrative of the
prisoner himself, than by all the finished eloquence of the council who
undertook his defense.

AFTER this, the judge sums up the whole of the testimony to the jury: he omits
unnecessary details, and brings pointedly into view all those circumstances
which are of any importance either for or against the prisoner: and opens and
explains the law, if in the least doubtful, and often instructs the jury what
determination they ought, in his opinion, to give.

THE jury, being now charged with the whole matter, are conducted to some
private apartment, where they are shut up, and a constable is placed on the out
side of the door; and there they must remain, secluded from all external
communication whatever, without meat, drink or sustenance of any kind until
they shall have unanimously agreed in their judgment. Any one dissenting voice
will annihilate the verdict or decision. When they have all agreed, they give
notice thereof to the constable at the door, who immediately sends information
to the judge. The court, if not then sitting, forthwith convenes, and the
prisoner is again sent for; for it is absolutely necessary that the verdict
should be given in his presence. The jury then come into court, and the clerk
having called over their names, to show that none are missing, asks them if
they have agreed in their verdict? -- they answer in the affirmative. He then
demands of them, whether the prisoner is guilty or not guilty of the crime with
which he stands charged? -- to which the foreman of the jury, in behalf of the
rest, answers guilty or not guilty, as the case may be. This the clerk
immediately records; and then desires the jury to attend to their verdict, as
the court has recorded it, demanding assent, which is again given.

THIS determination is called a verdict, or vere-dictum. Because the law
presumes that whatever twelve impartial men, so selected, so sworn, and so
instructed, shall, with united voice, declare, must inevitably be the truth:
neither will the law suffer a verdict, so given and recorded, to be afterward
doubted or contested.

IF the prisoner has been found guilty, the judge asks him what he has to say
why the sentence of the law should not be pronounced against him? For, even in
this last stage, the prisoner may, if he can, show some defect in the
proceedings, some uncertainty in the indictment, or other irregularity of force
sufficient to arrest the judgment. For when the law presumes that the jury have
delivered the truth, it supposes the whole proceedings to have been fair,
regular and legal; otherwise the verdict is not founded on such a basis as the
law requires, and therefore is not that legal uncontrovertible truth it looks
for. If the prisoner has no such plea to make, judgment is pronounced against
him; and he has no chance left but that of the king's pardon.

THERE are several minutiae in this process, and some exceptions which I have
omitted; but the above is the general outline of trial in criminal cases.

IN disputes about property, and actions for damages, the same principle
pervades the conduct of the suit; that is, to give the accused person all
possible opportunity of defense. In civil causes, however, there is no grand
jury; neither of the parties have a right to make peremptory challenges; and
the jury are not so rigidly treated as in cases of life and death; yet their
determination or verdict must be unanimous, as in the former case; and there is
no reversing their verdict, but by discovering some error in the proceedings,
or some fraud or corruption in the jury

SUCH is the mode of administering justice in this country. A system which is
deemed the palladium of British liberty, and the subject of perpetual
panegyric. And no wonder; since, as a system, nothing can be more perfect;
inasmuch as it is calculated to shield the poorest individual in the community
against the secret strokes of wealthy malice, or the open violence of
overweening power.

BUT I have given you a delineation of what the practice ought to be, not what
it may be. If the several parts of this machine should in all instances operate
according to their respective destinations, and no further, it would be very
difficult for a guilty person to escape, and next to impossible that an
innocent man should suffer: and in contests about property, there would be the
greatest reason to expect that impartial and substantial justice must take
place.

I could myself enlarge, with the zeal of an Englishman, on the external beauty
of this admirable fabric, and its apparent strength as a bulwark against
oppression. But let us now consider the diseases to which this constitution is
liable, and how far the good purposes of an excellent theory may be evaded or
perverted in the execution.

IN the first place, the sheriff selects and returns such persons as he pleases
to serve on both juries: and here he has uncontrolled opportunity of gratifying
his own partialities, if he has any, respecting the persons to be tried, or the
cause depending: for it matters not what private passions or prejudices the
juries may have, provided they are legally unexceptionable; and popular
governments are so subject to party rage, that such partialities in the sheriff
may sometimes be expected.

INDEED, it is not uncommon for people here to form a judgment of the issue of
a doubtful cause, from a knowledge of the jury which is to determine it. It is
to guard against the sheriff's packing a jury, as it is called, that peremptory
challenges are allowed in capital cases.

WHEN the grand jury is formed, the judge always addresses them from the bench.
This is called charging the grand jury, and should, according to the original
design, be no more than a general delineation of their duty, and the law
definitions of the crimes and offenses of which they are to make enquiry, and
present to the jurisdiction of the court: because these men being ^elected from
the mass of the people, are not supposed to be versed in legal precision and
niceties. But the judge often takes this opportunity of going farther: he
insinuates to them, that they may indict on mere probable testimony; that they
should attend only to the testimony in behalf of the prosecution, and have
nothing to do with any witnesses but those whom the king's attorney shall send
to them; and that if they find the bill, it will amount to nothing more than a
kind of legal accusation, which, if wrong, will be afterward set right by the
petit jury. But this is a deviation from the original constitution, which
placed the grand jury at the first entrance of the law to screen the innocent
from malicious prosecutions. For what with confinement, expense, and infamy, a
man may be effectually ruined by the grand jury's finding a bill against him,
although he may be afterward fully acquitted by the petit jury.

THUS charged, however, the grand jury retire. Now it should be considered that
these are called off from their ordinary business to perform a temporary duty,
not very agreeable in itself, and attended with no profit; but, on the
contrary, somewhat expensive. The ideas they have imbibed from the charge, have
a great tendency to relax the binding force of their oath of office: their
present duty is in the law line, and they do not pretend to understand law: but
the judge who does understand it, has instructed them; and on his opinion they
rest the sanctity of their oath, and the rights of their station. When such
principles prevail, the real use of a grand jury is in a great measure set
aside, and the institution becomes rather a burdensome ceremony, than a real
advantage.

THE judge has a manifest influence over both the grand and petit juries; but
he must exercise this with moderation and discretion; for the people have in
general a pretty just knowledge of their fundamental rights; these they will
suffer to be impaired through indolence, inattention, or persuasion, but will
never suffer them to be directly violated or called in question. The judge may
insinuate any thing, but if he openly assumes unconstitutional powers over the
jury, he is sure to be opposed with invincible firmness. And when ever an open
contest of this kind happens, the jury will certainly have the popular current
in their favor, unless they should be so notoriously in the the wrong as to
preclude all defense of their conduct.

THE petit jury, are now to be formed, or, as it is called, impannelled. And
here again is a large field for contrivance and address. In suits for damages
or for property, great dexterity is exercised on both sides for securing proper
men on the jury. So great are the apprehensions of unfairness and disadvantage
in this particular, that it is common for the parties in the suit to demand
that the cause shall be tried by what is called a struck jury. When this
happens the prothonotary, or clerk of the court, makes out a list of 48 good
and lawful men of the county, and from this list the parties, or their
attorneys for them, alternately strike out the names of such as they do not
approve until there are but 24 names left. These 24 are summoned by the sheriff
to attend the court, and the first 12 of the number who shall make their
appearance on the day of trial, and answer to their names, are to compose the
jury who are to determine the cause.

AFTER the jury have been impannelled, have heard the testimony and the
arguments, and the judge has summed up the whole matter, they retire to form
their verdict. For this purpose, as I before observed, they are excluded from
all external communication, sustenance, or comfort. By these means they are
compelled to make up a unanimous opinion or starve, be the case never so
doubtful or difficult. In this lies the principal fallacy of the system;
inasmuch as it is next to an impossibility that twelve men, of various tempers,
abilities and knowledge, should freely and decidedly unite in judgment on a
disputable and uncertain case. The truth is, they seldom suffer any great
extremities for conscience sake "And wretches hang, that jurymen may dine."

Garth.
. The last impressions they received came from the judge; his station, his
authority, his knowledge in the law, will give an almost invincible force to
these impressions. And the result is, that nine times in ten, the verdict,
especially in civil cases, is made conformably to his opinion.

THE designated legal power of an English judge is not very considerable; but
the official influence he has over the determinations of juries, subjects, in a
great degree, the lives and property of the people to his judgment or caprice.
And this masked power is the more dangerous; because, if he should be partial,
unjust, or corrupt, his conduct is screened by the intervention of the jury,
the final decision being their verdict, not his.

BUT suppose the judge states the case impartially to the jury, without making
any attempt to bias their judgment; the consequence is, that some leading man
in the jury will bring over the rest to his opinion, or some very obstinate man
wear out the patience of his fellows. There have been instances when eleven
have agreed upon a verdict and the persevering twelfth has compelled them to
change their minds, and yield to the superior strength of his constitution. It
often happens that a verdict is put to the vote, and the minority accedes to
the opinion of the majority. But most commonly the verdict is determined by the
advice of the judge, or the opinion of one of the jury of more reputed
knowledge than the rest. So that in disputable cases, it seldom, if ever,
happens that the final verdict is that free, clear, and unanimous decision of
twelve impartial men, under oath, which the law presumes, and which the system
requires. If two or more of the jury should be of contrary opinions, and
neither will give way, no verdict can possibly be given in. In such a case,
which sometimes occurs, there is but one remedy, which indeed is not
countenanced by law, but suggested by necessity. It is this. The sheriff, or
some body for him, steals away one of the jury from the bar, so that when the
clerk calls over their names, it is found that there are but eleven jurymen,
and this invalidates all the proceedings. The business must be put off to
another court, and the whole process begun de novo.

IF, when the verdict is given in, the judge should not approve of it, he
sometimes takes the liberty of sending back the jury to reconsider the matter;
but if they persist, he must finally submit and record the verdict. But such
cases seldom occur. In general the juries take their tone from the judge's
charge. When they have given in their decision, they are discharged, and
disperse, and are never after accountable for what they have done, unless in
cases of manifest corruption. It is with them, as with all popular bodies --
the individuals never think themselves responsible for what the whole have done.

IN causes which do not so much depend upon expositions of law, such as an
equitable adjustment of long and intricate accounts, or satisfaction for
injuries which cannot so well be ascertained by legal testimony, it is
customary for the contending parties to consent in open court to a reference.
Whereupon the judges nominate three or more indifferent persons to hear and
arbitrate the matters in variance. These arbitrators are not compelled to be
unanimous, neither are they subjected to the other restrictions of a jury. They
meet when and where they please, they investigate the business in their own
manner, and in their own time, and finally send their award in writing to the
court. And this award, when received and recorded, becomes the judgment of the
court.

ARBITRATIONS are liable to this imperfection. The arbitrators not having the
opinion of the judge to rest upon, not being restrained by rigid rules, being
few in number, and moving in an enlarged sphere of investigation, are more
pointedly and personally answerable, in reputation at least, for the rectitude
and propriety of their determination. In this situation, the general aim, in
difficult cases is, if possible, to satisfy both the contending parties, and so
avoid the complaints or censures of either; and this they frequently accomplish
by halving the value in dispute between them, when it can be done; and thus
substantial justice is done to neither.

ALTHOUGH the English law leans so strongly in favor of the accused in
criminal cases, giving every reasonable advantage to the party who is put upon
his defense, yet the form of process is so decided, and so well understood,
that unnecessary delays seldom occur; but this is far from being the case in
civil actions, which are attended with so many complex circumstances, forms,
and delays, all which incur a considerable expense, that the plaintiff, unless
in very plain cases, such as an undisputed bond, or note of hand, had better
put up with a small injury or loss, than to prosecute his suit, although in the
end he should prove successful. For here the the law is so unreasonably in
favor of the defendant, and allows him so many dilatory pleas, causes of
adjournment, and removals from court to court, that a wealthy wrong-doer, with
the help of able council, may weary out the most equitable claimant by
exhausting his patience and his purse.

WHEN an action is brought, the right or wrong of the case, or what is called
the merits of the cause, never come into view till toward the close of the
business. The only question is, whether the plaintiff has brought, and
conducted his claim, according to the strict forms of law, which forms are not
settled by any code or determinate system; but must be gathered from the
authorities, that is, from the reports of former determinations when like
points of process have been contested. The intention of throwing these
obstacles in the way of justice is to prevent the plaintiff from overreaching
the defendant in any stage of the process. But the evils attending this extreme
caution are more than a balance to the dangers it is designed to obviate.

IT would be in vain for me to give you the history of the many causes of delay
that may legally occur in the pursuit of a manifestly equitable title to a
tract of land, whole volumes would be insufficient to the purpose; my present
object only respects the mode of trial by jury, not the general practice of the
law in this country.

THE result of my observations amounts to this, that perfection is not to be
looked for in human institutions. The British form of government, as well as
British jurisprudence, exhibits a specious appearance of perfect security to
the subject; but this perfect security exists only in the theory; the proposed
object of the system is to ensure to the people all the good effects of wisdom
and integrity in their rulers and officers of justice; but wisdom and integrity
are absolutely necessary to the due execution of the plan. So that the effects
promised must in fact precede the operation; which is a political petitio
principii.

IN England, all laws are supposed to be made by the free consent of the
people, by means of their representatives; and judical decisions to be the
verdict of twelve impartial men, unanimous in their opinions. Neither of these
positions are strictly true in fact. It is most notorious, that, in the first
case, the members of parliament frequently purchase the voices of the people,
and afterward sell their own and votes to the king or his minister; so that
the king can almost always command a majority of parliamentary voices. And, in
the second case, the authority of the judge most commonly influences the
verdict of a jury; so that in truth, the king makes the laws, and the judges
execute them, whilst the people only seem to do both; -- and they remain
content with this seeming, until administration becomes too manifestly
oppressive and corrupt. When this happens they struggle for original rights, by
insurrections and revolutions; which is the popular remedy common to every
government, when that government is so exercised as to become insupportable.

THESE remarks may perhaps appear too severe, but they are founded in truth. A
candid Englishman would acknowledge, that the imperfections I have pointed at,
may, and sometimes do, occur in their political system; but he would urge, and
with some reason too, that, all circumstances considered, all evils balanced,
and all inconveniences averaged, the constitution of his country is the safest
and best yet devised for uniting these two difficult problems -- The security
of the people's rights, with the dignity and vigor of government.

I will readily acknowledge, that, upon the whole, justice is well
admininistred in this country; but I believe this is more owing to the
abilities and integrity of their judges, than to the infallibility of their
system. A bad judge might be a curse to the people, without directly violating
the legal rules of his official conduct.

FOR my own part, I am of opinion, that the happiness of a people depends more
upon their national character than their form of government. A truly
enlightened people cannot be enslaved real despotism cannot be exercised,
unless the mass of the people are either stupidly ignorant, grossly licentious
and immoral, or extremely begotted. In the first case, they submit to every
imposition, because they know nothing of the rights of nature, or the origin of
delegated power; in the second, they become enervated by luxury, and
indifferent to those rights and privileges, of which they have rendered
themselves unworthy; and, in the third, their tyrant will take care to have the
priesthood on his side, and make the consciences of his subjects the chains by
which he will hold them in the most abject servitude; or, which is not
improbable, the priesthood will be themselves the tyrants, and keep both the
sov^^^ign and his people under a most rigid control.

OF all the means by which a nation may be made miserable, this last is the
most wicked and most effectual. Freed from this servitude, a people cannot, in
this age of the world, long remain either stupidly ignorant, or grossly
immoral; but inexorable bigotry and rooted superstition lock up the doors of
knowledge and preclude reformation. No nation was ever famous for advancements
in arts and sciences, for discoveries in the truths of nature which enlarge the
mind, or the inventions of improvements, which add to the happiness or
convenience of mankind, whilst they were compelled by the prejudices of
education, or the rigor of the laws, to yield implicit faith and obedience to
the priesthood -- Quere -- Which was the most beneficial character to the world
-- the man who invented the Spinning wheel, or he who composed the Athanasian
Creed?

BUT I am wandering far from my subject, and have unexpectedly made my letter
of an unreasonable length. Had I foreseen how far my dissertation on jury
trials would have led me, I should probably not have undertaken it.

BUT what business have you or I with British jurisprudence? this question
never occured to me till now. If it had -- I might have saved myself a deal of
writing, and you much dull reading.

I shall leave this city in four or five weeks and pass over to France. You may
expect to hear from me, in a more entertaining style when I get to paris. Till
then -- Adieu! And believe me when I assure you that I am,

Dear Count, Your, etc. etc. etc.

AN attack was made upon the Bank of North America, by a then prevailing party.
Mr. T. Pain, author of a very popular pamphlet, which he published in the
beginning of the late war, under the title of Common Sense, took up his pen in
defense of the Bank. This performance occasioned the following ironical answer;
which, however, was never published; as the succeeding house of assembly soon
repealed the act for disfranchising that institution.

THE REMARKS OF UNCOMMON SENSE ON A LATE PAMPHLET ENTITLED DISSERTATIONS ON
GOVERNMENT, THE AFFAIRS OF THE BANK, etc. BY THE AUTHOR OF COMMON SENSE. 1785.
IT is said of Archimedes, that he would have undertaken to move the globe of
the earth, provided a place could be had whereon he might erect his machine. So
it is with speculative authors in every science. Grant them only a few first
principles or data, so called, because they must depend upon the reader's
benevolence for admission, being either not true in fact, or incapable of
proof; I say, grant but these, and the subsequent reasoning cannot easily be
controverted. Give an ingenious author a point whereon to rest the fulcrum of
his argument, and he will move whole systems, physical, moral, or political.

THE manifest purpose of the pamphlet before me is to justify the Bank of
North America as a useful institution, notwithstanding that it has been
declared by act of assembly to be a pernicious corporation, and incompatible
with the public safety; and to show that the legislature had no legal right to
deprive it of its charter; and also to censure and ridicule a respectable
committee of the house, upon whose report the act for disfranchising the bank
was founded.

IN order to prove that the assembly had no right to retract a charter once
granted, without some legal forfeiture or breach of conditions on the part of
the grantees, he rests the fulcrum of his arguments on certain first principles
of government. Now, if these first principles should be found on examination to
be laid on hollow ground; that is, that however true they may be in reason,
they are not true in fact, it will follow, that the author, the pamphlet, the
argument, and the bank of North America, must all sink together -- Let us then
take a short view of this writer's ground work.

COMMON-SENSE tells us, that in all governments there must be a sovereign power
somewhere, and that the repository where this sovereignty is placed is the
first criterion of distinction between a despotic form of government and a free
country: that in the first, it is possessed by an individual in hereditary
right; in the second, it is held by the people at large, and by them
periodically assigned to their delegates or representatives.

THE fallacy of this supposed axiom consists in his considering sovereign power
as a simple elementary principle; whereas it is manifestly divisible into at
least two component parts: viz. power, considered only in reference to the act
or thing done, or to be done; and will, considered as influencing and dictating
the exercise of that power. For instance, in a mill, the power of grinding corn
is in the stones, wheels, and movements of the machine; but the will is in the
miller, who superintends and governs its operations.

A mere act of power may be exercised without the concurrence of the will: and
that there may be a will, without a power to carry it into effect, will not be
denied. Now the true criterion of distinction between a despotic rule and the
free government of Pennsylvania consists in this; that in the former case, the
will and power are both inherent in an individual and his successors; whereas
in Pennsylvania, the power of making laws is in the house of assembly; but the
will that suggests, dictates to, and influences this power, is lodged with
certain learned and worthy persons, who are not members of that house, and who
are not vested with the power of actually making laws.

I begin to perceive that I have involved myself in a very difficult and subtle
argument -- I wish I may be able to make myself understood.

A majority of voices in the house of assembly have an undoubted right to order
the seals of the commonwealth to be affixed to a bill which has previously
passed the forms of legislation. The seals being thus affixed, that bill
becomes a law, binding on all whom it may concern, being citizens of the state.
Now this is a mere naked act of power, the authenticity of which does not at
all depend on a genuine concurrence of will in those who exercise it; for the
will is either directly or remotely the offspring of the understanding; yet the
law would be valid, although the majority that voted it into existence, should
be totally ignorant of its principles and operation.

I will put a case, which I confess, is a very absurd one; but it will serve to
illustrate my argument.

SUPPOSE a contest should arise respecting the true translation of a passage in
the original Hebrew bible; and that this difference of opinion should occasion
such hot disputes and angry parties in the state as to make it necessary for
the legislature to interfere and determine the point. Suppose innumerable
petitions pro and con to be laid before the house, and that at last a committee
should be appointed to enquire and report upon the merits of the question. This
committee having no knowledge of the Hebrew tongue will naturally apply to some
learned men -- heads of one of the parties, but not members of the house, who
will tell them -- This is a business you do not understand -- assemblymen never
read Hebrew, they only read newspapers -- but we will draw up a report for you.
The report is accordingly drawn up by these learned men -- the committee adopt
it -- they lay it before the house -- a bill is drawn conformably thereto, and
passed into a law, and so the question is decided. Now, in this transaction
there is a manifest separation of the will from the power. The committee had
the power of presenting the report, and the house of passing it into a law; but
neither the committee nor the house could possibly exercise any will on a
subject of which they had not the least knowledge or understanding. Their will
might, indeed, be exercised in the service of the party they wished to favor,
but not in the decision of the question.

On these principles I venture to assert in vindication of a late committee on
the affairs of the bank, against the aspersions of Common Sense, that, let
their report be proper or improper, let the law passed thereupon be just or
unjust, no censure can possibly lie against the committee, because, some few
instances excepted, no man is responsible for an act in which his will did not
concur.

BUT the committee does not stand in need of this or any other defense: their
report was perfectly just and proper, and exhibited an intimate knowledge of
the constitution and tendency of the bank of North America: as I shall fully
show when I come to enumerate the high crimes of the president, directors, and
stockholders of our national bank.

SOVEREIGNTY being thus divisible into will and power, the advantage of our
free government consists in this, that let who will exercise the power in the
house of legislation, the will of government may be possessed by worthy and
enterprising men out of the house, by which the labor of law-making is divided
and becomes easy and advantageous.

ON this singularity in our political system is founded a doctrine, not long
since advanced by learned men, which, if established, must fully answer the
purposes of those who discovered it, viz. that assemblies, juries, and such
confidential appointments are nothing more than LEGAL MACHINES, See Vol. I. p.
205
designed to give legal sanction to the views of those, who from superior
abilities and official greatness, are best qualified to influence and direct
them. It would be a strange thing indeed if the mill should grind what sort of
grain it pleased, and go, or stop, according to its own caprices.

THAT Common Sense has taken a wrong ground of argument is plain from this. He
gives a copy our bill of rights, and from thence deduces his system of
reasoning. It had been more to the purpose, if, instead of a bill of rights, he
had given us a bill of facts. A bill of rights is a very useful thing in the
commencement of a commonwealth; like leading strings for a child it assists it
in walking before it has strength to go alone. But when the government is
established, what occasion can there be for a bill of rights? When the house is
built, the scaffolding should be taken away. When the Ship is launched, she
leaves her former supports behind.

IT may be asked if the bill of rights and our frame of government are no
longer to be regarded, where shall we look for a rule of conduct?

I answer, precedent will always furnish sufficient rules of conduct. In the
commencement of a republic, it is plain there can be no precedents: all things
are then new; and a bill of rights, and a designated constitution, must be the
standards of authority. As the republic advances in strength and stability,
precedents sprout spontaneously, kill the roots of original rights, and in time
occupy the whole ground. The only difficulty is to create and establish the
first precedent. This done, it will soon become a powerful engine. Like an
anchor to windward, it will enable the skilful pilot to warp the ship against
wind and tide. It will also prove very prolific; for a good precedent, like a
good potatoe, contains within itself the eyes or germs of many future
precedents or potatoes.

FOR example -- In an early period of our political existence it seemed no
great impropriety that committees of the house of assembly should take the
opinions of the judges on questions respecting mere law-points. But this soon
grew to a custom of sending not questions only, but the bills themselves, to
the judges for consideration. Thus encouraged, their honors soon undertook to
recommend, and even draw petitions to the assembly for or against measures
which they wished to promote or oppose; to frame reports for committees; and
originated bills for the legislature; and to establish, by precedent, an
out-of-doors influence, so strong as virtually to possess the will of
government; leaving to the house of assembly the more mechanical power of
enacting laws.

THUS has a total change, in effect, taken place in our constitution. We began
with a single branch of legislation, and it is manifest that we have now three
distinct branches, viz. an upper house, a lower house, and a legislative
council. Our upper house, it is well known, meet at the state house in Chestnut
Street; the lower house assemble at the Indian Queen in Market Street The
members of assembly, who at this time combined to form a majority in the house,
used to meet in the evening at the Indian Queen, and there debate on questions
which were to be agitated next day in the house. After debate, the question was
put to vote, and the then minority were to vote next day in assembly, not
according to their own judgments, but according to this previous determination.
Such was the compact between them. See Page 86.
, and the judges from the supreme court form the legislative council. This
council, in conjunction with the lower house, is the repository of the will of
our sovereignty, having a direct influence upon the acts of government whilst
under deliberation. And the council have, by precedent, acquired a separate and
exclusive right of revising, altering, and amending, the laws after they have
been enacted and published. And thus has our bill of facts introduced a form
of government very different from that designated in our bill of rights and
original constitution.

HAVING shown, to satisfaction I hope, that common Sense has entirely mistaken
the present constitution of Pennsylvania, it follows, that all his arguments,
founded on what our system of government was, instead of what it is, must fall
to the ground. Amongst these, the first in rank is a subtle distinction
between an act and a law. The design of which is to show that there are not two
sorts of justice in nature. That the same justice which binds individuals in a
bargain, should bind the public in contracts. That the assembly, as the
representative body of the people, have a right to make contracts with
individuals, and that the party or parties contracted with, have an interest in
the bargain, which they cannot justly be deprived of by a mere arbitrary change
of opinion in the grantor. Because, such a contract is an act, and not a law,
subject to repeal at pleasure. And so applying this doctrine to the case of the
bank, he infers that the assembly had no right to deprive that corporation of
its character.

BUT the fallacy of this reasoning will appear, by considering the facts and
principles just stated; I mean the separation of the will from the power, in
the sovereignty of Pennsylvania.

SUPPOSE a remonstrance to be made to the house of assembly, representing, in
strong and plausible terms, the injustice in thus depriving the bank of its
charter, without any legal conviction of its offense, or forfeiture on the part
of that instition; the natural answer would be, the business of this house is
determined by a majority of voices; that majority is secured by the lower
house, and influenced and directed by the legislative council. All the power we
have is to enact laws, but what those laws shall be, depends upon those wise
men who are in possession of the sovereignty of will. If any thing should be
wrong, we are not responsible, being nothing more than legal machines. Go to
those who direct our proceedings, and perhaps they may give you satisfaction.

SHOULD application then be made to the lower house, and legislative council,
they would say, We have not the power to make laws, or to repeal them; we can
neither give charters, nor take them away; the seals of the commonwealth are
not in our possession; the house of assembly is alone competent to your purpose.

AND herein consists the excellency of our government, that let things go a^
they will, there is nobody to blame.

THE distinction between an act and a law made by Common Sense has no real
foundation; because he places what he calls an act of assembly upon the footing
of a grant or contract not revocable at pleasure. But the binding force of all
contracts depends upon a concurrence of the will and the act. And, therefore, a
grant, bond, or bargain, executed under compulsions, restraint, or undue
influence, is of no validity. Now, the will being severed from the power, in
our system of legislation, it is impossible that acts of government should be
no more than contracts. All acts of assembly are in fact laws, and as such,
liable to be revised, amended, or totally repealed, let Common Sense say what
he will.

IN the case of a grant or charter under specified conditions, there can be no
doubt, but that the grantees are strictly bound by the terms menmentioned; but,
it would be beneath the dignity of government, that it should be bound by any
conditions whatever: sovereign power scorns restraint.

I well recollect, that, in an argument held before a la^e house of assembly,
respecting the bank, the advocate for those who wished to overturn that
institution, proceeded on the grounds and principles I have above stated. Much
was urged in favor of the power of the house. The same power, he said, that
creates, can annihilate: it would be absurd to say, that the legislature can
do, but cannot undo; and so on. But, not a word of the justice or injustice,
the morality, or immorality, of the transaction; for these concern the will and
not the power, and were points on which the orator knew the house was not
responsible, for the reasons I have given above. I remember also, that I asked
a certain great lawyer The Ch -- J --.
, at that time, whether he thought that house could repeal the law for
emancipating negroes, and so make them slaves again? He answered, that it had a
legal power so to do.

SINCE then all acts of the legislature are laws, and as such may be altered or
repealed at pleasure, to what purpose has this author taken so much pains? Can
a pamphlet invalidate a law of the land? Will our assembly-men be ruled by the
dictates of Common Sense? Will they suffer the sovereignty of the state to be
bound in shackles? God forbid, that they should so far forget themselves their
friends, and adherents.

LET us now take a short view of the present situation of the bank. A learned
and enlightened committee of the house of assembly, after a fair and impartial
enquiry, have found and reported -- That the bank, as at present established,
is in every view incompatible with the public safety -- and a law founded on
this report, has been duly enacted, taking from that institution the charter
which the imprudence of a former assembly had granted and confirmed to it. To
what purpose then, I again ask, has Common Sense taken so much pains? This
corporation, so far as it depends for existence on the charter in question,
exists no more. This cannot be denied. Does this author expect that our present
assembly should work miracles, and raise the dead? He cries out against the
illegality of the proceedings that disfranchised the bank; what good can this
do? After a criminal has been executed, what purpose can it answer to to
discover insufficiencies in the court that convicted him, or irregularities in
his trial? Will these discoveries bring the man to life, and give him the
chance of a new and fairer trial? Surely not.

A corporation can have but one life, viz. a legal or political life; but an
individual may have two lives, and may exist in one, though deprived of the
other -- that is, an individual may be alive and in health in fact, and at the
same time absolutely dead in law. An instance of this happened some time since
in the county of York. At a court of common pleas there, an ingenious lawyer
contrived to have a report brought into court, that the plaintiff, in a certain
action then depending, had suddenly died. This report was circulated with such
probable circumstances that nobody doubted but that the poor man was dead. The
action of course abated by the death of the plaintiff, and it was so entered
upon the docket. At the next court the plaintiff appeared in propria persona,
and complained loudly of the injury that had been done him by this false
report: but the ingenious lawyer aforesaid, rose up and assured the court that
the man was dead, notwithstanding his impertinent intrusion there: and for the
truth of this, he appealed to the entry on the docket; hoping that the court
would not allow any testimony to be given in contradiction to a record, which,
he observed, is the highest standard of truth known in law.

NOW, although an individual may enjoy a double or twofold life -- as is clear
from this man's being capable of a double death, for the plaintiff certainly
died over again -- yet corporations having no real, but only a political
existence, can die but once. Well! then, the annulling the charter of the bank,
having deprived that institution of its political life, so far at least as it
depended thereupon, The bank had a charter from Congress, as well as from the
state of Pennsylvania
it necessarily follows that this bank is defunct, demised, deceased, and
departed. And there is but one way left, that I know of, in which it can make
its appearance amongst us; and that is, by the walking of its discontented
ghost.

SOME have thought that the bank may still be considered as politically
existing, by virtue of the charter it holds under the Congress of the United
States: but as this is a very nice question, and replete with law learning, I
shall reserve it for future discussion in a chapter by itself. It only remains
now to show, that the bank has justly deserved the fate it has found, by
enumerating some of the manifold crimes and misdemeanors it has committed, and
the horrible dangers and evils to the state with which that institution was
pregnant.

I cannot do this better than by following the steps of that enlightened
committee, who may be said to have been the jury which passed between the
commonwealth and the bank on its life and death, under the sacred sanction of
an oath of office. They have found facts, which, after verdict, ought not to be
disputed; that is to say --

THE committee, to whom were referred the petitions concerning the bank,
established at Philadelphia, and who were instructed to enquire, whether the
said bank be compatible with the public safety, and that equality which ought
ever to prevail between the individuals of a republic, beg leave to report:
that it is the opinion of this committee, that the said bank, as at present
established, is in every view incompatible with the public safety. That in the
present state of our trade, the said bank has a direct tendency to banish a
great part of the specie from the country, so as to produce a scarcity of
money, and to collect into the hands ot the stockholders of the said bank,
almost the whole of the money which remains amongst us. That, the accumulation
of enormous wealth in the hands of a society who claim perpetual duration, will
necessarily produce a degree of influence and power which cannot be entrusted
in the hands of any set of men, whatsoever, without endangering the public
safety. That, the said bank, in its corporate capacity, is empowered to hold
estates to the amount of ten millions of dollars; and, by the tenor of the
present charter is to exist for ever, without being obliged to yield any
emolument to the government, or to be at all dependant upon it. That, the great
profits of the bank, which will daily increase as money grows scarcer, and
which already far exceeds the profit of European banks, have tempted foreigners
to vest their money in this bank, and thus to draw from us large sums for
interest. That foreigners will doubtless be more and more induced to become
stock-holders, until the time may arrive, when this enormous engine of power
may become subject to foreign influence: this country may be agitated with the
politics of European courts, and the good people of America reduced once more
into a state of subordination and dependence upon some one or other of the
European powers. That, at best, if it were even confined to the hands of
Americans, it would be totally destructive of that equality which ought to
prevail in a republic. We have nothing in our free and equal government capable
of balancing the influence which the bank must create; and we see nothing,
which in the course of a few years, can prevent the directors of the bank from
governing Pennsylvania. Already we have felt its influence indirectly
interfering in the measures of the legislature. Already the house of assembly,
the representatives of the people, have been threatened that the credit of our
paper currency will be blasted by the bank. And if this growing evil continues,
we fear the time is not very distant when the bank will be able to dictate to
the legislature what laws to pass, and what to forbear.
THAT the bank, as established, is incompatible with the public safety. That,
in the present state of trade, it had a direct tendency to banish specie from
the country, and thereby accumulate it in the hands of the stock-holders. That
this accumulation of enormous wealth in the hands of those very citizens who
are instrumental in banishing wealth from the country, will necessarily produce
a degree of influence and power which cannot be trusted in the hands of a set
of men, not attached to the party whose interests the committee wish to
promote, without endangering the very existence of that party. That government
had not received, nor was likely to receive, any advantage from this
institution; because it could only borrow from the bank for public use, and not
seize upon the st^ck whenever exigence, convenience, or the views of those in
power, require it. That, the profits of the bank being in money, must daily
increase, as money grows scarcer; and has already so far exceeded the profits
of European banks, as to tempt foreigners to increase this scarcity of money,
by vesting large sums in the bank, for which they only draw interest. That,
foreigner after foreigner, may be thus tempted by our increasing scarcity of
money, until all the specie of Europe shall be accumulated in the bank; and
then princes and states will hold annual meetings for the election of a
president and directors to manage this enormous engine of power: and so our
country will be again agitated by European politics, and the good people of
America, by possessing the wealth of foreign nations, will become dependant
upon them. That even supposing no interference of foreigners, yet our own
citizens being stockholders might in time, by banishing all the specie from the
country, become so enormously rich and powerful as to seize on the government
of the state, subvert the constitution, and give legislative authority to the
president and directors of the bank.

AFTER this black catalogue of offenses and possible evils, who will say that
the bank has not justly merited political death? But besides these pernicious
effects, these fears and apprehensions, other evil designs and abominable
practices have been suggested against this institution -- such as, that Mr. F
--, once in every week, rises at midnight, and with a dark lanthorn in his
hand, enters the vaults of the bank through the subterraneous passage leading
from the cellars of his own house into those vaults; that he there meets
Beelzebub and Blackbeard the pirate; and that these three, sitting upon boxes of
money, hold consultations, and conspire against the peace and safety of the
commonwealth. That one of the schemes of this infernal triumvirate is to bribe
the Algerines with the money of the bank to seize upon all American vessels,
except those in which R -- M --, esquire. is interested: and another is to change
our republican form of government to a monarchy. In which case R -- M -- is to
be king of Pennsylvania; T -- W --, esquire. viceroy; Mr. F --, chief justice, and
all the clerks of the bank justices of the peace.

BUT as the committee, notwithstanding the strict enquiry they have made, have
not sound or reported these facts, I am inclined, to th^^k they may not be
true. It would not be amiss, however, that the assembly should order Mr. F --
's cellars to be examined, and if the subterraneous passage should be found, it
will give probability to the suggestion; and then further enquiries might lead
to a discovery of the whole plot.

A SPECIMEN OF A MODERN LAWSUIT. OR THE CONDUCT OF A COURT OF JUSTICE
DISPLAYED; INTENDED AS A MODEL FOR A NEW BOOK OF MODERN REPORTS: IN THE STYLE
OF THE YEAR 1786. IN SPECULO.
THE PREFACE.
IN a government professedly free, that is a government of laws, binding on the
whole by the consent of legal representatives of the whole, it seems necessary
that not only the laws themselves, but what is called the practice of the law,
should be better understood by the people at large.

IT is in vain for a person not versed in the mysteries of the profession to
look into books of reports for the history of a trial at law. He may as well
look for religion in the works of Jacob Behmen, or the practice of physic in
Aristotle. He will find the subject matter concealed in technical jargon, and a
cloud of artificial terms, to many of which professors themselves have not yet
assigned a determinate meaning.

WHEN a law first issues from the hands of the legislature it is generally
sufficiently intelligible. It is like metal from the smelting furnace. But when
it has undergone the operations of a judicial forge, it assumes appearances
very different from its first form. For law is the most malleable thing in
nature, and what with the heat of contest and the hammers of legal forms, it
soon becomes, in judicial construction, no more like the original than a bar of
iron is like the pig of metal from which it has been forged.

I think it would be of considerable use, that this process should be
delineated at large; that the people may have an opportunity of knowing whether
their own acts are executed according to their spirit and intent, and whether,
what is called the common law, is fairly construed and applied in their courts
of justice, or not.

I know of no better way to effect this, than by recommending that all trials
and law proceedings should be published in detail, with as sparing a use of
mere professional language as possible. The case in contest should first be
stated in as few and plain words as may be; and then should follow the whole
proceedings of the court; the arguments of council; the interferences and
opinions of the judges, etc. all in dramatic form.

TO elucidate my scheme, I will attempt the report of a case in the manner I
think it ought to be done.

IT is scarcely necessary to premise that the case I shall state, the dramatis
personae, and other circumstances, are altogether fictitious, and designed only
as a mode for learned reporters in time to come.

SPECIMEN OF A MODERN LAWSUIT. THE CASE STATED.
LAWRENCE LANDLORD was seized in fee of 300 acres of land: that is, it was his
own estate. He leased 100 acres thereof, together with a farm-house, barn,
orchard, etc. to his neighbor Timothy Tenant, for a term of years, reserving a
certain rent, and covenanting for several specific articles and privileges:
amongst these was the following.

AND it is hereby further agreed by and between the said parties, that the said
Timothy Tenant shall at all times, during the term of this present lease,
preserve, keep, and set apart for the use, benefit, and behoof, of the said
Lawrence Landlord, the apple-skins or parings of all the apples used in the
said Timothy Tenant's family; to the intent and purpose that the said Lawrence
Landlord may therewith feed, fatten, and raise up his pig or pigs: Provided
always, that the said Lawrence Landlord, by himself or his servants, and at his
own expense, cost and trouble, shall send for, fetch, carry, or cause to be
carried, away the apple-skins or parings aforesaid, for the purposes aforesaid.

AND so it was, that under a construction of this clause, and by advice of
council learned in the law, Lawrence Landlord had sent for and taken away the
APPLES growing in the orchard of Timothy Tenant. Whereupon the said Timothy
brought his action of trespass, and sued for damages for the wrong and injury
done.

THIS cause had been instituted in the common pleas, and gone through the
ceremonials of many terms. At length, all objections being obviated, and all
causes of delay removed, the defendant finding that the trial must certainly
come on, removed the cause, by habeas corpus, to a superior court. After again
waiting all reasonable and unreasonable adjournments, objections and delays,
the argument came on in the superior court, on Thursday the (...) day of (...)
A. D. 1786.

PRESENT, The judges in their robes, viz. The honorable chief justice I, Judge
YOU, Judge HIM,
with the officers of the court, counselors of the bar, jurymen, etc. and a
great number of idle citizens, idle apprentices, and blackguard boys.

(The crier opens the court.) Chapter Jus. (Speaking to one of his brethren.) Have
you seen the papers of today?


Jud. YOU. I just cast my eyes over them; but had not time to read any thing
regularly through.


Chapter Jus. Full of libels and abuse! The printers have become so licentious,
that it is high time to curb and restrain the press.


Jud. HIM. High time indeed. I wish the assembly would pass a short act,
empowering the judges of the supreme court to superintend the press, and
license publications. Government will never be respectable whilst the presses
are free; by free, I mean so licentious.


Coun. X. I wait the court's leisure --


Chapter Jus. Well! what is the business?


Coun. X. If your honors please -- the cause marked for today, is Timothy
Tenant versus Lawrence Landlord; and I would move the court that the trial
should now come on.


Chapter Jus. Let the jury be called --


Coun. X. If the court pleases -- the jury are empannelled, and we are ready to
proceed.


C. Jus. Well! what is the title of this cause?


Coun. X. Timothy Tenant versus Lawrence Landlord -- action on the case --


Chapter Jus. HAND me a sheet or two of paper -- Well! go on --


Coun. X. May it please your honors! and you, gentlemen of the jury! -- In
this cause I am council for the plaintiff. It is an action of trespass, and the
cause of action is set forth in the declaration, which states; that on the 10th
day of October, in the year 1783, Lawrence Landlord, the defendant, did with
his servants and accomplices, enter the demesne of the plaintiff, and with
force and arms, and so forth, then and there did take and carry away one bushel
of apples, the property of the plaintiff, and of the growth and produce of a
certain orchard, which then was, and still is, in the rightful tenure,
possession, and occupancy, of the plaintiff; by virtue of a certain lease or
contract, the term of which was not then, nor is yet, expired.

IF the court pleases, I shall proceed to establish the facts, by exhibiting a
copy or counterpart of the lease, and producing witnesses to prove the wrong
and injury done.


Court. Z. May it please your honors! we will save the gentleman the trouble,
and the court their time and attention, by demurring to the testimony offered.
We admit the facts, and shall rest our defense upon the legal construction of
the clause in the lease, which reserves to Lawrence Landlord all the
apple-skins or parings, and so forth; and shall show most clearly, that both by
the intendment of the parties, and the very words of the contract, all apples
growing on the premises were reserved to the use of the lessor.


Coun. X. Here then, if the court pleases, we join issue. It is not pretended
that we have in any instance violated the terms of our lease, or incurred any
forfeiture. The clause in contest: is in these words: And it is hereby further
agreed by and between the said parties, that the said Timothy Tenant shall at
all times, during the term of this present lease, preserve, keep, and set
apart, for the use, benefit and behoof the said Lawrence Landlord, the
apple-skins, or parings, of all the apples used in his, the said Timothy
Tenant's family, to the intent and purpose, that the said Lawrence Landlord may
therewith feed, fatten, and raise up his pig or pigs. Provided always, and so
forth.

NOW, it lies with the defendant to show that there is no difference between
the apple skins or parings, and the apples themselves.

THE facts being admitted, no further opening of the cause is necessary. The
court and jury will perceive the point on which it turns, viz. the construction
and legal operation of the clause just read. I shall wait for the arguments and
authorities that may be produced on the other side, only observing for the
present, that the injury we have sustained has been very grievous; the peace
of our family has been disturbed by strangers entering with a usurped
authority, and snatching, as it were, the victuals from our mouth, and from the
mouths of our children. And further, that if this right should be established
in the lessor, we shall have lost not only the dumplins of that day, but all
future dumplins, apple-pies and apple-puddings, duthe term of our lease.


Coun. Z. May it please your honors! and you, gentlemen of the jury! In this
cause wherein Timothy Tenant is plaintiff, and Lawrence Landlord defendant; I
am council for the defendant. As there is no dispute about the facts, much time
will be spared, and the argument brought within a narrow compass.

WE are charged, gentlemen of the jury, with having, with force and arms, and
so forth, taken certain apples from an orchard in the tenure of the plaintiff.
Setting aside the literal meaning of those formidable words -- with force and
arms, which in this pul-lace, are mere forms of law, and therefore have no
meaning at all. I say, setting aside these formidable words, we acknowledge and
confess that we took certain apples from an orchard in the tenure of Timothy
Tenant the plaintiff; and we contend, and we hope we shall be able to
demonstrate to this honorable court, by arguments most cul-lear and pul-lain,
drawn from the pe-urest fountains of law, and supported by most respectable
authorities, that we have committed no wrong whatever; no bur-reach of our
contract; and that Timothy Tenant has no rightful cause of compul-laint
against us. And why? Because we say, when we assigned this estate to the
lessee, we expur-ressly reserved the fur-ruit of this orchard to our own use,
or rather to the use of our pig or pigs. And how will this appear? most
cul-learly by attending to the clause in the lease, which is the object of our
pur-resent discussion.

THIS cul-lause, gentlemen of the jury, is in these words: "And it hereby
further agreed by and between the said parties," etc. etc. etc.

NOW, may it please the court, here is a full and com-pul-lete agreement,
covenant or contract, between the lessor and lessee.

AN agur-reement, gentlemen of the jury, is defined in law, agregatio mentium
de re aliqua facta vel facienda: that is, a concurrence of will in the parties,
respecting something done or to be done; and a contract or covenant is an
agur-reement substantiated and solemnized in full form of law. Further, may it
please the court, obligation arising from contracts are divided and
distinguished, ex re, from a thing done; ex verbis, from words; ex literis,
from writing; and ex consensu, from consent.

NOW I shall pur-rove to the satisfaction of the court and jury, that the
present contract is full and com-pul-lete in all these essential circumstances;
that is to say; ex re, ex verbis, ex literis, and ex-consensu. And, if so, we
apprehend it must follow as cul-learly as a pur-roblem in Euclid, that the
lessor had a right to take the apples of the lessee, and give them to his pigs.
May it please the court, the res, rem, or re, in this contract, is the right
reserved by the lessor to enter the pur-remises of the lessee, and take away
all the apple-skins or parings of apples, and so forth; the very words of the
lease. Now, if the court pleases, how is this res, rem, or re, confirmed and
established? Why, ex verbis from the words of the clause, and ex literis from
the letters which compose those words; and the ex consensu is cul-lear beyond
the possibility of a doubt, by the seals and signatures of the parties,
solemnly executed in the pur-resence of several subscribing witnesses.

I now come, if the court pleases, to prove by solid argument, supported by a
cul-loud of authorities most respectable in law, that by the word apple-skins
and parings, the apples themselves will pass by con-stur-ruction of law and
right reason.

NOW, if your honors please, it is most pul-lain and manifest, that the apple
skin cannot possibly be transferred, given or taken away, without the apple
itself passing therewith. And why? For this pul-lain, and cul-lear reason,
because, if the apple-skin or paring be severed or separated from the apple, it
is no longer an apple-skin, but becomes, in its severed state, only the skin of
an apple; and so says the law. Coke's Reports, Part IInd page 225, Severance
of corn, is the cutting and carrying it off from the ground; and sometimes, the
setting out the tithe from the rest of the corn, is called severance: most
cul-learly then, the cutting the skin from the apple, is a severance; and such
a severance as the law notices and recognizes. Gentlemen of the jury! I hope I
am understood; this is a very important point. I say, there is a material
difference between an apple skin and the skin of an apple. And, why? Because a
reservation of the apple-skin is, by constur-ruction of law, a reservation of
the apple itself. And, why? For this pul-lain and manifest reason; because,
when the outward bounds, lines, or limits; or, as the law expresses it, the
pars continens of any matter or thing is discur-riptively conveyed, assigned,
or reserved, the internal parts of that matter or thing must also be conveyed,
assigned, or reserved, otherwise there would be an absolute severance, which
the law abhors; for, it is an adjudged case, that tenants in common of a horse
cannot severe their property.

BUT, may it please your honors! I hasten to produce authorities directly in
point: and first, if the court pleases, I will take up O'Farrell's Reports,
page 106.

MISTAKE versus BLUNDER.
THIS was an action on the statute of Patrick 4th chap. 16. called the statute
of nails, which prohibits all subjects within the realm from cutting or paring
their nails on a Friday: under the penalty of twenty shillings for every
offense, to be recovered by the overseers of the poor, for the use of the poor
of the county in which the offense should be committed. Mistake and others were
overseers of the poor for the county of Antrim, and brought their action under
the statute against the defendant. And it was in proof that the defendant had
pared his thumb nails and his great toe nails on Friday, to wit: on Friday, the
-- day of --, at twelve o'clock in the night of the same day.

COUNCIL for the defendant demurred to the facts; observing, that as this was a
penal law, it ought to be strictly construed. And thereupon, took three points
of defense, viz. First, it was urged, that night is not day, and the statute
expressly says Fri-day and not Fri-night; and the proof is, that the cutting
was at night. Secondly, it was contended, that twelve o'clock on Friday night
is in fact the beginning of Saturday morning, and therefore not within the
statute. And, thirdly, that the words of the statute are UNGUES DIGITORUM --
Anglici -- the nails of the FINGERS, and the testimony only respects thumbs and
great toes.

THE jury gave in a special verdict: whereupon, after long advisement, the
judges were unanimously of opinion, on the first point, that in construction of
law, day is night and night is day; because a day consists of 24 hours, and the
law will not allow of fractions of a day d^ minimi non curat^ lex -- in
English, the law don't stand upon trifles. On ^he second point, that 12 o'clock
at night, being the precise line of division between Friday night and Saturday
morning, is a portion or point of time which may be considered as belonging to
both, or to either, or to neither, at the discretion of the court. And,
thirdly, that in construction of law, fingers are thumbs and thumbs are
fingers, and thumbs and fingers are great toes and little toes, and great toes
and little toes are thumbs and fingers; and so judgment for the plaintiff.

NOW, may it please the court, from this authority it is most cul-lear, that
apple-skins are apples, and that apples are apple-skins. I am confident in
saying that the smallest particle of doubt cannot remain in the unpur-rejudiced
mind. But to make the matter still more cul-lear and pul-lain, as if it were
possible to demonstrate demonsturration, here is an act of assembly -- an act
of our own government, which brings the matter home to the very door of the
pur-resent case. Acts of assembly, printed volume, page 314. This, if the court
pleases, is an act for laying an excise on cider, and the words are "all apples
or apple-skins." -- Now the article or is in this place neither conjunctive nor
disjunctive, but pe-urly explanatory: as if the law had said, all apples -- or,
which is the same thing, all apple-skins.

HERE, Gentlemen of the jury, the legislature has declared itself on the very
point before the court. And it is cul-lear as the sun at noon day when not a
cul-loud is to be seen in the sky, that apple-skins or parings and the apples
themselves are, in constur-ruction of law, one and the same thing. And it
follows, as undeniably as a pur-obl^m in Euclid, that when the present lessor
reserved the apple-skins or parings, he, at one and the same time, reserved the
apples also for his use, or rather, as the contract expur-resses it, for the
use of his pig or pigs.

FOR what would be the consequence, may it please the court -- what would be
the consequence of any other construction? If the lessee should eat the apples
himself, would this fatten the lessor's pigs? Surely not -- Would the dumplins
and apple-pyes of the pul-laintiff's children fatten the defendant's pigs?
Surely not -- Would the cider made by Timothy Tenant raise up the pigs of
Lawrence Landlord? Surely not -- Does the clause in the lease say that the
tenant shall have all the apples, and leave only the skins of apples for the
landlord? It says no such thing.

WITH the leave of the court, I will put a case -- Suppose a miller has a sack
of meal: I ask him what he will take for that sack, and we agree for twenty
shillings. After the agreement, and after I have paid the stipulated price, the
cur-rafty miller may as well empty out the meal and give me the void sack for
my money, as that the pul-laintiff, in the pur-resent cause, should be entitled
by this honorable court to eat the apples himself, and give only the skins of
apples to the defendant.

GENTLMEN of the jury! this is a cause of gur-reat magnitude, no less than
determining by solemn adjudication the distinction between an apple-skin and
the skin of an apple. But I have the fullest confidence that this enlightened
court and jury, will see as cul-lear as the sun when not a single cul-loud
intervenes, that the skin of an apple is or may be the skin of any apple; but
an apple-skin is the skin of a known and determinate apple; annexed to and
circumscribing that apple; being in truth the pars continens thereof. As if one
should take an apple in his hand, and say -- this, pointing to the part,
(having cut the apple in half) is the apple seed -- this, (still pointing to
the respective parts,) is the apple-core -- this, is the apple pulp -- and
this, (still pointing,) is the apple skin -- the pars continens of the whole;
and so, altogether, viz, seed, core, pulp and skin, make up a full and
com-pul-lete apple -- or, as the law would express it, an apple-skin pars pro
toto -- for the law delights in brevity.

MAY it please the court, I come now, in as few words as possible, to answer an
argument which may be brought on the other side, founded on these words in the
clause under consideration: Of all the apples used in his the said Timothy
Tenant's family. And here, most pur-robably, the gentleman of council for the
pul-laintiff, will observe with his usual ingenuity, that these words strongly
indicate a severance to be intended. Otherwise, as he will say, how shall the
apples be used in the family of the lessee, if, under the term apple-skins, the
whole, that is, both skins and apples are reserved to the lessor?

SUCH an argument might have weight with a less enlightened jury than that I
have the honor now to address. But let us bur-ring this seeming reason to the
test of law, that unerring rule of right, that apex, summit, and perfection of
human reason, and we shall soon see the mist of error vanish, and the cul-lear
sun of truth bur-reak forth with unrivalled ur-radiance.

THE words are: of all the apples used in his (the pul-laintiff's) family. We
will now consider, if the court pleases, the doctrine of USES, as laid down in
the books. And here it is to be observed, that the habendum of every deed
consists of two limitations; the one of estate or property which the feoffee,
or party possessive, shall receive by the deed; and the other the limitation of
the use or uses: that is, for whose use he shall hold the property: by which
means the possession is in one man, and the use or pur-rofit in another. And
for this, I turn to Gilbert's law of uses, page 175. An use, at common law, was
an equitable right which he reserved, who conveyed a legal estate to another;
upon trust and confidence, that the person to whom he so conveyed it, would
nevertheless suffer him to take the rents and profits of the land.

HERE then it is pul-lain to demonstration, that the lessor, the defendant in
the pur-resent cause, has reserved the pur-rofits or fur-ruits of the land
although he has leased the soil itself to the pul-laintiff. And how has he done
this? Not by reserving the apples gur-rowing on the premises. This would have
been equivocal and uncertain, as the vulgar tongue for the most part is. And
why? Because it is not certain and determinate what an apple is -- There are
fur-ruits, which in common parlance are called oak-apples; others balsam
apples; others crab-apples, and so forth: and even potatoes are denominated les
pommes de terre; that is, earth apples; or, as some translate it, the apples of
the earth. How, I say, has the lessor made his reservation? Not by reserving
the skins of apples; for then cestuy que use, the lessor's pigs would have
nothing but the offals, the excrementitious parts of the fur-ruit to fatten on.
But he has, with tur-rue legal precision, reserved the apple-skins which
include the apples themselves; as the metes and boundaries of a tract of land
incul-lude and convey the land itself, with all its buildings, impur-rovements
and appurtenances. And why? Because by a maxim of law, cujus est solum ejus est
usque ad coelum.

BUT to return to the doctrine of uses -- Gilbert's law of uses page 26: Though
at common law cestuy que use had no power over the land, yet he might alien the
use; because every one might dispose of the rights that are in him.

HERE then, if your honors please! we see, that the lessor, the pur-resent
defendant, has a power, not only to use the apples himself, but might, if he
so thought fit, sell or dispose of them to another. A fortiori shall he give
them to his own pigs. And why? Because, says this bur-right luminary of law,
Baron Gilbert, Every man may dispose of the right that is in him

MAY it please the court, I could go on, op^^ up, and display the whole
doctrine of trusts and uses, as laid down in the books; and, at every step, it
would appear cul-lear, cul-learer, and still more cul-lear, that the words of
the contract, "used in his family," are, by intendment of law, to be considered
as meaning no more than a naked possession in trust for cestuy que use the
defendant's pigs.

BUT I shall not take up the time of this honorable court, by heaping proof
upon proof, or in attempts to elucidate the ur-radiance of the sun.

I confidently submit the defendant's cause to the court and jury: having, as I
hope, quenched every scintilla of doubt in the unpur-rejudiced mind.


Chapter Jus. Let the court be adjourned to three o'clock this afternoon; and I
expect that the jury, (...) ^e gentlemen of the bar, will be punctual in the^^
attendance* We shall wait for no man in this court. I am determined to
establish punctuality wherever I am concerned. I insist upon every man's
attendance at three o'clock precisely. We shall not waste our precious time in
waiting for other people's conveniences.


(The court rises.) (Four o'clock.) Crier. Yonder comes the chief justice.


The judges take their seats Chapter Jus. Let the courts of oyer and terminer, and
the supreme court be opened.


(The crier opens the court.) Coun. X. May it please your honors! and you
gentlemen of the jury!

I come now to close the pleadings in this cause, by replying to the arguments
and authorities advanced in behalf of the defendant.

BUT, before I enter on the subject, I beg leave to clear the way now by
denying one of the gentleman's authorities to be genuine. I did not choose to
interrupt him at the time; but he may obviate the objection now if he can; the
authority I allude to was cited from the printed volume of our acts of
assembly, page 314. in these words, "all apple skins or apples." Now, I say
that this is a false and erroneous publication of the law, and of no authority.
I have here, if the court pleases, a certified copy of this law taken from the
original record in the roll's office. By which it it will appear that the
words, as enacted, have a very different import from what they have, or may be
supposed to have, as published is this spurious edition of the laws of this
commonwealth.


Chapter Jus. I will not suffer the authority of that book to be questioned whilst
I preside in this court -- Let me not hear a word more on this head.


Crier. Make room there for the grand jury! clear the way for the jury!


Cl. Gentlemen, have you any bills or presentiments to make?


(The Foreman presents a paper.) Chapter Jus. What! the bill returned ignoramus! --
Well! And pray gentlemen, what can be your reason for not finding this bill?


Foreman. Because, after a careful examination of witnesses, for and against
the party accused, we did not think the charge sufficiently supported.


Chapter Jus. And what business had you with any witnesses but those furnished by
the court? How dare you to tamper with witnesses unknown to me or the attorney
general?


Foreman. We have solemnly sworn to make diligent enquiry, and true presentment
make; and we apprehend that we should not have performed our duty if we
rejected any legal testimony that offered respecting the matter we had in
charge -- -- However, we acted under the solemnity of an oath, and have
discharged our consciences.


Chapter Jus. Sir! I will not be insulted! Tell me of your oath and your
conscience! You knew it was my desire that you should find this bill, and that
ought to have satisfied you -- Conscience, indeed! The court is the keeper of a
grand jury's conscience; I am sure I sent you a sufficient testimony to satisfy
your conscience; all we want of you is to give legal form to our proceedings --
It would be a fine court indeed, if a parcel of ignorant merchants should have
it in their power to control our proceedings in the administration of justice
-- But you have other reasons than conscience for this conduct. How dare you
receive other testimony than such as had been qualified and furnished by the
court? But this shows your extreme ignorance of law -- of even the first
principles of law.


Foreman. May it please your honor! We did not come here to be abused; we have
been called upon to perform a duty neither agreeable in itself nor profitable
to us; we have been forced from our private business (pressing enough at this
time on most of us) to attend this court. Our duty has been designated to us in
a very solemn oath, the terms of which are, as we think, too plain to be
misunderstood, even by the most unlearned; and we are humbly of opinion, that
--


Chapter Jus. Hold your tongue, sir -- I order you to hold your tongue -- What
shall we be braved and insulted in the execution of our office? -- I command
you to hold your tongue.


Jud. HIM. Gentlemen of the grand jury, you seem to have entirely mistaken the
business. You have got a wrong notion of your own office and character, I mean
as the law considers you; whatever your individual knowledge or merits may be,
as a grand jury, the law defines you to be a number of unlearned men, got
together to form a part of the legal machinery of the court. As to your oath of
office; this is also nothing more than a law-form, and like other law forms,
has, or may have, a very different import from what the same words would have
in common acceptance; the true intent and meaning of this oath has been
explained to you by the chief justice, in his excellent charge, previous to
your entering on the duties of your office. You were then told, that when this
oath enjoins you diligently to enquire, and true presentment make, it means
nothing more, in the law language, than that you are to consider, from the
testimony furnished by the court, whether there may not be probable cause of
suspicion, that the accused party is guilty of the crime laid to his charge;
and this ought to have satisfied you; for as I before observed, a grand jury is
only a legal machine, manageable at the discretion of the court.


Foreman. If the court pleases! We apprehend --


Chapter Jus. Not a word more, sir, I will not hear a word, sir.

GENTLEMEN of the grand jury, the court having no further occasion for your
services, you are discharged.


(The grand jury retire in great discontent.) Coun. X. I pray your honor's
attention for a few minutes! I was going to observe, that in my opinion --


Chapter Jus. I will not hear a word now on this subject -- the case is too plain:
I shall spend no more time upon it.

GENTLEMEN of the jury:

YOU have heard this cause, and must preceive that the point on which it turns,
is the legal construction of a clause in the lease; which, being purely a
matter of law, comes not within the sphere of your duty, or abilities to
determine: you will therefore retire and bring in a special verdict.

ADJOURN the court to nine o'clock tomorrow morning, precisely, and see that
you are all punctual in your attendance.

(The court rises.) (Friday mornimg, nine o'clock.) Judge YOU, Judge HIM, the
jury, officers of the court, etc. At three quarters after eleven, enter his
honor the chief justice. The court is opened, the jury called, etc.

THE jury hand in a special verdict, in these words: IN this cause, wherein
Timothy Tenant is plaintiff, and Lawrence Landlord defendant; if, in
construction of law, a reservation of apple-skins and parings of apples is a
reservation of the whole fruit or the apples themselves, then we find for the
defendant; but if apple-skins are, in construction of law, nothing more than
apple-skins, then we find for the plaintiff -- ten pounds damages, with costs
of suit.


Chapter Jus. AS this seems to be a cause of considerable expectation, the court
will take time to consider, and will give judgment on the (...) day of (...)
next; six months from this time.

(The court rises.) AT the time appointed, the court met, and after many
adjournments from day to day, for three weeks; judgment was at last given as
follows:


Chapter Jus. We are now ready to give judgment on the special verdict in the
cause, Timothy Tenant against Lawrence Landlord.

THE legal construction and operation of a clause of reservation in a lease
granted by the defendant to the plaintiff, is the sole point on which the
determination of this cause must depend. The reserve made, is, of the
apple-skins or parings of all the apples used in his, the said Timothy
Tenant's, family; to the intent and purpose, that the said Lawrence Landlord
may therewith feed, fatten, and raise up his pig or pigs.

THE distinction between an apple-skin and the skin of an apple was well
supported by the council for the defendant. And the case cited from O'Farrel's
reports closely applied. This case of Mistake versus Blunder gave rise to many
learned comments on the statute of nails. Amongst these a very scarce tract
has fallen into my hands, written by the greatest lawyer of his day. He is
large on all the points taken in that cause: and on the second, he says, that
twelve o'clock on Friday night may be considered as one o'clock on Saturday
morning, or as eleven o'clock on Friday night, at the discretion of the court:
because, in all cases where a statute fixes a precise and determinate time, one
hour each way is supposed to be allowed to the judges, in their decisions
thereupon, to make up for the variations of clocks and watches.

BUT to the point. This lease or contract, is a deed; and deeds are to be
considered with respect to their form and substance: as to the first, it is not
contended but that this deed is regular in point of form. Let us then consider
the substance. The substance of any deed is the intention of the parties, at
the time of executing it. For all the solemnities which the law requires have
no other end or tendency but that of substantiating and fixing, in the most
lasting and unequivocal terms, the will and intention of the contractors. We
will now bring the clause in question to the test of this rule. The words are,
All apple-skins and parings, and so forth; "To the intent," and so forth, "That
the lessor should fatten and raise up his pigs." Now it signifies nothing what
we are to understand by apple-skins or parings; what is the essence? What is
the substantial part? What ought to have been the will of the parties in this
contract? Certainly the raising and fattening of pigs was, or ought to have
been, the principal object. And, for this reason, because the law looks, with a
friendly eye on the raising of hogs, and making of pork and bacon, for these
are amongst the staple commodities of our country. And we find many acts of
assembly for the encouragement of the breed of hogs. Such as the act making it
penal for any one to alter the mark of a marked, or unmarked, hog; and the act
laying a duty on all roasted pigs under the age of six months, and enjoing them
to be killed sparingly -- and also one other remarkable act, lately passed, for
making hogs, pigs, and swine free of the city, and granting them unmolested
egress and regress through our streets, lanes, and alleys. Under this act, a
hog may have his quare impedit against any street commissioner or citizen who
shall obstruct his passage, or molest him in the exercise of his right; yet it
has been holden, that a hog may not, by virtue of this act, enter the houses,
parlours, or chambers of the citizens.

THUS we see that the law has a special respect to the raising and fattening
of hogs. And what the law intends to be done, it also intends to be well done,
or in the best and most effectual manner. Now, how shall the lessor's pigs be
best raised up and fattened? Not by being fed with husks, skins or parings; but
by eating of the fruit itself, which contains most of the saccharine or
nutritious juices of the tree.

ON these clear principles, the court adjudges in favor of the defendant, with
costs; and so let it be entered.


Jud. YOU. I am sorry to find myself under the necessity of dissenting from my
brethren. As I cannot help thinking, after mature and delibrate consideration,
that an apple-skin is nothing more than an apple-skin. However, as the majority
is against my opinion, the judgment must be entered in favor of the defendant.


Coun. X. It the court pleases! I beg leave to move for a re-hearing of this
cause. Not for the sake of delay; but for this reason -- We did not foresee the
principles upon which the court has grounded its decision; and therefore have
not provided either evidence or argument to the point which has influenced your
honors. If we may be indulged with a re-hearing we shall bring full proof that
the lessor did not keep any pig or pigs; and so by his own act or neglect has
rendered it impossible for the plai^^iff to execute the trust. There being in
fact no cestuy que use for whom the trust should be executed. It is a maxim in
law, that no one shall benefit by his own wrong; much less shall a man suffer
for not doing that which his adversary has put it out of his power to do.


(The judges consult together.) Chapter Jus. I was of opinion that no re-hearing
should be granted -- judge YOU thought it ought to be allowed, judge HIM was
doubtful, and thereupon, CURIA VULT ADVISARE.


IN December 1778 the convention of Pennsylvania assembled to consider the
constitution or frame of government for the United States, drawn up by the late
general convention of the states, and by them recommended to the consideration
of the people at large. After three weeks deliberation, the proposed
constitution was adopted by the convention of Pennsylvania, by a majority of
two thirds of that body. The following allegory contains in substance the
principal arguments used in that important debate.

THE NEW ROOF.
THE roof a certain Mansion House was observed to be in a very bad condition
The old Confederation.
, and quite insufficient for the purpose of protection from the inclemencies of
the weather. This was matter of surprise and speculation, as it was well known
that the roof was not more than twelve years old, and therefore its defects
could not be ascribed to a natural decay by time.

ALTHOUGH there were many different opinions respecting the causes of this
deficiency, yet all agreed that the family could not sleep in comfort or safety
under it.

AT last it was determined to employ some skilful architects to survey and
examine this defective roof, to make report of its condition, and to point out
such alterations and repairs as might be found necessary.

THESE skilful architects accordingly met together; and after a thorough
examination of the faulty roof, they found,

1st That the whole fabric was too weak.

2nd That there were indeed thirteen rafters; but that these rafters were not
connected by any braces or ties, so as to form a union of strength.

3d That some of these rafters were thick and heavy, and others too slight; and
as the whole had been put together whilst the timber was yet green, some had
warped outward, and of course sustained an undue proportion of weight, whilst
others, warping inwards, had shrunk from bearing any weight at all.

4th THAT the shingling and lathing had not been secured with iron nails, but
only wooden pegs Paper Currency.
, which swelling and shrinking by successions of wet and dry weather, had left
the shingles so loose, that many of them had been blown away by the wind; and
that before long, the whole would, probably, in like manner be blown away.

5th THAT the cornice was so ill proportioned, and so badly put up, as to be
neither an ornament nor of use: and,

6th That the roof was so flat as to admit the most idle servants in the
family, their playmates and acquaintance, to trample upon and abuse it Want of
dignity in government.
.

HAVING made these observations, these judicious architects were of opinion,
that it would be altogether vain and fruitless to attempt any alterations or
repairs in a roof so defective in all points, and therefore proposed to have it
entirely removed; and that a new roof, of a better construction, should be
erected over the mansion house: and they also prepared a drawing or plan of a
new roof, such as they thought most excellent for security, duration, and
ornament. In forming this plan, they consulted the most celebrated authors in
ancient and modern architecture, and brought into their design the most
approved parts, selected from the models before them; and finally endeavored
to proportion the whole to the size of the building, and the strength of the
walls.

THIS proposal of a new roof, it may well be imagined, became the principal
subject of conversation in the family: and the opinions of it were various,
according to the judgment, interests, or ignorance of the disputants.

ON a certain day the servants of the family had assembled in the great hall to
discuss the important question. Amongst these was JAMES, J -- W --, esquire.
the architect, who had been one of the surveyors of the old roof, and had a
principal hand in forming the plan of the new one. A great number of tenants
had also gathered out of doors, and crowded the windows and avenues to the
hall, which were left open for them, that they might hear the arguments for and
against the new roof.

NOW, there was an old woman, known by the name of Margery the midwife, who had
got a comfortable apartment in the mansion house. This woman was of an
intriguing spirit, of a restless and inveterate temper, fond of tattle, and a
great mischief-maker. In this situation, and with these talents, she
unavoidably acquired an influence in the family; by the exercise of which,
according to her natural propensity, she had long kept the house in confusion,
and sown discord and discontent amongst the servants.

MARGERY was, for many reasons, an irreconcilable enemy to the new roof, and
the artichects who had contrived it. Amongst these, two reasons were very
obvious. First: the mantle-piece, on which her cups and platters were placed,
was made of a portion of the great cornice; and she boiled her pot with the
shingles that blew off from the defective roof: and, secondly, it so happened
that, in the construction of the new roof, her apartment would be considerably
lessened.

NO sooner, therefore, did she hear of the plan proposed by the architects, but
she put on her old red cloak, and was day and night trudging amongst the
servants and tenants, crying out against the new roof, and the framers thereof.
Amongst these she had selected William, Jack, and Robert, three of the
servants, and instigated them to oppose the plan recommended. She caused them
to be sent to the great hall on the day of debate, and furnished them with
innumerable alarms and fears, cunning arguments, and specious objections.

NOW, the principal argument and objections with which Margery had instructed
William, Jack, and Robert, were these.

1st THAT the architects had not exhibited a bill of scantling Bill of rights.
for the new roof, as they ought to have done; and, therefore, the carpenters,
under the pretense of providing timber for it, might lay waste whole forests,
to the ruin of the farm.

2dly THAT no provision was made in the plan for a trap door Liberty of the
press.
for the servants to pass through with water, if the chimney should take fire,
and that in case of such an accident it might hereafter be deemed penal to
break a hole in the roof, for access, to save the whole building from
destruction.

3dly THAT this roof was to be guarded by battlements Standing army.
, which in stormy seasons, would prove dangerous to the family, as the bricks
might be blown down and fall on their heads.

4thly IT was observed, that the old roof was ornamented with twelve pedestals,
Trial by jury.
ranged along the ridge, which had been objects of universal admiration.
Whereas, according to the new plan, these pedestals were only to be placed
along the eaves of the roof over the walls. As to the cupola, some of the
objectors said it was too heavy, and would prove a dangerous burden to the
building; whilst others insisted that it was too light, and would certainly be
blown away by the wind

5thly IT was urged, that the thirteen rafters would be so strongly braced
together, that the individual and separate strength of each rafter would be
lost in the compounded and united strength of the whole That the sovereignties
of the several states would be absorbed in the general government.
and so this roof might be considered as one solid mass of timber, and not as
composed of distinct rafters like the old roof.

6thly THAT, according to the proposed plan, the several parts of the roof were
so framed as to mutually strengthen and support each other; and therefore,
there was great reason to fear, that the whole might stand independent of the
walls; and, that in time the walls might moulder away, and the roof remain
suspended in the air, threatening destruction to all who should come under it
That it would be a consolidated government, and might exist independent of the
people or of the states.
.

TO these objections, JAMES, the architect, in substance replied.

1st AS to the want of a bill of scantling, he observed, that if the timber for
this roof was to be purchased from a stranger, it would have been quite proper
to have such a bill, lest the stranger should charge in account more than he
was entitled to; but as the timber was to be cut from our own lands, a bill of
scantling was both useless and improper. It was of no use, because the wood
always was, and always would be, the property of the family, whether growing in
the forest, or fabricated into a roof for the mansion house; and improper,
because the carpenters would be bound by the bill of scantling; which, if it
should not be perfectly accurate, a circumstance not to be expected, either the
roof would be defective for want of sufficient materials, or the carpenters
must cut from the forest, without authority, which is penal by the laws of the
house.

2dly TO the second objection, he said, that a trap-door was not properly a
part in the frame of a roof; but there could be no doubt but that the
carpenters would take care to make such a door in the shingling for the family
to carry water through, dirty or clean, to extinguish fire, either in the
chimney or on the roof; and that this was the only proper way of making such a
door.

3dly AS to the battlements, he insisted, that they were absolutely necessary
for the protection of the whole house. 1st Because, in case of a sudden attack
by robbers, the family could defend themselves behind these battlements, and
annoy and disperse the enemy. 2dly If any of the adjoining buildings should
take fire, the battlements would screen the roof from the destructive flames.
And, 3dly, they would retain the rafters in their respective places, in case
any of them should, from rottenness or warping, be in danger of falling from
the general union, and injuring the other parts of the roof: observing also,
that the battlements should always be ready for these purposes, as there would
be neither time nor opportunity for raising battlements after an assault was
actually made, or a conflagration begun. As to the bricks being blown down, and
falling on the heads of the people, he said the whole would always be in the
power of the family, who could at any time repair or remove any loose and
dangerous parts; and there could be no doubt but that their vigilance would be
fully sufficient to prevent accidents of this kind.

4thly WITH respect to the twelve pedestals, he acknowledged their use and
beauty; but observed that these, like all other things, were only so in their
proper places, and under circumstances suited to their nature and design: and
he insisted that the ridge of a roof was not the place for pedestals, which
should rest on the solid wall, being made of the same materials; and ought, in
propriety, to be considered as so many projections, or continuations of the
wall itself, and not as component parts of the wooden roof. As to the cupola,
he said, that all agreed that there should be one of some kind or other; as
well for a proper finish to the building, as for the purpose of indicating the
winds, and containing a bell to sound the alarm in cases of necessity. The
objections to the proposed cupola, he said, were too contradictory to merit a
reply.

5thly TO the fifth objection, he answered: that the intention really was to
make a firm and substantial roof, by uniting the strength of the thirteen
rafters: but that this was so far from annihilating the several rafters, and
rendering them of no use individually, that it was manifest, from a bare
inspection of the plan, that the strength of each contributed to the strength
of the whole, and that the existence of each and all was essential to the
existence of the fabric as a roof.

6thly AND lastly, he said, that the roof was, in truth, so framed as that the
parts should mutually support and check each other. But it was absolutely
absurd, and contrary to the known laws of nature, to infer from thence, that
the whole frame could stand self-supported in the air. For, however its
component parts might be combined with respect to each other, the whole must
necessarily rest upon and be supported by the walls. That the walls might,
indeed, stand for a few years in a ruinous and uninhabitable condition, without
any roof; but the roof could not, for a moment, stand without the support of
the walls: and finally, that of all dangers and apprehensions, this of the
roof's remaining after the walls are gone, was the most absurd and impossible.

IT was mentioned before, that whilst this debate was going on in the great
hall, the windows and doors were crowded with attendants. Amongst these, was a
half crazy fellow, who was suffered to go at large as a harmless lunatic. A
furious writer under the signature of Philadelphiensis.
Margery, however, thought he might be a serviceable engine in promoting
opposition to the new roof. As people of deranged understandings are easily
irritated, she exasperated this poor fellow against the architects, and filled
him with terrible apprehensions from the new roof; making him believe that the
architects had provided a dark hole in the garret, where he was to be chained
for life. Having by these suggestions filled his mind with rage and terror, she
turned him loose amongst the crowd, where he roared and bawled to the great
annoyance of the bye-standers.

THIS circumstance would not have been noticed, but for the opportunity of
exhibiting the style and manner in which a half deranged and highly irritated
mind will express itself. One of his rhapsodies shall conclude this narrative.

This fustian is a burlesque of a paper published under the signature of
PHILADELPHIENSIS; the original is subjoined, taken from the Independent
Gazetteer of Dec. 19, 1787. I had it in my power afterward to detect and
expose the real name of the author of these inflamatory publications, which put
a stop to the productions of PHILADELPHIENSIS. He was an Irish schoolmaster,
who had not been more than two years in the country, and who, without either
property or reputation in America, endeavored, under the cover of a fictitious
signature, not only to inflame people against the plan of government proposed
by America's best patriot's and most able statesmen; but even ventured to abuse
and vilify such characters as GENERAL WASHINGTON, Dr. Franklin, and the
gentlemen who composed the general convention, calling them in the public
papers, villains and conspirators.
THE new roof! the new roof! -- Oh! the new roof! shall demagogues, despising
every sense of order and decency, frame a new roof? If such barefaced
presumption, arrogance, and tyrannical proceedings will not rouse you, the whip
and the goad -- the whip and the goad -- should do it. But you are careless and
insecure sinners, whom neither admonitions, entreaties, or threatenings can
reclaim. Sinners consigned to unutterable and endless woe. Where is that
pusillanimous wretch who can submit to such contumely? Oh, for the ultima ratio
regum! [He got these three Latin words from Margery] Oh! for the ultima ratio
regum! -- Ah! the days of Nero! -- Ah! the days of Caligula! -- Ah! the British
tyrant and his infernal junto! -- Glorious revolution! -- Awful crisis! --
Self-important nabobs -- diabolical plots and secret machinations -- Oh! the
architects! the architects! They have seized the government, secured power,
brow-beat with insolence, and assume majesty -- Oh! the architects! They will
treat you as conquered slaves -- they will make you pass under the yoke, and
leave their gluttony and riot to attend the pleasing sport -- Oh! that the
glory of the Lord may be made perfect! -- that he would show strength with his
arm, and scatter the proud in the imaginations of their hearts! Blow the
trumpet; sound an alarm. I will cry day and night. Behold, is not this my
number five! attend to my words, ye women laboring of child; ye sick persons
and young children. Behold, behold, the lurking places; the despots; the
infernal designs; the lust of dominion and conspiracies. From battle and murder
and sudden death, good Lord deliver us!

FIGURE to yourselves, my good fellows, a man with a cow and a horse. -- Oh!
the battlements, the battlements! they will fall upon his cow; they will fall
upon his horse, and will wound them and bruise them, and put them to death; and
the poor man will perish with hunger. Do I exaggerate? No, truly. Europe, Asia,
and Indostan, deny it if you can. Oh God! what a monster is man! A being
possessed of knowledge, reason, judgment, and an immortal soul. What a monster
is man! But the architects are said to be men of skill and approved worth; then
the more their shame -- curse on the villains! We beseech thee to hear us! Oh!
ah! ah! oh!"

FROM THE INDEPENDENT GAZETTEER O^ JULY 29, 1787.
"MY FELLOW-CIT^
"IF the arbitrary proceedings of the convention of Pennsylvania do not rouse
your attention to the rights of yourselves and your children, there is nothing
that I can say will do it. If the contempt and obloquy with which that body
(whose legality even may be questioned) has treated your petitions, cannot
bring you to think seriously, what then will? When a few demagogues, despising
every sense of order and decency, have rejected the petitions of the people,
and in the most supercilious manner triumphed over the freemen of America, as
if they were their slaves, and they themselves their lords and masters; I say,
that if such barefaced presumption and arrogance, such tyrannical proceedings
of the men, who, if acting constitutionally, were the servants of the people,
be not sufficient to awaken you to a sense of your duty and interest, nothing
less than the goad and the whip can succeed. Your condition must be like that
of the insecure sinner, whom neither the admonitions nor entreaties of his
friends, nor even the threatenings of awaiting justice, could reclaim, or
convince of his error; his reformation is neglected until it is too late, when
he finds himself in a state of unutterable and endless woe.

IT may be asserted with confidence, that besides the petitions that Mr.
Whitehill presented to the convention, from Cumberland county, against the
adoption of the new constitution, there is not a county or town in the state
that should not have followed the example, if a reasonable time had been
allowed for the petitions to come in. Now, if we consider but for a moment how
contemptuously the people were treated on this occasion, we may form some idea
of the way in which they are hereafter to be governed by their well born
masters -- The petitions being read from the chair, Mr M'Kean said, that he was
sorry that at this stage of the business so improper an attempt should be made;
he hoped therefore that the petitions would not be attended to. Where is the
freeman in America that can tamely suffer such an insult to his dignity to pass
with impunity? Where is that pusillanimous wretch that can submit to this
contumely? Is not this the language of Britain in the years 1775 and 1776
renewed? What said George the Third and his pampered ministers more than this
to the petitions of America? Is it improper for freemen to petition for their
rights? If it be; then I say that the impropriety consisted only in their not
demanding them. Propriety requires that the people should approach their
representatives with a becoming humility; but the governors of a free people
must ever be considered as their servants, and are therefore bound to observe
decency toward them, and to act according to their instructions, and agreeably
to conscience. If the petitions of the freemen of America, couched in decent
and respectful terms, will not be attended to; then, be it known, that their
demands must and will be granted: if no better will do, the ultima ratio regum
must secure to the people their rights. God in his providence has crowned them
with success once already on this head; and there is little doubt, with the
same assistance, but a second attempt will terminate just as much in favor of
liberty.

THE indignity offered to ^he people and their petitions by the haughty
lordlings of the convention, proclaims the chains of despotism alread^ firmly
rivetted. Like a herald it cries aloud -- Hush, ye slaves, how dare you
interrupt your mighty rulers, who alone have a divine right to establish
constitutions and governments, calculated to promote their own aggrandizement
and honor. Ah! my friends, the days of a cruel Nero approach fast; the
language of a monster, of a Caligula, could not be more imperious. I challenge
the whole continent, the well-born and their parasites, to show an instance of
greater insolence than this, on the part of the British tyrant, and his
infernal junto, to the people of America before our glorious revolution. My
fellow-citizens, this is an awful crisis; your situation is alarming indeed;
yourselves and your petitions are ^^spised and trampled under the feet of
self-impo^^^nt nabobs; whose diabolical plots, and secret machinations have
been carried on since the revolution, with a view to destroy your liberties,
and reduce you to a state of slavery and dependence: and, alas! I fear they
have found you off your guard, and taken you by surprise. These aspiring men
having seized the government, and secured all power, as they suppose to
themselves, now openly brow-beat you with their insolence, and assume majesty;
and even treat you like menial ^^^vants, your representatives as so many
conquered slaves, that they intend to make pass under the yoke, as soon as
leisure from their gluttony and rioting on the industry of the poor, shall
permit them to attend such a pleasing piece of sport.

BUT, I trust, these petty tyrants will soon find to their confusion, that
their own imprudent zeal has declared their designs. Providence has ordered
that they should begin to carry their arbitrary schemes too soon into
execution, that boundless ambition should precipitate their destruction, and
that the glory of God should be made perfect in the salvation of the poor.
Blessed be his name: "he has showed strength with his arm: he has scattered
the proud in the imaginations of their hearts: he has put down the mighty from
their seat, and exalted them of low degree: he has filled the hungry with good
things, and the rich he has sent empty away." As a villain, who secreted to
rob and murder in the silent hour of night, issues forth from his lurking place
before the people have retired to sleep, and thus frustrates his infernal
design by impatience; so, in like manner, the lust of dominion has urged these
despots on to the adoption of measures that will inevitably, and I hope
immediately, unhinge every part of their conspiracy against the rights of their
fellow-men, and bring on themselves infamy and disgrace.

FIGURE to yourselves, my brethren* a man with a plantation just sufficient to
raise a competency for himself and his dear little children; but by reason of
the immoderate revenue necessary to support the emperor, the illustrious
well-born congress, the standing army, etc. etc. he necessarily fails in the
payment of his taxes; then a hard-hearted federal officer seizes and sells his
cows, his horses, and even the land itself must be disposed of to answer the
demands of government. He pleads unfruitful seasons, his old age, and his
numerous and helpless family. But, alas! these avail him nothing; his farm, his
cattle, and his all are sold for less than half their value, to his wealthy
neighbor, already possessed of half the land in the county, to whom also,
himself and his children must become servants and slaves, or else perish with
hunger and want! Do I exaggerate here? No, truly. View the misery of the poor
under the despotic governments of Europe and Asia, and then deny the truth of
my position if you can. It is a common saying among the poor of Indostan, that
to lie is better than to stand, to sleep is better than to wake, but death is
best of all, for it delivers them from the cruelty of their nabobs. Even in the
freest country in Europe, a lady's lap-dog is more esteemed than the child of a
poor man. Oh God! what a monster is man! that a dog should be nourished and
pampered up by him with dainties, whilst a being possessed of knowledge,
reason, judgment, and an immortal soul, bought with no less a price than the
blood of our divine Redeemer, should be driven from his door, without admitting
him, even for a moment, to assuage his hunger with the crumbs that might fall
from his table.

BUT the members of the federal convention were men who have been all tried in
the field of action, say some; they have fought for American liberty: then the
more to their shame be it said. Curse on the villain, who protects virgin
innocence only with a view that he may himself become the ravisher; so that, if
the assertion was true, it only turns to their disgrace; but, as it happens, it
is not true, or at least only so in part. This was a scheme taken by the
despots and their sycophants to bias the public mind in favor of the
constitution; for the convention was composed of a variety of characters:
ambitious men, jesuits, tories, lawyers, etc. formed the majority, whose
similitude to each other consisted only in their determination to lord it over
their fellow-citizens; like the rays that, converging from every direction,
meet in a point, and their sentiments and deliberations concentered in tyranny
alone; they were unanimous in forming a government that should raise the
fortunes and respectability of the well born few, and oppress the plebeians.

PHILADELPHIENSIS, No V.

THE NEW ROOF: A SONG FOR FEDERAL MECHANICS.
I.
COME muster, my lads, your mechanical tools,
Your saws and your axes, your hammers and rules;
Bring your mallets and planes, your level and line,
And plenty of pins of American pine:
For our roof we will raise, and our song still shall be,
Our government firm, and our citizens free.
II.
COME, up with the plates, lay them firm on the wall,
Like the people at large, they are the ground work of all;
Examine them well, and see that they are sound,
Let no rotten part in our building be found:
For our roof we will raise, and our song still shall be
A government firm, and our citizens free.
III.
NOW hand up the girders, lay each in his place,
Between them the joists, must divide all the space;
Like assemblymen these should lie level along,
Like girders, our senate prove loyal and strong:
For our roof we will raise, and our song still shall be
A government firm over citizens free.
IV.
THE rafters now frame; your king-posts and braces,
And drive your pins home, to keep all in their places;
Let wisdom and strength in the fabric combine,
And your pins be all made of American pine:
For our roof we will raise, and our song still shall be,
A government firm over citizens free.
V.
OUR king-posts are judges; how upright they stand,
Supporting the braces; the laws of the land:
The laws of the land, which divide right from wrong,
And strengthen the weak, by weak'ning the strong:
For our roof we will raise, and our song still shall be,
Laws equal and just, for a people that is free.
VI.
UP! up! with the rafters; each frame is a state:
How nobly they rise! their span, too, how great!
From the north to the south, over the whole they extend,
And rest on the walls, whilst the walls they defend:
For our roof we will raise, and our song still shall be
Combined in strength, yet as citizens free.
VII.
NOW enter the purlins, and drive your pins through;
And see that your joints are drawn home and all true.
The purlins will bind all the rafters together:
The strength of the whole shall defy wind and weather:
For our roof we will raise, and our song still shall be,
United as states, but as citizens free.
VIII.
COME, raise up the turret; our glory and pride;
In the center it stands, over the whole to preside:
The sons of Columbia shall view with delight
Its pillar's, and arches, and towering height:
Our roof is now raised, and our song still shall be,
A federal head over a people that is free.
IX.
HUZZA! my brave boys, our work is complete;
The world shall admire Columbia's fair seat;
Its strength against tempest and time shall be proof,
And thousands shall come to dwell under our roof:
Whilst we drain the deep bowl, our toast still shall be
Our government firm, and our citizens free.
AN INTERCEPTED LETTER FROM THE AUTHOR OF THE SENTINEL, A most inflammatory and
abusive paper under the title of THE SENTINEL.
TO HIS FRIEND IN (...) COUNTY.
PHILADELPHIA, Jan. 19, 1788. DEAR SIR,
I Received your letter by Mr ***** and am very sorry to find that your
exertions in the county of ***** have been attended with so little success. I
expected long before this to have heard of a commotion begun. It is indeed high
time that something vigorous should be attempted, otherwise the spirit of our
cause will languish, and when once that spirit has evaporated it will not be
in our power to recall it.

YOU know it was always our opinion, that the great gun should be charged here
in the city, and fired off in one of the western counties. I am sure I have not
been remiss in my part of the business. Have I not already charged it with
eleven cartridges well rammed down; and when I am every moment expecting the
explosion, you only urge me to double my diligence and ram away. In short, I am
almost weary of this fruitless toil. I don't find that my publications have had
the desired effect here; I would fain hope that they have been more operative
in the counties; if so, you should have informed me, for I want encouragement
more than a spur.

WHILST I am issuing number after number of my Sentinel, all written with a
freedom and spirit sufficient, one would think, to rouse the people; I say,
whilst I am doing this, the states, one after another, either unanimously, or
by very large majorities, are ratifying the new constitution. You have heard,
or will hear, that Connecticut has adopted it by a majority of 127 to 40 in
their state convention. Besides this, I have the mortification to see my
Sentinels printed, and reprinted, but never replied to. Attempts to answer
would afford fresh sources of argument; can any thing be more provoking or
discouraging? I have rung the changes upon the liberty of the press; the trial
by jury; despotism and tyranny: and am reduced to the necessity of repeating in
different words the same railings against the new constitution, and the same
abuse against the framers of it.

THE novelty of this boldness is over, and my pieces are now scarcely read. I
am astonished that such extraordinary exertions have had so little effect with
the people. I have directly, and without reserve, called the members of the
late general convention, with general W -- n at their head, villians, traitors,
fools and conspirators, collectively and individually, and yet the mob does not
rise. I have often told you, that it is of no great importance on which side an
insurrection takes place -- all that is necessary, is to have a commotion
begun. A faction can always turn public confusion to its own account. I was in
great hopes that the attack upon Major Boyd's house would have produced
something; it was indeed serviceable to our party, but the flame was too weak
to spread; the law interfered and extinguished it entirely. A mob is not worth
a farthing, unless, by its great numbers, or the weight and influence of its
leaders, it can stoutly look law in the face, and bid defiance to its operation.

YOU tell me that you have enlisted about 60 insurgents -- but what can they
do? 600 in each of the counties would have been more to the purpose. Either you
must have been very negligent, or your influence in the county is not as great
as you gave us reason to believe.

YOU say you have constantly attended at taverns, vendues, funerals and other
public meetings -- liberally treated those whom your thought it might be of use
to gain -- distributed my Sentinels, and watched the most favorable
opportunities for inflaming the minds of the people. This is all very well; but
if the consequence has been no more than the association of 60 insurgents, it
is certainly very poor doings. If our friends have done no better in the other
counties, and I have not yet heard that they have done any thing, our party had
better tack about, and cry up the new constitution, that some of us may stand a
chance at least for a share in the loaves and fishes. For if, notwithstanding
our opposition, this new constitution should be established, we shall always be
looked upon as disaffected to the government, and unfit to be trusted with
offices under it.

OUR champions in the other states begin to fall off. You have seen, I suppose,
governor R -- 's letter; and I am told, that R -- H -- L -- and Mr. M -- have
dropped all opposition. Unless some extraordinary exertions are made, and
speedily too, our whole scheme must fall to the ground. Only imagine what a
ridiculous figure I make here. I am every week publishing things, which, in any
other country would bring the author to the gallows, as a seditious disturber
of the public peace -- and yet nothing comes of it. My performances, as I said
before, do not even provoke a reply. Can any thing be more mortifying? In the
mean time, the new constitution is taking root in the other states. And it must
be confessed, that in every instance where the people have been legally brought
together, either in conventions, or as assemblymen, grand juries* or otherwise,
they have uniformly declared themselves in favor of it. These are great
obstacles to our views. We have affected the popular side of the question, and
the voice of the people is decidedly against us. Patriotism, not supported by
the body, the citizens is always denominated faction.

TO conclude, unless we can do something speedily, toward raising a
respectable commotion in the state, it is my opinion that we ought to prepare
for joining the general current in favor of this new system of government: and
this may be plausibly effected by declaring that we never had any thing in view
but the good of our country: that the new constitution appeared, in our
judgments, to contain many things objectionable, and some things even
dangerous, to the liberties of the people. But as the general opinion seems to
be otherwise, we resign our prejudices to the will of the majority, as every
good citizen ought to do: and since we find that the proposed system of a
federal government is indeed likely to be established, we shall not be behind
any in zealous exertions for its support.

THINK of these things, and let me hear from you as soon as possible. In the
mean time,

I am, dear sir, Yours, etc. SENTINEL.

OBJECTIONS TO THE PROPOSED PLAN OF A FEDERAL GOVERNMENT FOR THE UNITED STATES,
ON GENUINE PRINCIPLES.
AT a Meeting of the Wheel-barrow Society Convicts condemned to the
Wheel-Barrow for various crimes.
in the prison yard, Philadelphia, Febuary 8th. 1788.

Present fifty eight members.

Jem. Doran in the chair.

AFTER mature discussion, the society unanimously agreed in the following
FUNDAMENTAL PRINCIPLES.

1st Pure natural liberty, is the right of every man to do whatever he pleases
without control, and to possess, without retribution, whatever he can acquire
by his valor or address.

2d STATES or sovereign powers are as individuals in a state of nature; and
therefore true political liberty, or the liberty of a state as a body politic,
is the right of that state, or of those who are in possession of the
sovereignty thereof, to do such things, and enact such laws, as may be thought
conducive to the advancement of the powers and interests of that state, or of
the government thereof, uncontrouled by the artificial system of restraints,
known by the name of the law of nations.

3d ALL systems of government, whether operating on states, or on individuals,
although ostensibly formed, and speciously declared to be for the establishment
of general justice and of general good, ought to be abhorred by the true sons
of freedom as invasions on, and abridgments of their natural rights.

4th WHEREAS in the present imperfect state of things, true natural liberty, as
defined in our first fundamental principle, cannot be universally enjoyed,
necessity enforces a submission to what is called government, under some form
or other.

5th ACCORDING to the foregoing principles, that form of government is the best
which contains the fewest restraints, and leaves in the hand of the governed
the greatest portion of natural liberty, and the fullest scope for the exercise
of personal prowess and native ingenuity, it being demonstrable, that if the
component parts of any society are left free, and become, by any means, rich
and happy, the whole of that society will be free, rich and happy.

6th THE worst of all possible governments is that in which the vigorous
operation of general laws, and a complication of internal checks, restraints
and regulations, prevent individual states or persons from pursuing their
separate interest in their own way; most wickedly sacrificing the real
emolument of individuals to the visionary good and prosperity of the whole.

THESE fundamental principles being established, the plan of government
proposed by the late general convention for the United States was taken up;
considered by paragraphs, and compared with the doctrines laid down; and after
some debate the following resolutions were unanimously adopted. viz.

1st RESOLVED, That the constitution proposed for the United States, is a
consolidated government, pregnant with the seeds of coercion and restraint, and
therefore a system of tyranny and oppression.

2d RESOLVED, That under such a government, neither states nor individuals can
do, or refuse to do, whatever they please in all cases; which is a direct
infringement on the natural liberty of both, as defined in our first
fundamental principle.

3d RESOLVED, That under such a government, men of education, abilities, and
property, commonly called the well-born, will be most likely to get into places
of power and trust, to the exclusion of a large majority of citizens of a
contrary description.

4th RESOLVED, That as this constitution most arbitrarily and inhumanly
prohibits the emission of Paper-Money, and other resources by which the
unfortunate debtor may throw off the discouraging burden of his obligations,
it ought to to be considered, as in fact it is, a system of tyranny and
oppression, compelling citizens, in many instances, to do things extremely
disagreeable and contrary to their present interest.

5th RESOLVED, That under such a government, the industrious and wealthy may
enjoy their property in security, to the great injury of those who have no
property at all.

6th RESOLVED, That under such a government, there will be no encouragement for
gentlemen of adventure and address, to procure subsistence and wealth by
extraordinary modes of acquirement; because what is called the vigor of
government will pervade the whole union.

7th RESOLVED, That the system proposed, is consonant with our 6th fundamental
principle, and the worst of all possible governments; and therefore,

8th RESOLVED, That the members of the late general convention, who framed,
voted for, and recommended this plan of government, and all state conventions
which have, or hereafter shall adopt and ratify the same; and all those
individuals, who by word of mouth, by writing and publishing, or by any other
means, shall express their approbation of the said infamous constitution are,
and ought to be, considered by all the true sons of liberty, as demagogues,
aristocraties, conspirators, traitors, tyrants, and enemies of the natural
rights of mankind.

9th RESOLVED, That as we are the most numerous and respectable body that has
as yet combined formally to avow and publish a disapprobation of this new
constitution, it is fit and proper that we should be regularly organized, that
other worthy mal-contents in this and the other states may, by association or
election, be annexed to our community, and so form a union of strength to
oppose the establishment of this tyrannical government; therefore,

10th RESOLVED, That we will now proceed to the election of a president,
vice president, and secretary.

WHEREUPON the ballots, being fairly taken and counted, stood as follows.

PRESIDENT.
FOR the author of the pieces signed Sentinel, Votes. 51 For Jem Doran, Votes.
5 For Arthur M'Garrity, Votes. 2
VICE PRESIDENT.
FOR L -- M --, Esquire of Maryland, Votes. 47 For Daniel Cronan, Votes. 8 For
Pat Dalton, Votes. 3
SECRETARY.
FOR the author of the papers signed Philadelphiensis, Votes. 30 For Kit
Carbery Votes. 28
THE following members were then appointed a committee of correspondence, viz.
Jem. Doran, Arthur M'Garrity, John Doughty, Pat. Dalton, Daniel Cronan, James
Bulger, and Kit Carberry, to hold communication with the adherents of General
Shays in the state of Massachusetts, and with other worthy opposers in the
several states.

AFTER ordering that these their proceedings should be published, the society
resumed their daily occupation of cleaning the streets and common sewers.

SOME THOUGHTS ON THE DISEASES OF THE MIND; WITH A SCHEME FOR PURGING THE MORAL
FACULTIES OF THE GOOD PEOPLE OF PENNSYLVANIA. QUITE NEW AND VERY PHILOSOPHICAL.
THAT there is an intimate connection between the soul and the body, and that
the one is apt to be affected by the disorders and irregularities of the other,
is a truth too manifest to be controverted. How this connection is formed, to
what extent it exists, and what are the visible organs of the body which
compose the intermediate links of union, with the invisible faculties of the
mind, are problems which have been often in vain attempted. I neither pretend
to have found out the secret, nor have I, at present, any plausible hypothesis
to propose on this delicate subject.

THIS mutual influence, however, which plainly exists between spirit and matter
in all animals, and more especially in man, has produced many promising
devices for remedying the disorders of the mind, which seem to be beyond our
reach, by attacking the organs of the body, which are within our power. A late
ingenious author Dr. Rush.
has gone great lengths in this hypothesis, in his " Dissertation on the effect
of physical causes on the moral faculty."

FOR my own part, I believe there is some truth in the doctrine; and that, in
particular cases, if applied with great judgment, a partial and temporary
effect may be obtained. But if the seat of the disease should really be in the
mind, it will be in vain to expect a radical cure, by medical attacks on the
body, which can do no more than for the present deprive the mind of the
instruments by which she exhibits her distempered faculties.

FOR instance: suppose a person to be of an irascible, captious disposition,
subject to violent and ungovernable gusts of passion. To reduce his body by
phlebotomy, emetics, cathartics, a slender regimen, etc. would probably produce
a dejection of spirits, and an apparent calmness of temper. But must this man
be kept all his life time in a state of debility? For there is no doubt but
that as soon as health and vigor are allowed to return, the angry dispositions
will return too, and perhaps with increased inveteracy, on account of the
restriction. So, also, if I should be infected with a troublesome itch for
scribbling -- which heaven forbid! and my friends, with a view to a cure,
should deprive me of pen, ink, and paper. For the present, to be sure, I could
not scribble: but would the itch be removed? -- Far from it -- the scribbling
matter being refused a discharge, would accumulate, and become more virulent:
and so soon as the necessary instruments or organs of exhibition could be
procured, I should scribble worse than ever.

THIS scheme of whipping the mind over the body's shoulders will not, I
apprehend, answer any permanent purpose: and I know of no well authenticated
cases in support of the doctrine. Has government ever cured a propensity to
theft by the administration of the whipping-post or the wheel-barrow? Amongst
the innumerable experiments that have been made, I never heard of one
successful instance -- No; it seems more natural, that mental remedies should
be prescribed for mental disorders; and corporeal physic for bodily diseases.
Let there be physicians and metaphysicians as two distinct professions. I do
not mean by metaphysicians, such as are now professors in universities and
colleges; but practicing metaphysicians, who shall study the disorders and
irregularities of the human mind, and prescribe for their cure.

I have considered this matter very attentively, and am confident that many of
the cares and evils of life might be removed or alleviated by a judicious
metaphysical treatment. The first difficulty would be to gain the confidence of
the patient in a new science; for this confidence would be as necessary to the
metaphysical as it is to the physical cure of diseases -- and even more so --
for the imagination would have a great share in the business, and must indeed
serve as apothecary to the metaphysician. Wherein does the virtue of pills,
potions, and plasters principally consist? Surely not so much in the
ingredients of which they are composed, as in the implicit faith of those to
whom they are administered: a proof of which is, that no sooner is the
composition generally known but it sinks into general contempt; nobody will
take a detected nostrum. If, then, this confidence, this implicit faith of the
patient, is so useful in the operation of material medicine, much more should
it be cultivated and depended upon in a metaphysical case. Possessed of this, I
would undertake, with flattering hopes of success, to heal the maladies of the
mind by the use of discreet and obviously rational means.

FOR instance: should I find my patient disposed to melancholy, and his mind
clouded with imaginary doubts, difficulties, and fears, by poring over
polemical divinity, and wading deep in inscrutable mysteries; I would prescribe
a round of amusements, much company, and frequent changes of companions. I
would by every artifice provoke him to frequent laughter, and plunge him deep
in the vanities of this wicked world: but they should be vanities only; for I
would on no account violate the bounds of strict morality.

TO a patient of a contrary cast: vain, fickle, loquacious, and full of levity,
I would forbid the most innocent recreations. I would prescribe a chapter in
the history of the martyrs every morning before breakfast: he should study
algebra till dinner time; in the evening he should hear a long dull sermon
delivered with an unbroken monotony; and should himself read one of our acts of
assembly before going to bed: and I would continue my regimen and remedies
until I saw an entire change of disposition take place, and a radical cure
obtained.

BUT I am preparing a full account of the diseases of the mind, with the proper
mode of treatment in each, illustrated by a variety of cases. This work has
cost me much study and deep searches into human nature, and the subtle springs
and movements of the moral faculty. Although my book is almost ready for
publication, yet the evils of the present time call so loudly for redress, that
I cannot delay giving an extract from my chapter on the epidemic diseases of
the mind, in hopes it may be of immediate use.

CACOETHES maledictionis, or an insatiable rage for slander and abuse. This
disease is peculiar to free governments. The proximate causes are envy,
discontent, and an overweening ambition. The diagnostic symptoms are an
inveterate hatred of men of wealth or abilities, and particularly of those in
public offices, and an unusual predominance of party spirit: and the crisis of
the distemper is an acrimonious eruption, discharging a deal of prurient matter
in private companies, or in the public papers. The curative indication is
manifest, for this, like many other mental diseases, is best managed by
allowing a free emission of the peccant humors, and permitting the moral
faculty to purge itself by natural discharges of the malevolent ichor.

THIS quotation suggests an observation or two which will lead directly to my
present purpose. It is recommended, that the moral faculty should be permitted
to purge itself by natural discharges. Now, there are but two possible ways by
which the mind can discharge her contents in the cacoethes maledictionis; viz.
by actions, and by words; either by speaking, scolding, storming, swearing,
writing, or publishing. When these means are forbid, or not conveniently
obtained, the disease breaks out into actions; viz. beating, bruising, mawling,
cuffing, kicking, and even murdering, killing, and so forth: and, therefore, a
free scope should be given to words, as the most salutary and safe issue of the
malignant matter.

THE art of printing has been a great blessing to mankind, inasmuch as it
affords a most convenient opportunity for the people to discharge their minds
of indigested crudities and rankling spleen. Before this invention, murders,
assassinations, rebellions, and revolutions, were much more frequent than
since. The poisoned cup, and the bloody dagger, are not known in countries
where the press, and and the free use of it, are allowed. As this is a new and
a very deep remark, I hope it will be attended to. I know that the less
sanguinary character of modern times is generally attributed to the progress of
civilization. But how has this civilization been advanced? Certainly by the
vent which the press affords for the morbid minds of the people to get rid of
their impurities, and by keeping up a free circulation of ideas, so necessary
to the mental health of man. As a proof, we see that, in countries where a free
access to the press is not permitted, the stilletto is, even at this day, in
use.

I come now to make the proposal which I had in view when I sat down to write
this paper; a proposal which, I flatter myself, will correct and mollify, if
not totally remove, the virulence of party spirit and personal animosity in
this state, and especially in the city; and sweeten and purify the political
atmosphere of our commonwealth. The preface to this my project is, I confess,
rather long; but it was necessary to show the metaphysical grounds on which it
is founded.

LET there be two public papers instituted. The one a weekly and the other a
daily paper. Let the printers be commissioned by government, and allowed
competent salaries for their time and trouble. They should be commissioned,
because all other printers should be prohibited from interfering in their
department. One of these papers may be entitled The Freeman's Convenience, and
the other The Chronicle of Scandal. Let these offices be always open as places
where the good people of Pennsylvania may ease their minds without restraint,
rebuke, or any hindrance whatever. And whereas some men are naturally bashful,
and do not like to be seen doing their occasions, there shall not only be a
number of fictitious signatures provided for their concealment, but the printer
shall, for the purpose of decency, have a tin plate fixed in his window,
fronting on a little alley, if his situation will permit, otherwise on the
street; in which, there shall be a slit, or opening large enough to receive,
secretly, any excrementitious matter; and it shall, for distinction's sake, be
thus inscribed -- " Wha' wants me? Lastly, the printers, their papers, and
their authors should all be outlawed. That is, they should be considered as
beyond the reach of any censure or penalty of common or statute law, or
restrictions by any ordinance, proclamation, or regulation whatever.

BY this institution all our other public papers would be kept free from
impurities, and occupied, as they ought to be, with interesting or amusing
articles of intelligence, grave or humourous essays, advertisements, etc. and
all the filth of the city would be carried off by the two commissioned papers.
So that after a little time, it would become as shocking to good manners for a
man to vent his spleen in one of the public newspapers, properly so called, as
it would be to commit an indecent evacuation in a private parlour, or a public
assembly. And thus also would the minds of the people be kept sweet and
healthy. For we may refine as we will, but the mind certainly has her
indecencies as well as the body, and, when overloaded with indigested matter,
must find a vent somewhere. For nature will be obeyed, and surely good policy
requires that a suitable place should be provided for the purpose, rather than
that the public sense should be continually offended by the evacuations of
every distempered mind, which, though necessary, are neither decked with roses
nor perfumed with amber.

YET I would not exclude from the common papers of the city attempts at wit and
satire, or little effusions in verse, in the poet's corner. A sarcasm is
nothing more than spitting; and so it is usual to say -- "He has spit his
spite" -- A crude attempt at humor is parallel with blowing one's nose, for
such humors are apt to collect in cold constitutions; and a young poetaster
may be put into a considerable perspiration by the scorching flames of love --
These may all happen in the best company without offense, provide they are
conducted with decency; and they are certainly necessary to health.

I shall conclude with an account of two cases, in proof of my general system.

I knew a young man, about 32 years of age, who, from losses in trade and
crosses in love, began to grow melancholy, retired and discontented. He came to
me for advice. I asked him if he had ever tried to write verses. He told me
that he had upon two or three occasions, and found that he could tack rhymes
together pretty well; but had no thoughts of cultivating the talent. But I
advised by all means to try what he could do in that way. He followed my
prescription; and employed himself for a year or two in writing sonnets to
Mira, Odes to Liberty, and Elegies to birds, and dead lap-dogs, with a variety
of other subjects, according to the course of the humors that infected his
mind. He is now of a calm, contemplative habit, but far from melancholy; on the
contrary, he is delighted with his own performances, and enjoys the comfort of
self-applause, which, after all, is the most substantial comfort of life.

MY second instance is that of a German Doctor, who has had, or thinks he has
had, a vision, in which the mysteries and economy of the spiritual world was
manifested to him. He has told me the story of this vision, and a very long
story it is -- but I heard it all with patient attention. Some time after, he
wanted to tell me the same story over again, but I begged to be excused. Upon
which he heartily assured me, that he found it absolutely necessary to relate
the history of his vision, at least once a week, otherwise he grew restless and
uneasy in his mind. He came indeed full up to my present system, and said, and
in direct terms, that it was a necessary evacuation of his mind.

THE practice of the law affords, I confess, a convenient outlet for much
mental virulence. Not only what are called spite-actions, but many suits of a
more sober aspect, are only extravasations of mental bile. But this process is
to expensive and too tedious for general use. My proposal is, I think, much
better in every respect. It is a scheme by which envy and revenge may be
gratified without danger and without cost, and abuse, slander, and invective
spend themselves, like rockets, in harmless explosions. For no man, in his
senses, will ever think of giving credit to any thing contained in the
Freeman's Convenience or Chronicle of Scandal.

PROJECTOR.

As I not only drew up for publication the following account of the grand
procession, performed at Philadelphia on the 4th of July 1788; but had no small
share in planning and directing the arrangement of it, and as it was a
spectacle as singular in itself as the occasion was extraordinary, I have
thought proper to give it a place here, that the remembrance of it may have one
more chance of preservation in addition to those of the Newspapers of the time.

AN ACCOUNT OF THE GRAND FEDERAL PROCESSION. PERFORMED AT PHILADELPHIA ON
FRIDAY THE 4th OF JULY 1778.
ON Friday the 4th of July 1788, the citizens of Philadelphia celebrated the
declaration of Independence, made by the Thirteen United States of America on
the 4th of July 1776, and the establishment of the constitution, or frame of
government proposed by the late general convention of the states, and now
solemnly adopted and ratified by ten of those states.

THE rising sun was saluted with a full peal from Christ Church steeple, and a
discharge of cannon from the ship, Rising Sun, commanded by Captain Philip
Brown, anchored off Market street, and superbly decorated with the flags of
nations in alliance with America.

TEN vessels, in honor of the ten states of the present union, were dressed
and arranged the whole length of the harbor; each bearing a broad white flag
at the mast-head, inscribed with the names of the states respectively in broad
gold letters, in the following order; New Hampshire, opposite to the Northern
Liberties; Massachusetts, opposite to Vine street; Connecticut, to Race street;
New Jersey, to Arch street; Pennsylvania, to Market street; Delaware to Chestnut
street; Maryland, to Walnut street; Virginia to Spruce street; South Carolina,
to Pine street; and Georgia, to South street. The ships along the wharfs were
also dressed on the occasion; and as a brisk south wind prevailed through the
whole day, the flags and pennants were kept in full display; and exhibited a
most pleasing and animating prospect.

ACCORDING to orders issued the day before, the several parts which were to
compose this grand procession, began to assemble at eight o'clock in the
morning, at and near the intersection of South and Third-streets.

NINE gentlemen, distinguished by white plumes in their hats, and furnished
with speaking trumpets, were superintendants of the procession; viz. general
Mifflin, general Stewart, colonel Proctor, colonel Gurney, colonel Will,
colonel Marsh, major Moore, major Lenox, and Mr. Peter Brown.

THE different companies of military, trades and professions, had previously
met in various parts of the city, of their own appointment; where they were
separately formed by their officers and conconductors, and marched in order
with their respective flags, devices, and machines, to the place of general
rendezvous. As these companies arrived in succession, the superintendants
disposed of them in the neighboring streets in such manner as that they might
easily fall into the stations they were to occupy in forming the general
procession, as they should be successively called upon. By this means the most
perfect order and regularity was effectually preserved.

AFTER a strict review of the streets of the city, it had been determined, that
the line of march should be as follows. To commence at the intersection of
South and Third-streets; thence along Third-street to Callowhill-street; thence
up Callowhill-street to Fourth-street; thence along Fourth-street to
Market-street; and thence to UNION GREEN, in front of Bush-Hill -- William
Hamilton, esquire. having kindly offered the spacious lawn before his house at
Bush-Hill for the purposes of the day.

THE street commissioners had, the evening before, gone through the line of
march, and directed the pavements to be swept, the trees to be lopped, and all
obstacles removed.

ABOUT half after nine o'clock the GRAND PROCESSION began to move; of which the
following is as correct a detail as could be procured.

I.
TWELVE axe-men, dressed in white frocks, with black girdles round their
waists, and wearing ornamented caps; and headed by major Philip Pancake.

II.
THE first city troop of light dragoons, commanded by captain Miles.

III. INDEPENDENCE.
JOHN Nixon, esquire. on horseback, bearing the staff and cap of liberty; under the
cap a white silk flag, with these words, "FOURTH OF JULY, 1776," in large gold
letters.

IV.
FOUR pieces of artillery, with a detachment from the train, commanded by by
captains Morel and Fisher.

V. FRENCH ALLIANCE.
THOMAS Fitzsimons, esquire. on horseback, carrying a flag of white silk, bearing
three fleurs de lys, and thirteen stars in union over the words "SIXTH OF
FEBRUARY, 1778," in gold characters. The horse on which he rode was the same on
which count Rochambeau rode at the siege of Yorktown.

VI.
CORPSE of light infantry commanded by captain A. G. Claypoole, with the
standard of the first rement.

VII. DEFINITIVE TREATY OF PEACE.
GEORGE Clymer, esquire. on horseback, carrying a staff adorned with olive and
laurel: the words -- "THIRD OF SEPTEMBER, 1783," in gold letters pendant from
the staff.

VIII.
COLONEL John She, on horseback, carrying a flag, blue field, bearing an olive
and laurel wreath over the words, "WASHINGTON, the friend of his country," in
silver letters: the staff adorned with olive and laurel.

IX.
THE city troop of light dragoons, captain W. Bingham, commanded by major W.
Jackson.

X.
RICHARD Bache, esquire. on horseback, as a herald, attended by a trumpet,
proclaiming "a new era!" the words, "NEW ERA," in gold letters, pendant from
the herald's staff -- and also the following lines:

"Peace over our land her olive wand extends,
"And white robbed innocence from heaven descends;
"The crimes and frauds of anarchy shall fail,
"Returning justice lifts again her scale."
XI. CONVENTION OF THE STATES.
THE honorable Peter Muhlenburg, esquire. on horseback, carrying a blue flag, with
the words -- "SEVENTEENTH OF SEPTEMBER, 1787," in silver letters.

XII.
A band of music performing a grand march, composed by Mr. Alexander Reinagle
for the occasion.

XIII. THE CONSTITUTION.
THE hon. chief justice M'Kean; the hon. judge Atlee; the hon. judge Rush -- in
their robes of office; seated in a lofty ornamented car, in form of a large
Eagle, drawn by six white horses; the chief justice supported a tall staff, on
the top of which was the cap of liberty; under the cap, the New Constitution
framed and ornamented; and immediately under the Constitution, the words --
"THE PEOPLE" -- in large gold letters affixed to the staff. The car was made by
Messrs. George and William Hunter. The carriage was painted light blue, 20 feet
long: the hind wheels 8 feet, and the fore wheels 6 feet in diameter. The body,
mounted on springs, was 13 feet high, in the shape of a bald eagle -- from the
head to the tail 13 feet -- the breast emblazoned with 13 silver stars in a
sky-blue field; and underneath, a shield bearing 13 stripes, alternate red and
white. The dexter talons of the eagle embraced an olive branch: the sinister
grasped thirteen arrows.

XIV.
CORPSE of light infantry, commanded by captain Heysham, with the standard of
the third regiment.

XV.
TEN gentlemen, representing the states that had ratified the federal
constitution; each carrying a small flag, bearing the name of the state he
represented, in gold letters, and walking arm in arm, emblematical of the
union, viz. Duncan Ingraham esquire. New Hampshire. Jona. Williams, jun. esquire.
Massachusetts. Jared Ingersol, esquire. Connecticut. Samuel Stockton, esquire.
New Jersey. James Wilson, esquire. Pennsylvania. Col. Thomas Robinson, Delaware.
Hon. I. E. Howard, esquire. Maryland. Colonel Febiger, Virginia. W. Ward Burrows,
esquire. S. Carolina. George Meade, esquire. Georgia.


XVI.
COL. William Williams, on horseback, in complete armor, bearing on his arm a
shield emblazoned with the arms of the United States.

XVII.
THE Montgomery troop of light horse, commanded by captain James Morris.

XVIII.
THE consuls and representatives of foreign states in alliance with America, in
an ornamented car drawn by four horses: viz.

CAPT. Thomas Bell, with the flag of the United States of America. BARBE de
Marbois, esquire, vice consul of France. J. H. C. Heinneken, esquire. consul of the
United Netherlands, with the flag of Holland. CHARLES Helstedt, esquire. consul
general of Sweden, with the Swedish flag. CHARLES W. Lecke, esquire. with the flag
of Prussia. THOMAS Barclay, esquire. with the flag of Morocco.
XIX.
THE hon. Francis Hopkinson, esquire. judge of the admiralty, wearing in his hat a
gold anchor, pendan^ on a green ribband, preceded by the register's clerk,
carrying a green bag filled with rolls of parchment, the word ADMIRALTY in
large letters on the front of the bag.

JAMES Read, esquire. register of the admiralty court, wearing a silver pen in his
hat.

CLEMENT Biddle, esquire. marshal of the admiralty, carrying a silver oar,
decorated with green ribbands.

XX.
THE wardens of the port, and the tonnage officer.

XXI.
COLLECTOR of the customs and naval officer.

XXII.
PETER Baynton, esquire. as a citizen, and col. Isaac Melchor, as an Indian chief,
in a carriage, smoking the calumet of peace together. The sachem magnificently
dressed according to the Indian custom: his head adorned with scarlet and white
plumes; jewels of silver hanging from his nose and ears: ten strings of wampum
round his neck; the broad belt of peace and brotherly love in his hand:
clothed with a richly ornamented vest and other decorations suitable to the
character.

XXIII.
THE Berks county troop, consisting of 30 dragoons, commanded by capt. Ph.
Strubing.

XXIV.
THE NEW ROOF, or GRAND FEDERAL EDIFICE; on a carriage drawn by ten white
horses. This building was in the form of a dome, supported by 13 Corinthian
columns, raised on pedestals proper to that order: the frize decorated with 13
stars. Ten of the columns were complete, but three left unfinished. On the
pedestals of the columns were inscribed, in ornamented ciphers, the initials of
the 13 American states. On the top of the dome was a handsome cupola,
surmounted by a figure of plenty, bearing a cornucopia, and other emblems of
her character. The dimensions of this building were as follows -- 10 feet
diameter -- 11 feet to the top of the cornice -- the dome 4 feet high -- the
cupola 5 feet high -- the figure of plenty 3 feet high -- the carriage on which
the building was mounted 3 feet high -- the whole 36 feet in height. Round the
pedestal of the edifice, these words, "IN UNION THE FABRIC STANDS FIRM."

THIS elegant edifice was begun and finished in the short space of four days by
Messrs. William Williams and Co.

THE grand edifice was followed by architects and house-carpenters, in number
450, carrying insignia of the trade, preceded by Messrs. Benjamin Loxley,
Gunning Bedford, Thomas Nevil, Levi Budd, Joseph Ogilby, and William Roberts,
displaying designs in architecture, etc. -- Mr. George Ingels bore the house
carpenter's standard. -- Motto -- "JUSTICE AND BENEVOLENCE."

TO this corpse, the saw makers and file cutters attached themselves; headed by
Messrs. John Harper and William Cook, with a flag -- a hand and a saw-mill-saw,
gilt, on a pink field.

ON the floor of the grand edifice were ten chairs for the accommodation of ten
gentlemen, viz. Messrs. Hilary Baker, George Latimer, John Wharton, John
Nesbitt, Samuel Morris, John Brown, Tench Francis, Joseph Anthony, John
Chaloner, and Benjamin Fuller. These gentlemen sat as representatives of the
citizens at large, to whom the federal constitution was committed previous to
its ratification.

WHEN the grand edifice arrived at Union Green, these gentlemen gave up their
seats to the representatives of the states, mentioned in article XV, who
entered the temple, and fixed their flags to the corinthian columns, to which
they respectively belonged. In the evening, the edifice, with the ten gentlemen
representing the states now in union, was brought back in great triumph, and
with loud huzzas, and left in the area before the state-house.

XXV.
THE Pennsylvania society of Cincinnati, and militia, officers.

XXVI.
CORPSE of light infantry, commanded by captain Rose, with the standard of the
fifth regiment.

XXVII.
THE agricultural society, headed by their president Samuel Powel, esquire. A flag
borne by major Samuel Hodgdon, on a buff colored ground in an oval
compartment; industry represented by a plo^ghman, driving a plough, drawn by
oxen, followed by the goddess of plenty, bearing a cornu^opi^ in her left, and
a sickle in her right, hand. A view of an American farm in the back ground --
Motto -- " Venerate the plough."

XXVIII.
FARMERS. ^eaded by Messrs. Richard Peter's, Richard Wi^^^^, Samuel Meredith,
Isaac Warner, George Gra^^ William Peltz, -- Burkhart, and Charles Willing. Two
ploughs, one drawn by four oxen, directed by Richard Willing, esquire. in the dress
and character of a farmer, the other drawn by two horses, and directed by Mr.
-- Burkhart, followed by a sower sowing seed, with a number of farmers,
millers, etc. N. B. This conspicuous and interesting part of the procession
cannot be minutely described, as the gentlemen who conducted it live in the
country; and there was not time for procuring from them a particular account of
the arrange^^^^.

XXIX.
THE manufacturing society, with their spinning and carding machines, looms,
etc. Mr. Gallaudet carried the flag; the device, on which was a beehive
standing in the beams of the sun -- bees issuing from the hive. The flag a blue
silk: motto -- " In its rays we shall feel new vigor," in gold letters:
followed by Robert Hare, esquire. the managers of the society, subscribers to the
institution, committee for managing the manufacturing fund, and subscribers to
the fund.

THE carriage 30 feet in length, 18 feet wide, and 13 feet high, neatly covered
with white cotton, of the society's manufacture, drawn by ten large bay horses.
On this carriage was placed the carding machine, worked by two men, carding
cotton at the rate of 50 lb weight per day. Also spinning machine of 80
spindles, worked by a woman (a native of, and instructed in the city) drawing
cotton suitable for fine jeans or federal rib. On the right hand of the stage
was placed a lace loom, and a workman weaving a rich scarlet and white livery
lace. On the left, a man weaving jean on a large loom, with a fly shuttle. --
Behind the looms was fixed the apparatus of Mr. Hewson, printing muslins of an
elegant chintz pattern; Mr. Lang, designing and cutting prints for shawls; on
the right sat Mrs. Hewson and her four daughters penciling a piece of sprigged
chintz of Mr. Hewson's printing, all dressed in cottons of their own
manufacture. On the back part of the carriage, on a lofty staff, was displayed
the callicoe printer's flag; in the center 13 stars on a blue field, and 13 red
stripes on a white field; round the borders of the flag were printed 37
different patterns of various colors; one of them a very elegant bed furniture
chintz of six colors, as specimens of printing done at Philadelphia. Motto --
" May the union government protect the manufactures of America." The several
machines, and the different branches of the manufactory, were all in action
during the whole time of the procession. This carriage was followed by the
weavers of the factory, and others of the same trade, about 100 in number,
having the weaver's flag carried in front -- a rampant lion on a green field,
holding a shuttle in his dexter paw -- Motto -- " May government protect us."
The cotton card makers annexed themselves to this society.

XXX.
CORPSE of light infantry, commanded by captain Robinson, with the standard of
the sixth regiment.

XXXI. THE MARINE SOCIETY.
CAPTAIN William Greenway, carrying a globe, attended by captains Heysham and
Albertson, with spy glasses in their hands. Ten captains, five abreast, each
carrying a quadrant, viz. J. Woods, J. Ashmead, William Miller, Samuel Howell,
John Souder, Robert Bethell, W. Allen, W. Tanner, Leeson Simmons, and George
Atkinson, followed by the members of the society, six abreast, carrying
trumpets, spy glasses, charts, etc. and wearing each a badge in his hat,
representing a ship under sail. -- ^9 in number.

XXXII. THE FEDERAL SHIP UNION,
MOUNTING 20 guns, commanded by John Green, esquire. captain S. Smith, W. Belcher,
and Mr. Mercer, lieutenants; four young boys in uniform, as midshipmen; the
crew, including officers, consisted of 25 men. The ship Union was 33 feet in
length; her width and rigging in proportion to that length. Her bottom was the
barge of the ship Alliance, and the same which formerly belonged to the
Serapis, and was taken in the memorable engagement of captain Paul Jones, in
the Bon Homme Richard, with the Serapis. The Union was a masterpiece of
elegant workmanship, decorated with emblematical carvings, and finished
throughout, even to a stroke of the painter's brush. And, what is truly
surprising, she was begun and finished in less than four days: viz. she was
begun at eleven o'clock on Monday morning the 30th of June, and was brought
complete to the place of rendezvous, on the Thursday evening following, fully
prepared to join in the general procession. The workmanship and appearance of
this beautiful object commanded universal attention and applause, and did great
and merited honor to the artists of Philadelphia, who were concerned in her
construction. She was mounted on a carriage drawn by ten horses. A large sheet
of canvas was tacked all around along her water line, and, extending over a
light frame, hung down to the ground, so as to conceal the wheels and
machinery; and the canvas painted to represent the sea, so that nothing
incongruous appeared to offend the eye. The ceremonies of setting sail,
receiving a pilot on board, trimming her sails to the wind, according to the
several courses of the line of march, throwing the lead when she approached
near to Union Green, her arrival there, casting anchor, being hailed and
welcomed with three cheers, and the captain forwarding his dispatches to the
president of the United States, etc. etc. etc. were all performed with the
strictest maritime propriety. But neither time, nor the space allotted for this
account, will permit such a detail as would do justice to captain Green and his
crew, and to the builders and workmen concerned in the constructing and
finishing this beautiful and conspicuous feature in the grand procession.

THE ship was followed by the pilots of the port, with their boat, named " the
Federal Pilots," under the command of Mr. Isaac Roach, who sheared along side
the ship Union at the appointed place, and put Mr. Michael Dawson on board as
pilot; then took his station in the procession, attended and took the pilot off
again on her arrival.

BOAT BUILDERS.
A frame representing a boat builder's shop, 18 feet long, 8 wide, and 13 high,
mounted on a carriage drawn by horses. On the top of the frame was placed the
ship Union's Barge, elegantly finished. On the ensign staff, a flag, blue
field, quartered with 13 stripes, in the field an Ax and an adze crossing each
other -- Motto " By these we live." The barge 10 feet long, manned with a
cockswain and six little boys as bargemen, dressed in white linen uniform,
decorated with blue ribbands. On the platform underneath the barge, were seven
hands at work, building a boat 13 feet long, which was actually set up and
nearly completed during the procession. The whole machine was constructed with
great skill, and drawn by four bright bay horses belonging to, and under the
conduct of, Mr Jacob Toy, followed by 40 Boat Builders, headed by Messrs Bowyer
Brooks and Warwick Hale.

SAIL MAKERS.
A flag, carried by Capt. Joseph Rice, representing an inside view of a sail
loft, with masters and men at work -- On the top Thirteen Stars -- in the fly 5
vessels -- Motto -- May commerce flourish, and industry be rewarded: followed
by a number of masters, journeymen and apprentices.

SHIP CARPENTERS.
HEADED by Messrs Francis Grice and John Norris, with the draft of a ship on
the stocks, and cases of instruments in their hands. A flag, on which was
represented a ship on the stocks carried by Manuel Eyres, Esquire. supported by
Messrs Harrison, Rice, brewster, and Humphreys; followed by mastmakers,
caulkers and workmen, to the amount of 330, all wearing badges in their hats
representing a ship on the stocks, and sprigs of white oak.

SHIP JOINERS.
NICHOLAS YOUNG, conductor, his son carrying a cedar staff before him; Robert
M'Mullan master workman -- William M'Mullan and S. Ormes. with a flag, bearing
the company's arms. viz. a. binnacle and hen-coop, crooked plains, and other
tools of the profession, thirteen stripes and Thirteen Stars -- 10 of them in
full splendor -- Motto -- By these we support our families: followed by 25 of
the trade, wearing sprigs of cedar in their hats.

ROPE-MAKERS AND SHIP-CHANDLERS.
THE flag, carried in front by Richard Tittermary, representing a Rope Yard,
with 10 men spinning and 3 standing idle, with their hemp about their waists --
Motto -- May commerce flourish. Next in front, as leaders, were J. Tittermary,
sen. and G. Goodwin, being the oldest of the trade; followed by masters,
journeymen and apprentices, with hemp round their waists, etc. about 60 in
number.

MERCHANTS AND TRADERS.
THEIR standard, the flag of a Merchant Ship of the United States -- in the
union 10 illuminated stars, 3 only traced out. On one side of the flag a ship,
the Pennsylvania, with an inscription, 4th July 1788. On the reverse of the
flag, a globe and a scroll, with these words -- "par tout le mond." The flag
staff termined with a silver cone, to which a mariner's compass was suspended
by a ring. The standard borne by Mr Nesbit. Thomas Willing, Esquire. atttended by
Messrs Charles Pettit, John Wilcocks, John Ross, and Tench Coxe, the merchants
committee; then the body of merchants and traders, and after them a train of
clerks and apprentices, preceded by Mr Saintonge, carrying a large ledger.

CORPSE of light infantry, commanded by capt. Sproat, with the standard of the
4th regiment.

TRADES AND PROFESSIONS.
N. B. The order of the several trades, except those concerned in the
construction and fitting out a ship and house carpenters, was determined by lot.

XXXIII. CORDWAINERS.
A carriage drawn by four horses, representing a cordwainer's shop, in which
were six men actually at work: the shop hung round with shoes, boots, etc. Mr
Alexander Rutherford conductor, Messrs Elisha Gordon and Martin Bish,
Assistants, followed by a committee of nine, three abreast. Mr James. Roney,
junior, standard bearer. The standard -- The cordwainers arms on a crimson
field: above the arms, Crispin holding a laurel branch in his right hand, and a
scroll of parchment in his left; three hundred corwainers following, six
abreast, each wearing a white leathern apron, embellished with the company's
arms, richly painted.

XXXIV. COACH PAINTERS.
WITH a flag, ornamented with the insignia of the art, followed by ten of the
profession, carrying pallets and pencils.

XXXV. CABINET AND CHAIR MALERS.
MR. Jonathan Gostelow carrying the scale and dividers; Mr. Jedediah Snowden
with the rules of architecture; four of the oldest masters; Mr. James Lee,
attended by three masters bearing the standard, or cabinet maker's arms,
elegantly painted and gilt, on a blue field, ornamented with thirteen stars;
ten radiant and three unfinished; below the arms, two hands united -- Motto --
" By unity we support society." The masters six abreast, wearing linen aprons
and buck's tails in their hats, preceding the work-shop, seventeen feet long,
nine feet eight inches wide, and fourteen feet high, on a carriage drawn by
four horses; two signs projecting from the shop, and inscribed "Federal cabinet
and chair shop;" one on each side; Mr. John Brown, with journeymen and
apprentices at work in the shop. The shop followed by journeymen and
apprentices, six abreast, wearing lined aprons and buck's tails in their hats;
the aprons were all of American manufacture -- one hundred in train.

XXXVI. BRICK MAKERS.
A large flag of green silk, on which was represented a brick-yard; hands at
work; a kiln burning^ at a little distance a federal city building -- Motto --
It was hard in Egypt, but this prospect makes it easy. Ten master brick makers,
headed by Mr. David Rose, senior, and followed by one hundred workmen in frocks
and trowsers, with tools, etc.

XXXVII. HOUSE, SHIP, AND SIGN PAINTERS.
ARMS, three shields argent, on a field azure; crest, a hand holding a brush,
proper -- Motto -- " Virtue alone is true nobility." The stage fourteen feet by
seven; on it a mill for manufacturing colors; a glazing table, with a stone
for grinding paint; the stage furnished with pots, sashes, tools, etc. The
business on the stage conducted by Messrs. Stride, Wells, Cowen, Deveter, and
M'Elwee. The flag borne by Mr. Fausburg, as oldest painter, supported by Messrs
Flinn and Fullerton, followed by the artists, six abreast, carrying gilded
brushes, diamonds, gold hammers, glazing knives, etc. sixty eight in procession.

XXXVIII. PORTERS.
LED by John Lawrence and George Green, on each side a porter dressed, leading
a horse and dray; the horse richly decorated with blue, white, and red ribbands
-- on the dray, five barrels of superfine flower; on the head of each barrel,
the words "Federal flour;" the dray followed by John Jacobs and 40 porters. The
standard borne by David Sparks, of light blue silk; the device thirteen
stripes, thirteen stars, three of them clowded; a horse and dray, four barrels
on the dray, and a porter loading a fifth -- Motto -- May industry ever be
encouraged; the standard, followed by a number of porters; Andrew Dyer and
Joseph Greenwold brought up the rear, all wearing white aprons, tied with
ribbands of blue silk, and carrying whips, ornamented with blue, white, and red
ribbands; the officers wore sashes of blue silk. After the procession, the five
barrrels of federal flour were delivered to the overseers for the use of the
poor.

XXXIX. CLOCK AND WATCH-MAKERS.
THE company's arms, neatly painted on a silk flag -- Motto -- " Time rules all
things;" headed by Mr. J. Wood, and followed by twenty three members.

XL. FRINGE AND RIBBAND WEAVERS.
M^ J. Williams, carrying a blue staff, capped with a gilt ball; across the
staff 10 wires, to which were suspended implements and specimens of the art.
The fringe, lace, and line shuttles were each charged with a quill of shute to
show that they were all in employ -- The ribband shuttle empty. In the gilt
ball was fixed a wire, 18 inches long, from which flowed a ribband of ten
stripes -- Immediately below the cross-wires, a paper, inscribed with verses,
composed by Mr Williams on the occasion.

XLI. BRICK-LAYERS.
HEADED by Messrs. Nicholas Hicks, William Johnson, and Jacob Graff, with their
aprons and trowels; a flag with the following device; the federal city rising
in a forest, workmen building it, and the sun illuminating it -- Motto -- "
Both buildings and rulers are the works of our hands." The flag attended by
Messrs. C. Souder, W. Marsh, and Jos. Wildy, supported by Messrs. J. Robbins,
P. Waglom, T. Mitchell, J. Boyd, Burton Wallace, M. Groves, J. Souder, Edward
M'Kaighen, Alexander M'Kinley, ten master bricklayers, wearing aprons, and
carrying trowels, plum-rules, etc. followed by 55 of the trade.

XLII. TAILORS.
HEADED by Messrs. Barker, Stille, Martin, and Tatem, carrying a white flag,
bearing the company's arms -- Motto -- " By union our strength increases;"
followed by 250 of the trade.

XLIII. INSTUMENT-MAKERS, TURNERS, WINDSOR-CHAIR-MAKERS, AND SPINNING-WHEEL
MAKERS.
CONDUCTED by captain J. Cornish. Mr. John Stow, bearing the standard, viz. the
turner's arms, with the addition of a spinning-wheel on one side, and a windsor
chair on the other -- Motto -- " By faith we obtain." Messrs. G. Stow, and M.
Fox, carrying small columns, representing the several branches of turner's
work. Followed by Messrs. Anthony and Mason, with a group of musical
instruments, and sixty workmen in green aprons.

XLIV. CARVERS AND GILDERS.
THE carvers and gilders exhibited an ornamentmented car, on a federal plan;
viz. it was 13 feet by 10 on the floor, whereon was erected 13 pilasters richly
ornamented with carved work. The capitals of 10 of them were gilt, and labelled
with the names of the states in the order in which they acceded to the new
constitution: the remaining three left somewhat unfinished. About 3 feet above
the floor, a level railing united to the pilasters, denoting the equality of
the subjects. In the center a column 10 feet high, with laurel twining round
it; and on the top a bust of general Washington, crowned with laurel, dressed
in the American uniform, with thirteen stars on a collar. The column was
supported by 10 tight stays from the 10 finished pilasters: three slack stays
hanging from the unfinished pilasters. Over the general's bust, the American
standard was displayed.

IN the center of the front of the carriage was the head of Phidias, the most
eminent of ancient carvers, with emblematical figures supporting him. On the
inside of the front railing, a large figure for the head of a ship, richly
carved and painted: and the whole outside of the car decorated all round with
figures of the seasons, the cardinal virtues, and various devices.

BEFORE the car, walked the artists of the several branches, headed by Mr.
Cutbush, ship carver, and Messrs. Reynolds and Jugiez, house furniture and
coach carvers, together with a number of young artists, wearing blue ribbands
round their necks, to which were suspended medallions of ten burnished gold
stars on a blue ground. Amongst these, one carried a figure of Ceres, another,
Fame, with her trumpet, announcing the federal union, and another a corinthian
column, complete. In the car a number of artists at work, superintended by Mr.
Rush, ship carver.

XLV. COOPERS.
CONDUCTED by Mr. D. Dolbey. An elegant flag of the cooper's arms, embellished
with thirteen stars -- Motto -- " May commerce flourish -- Love as brethren."
After the flag, Messrs. W. King, R. Babe, and J. Lunch, followed by 150
coopers, in white leathern aprons, and wearing badges in their hats.

XLVI. PLANE MAKERS.
MR. W. Martin in front, with the standard, viz. a white field; a smoothing
plane on the top; in the middle a pair of spring dividers, three planes, a
brace, a square, and a guage -- Motto -- " Truth:" followed by 8 workmen.

XLVII. WHIP AND CANE MAKERS.
A machine on a carriage, a boy in it at work, platting a whip; followed by Mr.
M'Callister and journeymen, carrying articles of the trade on the top of a flag
-- Motto -- Let us encourage our own manufactures.

XLVIII. BLACK-SMITHS, WHITE SMITHS, AND NAILORS.
A machine drawn by nine horses, representing a Smiths manufactory, being a
frame 10 by 15 feet, and 9 feet high, with a real brick chimney extending 3
feet above the roof and completely furnished for use. In front of the building,
three master Blacksmiths, viz. N. Brown, N. Hess, and W. Perkins supporting the
standard -- The Smiths arms highly ornamented -- Motto -- "By hammer in hand,
all arts do stand." The Manufactory was in full emply during the procession --
Mr I. Mingler, and his assistant C. Keyser, completed a set of plough irons out
of old swords; worked a sword into a sickle, turned several horse-shoes, and
performed several jobs on demand.

MR. J. Goodman, jun. white smith, finished a complete pair of pliars, a knife,
and some machinery, and other work, on demand.

MESSRS. A. Feffinger and B. Brummel forged, finished, and sold a number of
spikes, nails, and broad tacks; all which was performed in the street during
the procession. The whole was under the conduct of Messrs. Godfrey Gebler,
David Henderson, G. Goddard, Ja. Esler, Lewis Prahl, and J. Eckfelt; followed
by two hundred brother black-smiths, white-smiths, and nailers.

XLIX. COACH MAKERS.
PRECEDED by Mr. John Bringhurst, in a phaeton drawn by 2 horses, carrying a
draft of a coach on a white silk flag. A stage nine feet high, sixteen feet
long, and eight feet wide, on a carriage drawn by four horses, representing a
shop, Mr. G. Way, master workman, a body and carriage-maker, a wheelwright, a
trimmer, and a harness maker, all at work, and a painter ornamenting a body. On
each side of the stage, the words, " No tax on American carriages." In the
center was erected the standard, of yellow silk, emblazoned with the arms of
the profession, viz. three coaches on a blue field; the chariot of the sun
appearing through the clouds -- Motto -- The clouds dispelled, we shine forth;
the staff decorated with the implements of the trade. Ten masters, each bearing
a yellow silk flag, with the names of the states in union, in letters of gold,
on a blue field; five before and five behind the stage; the whole followed by
one hundred and fifty workmen.

L. POTTERS.
A flag, on which was neatly painted a kiln burning, and several men at work in
the different branches of the business -- Motto -- " The potter has power over
his clay." -- A machine, drawn by horses, on which was a potter's wheel and men
at work. A number of cups, bowls, mugs, etc. were made during the procession,
followed by twenty potters, headed by Messrs. C. Percy and M. Gilbert, wearing
linen aprons of American manufacture.

LI. HATTERS.
LED by Mr. A. Tybout; the standard borne by Mr. J. Gordon, viz. on a white
field, a hat in hand; on each side a tassel band; the crest, a beaver; motto,
on a crimson garter in gold letters: With the industry of the beaver we support
our rights; followed by one hundred and twenty four hatters.

LII. WHEEL WRIGHTS.
A stage drawn by two horses, five men working upon it, making a plough, and a
speed for a wagon wheel. The standard, a blue flag -- Motto -- " The united
wheel-wrights;" followed by twenty two of the trade, headed by Messrs. Conrad,
Robinson, and Nicholas Reep.

LIII. TIN-PLATE WORKERS.
PRECEDED by J. Finnaur and Martin Riser, carrying the standard with the
company's arms, followed by workmen in green aprons.

LIVE. SKINNERS, BREECHES MAKERS, AND GLOVERS.
HEADED by Messrs. J. Lisle, and G. Cooper, the one carrying a breaming knife,
the other a paring knife. The standard, borne by Mr. Shreiner, viz. on one
side, a deer and a glove, on the other, the golden fleece, and below it a pair
of breeches -- Motto -- May our manufacture be equal in its consumption to its
usefulness; followed by fifty eight of the trade, in buckskin breeches and
gloves, and wearing buck's tails in their hats. To these Mr. J. Rogers,
parchment and glue manufacturer, attached himself.

LV. TALLOW CHANDLERS.
MR. R. Porter, master. Two standards. First, the company's arms on a blue
field, trimmed with white, three doves with olive branches. Over the arms an
angel bearing St. John Baptist's head; on each side, two blazing lamps -- Motto
-- " Let your light so shine." Second standard, a chandelier of thirteen
branches, a lighted candle in each, and thirteen stars in a silver semicircle.
Inscription, " The stars of America a light to the world." Motto, at the bottom
of the chandelier, " United in one." The uniform, blue and white cockades, blue
aprons, bound with white, with a dove neatly painted on each, a white rod,
surmounted by an olive branch, in each person's hand; twenty in number.

LVI. VICTUALLERS.
A flag with this inscription -- "The death of anarchy and confusion, shall
feed the poor." Two ax men preceding two stately oxen 3000 lb weight -- a label
across the horns of each, the one inscribed Anarchy the other Confusion -- Ten
boys dressed in white, 5 on the right and 5 on the left of the oxen, carrying
small flags, with the names of the states of the union inscribed -- A band of
music-conductors, Messrs P. Hall, G. Welper, P. Odenheimer and Conrad Hoff;
followed by 86 master victuallers, all dressed in white. The oxen were afterward
killed, the hides and tallow sold for bread, and given, with the meat, to the
poor.

LVII. PRINTERS, BOOK-BINDERS, AND STATIONERS.
A stage 9 feet square, drawn by four horses-upon the stage the federal
printing press complete, with cases, and other implements of the business,
furnished by ten printing offices. Men at work upon the stage in the different
branches of the profession. Mr Durant, in the character of Mercury, in a white
dress, ornamented with red ribbands, and having real wings affixed to his head
and feet, and a garland of flowers round his temples -- During the procession,
the press-men were at work, and struck off, and distributed amongst the people,
many copies of the following ode, composed for the occasion by Francis
Hopkinson Esquire.

THE ODE.
Oh! for a muse of fire! To mount the skies,
And to a listening world proclaim;
Behold! Behold! an Empire rise!
An Era new, time as he flies,
Has entered in the book of fame.
On Alleghany's towering head
Echo shall stand; the tidings spread,
And over the lakes, and misty floods around,
An Era new resound.
See where Columbia sits alone,
And from her star bespangled throne,
Beholds the gay procession move along,
And hears the trumpet and the choral song.
She hears her sons rejoice;
Looks into future times, and sees
The numerous blessings heaven decrees;
And with her plaudit, joins the general voice.
"'It Is done! it is done! my sons, she cries,
"In war are valiant and in council wise,
" Wisdom and valor shall my rights defend,
"And over my vast domain those rights extend.
"Science shall flourish, genius stretch her wing,
"In native strains Columbian muses sing:
" Wealth crown the arts, and Justice cleanse her scales,
" Commerce her ponderous anchor weigh
-- "Wide spread her sails.
"And in far distant seas her flag display.
"My sons for freedom fought, nor fought in vain,
"But found a naked goddess was their gain;
" Good government alone can show the maid
"In robes of social happiness arrayed."
Hail to this festival! All hail the day!
Columbia's standard on her roof display;
And let the people's motto ever be,
" United thus, and thus united free."
THIS ode, and also one in the German language, fitted to the purpose, and
printed by Mr Steiner, were thrown amongst the people as the procession moved
along. Ten small packages, containing the above ode, and the toasts for the
day, were made up and addressed to the ten states in union respectively, and
these were tied to pigeons, which, at intervals, rose from Mercury's cap and
flew off, amidst the acclamations of an admiring multitude.

MR. W. Sellers, sen. bearing the standard of the united professions; viz.
azure, on a cheveron argent, an American bald eagle, volant, between two reams
of paper, proper, between three Bibles closed, proper. In chief, perched on the
point of the cheveron, a love with an olive branch, of the second* S^pporters,
two Fames, clothed in sky-blue, flowing robes, spangled with stars argent.
Crest, a Bible displayed, proper, on a wreath azure and argent. Under the
escutcheon, two pens placed saltiere ways, proper -- Motto -- " We protect, and
are supported by liberty." After the standard walked the masters of the
combined professions, followed by journeymen and apprentices, each carrying a
scroll, tied with blue silk binding, exhibiting the word " Typographer,"
illuminated by ten stars in union. Fifty in train.

LVIII. SADLERS.
A sadler's shop, dressed with sadlery, and a variety of ready made work;
elegant American plated furniture, etc. drawn by two fine horses. In the shop,
Mr. S. Burrows, and a number of hands at work: one of whom (having the
different parts in readiness) completed a neat saddle during the procession.
The standard, carried by Mr. Jehosophat Polk and J. Young, was of green silk,
with the company's arms thereon, elegantly painted and gilt -- Motto -- " Our
trust is in God." The company was headed by Messrs. J. Stephens and J. Mar.
Mr. William Haley, silver plater, joined himself to this corpse, carrying a
federal bit of his own workmanship.

LIX. STONE-CUTTERS.
THREE apprentices with tools, and two with the orders of the operative lodge:
one with the standard in mason's order; the rest following with pieces of
polished marble. Twenty in number.

LX. BREAD AND BISCUIT-BAKERS.
A standard of the bread baker's arms, properly emblazoned -- Motto -- " May
our country never want bread." Uniform; white shirts, and full plaited aprons,
quite round the waist, with light blue sashes. A stage, with a baker's oven,
complete, 6 feet in diameter. Three hands at work as the procession went on,
directed by a master baker, who distributed bread to the people as it was drawn
out of the oven. Headed by Mr. G. Mayer.

THE biscuit baker's standard. A white flag; a bake house, and several hands at
work -- Motto -- " May the federal government revive our trade." Messrs. T.
Hopkins and Matthias Landenberger in front of twelve masters. Messrs. I.
Peter's, sen. and W. Echart brought up the rear, each carrying a small peel: 150
bakers in procession.

LXI. GUN-SMITHS.
A stage on a four wheel carriage drawn by four horses, 14 feet long and 8 feet
wide, with a motto on each side in large letters: " Federal armoury." A number
of hands on the stage at work, under the direction of two senior masters, J.
Nicholson, and J. Perkins, Abm. Morrow bearing the standard in the rear of the
carriage, viz. a large white silk flag, cross guns in the middle: over the guns
the cap of liberty; under the guns, the letters CP (city proof) cross pistols,
with the letter V (viewed). At the end nearest the staff, a powder cask: on the
opposite end three balls. The uniform, green baize aprons, with green strings.

LXII. COPPER-SMITHS.
A car, 14 feet by 7, drawn by 4 horses, three hands working at stills and
tea-kettles, under the direction of Mr. Benjamin Harbeson.

A standard, bearing the arms of the trade, decorated with emblems, and
surrounded with 13 stars, carried by two, and followed by seventeen master
workmen.

LXIII. GOLDSMITHS, SILVER-SMITHS, AND JEWELLERS.
WILLIAM BALL, esquire. senior member, carrying an urn. Messrs. Jo. Gee and John
Germain, with the standard of white silk: on one side, the silver-smith's arms
-- Motto -- " Justitia virtutum regina." On the reverse, the genius of America,
holding in her hand a silver urn -- Motto -- " The purity, brightness, and
solidity of this metal is emblematical of that liberty which we expect from the
New Constitution." Her head surrounded by 13 stars; 10 very brilliant, two less
bright, and one with 3 dark points, and two light ones; the last emblematical
of Rhode Island; also one other star emerging bright from the horizon, for the
rising state of Kentucke. After the standard, the masters, journeymen, and
apprentices. Thirty-five.

LXIV. DISTILLERS.
ON a standard of blue silk, a still, worm-tub, and implements of the business,
neatly painted. The standard borne by Mr. M. Shubart; and followed by 12
distillers.

LXV. TOBACCONISTS.
HEADED by Mr John. Riley. The standard of white silk; a tobacco plant of 13
leaves, 10 in perfection, 3 not finished; a hogshead of tobacco on one side of
the plant, a roll of plug tobacco, a bottle and bladder of snuff: over the
plant, on the other side, 13 stars; 10 silvered, 3 unfinished. The standard
carried by Mr Thomas Leiper -- Motto -- "Success to the tobacco plant;" each
member wearing a green apron with blue strings, and a plume, composed of
different kinds of tobacco leaves in his hat, and carrying tools of the
profession in his hand. Conductors, Messrs Hamilton, Few, Stimble, and Murphey;
70 in train.

LXVI. BRASS FOUNDERS.
MR Daniel King in a car drawn by four gray horses, with an emblimatical
standard; a furnace in blast during the procession. He finished a 3 inch
howitzer, which was mounted and fired off with the artillery on Union Green.
His journeymen and apprentices also neatly excuted several pieces of work --
Mottoon the standard -- In vain the earth hertreasure hides. The whole
exhibition was at the sole expense of Mr King.

LVII. STOCKING MANUFACTURERS.
HEADED by Mr George Freytag -- a white standard; a pair of blue stockings
across -- a cap above; finger mitts below, incircled with a gilded heart -- a
gold crown with 10 points, on each point a blue star -- Motto -- The Union of
the American stocking manufacturers. Thirty in train.

LXVIII. TANNERS AND CURRIERS.
LED by Mr Geo. Leib, carrying the fag of the companys arms -- Motto -- "God be
with us" -- 25 in number.

CURRIERS, led by Mr Geo. Oakly carrying the company's flag -- Motto -- "spes
nostra Deus -- followed by 34 of the trade, each carrying a currying knife, and
wearing a blue apron and a jean coatee of our new manufactory

LXIX. UPHOLSTERERS.
HEADED by Messrs J. Mason and J. Davis. In front was carried a cushion with
its drapery, on which fluttered a dove with an olive branch in its mouth, and
upon its head a double scroll -- Motto -- "Be liberty thine;" followed by a
cabriole sopha decorated.

LXX. SUGAR REFINERS.
CONDUCTED by Chr. Kucher Esquire. Capt Ja. Lawersyler, Messrs B. Pennington. J.
Morgan, D. Mierken, Adam Coruman and II. Clause, wearing black cockades, blue
sashes, and white aprons. A blue standard arms: on a gold field, the cap of
liberty on a staff, between two loaves of sugar -- Motto -- " Double refined."
Thirteen stars in a blue field: crest, a lighted candle in a candlestick; on
the foot, the word " Proof; beneath, " American manufactures," ornamented with
sugar canes; followed by thirty-six, wearing white aprons, on which were
painted sugar loaves, marked 10; each carrying some implement of the trade.

LXXI. BREWERS.
TEN in number, headed by Reuben Haines, each wearing 10 ears of barley in his
hat, and a sash of hop-vines; and carrying malt-shovels and mashing oars. One
dray loaded with malt and hops, and one loaded with two hogsheads and a butt,
marked, Beer, Ale, Porter; with this inscription, " Proper drink for
Americans." A standard, carried by Luke Morris: the brewer's arms -- Motto -- "
Home brewed is best."

LXXII. PERUKE MAKERS AND BARBER SURGEONS.
PRECEDED by Messrs. Perrie and Tautwine, full dressed. The standard -- the
company's arms, on a white field, richly decorated; viz. a pillar, the emblem
of strength, surmounted with the cap of liberty, and supported by twelve hands,
in gules, representing the twelve concurring states that called the grand
convention. A pelican and her young, in a field, azure. The arms of the barber
surgeons: a goat rampant, in full coat, argent, in a field, sable: the arms of
the peruke makers, with two arms extended at top, hand in hand, the emblem of
union and friendship. Supporters: a land and river horse -- Motto -- " United
we stand." The treasurer of the company, the trustees, the company, according
to seniority, hand in hand, 6 abreast, consisting of 72, each wearing a white
sash, with a black relief down the middle, and cockades of the same, in honor
of the first and great ally of the United States.

LXXIII. ENGRAVERS.
THEIR armorial insignia (occasionally deviced) were, or, on a cheveron,
engrailed gules (between a parallel ruler, sable, barred and studded of the
first, and two gravers, saltiere ways, azure, handled of the third) three
plates. Crest, a copperplate on a sand-bag, proper; inscribed underneath, in
large capitals -- ENGRAVERS.

LXXIV. PLAISTERERS.
(No return.)

LXXV. BRUSH-MAKERS.
A white flag, with a white boar, and a bundle of bristles over him -- Motto --
" Federal brush manufactory." The flag carried by Mr. Roger Flahavan, jun.

LXXVI. STAY-MAKERS.
REPRESENTED by Mr. Francis Serre, with his first journeymen, carrying an
elegant pair of ladies stays. The several companies formed their own devices,
mottos, and emblems; and the above account is taken from their returns.


LXXVII.
CORPSE of light infantry, commanded by captain Rees, with the standard of the
second regiment.

LXXVIII.
THE civil and military officers of Congress in the city.

LXXIX.
THE supreme executive council of Pennsylvania. His excellency the president
Dr. Franklin.
was too much indisposed to attend.

LXXX.
THE justices of the court of common pleas, and the magistrates.

LXXXI.
SHERIFF and coroner, on horseback.

LXXXII.
THE board of city wardens, city treasurer, and secretary of the board, clerks
of the market, with standard weights and measures, constables of the watch,
with his two assistants.

A BAND OF MUSIC.
TWENTY watchmen, with their flams decorated, and in their proper dress: twenty
silent watchmen, with these staves: other watchmen calling the the hour --
"Past TEN o'clock, and a glorious STARLIGHT morning!" alluding to the 10 united
states, and the stars of the union.

LXXXIII.
THE street commissioners.

LXXXIV.
THE gentlemen of the bar, headed by the hon. Edward Shippen, esquire. president of
the common pleas, and William Bradford, esquire. attorney general, followed by the
young students in law.

LXXXV.
THE clergy of the different Christian denominations, with the rabbi of the
Jews, walking arm in arm.

LXXXVI.
THE college of physicians, headed by their president, Dr. John Redman, and
followed by the students in physic.

LXXXVII.
STUDENTS of the university, headed by the vice-provost: students of the
episcopal academy, and of most of the principal schools in the city, conducted
by their respective principals, professors, masters, and tutors. A small flag
borne before them, inscribed, " The rising generation."

LXXXVIII.
THE county troop of horse commanded by major W. M'Pherson, brought up the rear
of the whole.

MAJOR Fullerton attended the right wing, and colonel Mentges the left wing of
the line. Messrs. Stoneburner, Heiltzheimer, and Jonathan Penrose, furnished
and superintended the horses for the public carriages.

THIS grand procession began to move from the place of rendezvous about half
past nine (as was beforementioned) and the front arrived at Union Green, in
front of Bush Hill, about half past twelve. The length of the line was about
one mile and an half, the distance marched, about three miles. As the
procession passed along Fourth Street it was saluted, in military form, by
captain David Zeigler and lieutenant John Armstrong, and their company of
continental troops, which happened to be in the city at the time.

A very large circular range of tables, covered with awnings, and plentifully
spread with a cold collation, had been prepared the day before, by the
committee of provisions. In the center of this spacious circle (about 500 feet
in diameter) the grand edifice was placed, and the ship Union moored. The flags
of the consuls, and other standards, were planted round the edifice.

AS soon as the rear of the line arrived at Union Green, James Wilson, Esquire.
addressed the people, from the federal edifice, in the following

ORATION.
MY FRIENDS AND FELLOW-CITIZENS,
YOUR candid and generous indulgence I may well bespeak, for many reasons. I
shall mention but one. While I express it, I feel it in all its force. My
abilities are unequal -- abilities far superior to mine would be unequal to the
occasion, on which I have the honor of being called to address you.

A people, free and enlightened, establishing and ratifying a system of
government which they have previously considered, examined, and approved! This
is the sepctacle which we are assembled to celebrate; and it is the most
dignified one, that has yet appeared on our globe. Numerous and splendid have
been the triumphs of conquerors. From what causes have they originated? Of what
consequences have they been productive? They have generally begun in ambition;
they have generally ended in tyran^* But nothing tyrannical can participate of
dignity; and to Freedom's eye, Sesostris himself appears contemptible, even
when he treads on the necks of kings.

THE senators of Rome, seated on their curule chairs, and surrounded with all
their official luster, were an object much more respectable; and we view,
without displeasure, the admiration of those untutored savages, who considered
them as so many gods upon earth. But who were those senators? They were only a
part of a society; they were invested only with inferior powers.

WHAT is the object exhibited to our contemplation? A whole people exercising
its first and greatest power, performing an act of sovereignty, original and
unlimited!

THE scene before us is unexampled as well as magnificent. The greatest part of
governments have been the deformed offspring of force and fear. With these we
deign not comparison. But there have been others who have formed bold
pretensions to higher regard. You have heard of Sparta, of Athens, and of Rome.
You have heard of their admired constitutions, and of their high prized
freedom. In fancied right of these, they conceived themselves to be elevated
above the rest of the human race, whom they marked with the degrading title of
barbarians. But did they, in all their pomp and pride of liberty, ever furnish
to the astonished world an exhibition similar to that which we now contemplate?
Were their constitutions framed by those who were appointed for that purpose by
the people? Were they submitted to the consideration of the people? Had the
people an opportunity of expressing their sentiments concerning them? Were they
to stand or fall by the people's approving or rejecting vote? To all these
questions attentive and impartial history obliges us to answer in the negative.
The people were either unfit to be trusted, or their lawgivers were too
ambitious to trust them.

THE far famed establishment of Lycurgus was introduced by deception and fraud.
Under the specious pretense of consulting the oracle concerning his laws, he
prevailed on the Spartans to make a temporary experiment of them during his
absence, and to swear that they would suffer no alteration of them till his
return. Taking a disingenuous advantage of their scrupulous regard for their
oaths, he prevented his return, by a voluntary death; and in this manner
endeavored to secure a proud immortality to his system.

EVEN Solon, the mild and moderating Solon, far from considering himself as
employed only to propose such regulations as he should think best calculated
for promoting the happiness of the commonwealth, made and promulgated his laws
with all the haughty airs of absolute power. On more occasions than one, we
find him boasting with much self-complacency, of his extreme forbearance and
condescension, because he did not establish a disposition, in his own favor,
and because he did not reduce his equals to the humiliating condition of his
slaves.

DID Numa submit his Institutions to the good sense and free investigation of
Rome? They were received in precious communications from the goddess Egeria,
with whose presence and regard he was supremely favored; and they were imposed
on the easy faith of the citizens, as the dictates of an inspiration that was
divine.

SUCH, my fellow-citizens, was the origin of the most splendid establishments
that have been hitherto known; and such were the arts to which they owed their
introduction and success.

WHAT a flattering contrast arises from a retrospect of the scenes which we now
commemorate? Delegates were appointed to deliberate and propose. They met, and
performed their delegated trust. The result of their deliberations was laid
before the people. It was discussed and scrutinised in the fullest, freest, and
severest manner; by speaking, by writing, and by printing; by individuals, and
by public bodies; by its friends, and by its enemies. What was the issue? Most
favorable and most glorious to the system. By state after state, at time after
time, it was ratified; in some states unanimously; on the whole, by a large and
very respectable majority.

IT would be improper now to examine its qualities. A decent respect for those
who have accepted of it will lead us to presume that it is worthy of their
acceptance. The deliberate ratifications which have taken place, at once,
recommend the system, and the people by whom it has been ratified.

BUT why? Methinks I hear one say, Why is so much exultation displayed in
celebrating this event? We are prepared to give the reasons of our joy. We
rejoice, because, under this constitution, we hope to see just government, and
to enjoy the blessings that walk in her train.

LET us begin with peace; the mild and modest harbinger of felicity. How seldom
does the amiable wanderer choose for her permanent residence the habitations of
men! In their systems, she sees too many arrangements, civil and
ecclesiastical, inconsistent with the calmness and benignity of her temper. In
the old world, how many millions of men do we behold unprofitable to society,
burdensome to industry, the props of establishments that deserve not to be
supported, the causes of distrust in times of peace, and the instruments of
destruction in the times of war! Why are they not employed in cultivating
useful arts, and in forwarding public improvements? Let us indulge the pleasing
expectation, that such will be the operation of government in the United
States. Why may we not hope, that, disentangled from the intrigues and
jealousies of European politics, and unmolested with the alarm and solicitude
to which those intrigues and jealousies give birth, our councils will be
directed to the encouragement, and our strength be exerted in the cultivation,
of all the arts of peace?

OF those, the first is AGRICULTURE -- this is true in all countries. In the
United States, its truth is of peculiar importance. The subsistence of man, the
materials of manufactures, the articles of commerce; all spring originally from
the soil. On agriculture, therefore, the wealth of nations is founded. Whether
we consult the observations that reason will suggest, or attend to the
information that history will give, we shall in each case be satisfied of the
influence of government, good or bad, upon the state of agriculture. In a
government, whose maxims are those of oppression, property is insecure: it is
given, it is taken away by caprice. Where there is no security for property,
there is no encouragement for industry. Without industry, the richer the soil,
the more it abounds with weeds. The evidence of industry warrants the truth of
these general remarks: attend to Greece; and compare her agriculture in ancient
and modern times. Then, smiling harvest bore testimony to the bountiful boons
of liberty: now, the very earth languishes under oppression. View the Campania
of Rome: how melancholy the prospect! Which ever way you turn your afflicted
eyes, scenes of desolation crowd before them. Waste and barrenness appear
around you in all their hideous forms. What is the reason? With double tyranny
the land is cursed. Open the classic page -- you trace, in ^haste description,
the beautiful reverse of every thing you have seen. Whence proceeds the
difference? When the description was made, the force of liberty pervaded the
soil.

BUT is agriculture the only art which feels the influence of government? Over
manufactures and commerce its power is equally prevalent: there the same causes
operate; and there they produce the same effects. The industrious village, the
busy city, the crowded port -- all these are the gifts of liberty -- and
without a good government, liberty cannot exist.

THESE are advantages; but these are not all the advantages that result from a
system of good government. Agriculture, manufactures, and commerce will ensure
to us plenty, convenience, and elegance. But is there not something still
wanting to finish the man? Are internal virtues and accomplishments less
estimable or less attractive than external arts and ornaments? Is the operation
of government less powerful upon the former than upon the latter? By no means:
upon this, as upon a preceding topic, reason and history will concur in their
information and advice. In a serene mind the sciences and the virtues love to
dwell. But can the mind of a man be serene, when the property, liberty,
subsistence of himself, and of those for whom he feels more than for himself,
depend on a tyrant's nod? If the dispirited subject of oppression can with
difficulty exert his enfeebled faculties so far as to provide, on the incessant
demands of nature, food, just enough to lengthen out his wretched existence,
can it be expected that, in such a state, he will experience those fine and
vigorous movements of the soul, without the full and free exercise of which
science and virtue will never flourish? Look around to the nations that now
exist. View in historic retrospect nations that have hitherto existed; the
collected result will be an entire conviction of these all interesting truths:
-- Where TYRANNY reigns, there is the country of IGNORANCE and VICE. Where GOOD
GOVERNMENT prevails, there is the country of SCIENCE and VIRTUE. Under a good
government, therefore, we must look for the accomplished man.

BUT shall we confine our views even here? While we wish to be accomplished men
and citizens, shall we wish to be nothing more? While we perform our duty, and
promote our happiness in this world, shall we bestow no regard upon the next?
Does no connection subsist between the two? From this connection flows the most
important of all the blessings of good government. But here let us pause:
unassisted reason can guide us no farther: she directs us to that heaven
descended science, by which LIFE and IMMORTALITY have been brought to light.

MAY we not now say that we have reason for our joy? But while we cherish the
delightful emotion, let us remember those things which are requisite to give it
permanence and stability. Shall we lie supine, and look in listless langour for
those blessings and enjoyments to which exertion is inseparably attached? If we
would be happy, we must be active. The constitution, and our manners, must
mutually support and be supported. Even on this festivity, it will not be
disagreeable or incongruous to review the virtues and manners that both justify
and adorn it.

FRUGALITY and temperance first attract our attention. These simple, but
powerful virtues, are the sole foundation on which a good government can rest
with security: they were the virtues which nursed and educated infant ROME, and
prepared her for all her greatness. But in the giddy hour of her prosperity,
she spurned from her the obscure instruments by which it was acquired; and in
their place substituted luxury and dissipation. The consequence was such as
might have been expected: she preserved, for some time, a gay and flourishing
appearance; but the internal health and soundness of her constitution was gone.
A^ last she fell a victim to the poisonous draughts which were administered by
her perfidious favorites. The fate of Rome, both in her rising and in her
falling state, will be the fate of every other nation that shall follow both
parts of her example.

INDUSTRY appears next among the virtues of a good citizen. Idleness is the
nurse of villains. The industrious alone constitute a nation's strength. I will
not expatiate on this fruitful subject: let one animating reflection suffice.
In a well constituted commonwealth, the industry of every citizen extends
beyond himself. A common interest pervades the society. Each gains from ALL,
and all gain from EACH. It has often been observed, that the sciences flourish
all together; the remark applies equally to the arts.

YOUR patriotic feelings attest the truth of what I say, when, among the
virtues necessary to merit and preserve the advantages of a good government, I
number a warm and uniform attachment to LIBERTY, and to the CONSTITUTION. The
enemies of liberty are artful and insiduous. A counterfeit steals her dress,
imitates her manners, forges her signature, assumes her name: but the real name
of the deceiver is LICENTIOUSNESS. Such is her effrontery, that she will charge
liberty to her face with imposture; and she will, with shameless front, insist
that herself alone is the genuine character, and that herself alone is entitled
to the respect which the genuine character deserves. With the giddy and
undiscerning, on whom a deeper impression is made by dauntless impudence, than
by modest merit, her pretensions are often successful. She rereceives the
h^ours of liberty; and liberty herself is treated as a traitor and an usurper.
Generally, however, this bold impostor acts only a secondary part. Though she
alone appear upon the stage, her motions are regulated by dark ambition, who
stands concealed behind the curtain, and who knows that despotism, his other
favorite, can always follow the success of licentiousness. Against these
enemies of liberty, who act in concert, though they appear on opposite sides,
the patriot citizen will keep a watchful guard.

A good constitution is the greatest blessing which a society can enjoy. Need I
infer, that it is the duty of every citizen to use his best and most
unremitting endeavors for preserving it pure, healthful, and vigorous? For the
accomplishment of this great purpose, the exertions of no one citizen are
unimportant. Let no one, therefore, harbor for a moment the mean idea that he
is, and can be of no value to his country. Let the contrary manly impression
animate his soul. Every one can, at many times, perform to the state useful
services; and he who steadily pursues the road of patriotism has the most
inviting prospect, of being able, at some times, to perform eminent ones.

ALLOW me to direct your attention, in a very particular manner, to a momentous
part, which, by this constitution, every citizen will frequently be called to
act. All those, in places of power and trust, will be elected, either
immediately by the people, or in such a manner that their appointment will
depend ultimately on such immediate election. All the derivative movements of
government must spring from the original movement of the people at large. If,
to this, they give a sufficient force, and a just direction, all the others
will be governed by its controlling power. To speak without a metaphor; if the
people, at their elections, take care to choose none but representatives that
are wise and good, their representatives will take care, in their turn, to
choose or appoint none but such as are wise and good also. The remark applies
to every succeeding election and appointment. Thus the characters proper for
public officers will be diffused from the immediate elections of the people
over the remotest parts of administration. Of what immense consequence is it,
then, that this primary duty should be faithfully and skilfully discharged? On
the faithful discharge of it, the public happiness or infelicity under this,
and every other constitution, must, in a very great measure, depend. For,
believe me, no government, even the best, can be happily administered by
ignorant or vicious men. You will forgive me, I am sure, for endeavoring to
impress upon your minds, in the strongest manner, the importance of this great
duty. It is the first concoction in politics; and if an error is committed
here, it can never be corrected in any subsequent process, the certain
consequence must be disease. Let no one say, that he is but a single citizen,
and that his ticket will be but one in the box; that one ticket may turn the
election. In battle, every soldier should consider the public safety as
depending on his single arm; at an election, every citizen should consider the
public happiness as depending on his single vote.

A progressive state is necessary to the happiness and perfection of man.
Whatever seize are already reached, seize still higher should be
pursued. Let us therefore strive with noble emulation. Let us suppose we have
done nothing while any thing yet remains to be done. Let us, with fervent zeal,
press forward, and make unceasing advances in every thing that can support,
improve, refine, or embellish society.

TO enter into particulars under each of these heads, and to dilate them
according to their importance, would be improper at this time. A few remarks on
the last of them will be congenial with the entertainments of this auspicious
day.

IF we give the slightest attention to nature, we shall discover, that with
utility she is curious to blend ornament. Can we imitate a better pattern?
Public exhibitions have been the favorite amusements of some of the wisest and
most accomplished nations. Greece, in her most shining era, considered games
as far from being the least respectable amongst her public establishments. The
shows of the circus evince that, on this subject, the sentiments of Greece were
fortified by those of Rome.

PUBLIC processions may be so planned and executed, as to join both the
properties of nature's rule. They may instruct and improve, while they
entertain and please. They may point out the elegance or usefulness of the
sciences and the arts. They may preserve the memory, and engrave the importance
of great political events. They may represent, with peculiar felicity and
force, the operation and effects of great political truths. The picturesque and
splendid decorations around me, furnish the most beautiful and most brilliant
proofs, that these remarks are far from being imaginary.

THE commencement of our government has been eminently glorious; let our
progress in every excellence be proportionably great -- it will -- it must be
so. What an enrapturing prospect opens on the United States! Placid husbandry
walks in front, attended by the venerable PLOUGH -- lowing herds adorn our
valleys -- bleating flocks spread over our hills -- verdant meadows, enamelled
pastures, yellow harvests, bending orchards, rise in rapid succession from east
to west: Plenty, with her copious horn, sits easy, smiling, and in conscious
complacency, enjoys and presides over the scenes: Commerce next advances in all
her splendid and embellished forms. The rivers and lakes, and seas, are crowded
with ships: their shores are covered with cities: the cities are filled with
inhabitants: the arts decked with elegance, yet with simplicity, appear in
beautiful variety, and well adjusted arrangement. Around them are diffused, in
rich abundance, the necessaries, the decencies, and the ornaments of life. With
heartfelt contentment, Industry beholds his honest labors flourishing and
secure. Peace walks serene and unalarmed over all the unmolested regions; while
liberty, virtue, and religion go hand in hand, harmoniously protecting,
enlivening, and exalting all -- Happy country! MAY THY HAPPINESS BE PERPETUAL!"

AFTER, the oration, the several light companies vere drawn off by captain
Heysham, to an eminence, and fired a feu-de-joie of three rounds, and then the
company went to dinner. No spirit or wine of any kind were introduced: American
porter, beer, and cider, were the only liquors; and of these the supplies were
very abundant. The whole inner circumference of the circle of tables was lined
with hogsheads, butts, and barrels of these liquors on tap. The following
toasts were drank, announced by trumpets, and answered by the artillery -- a
round of ten to each toast -- and these were again answered by cannon from the
ship Rising Sun, at her moorings in the river.

TOASTS.
1. THE people of the United States. 2. Honor and immortality to the members
of the late federal convention.

3. GENERAL WASHINGTON.

4. THE king of France. 5. The United Netherlands. 6. The foreign powers in
alliance with the United States. 7. The agriculture, manufactures, and commerce
of the United States. 8. The heroes who have fallen in defense of our
liberties. 9. May reason, and not the sword, hereafter decide all national
disputes. 10. The whole family of mankind.

It should not be omitted in this account, that the several trades furnished
the devices, mottos, machines, and decorations themselves, and at the expense
of their respective companies. And that nearly the whole of the work exhibited
on that day, was completed between Monday morning and the Thursday evening
following.

THE military in general, horse, artillery, and infantry were completely
dressed, and accoutred, according to the uniform of their respective corpse, and
made a most martial appearance; being distributed in various parts of the line,
they gave a beautiful variety to the whole, and evinced that both soldiers and
citizens united in favor of the new government.

THE whole of this vast body was formed, and the entertainment of the day
conducted, with a regularity and decorum far beyond all reasonable expectation.
The foot-ways, the windows, and the roofs of the houses were crowded with
spectators, exhibiting a spectacle truly magnificent and irresisttibly
animating. But what was most pleasing to to the contemplative mind, universal
love and harmony prevailed, and every countenance appeared to be the index of a
heart glowing with urbanity and rational joy. This social idea was much
enforced by a circumstance, which, probably, never before occurred in such
extent, viz. The clergy of almost every denomination united in charity and
brotherly love. May they and their flocks so walk through life!

IT is impossible to be precise in numbers on such an occasion; but averaging
several opinions, there were about 5,000 in the line of procession, and about
17,000 on union Greeen. The green was entirely cleared by six o'clock in the
evening; and the edifice, ship, and several machines, being withdrawn, the
citizens soberly retired to their respective homes. The weather was remarkably
favorable for the season; cloudy without rain, and a brisk wind from the south
during the whole day. At night, the ship Rising Sun was handsomely illuminated
in honor of this great festival.

SUCH is the account we have been enabled to give of this memorable exhibition.
It is very probable there may be some omissions; if so, the committee can only
assure their fellow citizens, that no neglect or offense was intended to any
individual or company whatever. The shortness of the time, and the complicated
nature of the task, must be their apology.

AS the system of government now fully ratified, has been the occasion of much
present joy; so, may it prove a source of much future blessing to our country
and the glory of our rising empire!!!

Published by order, FRANCIS HOPKINSON, chairman of the committee of
arrangement.
July 8th. 1788. N. B. This extraordinary exhibition was not undertaken in
consequence of any order or recommendation of government, nor was any part of
the expense borne by the public treasury. The voluntary exertions and
contributions of the citizens furnished the whole.



END OF VOLUME SECOND.
THE MISCELLANEOUS ESSAYS AND OCCASIONAL WRITINGS OF FRANCIS HOPKINSON, ESQUIRE.

VOLUME III.

PHILADELPHIA: PRINTED BY T. DOBSON, AT THE STONE-HOUSE, NO 41, SECOND STREET.
M,DCC,XCII.

CONTENTS. VOLUME III.
JUDGMENTS in the ADMIRALTY of PENNSYLVANIA.
TUCKER versus the ship Pole, Page 1 Tucker versus the William, Page 3 Boyd and
Carter versus the Jemima, Page 5 Houston versus the Charming Nancy, Page 6
Haleskamp versus the Swift's boat and three negroes, Page 8 Young versus the
Haerlem, Page 9 Gamble versus the Terrible, Page 11 Falliage and Al. versus the
Hope, Page 12 Harridan versus the Hope, Page 14 Rice versus Tailor, Page 16
Geddes versus the Golden Rose, Page 19 Ducatur versus the Desire, Page 23
Montgomery versus the owners of the General Green, Page 24 The golden Rose
(bill of charges) Page 32 Ducatur versus the Nymph Page 34 Kemp versus the
Sarah, Page 38 Walker versus the Albion, Page 42 Phile versus the Active, Page
46 Pray and Al. versus the Recovery, Page 47 Young v^r^^s the Two Friends, Page
50 Mahoon and Al. versus the Gloucester, Page 55 Pringle and She versus the
Elizabeth, Page 61 Di^neuf versus Lacaze, Page 68 Miller versus the Resolution,
Page 70 Cassen versus the Tristam Shandy, Page 84 Robeson versus the Amelia,
Page 88 Hainey versus the Tristram Shandy and Dims^^^e, Page 89 Magee versus
the Fanny, Page 92 Willis versus the York, Page 94 Gibbs versus the Two
Friends, Page 95 Clinton versus the Hannah and General Knox, Page 99 Pierre de
Moitez versus the South Carolina, Page 104 Kemp versus the Experiment, Page 104
Mahoon and Al. (...) the Lady Margaret Page 106 M'Culloch versus the Lethe,
Page 117 Brice and Woodroff versus the Nancy, Page 118 Shaw versus the Lethe,
Page 123 Dray and Al. versus the Collier, Page 131 Talbot versus the owners of
the Achilles, Patty and Hibernia, Page 132 Dean and Al. versus John Angus, Page
139 Ditto Judgment on the merits, Page 152 Leibaert, Baes, Durdeyn and Co.
versus the Emperor, Page 163 Turnbull and Al. versus the Enterprise, Page 171
Forbes versus the Hannah, Page 176 Canizares versus the Sa. Trinidad, Page 185
Smith Versus Leard, Page 199 Anderson and Al. versus Forbes, Page 200 Moran
versus Baud^in, Page 202 Thybout versus Baudoin, Page 209
POEMS.
To the Rev. William Smith, Page 3 Ode to music, Page 5 Song, Page 7 To miss --
on her singing, Page 8 To the memory of M. William Willcocks, Page 10
Hermitage, a poem, Page 11 Advice to Amanda, Page 18 Epigram on the death of a
favorite lap dog, Page 20 L'Alegro, Page 21 Il Pensero, Page 28 Morning Hymn,
Page 36 Elegy on the Death of Mrs. Jane Willcocks, Page 39 Verses to the
officers of the 35th regiment, Page 42 Song, Page 45 On the expedition against
Louisbourg, Page 47 Prologue on opening the theater at Philadelphia, Page 50
Epilogue for Tamerlane, Page 52 Prologue in praise of music, Page 54 Charity, a
poem, Page 56 Description of a Church, Page 59 To Celia on her wedding day,
Page 61 Paraphrase on the 107th psalm, Page 65 Elegy to the memory of Josiah
Martin, Page 70 Epitaph for an infant, Page 73 Disappointed love, Page 74
Exercise to the memory of George II. Page 77 Exercise on the accession of
George III. Page 83 Science, a poem, Page 92 Morning hymn, Page 102 Evening
hymn, Page 104 To Rosalinda on her birth day, Page 107 To Rosalinda on her
birthday, Page 108 To Rosalinda on her birthday, Page 110 Extempore verses
from the top of Parnassus, Page 112 Dirtilla, a poem, Page 114 A sentiment,
Page 118 The treaty, a poem, Page 120 Elegy to the memory of Mrs. Anne Graeme,
Page 129 Verses written in a blank book which once belonged to Shenstone, Page
133 To a very young lady, Page 135 Ode on Mrs. B -- 's birthday, Page 137
Petition of the docks, thistles and nettles, Page 139 To Myrtilla, Page 143 To
Myrtilla, Page 144 An evening at sea, Page 146 Verses written near the
conclusion of a very tedious voyage, Page 148 To Delia, on a leaf in her pocket
book, Page 150 Song, Page 152 To Myrtilla, the nest, Page 154 the wasp, Page
155 To T -- M --. esquire. Page 157 To the memory of Mrs. Mary M'Kean, Page 161
Political ballad written in 1777, Page 164 The battle of the keggs, Page 169 A
camp ballad, Page 174 The toast, Page 176 The birds, the beasts, and the bat,
Page 177 Address of Amiral Collier and General Tyron, Page 181 In memory of Mr
James Bremner, Page 184 Eight Songs, Page 185 An oration which might have been
delivered, Page 193
JUDGMENTS IN THE ADMIRALTY OF PENNSYLVANIA.
[A. D. 1779.] TUCKER, QUI TAM versus THE SHIP POLE.
THE ship Pole sailed from Liverpool, in England, with a cargo of goods for the
city of New York in America, then in the possession of the British troops,
under a commission of letters of marque and reprisal against the subjects of
the United States; and with orders from her owners to cruize against the
Americans in her voyage, being properly armed for that purpose. After the
delivery of her cargo at New York, she was to sail for Jamaica, take in a
lading of rum and ^^gars, and then return to Liverpool.

SUCH was the plan of the voyage; subjected, however, to the discretion of an
agent at New York, who had power to alter it if he should think proper.

AFTER the ship had delivered her cargo at New York, the agent ordered her to
cruize on the American coast for four months, and shipped hands on board her
for the purpose, as privateer's-men, which appeared by an endorsement on the
ship's articles. She had also a let-pass on board, signed by the senior naval
officer at New York, stiling her a privateer.

UNDER these circumstances the Pole sailed from New York, and was captured by
Tucker, in a frigate belonging to the United States, and libelled against in
the admiralty of Pennsylvania as prize: whereupon a claim was filed in behalf
of the United States for one half of the value, under an ordinance of congress,
passed October 30th 1776, which gives the whole of vessels of war taken by the
ships of the United States to the captors, but reserves one half of merchantmen
so taken, to the states.

THE only question was, whether the ship Pole, at the time of her being
captured, should be considered as an armed merchantman, or a privateer
belonging to the enemy.

VERDICT in favor of the captors for the whole.

TUCKER, QUI TAM versus THE SLOOP WILLIAM.
THE sloop William, captain Ashburner, was the property of John Wallace, an
inhabitant of the island of St. Croix, and a subject of the king of Denmark.
She took in a part of her la^^ng at St. Croix, and cleared out at the
custom-house there for the port of Philadelphia. From St. Croix she went to
Tortola, a British island, where she took in the remainder of her cargo, which,
by the testimony, appeared to have been sent after her in a droger from St.
Croix. At Tortola, captain Ashburner, who was part owner of the cargo, cleared
out at the custom-house there for New York, then in possession of the British
troops.

WITH these double clearances, she arrived on the American coast, where captain
Tucker discovered, pursued, and boarded her under British colors. Ashburner
mistaking Tucker for a British officer, exhibited his Tortola papers, and
alleged that he was bound for New York, whereupon Tucker took the sloop as
prize, brought her to Philadelphia, and libelled against her in the admiralty
as prize; at the same time a claim was filed in behalf of Wallace and
Ashburner, the owners.

ON the trial, it was urged, in favor of the claimants, that this vessel and
cargo were wholly Danish property, and that, notwithstanding the Tortola
clearance, the sloop was in fact bound for Philadelphia, which clearance was
only intended as a cover from British capture. In proof of this, many letters
were exhibited, found on board, to sundry merchants of the United States. In
particular, one to John Willcox of Philadelphia, containing invoices of the
cargo, and consigning the whole to him, informing him also that the vessel was
covered with a British clearance.

IT was further shown, that from the course of the wind, and the direction in
which she was sailing at the time she was discovered, the probability was, that
she intended for the Delaware.

VERDICT for the claimants.

N. B. This was previous to the ordinance of congress making double papers
condemnation.

BOYD AND CARTER versus THE SCHOONER JEMIMA.
THE schooner Jemima, belonging to Robert Bridges of Philadelphia, was taken by
the British as she lay aground in a creek near to Borden-town, in New Jersey,
who stripped her, and then set her on fire. The libellants claimed salvage, for
that they, at considerable risk (the enemy be-yet in sight) went on board,
extinguished the fire, and saved the vessel.

VERDICT, in favor of the libellants, for one-half of the value of the
schooner.

HOUSTON versus THE BRIG CHARMING NANCY.
THE brig charming Nancy, belonging to Purviance, and others, subjects of the
United States, was on her voyage from Senepuxent to Philadelphia, when she was
discovered near the Capes of Delaware by Houston, in a Philadelphia privateer,
then out at sea. Houston hoisted British colors, and endeavored to come up
with her* whereupon, M'Kenzie, captain of the Charming Nancy, taking Houston
for an enemy, endeavored to run his vessel on shore; but being unable to
effect this in time, he, with the whole of his crew, took to their boat, and
rowed to land, not leaving a soul on board the brig. M'Kenzie soon after
discovered his mistake, went on board his vessel again with his mariners, and
brought her up to Philadelphia. And now Houston libelled for salvage, as having
found the vessel abandoned on the high seas, and saved her to her owners.

But as the abandomment was occasioned by the libellant's own act, the bill was
dismissed.

VERDICT, that the brig be restored wholly to her owners.

HALESKAMP, versus THE SWIFT's BOAT, AND THREE NEGROES.
THE Swift, a British sloop of war, chased the Rattlesnake, an American
privateer, till, in the heat of the action and chase, both vessels ran ashore
on the coast of Virginia, and stranded: the captain of the Swift then
surrendered to the Rattlesnake. The negroes in question were taken on board the
Swift. M'Cullough, commander of the Rattlesnake, took possession of his prize,
and employed the negroes for some time in saving goods from both wrecks: but
the negroes, watching a favorable opportunity, took the Swift's boat and went
off, intending for New York. Haleskamp saw them from the shore, pursued, and
took them, and now libelled against the boat and negroes as his prize.

AND it was urged, in behalf of the libellant, that the property, not having
been condemned in a court of admiralty, vested with M'Cullough only as a
possessory right, which ceased the moment an escape could be effected, and
therefore the libellant ought to be considered as an original captor.

BUT the judge was of opinion, that M'Cullough had by the capture acquired a
right, sub judice, which could not be injured by a fellow subject, and which a
court of justice alone could confirm or invalidate: that if Haleskamp had
libelled for salvage only, it had been good; but not as prize.

VERDICT -- that the libel be dismissed.

YOUNG, versus THE SLOOP HAERLEM.
SHAW, and others, of the city of New York, subjects of the United States, were
owners of the privateer sloop Harlequin (now called the Haerlem.) In September
1776, the British then invading New York, this sloop was, by order of General
Washington, stationed in Haerlem river to defend that pass, and prevent the
enemy's boats from going up the river. On the retreat of General Washington
with his troops, the owners not being able to get their vessel out to sea, on
account of the enemy, had her scuttled and sunk in Haerlem river, where she was
stationed, and then fled. The British troops took possession of New York, and
afterward, by order of admiral How, this vessel was raised, was called the
Haerlem, and sitted out as a cruiser in the British service. After cruising
three years against the Americans, and taking many prizes, she was at last
captured by the libellants. Whereupon the former owners claimed her as their
property; offering to pay one half of her value for salvage, as having been
more than 96 hours in the enemy's possession, when she was re-captured:
alleging, that their property had not entirely divested; because there was no
proof that she had ever been condemned as prize in the British court of
admiralty.

BUT although there was indeed no direct proof of such condemnation, yet the
length of time she was in the service of the enemy, together with the general
tendency of the testimony produced, gave a strong presumption that she had been
so condemned, and therefore the jury found a

VERDICT in favor of the libellants.

GAMBLE versus THE SLOOP TERRIBLE.
Claim, by John Osman, for five hogsheads of rum, and a share of the prize.
OSMAN was a prisoner in Jamaica, where also he had money due to him. With this
money he purchased five hogsheads of rum. He was then, with other prisoners of
war, put on board this sloop, which was British property, to be conveyed to New
York, and was permitted to take his five hogsheads of rum along with him on his
own account. The prisoners rose at sea upon the captain and crew, took
possession of the sloop, and brought her into the port of Philadelphia. Osman
was privy to the design, but unable to assist personally in the capture, being
confined in bed by his wounds.

VERDICT, that the sloop be condemned as prize, and that Osman have his five
hogsheads of rum, together with a distributive share of the prize.

FALLIAGE, and ALI. versus THE SCHOONER HOPE.
Mollineaux, and ali. Claimants.
MOLLINEAUX, and others, Frenchmen, were owners of the schooner Hope, which was
captured by a British privateer in her voyage from Maryland to France.
Falliage, and others, the former crew, but now prisoners on board, contrived to
make the British prize-master and his companions very drunk, and to keep them
so till the vessel was brought into the port of Philadelphia. And now the
owners claim their vessel again, on paying salvage, agreeably to the marine
laws of America.

BUT it was urged, that they, being French subjects, ought to be determined by
the law of France, which gives the whole of re-captured vessels to the
re-captor, when the prize has been more than twenty four hours in the
possession of the enemy.

BUT the judge was of opinion, that as American owners were, in cases of
recapture, allowed the benefit of the American law in the admiralty courts of
France, French owners ought also to have the benefit of the American law in the
ports of the United States.

VERDICT, that the schooner be restored to her former owners, they paying to
the re-captors one-half of the value in lieu of salvage.

HARRIDAN versus THE SLOOP OF WAR HOPE.
Joseph Blewer, et ali. Claimants.
AT the commencement of hostilities between Great Britain and America, the
British seized several merchant vessels in the harbor of Boston, amongst which
was the Hope, belonging to Blewer, and others, of Philadelphia. The British
afterward fitted her out as a sloop of war, and put her under royal
commission; and she cruised against the vessels of the United States for four
years, and was at last captured by the libellant.

THE claimants insisted, that this vessel had never been condemned as prize in
a British court of admiralty; because, at the time she was seized at Boston, no
letters of marque and reprisal had as yet issued against the United States, nor
had the British courts of admiralty been established in America for the
condemnation of their vessels: and thereupon they claimed their vessel, on
paying salvage according to the ordinance of congress of December 5th 1775.

VERDICT for the claimants, as to the vessel, her tackle, apparel, and
furniture (except the guns and warlike stores which were condemned as prize)
the said claimants paying one-half of the value to the libellant for salvage.

N. B. This verdict was contrary to the opinion of the judge.

RICE versus TAILOR.
THE parties were commanders of privateers duly commissioned. Tailor engaged,
and took a prize, Rice being in sight at the time of the capture. Whereupon
Rice claimed a share of booty under the maritime law.

ON the trial it appeared, that although Rice was in sight at the time of the
action, yet from the peculiarity of his situation, it was impossible he should
have contributed to the capture by terrifying the enemy: and so the jury found
a special verdict in these words.

THAT captain John Rice was in sight, and at the distance of five or six miles
at the time of the said capture, mentioned, and so forth; but that he did not
contribute to the said capture, or influence her surrender to the said captain
Tailor. And if upon this finding, etc. etc.

THE fact was, that Rice lay within a bar, close upon the shore of New Jersey,
and saw Tailor engage a British vessel, about five or six miles out at sea.
There were also two British vessels of force between Rice and Tailor, at the
time of the action. Rice, observing the battle, saw at last one of the vessels
strike to the other, but could not clearly discern which had the victory:
believing that Tailor had surrendered, he reported in Jersey that poor Tailor
was taken at last. But he found a few days afterward, that Tailor had been
successful, and brought his prize safe into port. Whereupon he claimed a share
of the booty under the general law reflecting vessels in sight of a capture.

IN the argument on the special verdict, the counsel for Rice rested his claim
principally on Molloy, Book 1st chap. 2. sect. 20. urging that no testimony
should be admitted against a presumption of law.

BUT the judge observed, that the presumption of law is founded on a material
fact: to wit, that the vessel in sight be armed and prepared for battle, or at
least in a possible condition to join in the battle. When this is the case, the
law will presume that her presence terrified the enemy and influenced the
surrender; and therefore, although she does not join in the engagement, allows
her a share of the prize in proportion to her men and guns. But if a vessel in
sight is aground on ashoal or bar, or is far to leeward, with disabled masts
and rigging, or is so situated (as in the present case) that it is manifestly
impossible for her to take any part in the battle, she cannot be considered as
to be so prepared for battle as to bring her within the presumption of law.

WHEN the reason of the law ceases, the law itself ought likewise to cease with
it. 1ss Black. p. 61.

AND so Rice's claim was dismissed.

THERE was an appeal from this decision, but the appeal was not prosecuted.

GEDDES versus THE GOLDEN ROSE.
THE Golden Rose, belonging to subjects of the States of Holland, sailed from
Hamburgh with a cargo consigned to Colloghan and Sons, merchants, in the island
of Teneriff, an island belonging to the crown of Spain.

HOLLAND was at this time in a state neutrality, but Britain had declared war
against Spain, and neither of these nations were in alliance with the United
States of America.

THE Golden Rose was captured near the Island of Teneriff by a British
privateer, and ordered for New York, then in possession of the British army,
and on her way to New York she was retaken by the libellant and brought into
the port of Philadelphia.

HASSENCLEVER filed a claim for the ship and cargo in behalf of the owners and
merchants, subjects of the states of Holland, and

DON Juan de Miralles also filed a claim for the cargo only, in behalf of
Colloghan and Sons, subjects of the king of Spain.

IT was argued for the libellant, that although the ship and cargo did
originally belong to the subjects of neutral powers with respect to America,
yet the property had totally divested by the British capture, the vessel having
been more than than six weeks in their possession: that if any injury was done
to the neutral owners, it was done by the British captain who first took her,
and not by the libellant, who forced her from a declared enemy as he had a
right to do: that the present case came within the resolve of congress of
November, 1775, declaring that all vessels employed in transporting provisions,
stores, and so forth, to the enemy in New York, should, if taken, be lawful
prize. And lastly, that if this vessel should not be condemned as prize, it
would be easy for subjects of neutral nations to supply the British at New York
with all things necessary for carrying on the war against us by collusion.

ON the contrary, it was urged for the claimants, that this ship had committed
no offense whatever, that her intended voyage was a lawful one, viz. from
Hamburgh to Teneriff. And although the libellant took her in her way to New
York, yet it was by compulsion that she was found in that course. that the
British privateer had violated the laws of nations in taking her, and therefore
she could not have been condemned in their courts of admiralty; inferring, that
as she was not legal prize to the captors, the re-captors could have no better
title: and that, supposing the cargo to be Spanish property, yet as it had not
been condemned to the captors, the property had not been totally divested, but
that the jus postliminii took place, agreeably to the ordinance of congress of
December 5. 1775.

AFTER long argument, the judge instructed the jury, that as the facts were all
acceded to in this cause, viz. That the ship was Dutch, and the cargo Spanish
property, and that she had been taken and retaken, as set forth in the libel,
the decision must depend upon points of law only, and therefore recommended
their bringing in a special verdict; adding, that he would not give his opinion
on the law, without taking time to look into the authorities referred to, and
reconsidering the arguments on both sides.

THE jury, after a long recess, brought in a general verdict, viz.

THE jury find for the first claimant as to the ship, and they award freight
according to charter-party. And they find a chest of clothes, and a piece of
linen to be the property of William Vanderwindt The Captain of the Golden Rose
when she was first captured.
. The said ship and goods to be restored without salvage.

THE jury find that the cargo, as set forth in three invoices exhibited in this
cause, are the goods of John Colloghan and Sons, of the Island of Teneriff, the
second claimants, they paying the said George Geddes for salvage, one moiety
thereof.

DUCATUR versus THE SCHONER DESIRE.
Argument on a special verdict.
THE question was whether French owners should have the benefit of the
ordinance of congress relative to recaptures, and it was so determined. Vide p.
Q. 13.

March 8th 1780, the law of Pennsylvania, admitting juries to decide in
admiralty causes was repealed, and a new admiralty, law enacted, leaving the
determination of such causes to the judge

(1780.) MONTGOMERY vesus. WHARTON, AND OTHERS, OWNERS OF THE SHIP GENERAL
GREEN.
WHARTON, and others, owners of the ship General Green, had chartered her to
certain merchants for a particular voyage, and appointed Montgomery master for
that voyage. The ship had cleared out at the naval office, and was on the point
of sailing, when a sudden frost filled the Delaware with ice, and fixed her in
the port of Philadelphia. During the winter some differences arose between the
owners and master. The consequence of which was that the owners by a letter of
dismission, discharged Montgomery from their service, and put another master on
board. Whereupon Montgomery libelled against the owners in the admiralty to
compel them to fulfill their contract with him.

THE question was, whether owners could dismiss the master they had appointed
before the completion of the voyage, after he had signed bills of lading for
the cargo, and shipped his mariner, without the owners showing sufficient cause
for such dismission.

AND it was contended, that the master, from the time of his appointment, has
the sole command of the ship vested in him, and cannot be displaced without
committing some offense sufficient to forfeit his rights and justify a
dismission. That after signing bills of lading, he becomes answerable to the
freighters for the delivery of the cargo, and that the owners cannot by their
act exonerate him from this charge, whilst the bills of lading signed with his
hand, remain in the possession of the freighters: that the libellant,
considering himself as engaged for this voyage, had neglected to seek for any
other appointment; and that the owners discharging him at this time, was an
injury which the court ought in justice to redress by compelling them to
reinstate him in his office.

IN behalf of the respondents it was urged, that the owners of a ship have, and
ought to have, a right to remove the master at pleasure; because their
interests are so deeply concerned in the appointment, that they are answerable
not only for his imprudent conduct, but are bound by contracts he may legally
make on account of the concern: that if, after their their choice or a master,
his appointment should be deemed irrevocable for the voyage, unless some gross
offense can be proved, the owners will be at the mercy of the master, who, by
his weak or wicked conduct, may bring them to ruin. That if when the owners
have dismissed the master, the court should undertake to reinstate him,
contrary to their judgment and inclination, and so force him upon them, the
court and not the owners, ought to be answerable to the freighters for any
consequences that may ensue: that neither the charter-party, shipping articles,
or bills of lading, prohibit a change of the master, as the contracts made with
him are made in his official and not in his personal capacity: that the master
is in fact the representative of the owners, and not himself personally bound,
neither is he answerable for the conduct of his successor: that in case an
action should be brought against him for a breach of contract on the bills of
lading, he might plead his dismission by the owners, and it would be good in
law: that the subordinate officers are appointed by the master of a ship, and
if they should misbehave, or prove insufficient or unsafe, the owners have no
remedy but by the removal of the master: that if owners are bound by the
appointment of a master to continue him for the voyage, the master ought also
to be bound to perform the voyage, even against his interest or inclination;
but if, in case of the master's refusal, the owners should libel against him in
the admiralty, the court could give no redress, because the court cannot award
damages, neither can it compel the master to a specific performance of his
contract, from the nature of the service: that the master's appointment is, and
ought to be during pleasure only: that the same power which appoints can
remove: that if a master suffers injury by an unreasonable dismission, he may
have his remedy at common law, where ample recompense in damages will be made
to him: and finally, that whatever inconveniences may arise to masters being
subjected to the caprice of owners of vessels, much greater would arise to the
owners, should they be compelled to retain in their service masters once
appointed, however contrary to their judgment or interest; and that no instance
can be produced of a master being thus forced upon the owners of a ship by any
court whatever.

TO which, council for the libellant replied -- That this cause came properly
before the court of admiralty: that where a court has the right to take
cognizance of an injury, it follows necessarily that it can give redress: that
if the court cannot award damages, it can order a specific performance of the
contract: that the court can compel the master to such performance; and if he
refuses, can attach his person, and oblige him to give security for the
completion of his contract; and, therefore, the jurisdiction is competent: that
it would be unjust to send the master to common law for redress, on the owner's
breach of contract, as the owners may fail and be unable to pay damages, and
therefore the ship ought to be his certain and proper security: that all
contracts ought to be sacred and mutual, being founded on reciprocity; and it
would be absurd to allege, that the master is bound on his part, and the
owners not bound on theirs: that a master engaged for a voyage, is like a
servant indented for a certain time; and that the engagement or indenture
cannot be dissolved, during the terms, but by mutual consent: that this vessel
was chartered to the freighter, who acquired by the charter-party a temporary
property in her, and the owners had nothing to do with her for the time, the
ship being under the same circumstances with a house leased for a term: that
after the charter-party is signed, and the goods laden on board, the owners
cannot discharge the master at their pleasure; as his good character and
abilities might have been the inducement which led the freighter to make choice
of that ship in preference: and, lastly, that if no instance can be found of a
master's being forced upon the owners of a ship, neither can any authority be
produced, giving the owners the arbitrary power of dismissing the master at
pleasure, and without assigning sufficient cause.

JUDGMENT.
AFTER having carefully considered the arguments advanced, and the authorities
cited in this cause, it appears to me unnecessary to pursue the whole tract of
argument that has been taken on this occasion. The decision of the cause rests
solely on the nature of the contract between the owners of a ship and the
captain they employ. And the terms or substance of such a contract is, in my
opinion this, viz. If the master well and faithfully performs the duties of his
station, the owners, on on their part, are bound to pay the stipulated wages,
and allow him all the customary privileges of his office. But it does not seem
to be any part of the contract, that a master once engaged, shall be master for
the voyage at all events. This might be extremely injurious to owners, on
account of the very extensive powers a master has over their property. And
however hard it may appear that that the master should be subject to the
caprice of his owners in this respect, he must consider it as one of the
unavoidable inconveniences of his occupation, and in cases of real injury apply
to the laws of his country for redress. Much greater would the danger be to
owners of vessels, and indeed to commerce in general, if the appointment of a
master should be irrevocable for the voyage. Whatever good opinion an owner may
have of the master, at the time of his appointment, he may find sufficient
reason afterward to change his mind, and yet not be able to produce legal
proof of his defection or inability. Fidelity or infidelity before a service
performed, is a matter of opinion only, and it would be an unreasonable
hardship to compel an owner to continue what was originally a voluntary trust,
in the hands of a person of whom he may have found subsequent reasons to
believe that he may prove either unfaithful or unskilful, although he may not
be able to charge him with any positive offense: but I cannot see how this
court can interfere to any effect. If the court should decree that the owners
shall receive the libellant on board, as master for the voyage contracted for;
have not the owners a power to sell their ship, to lay her up, or totally
change the voyage, and so evade the decree? Or, if a master should refuse to go
the voyage for which he engaged, can this court compel a specific performance
of the duties of his office? The remedy in both cases must be in damages for a
breach of contract, to which the common law is most competent. Let the bill be
dismissed.

THE libellant appealed from this judgment, and the cause was again fully
argued before the judges of the high court of errors and appeals; but the libel
was finally dismissed.

THE GOLDEN ROSE.
THE marshal of the court brought in an account against the ship Golden Rose,
for sundry expenditures made, and services done for the said ship and her
cargo; and prayed the judge to direct what parts of the said account should be
charged to the ship, and what to the cargo.

THE judge, after hearing argument thereupon, directed,

First, That captain Vanderwindt pay for the pilotage of his ship into port;
because this expense would have accrued to him, if he had arrived at the port
of his destination.

Secondly, That he also pay all reasonable charges for wharfage and fastenings:
because, by the terms of the charter-party, he is to bring his ship to a fit
place for unlading, and because those expenses are necessary to the safety of
his ship.

Thirdly, That the cargo be charged with all reasonable expenses attending the
unlading of the ship: because by the fifth article of the charter-party, it is
covenanted, that the freighter shall cause the cargo to be brought on board,
and at the place of discharge, taken from on board, free of charges.

Fourthly, That the expense of cutting the ship out of the ice be borne by the
ship and cargo, in equal proportions, provided the cargo was on board when this
service was done -- otherwise, by the ship only: because this was equally
necessary for the preservation of both.

Fifthly, That the marshal's bill for keeping watch on board, whilst the
property was in his possession, as also the court charges, or costs of suit, be
charged to the cargo: because the ship on the trial was fully acquitted.

Lastly, Wherever a charge is allotted in the above apportionment to be paid by
the cargo, it is to be understood that the libellants are to pay one half
thereof, and Colloghan and Sons, or their agents, the other half: because those
charges are supposed to be deducted from the whole cargo before distribution
made between the libellants and claimants, according to the decree.

DUCATUR. versus THE BRIG NYMPH.
Claim by Thomas Irwin and al.
IT appeared in testimony that the Brig Nymph (formerly called the Neptune),
had been the property of the claimants, and was captured by the British ship
Iris on the 22nd or 23d of April 1780: that on the 21st, and 22nd of the same
month, three other vessels were also taken by the same ship, all which prizes
were sent into New York: that on the 28th of the same month the captains of
these four prizes were all taken before the judge of admiralty there, and
examined, preparatory to the trial and condemnation of their vessels: that,
about a fortnight after, one of the said four captains was told by some of the
officers of the Iris, and also by some of the crew, that they had received
their shares of the four prizes aforesaid. It was also in proof, that the said
four vessels had been advertised for sale at the coffee-house in New York; and
one of them, viz. the Hetty, was particularly remembered to have been
advertised, as a condemned prize: that the Neptune had been purchased by
merchants in New York; and that on the 13th of May following she was
commissioned as a privateer, by the name of the Nymph, to cruise against the
vessels of the United States of America. Lastly, it appeared this brig sailed
from New York on the 21st and was captured by the libellant on the 25th of May.

AGAINST the libel of the captors there was a claim filed, by Thomas Irwin and
others, the former owners, founded on the ordinance of congress of the 5th of
December 1775, upon a suggestion that this vessel could not have been condemned
in the court of admiralty at New York previous to the re-capture: and in
support of this suggestion, a British act of parliament was exhibited, wherein
is set forth at large the mode in which the vessels captured from the United
States of America shall be proceeded against in their courts of admiralty.
Which act directs, that for the more more speedy condemnation of such vessels,
the whole process shall be completed in 28 days from the first application made
to the judge by the captors; and the claimants alleged that this brig not only
sailed from New York, but was re-captured by the libellant before the 28 days
were accomplished; and therefore inferred, that she could could not have been
condemned under this act: that all the evidence produced by the libellant to
proved a condemnation was merely hearsay, and ought to have no weight,
especially as there was no mention made of any such condemnation amongst the
papers found on board, as is usual. And lastly, that her having been sold,
commissioned, and sailing, and the money paid for purchasing her, being
distributed amongst the first captors (if true) is still no proof, or even
presumption, of her condemnation; because it is customary for the judge to
permit prizes to be sold before trial, the parties giving security; and
insisted, that before the property can totally divest, the condemnation must be
directly proved, according to the ordinance of December 5th 1775.

WHEREUPON the judge observed,

THAT the manifest spirit of the ordinance of congress of December 5th is truly
complied with when the property is fully and fairly divested: that the most
direct and decisive way of ascertaining such divesture is by legal condemnation
in the enemy's court of admiralty; and therefore the ordinance makes that the
criterion; but that congress could not expect that full and direct proof of
such condemnation could in all cases be produced, as the documents necessary to
such proof cannot always be in power of the parties; strong presumption must
therefore often supply the place of absolute proof: that this brig having been
captured, taken into the enemy's port, sold by order of the judge, commissioned
under a new name, fitted out and sent by new owners on a cruize, must found a
violent presumption that she had been legally condemned as lawful prize to the
first captors: that whether she had been formally condemned or not, these
circumstances were fully sufficient to a total divesture of the property from
the former owners: that the act of parliament referred to, is professedly
designed to shorten the process of the courts of admiralty, and directs that it
shall be completed within 28 days; but does not prohibit its being done in a
shorter time: that as proofs have been given that some vessels have been
condemned in a shorter time, it is possible, and even probable, that this brig
might also have been so condemned, and that such a presumption is justifiable
by all the circumstances of the case.

JUDGMENT.
THAT the brig be condemned as lawful prize to the libellants, and that the
claim be dismissed.

KEMP versus THE SLOOP SARAH.
Styles, and others, claimants.
THE Sloop Sarah, being Bermudian property, sailed with a cargo of onions,
sugar, salt, gin, flour and oil, from from Bermudas for Charlestown in South
Carolina, the owners knowing at the time of her sailing that Charlestown was
then in the possession of the British troops. The libellants discovered and
captured her on Charlestown bar, at the entrance of the harbor, brought her
into the port of Philadelphia, and libelled against her as prize.

WHEREUPON a claim was filed in behalf of Styles, and others, the former owners.

AND it was urged in support of the claim, that by an ordinance of congress of
the 24th of July 1776, the property of Bermudians was exempted from
confiscation: that under the sanction of this ordinance the Bermudians had
traded with the United States during the war, and frequently supplied their
necessities at a very great hazard: and that Styles the claimant in particular
had been twice taken prisoner by the British for trading with the subjects of
the United States: that the present cargo was not sent as supplies to the
enemy: that the flour on board was too inconsiderable a quantity to answer any
such purpose; and that salt could be imported into Charlestown much more
conveniently and cheaper from Turks Island than from Bermudas. That the truth
is, this cargo was designed in part to discharge a debt due from the claimants
to a certain Mr Loyd a known friend to the American cause, and now a prisoner
in Charlestown, and in part to purchase necessaries for the inhabitants of
Bermudas: that the ordinance of congress prohibiting any vessels from carrying
supplies, etc. to any part of the United States in the possession of the enemy,
cannot be supposed to extend to vessels carrying provisions to relieve the
wants of the subjects of those states who are prisoners and in distress, for
that such an extension would be contrary to reason, humanity, and good policy.
Testimony was also produced to prove, that there was really a debt due from the
claimants to Mr Loyd at Charlestown; and that the owners, or some of them, had
declared before the vessel sailed from Bermudas, that part of the cargo was to
discharge the debt due to Mr. Loyd, and the remainder to purchase provisions.

THE arguments being closed, the judge observed,

THAT the ordinance of congress in favor of the inhabitants of Bermudas, a
people under the sovereignty and allegiance of Great Britain, could never be
intended to put them on a better footing with respect to the war, than the
citizens of America, or the citizens of neutral powers; and that there could be
but little doubt, but that an American vessel, taken in the situation of the
brig Sarah, would have been confiscated: that the plea, that she was carrying
supplies to a prisoner, ought to have been supported by full and direct
testimony, to counteract the violent presumption to the contrary; but here was
no direct testimony to that point, and even supposing the suggestion to be
true, as to the good intentions of the claimants, they had not conducted the
business according to the known rules of war; for leave should have been first
obtained from the British commander at Charlestown, even for Bermudians to send
in supplies to his prisoners. It is indeed in proof, that there is a debt due
from the claimants to Mr. Loyd, a prisoner in Charlestown; and that one of the
owners was heard to say, that part of this cargo was to discharge that debt,
and the remainder to purchase provisions: but it no where appears, what was the
amount of this debt, a very necessary circumstance, if all other objections
were out of the way; otherwise, under cover of small and trifling debts due to
prisoners, large and important supplies might be introduced to the enemy; and
at any rate, the plea of paying a debt due could extend no further than the
amount of that debt. But in opposition to these appearances of good intentions,
it is in proof, that the owners originally designed this vessel and cargo for
the West India Islands, but changed the voyage as soon as it was known that
Charlestown had surrendered to the enemy.

I adjudge that this vessel and cargo be condemned as prize to the libellants,
and that the claim be dismissed

WALKER versus THE ALBION.
THIS ship was taken on her way from Liverpool to Archangel, having on board a
cargo of salt and a hogshead of rum. The captors sent in with the prize, the
ship's gunner, and three lads, prisoners; also two custom-house cockets, and an
imperfect logbook or journal, said to be all the papers found on board at the
time she was taken. One of these cockets respected the salt on board, and the
other, the rum. The prize-master swore that there were no other papers found in
the ship; and the gunner deposed, that the vessel was the property of Ormson
and Son, merchants in Liverpool, but that the salt and rum were shipped by a
consul from the court of Russia, at Liverpool, on account of the empress of
Russia.

ON this appearance of the cargo's being neutral property, the judge directed
the attorney general to file and prosecute a claim for the said cargo in behalf
of the her majesty Russia.

THE cause being fully argued, the judge declared himself as follows:

IT is not essential to the present enquiry, whether it is probable or not,
that there is at Liverpool such a character as a consul from the court of
Russia, or what the rights and privileges of a consul are, by the law of
nations; subjects which have perhaps been too largely discussed in the course
of this argument. The only question seems to be, Is there sufficient proof or
not that this cargo was shipped on account of her majesty of Russia, by her
factor or agent at Liverpool? or, in other words, I^ the cargo neutral property
or not?

THE testimony, by which this question is to be determined, stands thus: On the
one side are the custom-house cockets of Liverpool, certifying the salt to have
been shipped by Messrs. Gilbert and company, merchants, of Liverpool, and the
rum to have been shipped by a Mr. Roe, of the same place. On the other side we
have the deposition of the gunner of the ship, who belonged to her, as he says,
at the time she was taking in her lading at Liverpool; and expressly swears,
that both the salt and rum were shipped by a Russian consul at Liverpool, on
account of the empress; and gives several collateral circumstances to support
the truth of his allegation.

IT has been suggested on the part of the claimant, that custom-house papers
are often fallacious, and not conclusive evidence: that, for various mercantile
reasons, borrowed names are often substituted for the names of the real
shippers: that the deposition of the gunner is direct and absolute; and that
from the seeming mutilation of the log-book, and the papers forwarded being so
few, there is reason to suspect a suppression of evidence on the part of the
captors, in order to conceal from the court the real proprietor of this cargo;
and that this suspicion is further countenanced by the captors not sending
forward the captain or mate of the prize, as by his instructions he ought to
have done.

HAVING considered, as well these, as the arguments adduced in behalf of the
libellants, I am of opinion, That the testimony of the gunner, founded on
report only, concerning a matter in which he cannot be supposed to have any
certain or accurate knowledge, however honestly or impartially given, ought not
to outweigh the certified declaration of regular, official papers, unless some
probable proof can be given, or circumstances adduced to show, that these
papers are, or may be, fallacious. There does not, in the present case, appear
any reason, why a Russian factor or agent should make use of the names of
Liverpool merchants to cover his neutral property, which would have been secure
from confiscation without any such artifice: that a British merchant should, in
the present war, strive to conceal his property under a neutral name is a very
natural suggestion; but common sense will not allow the supposition, that a
neutral owner, already secure, would risk property under the borrowed names of
persons, whose names alone would endanger confiscation in case of capture. The
condition of the papers, and the not sending forward the captain or mate of the
prize, induce a censure of negligence on the part of the captors; but a wilful
suppression of evidence for the evasion of justice, is a crime of so heinous a
nature, that it ought not to be presumed of any one, unless very powerful
circumstances shall justify the presumption.

I adjuge, that the ship Albion and her cargo, be condemned as lawful prize to
the libellants.

FREDERICK PHILE versus THE BRIG ACTIVE, AND HER CARGO.
THE brig Active was seized by Frederick Phile, the naval officer of
Pennsylvania, going out of the port of Philadelphia, with a cargo of flour in
violation of an embargo law of the state.

JUDGMENT.
THAT the vessel, and her cargo, consisting of 252 barrels of flour, be
condemned; one-third part to the use of the state, one-third to the naval
officer, and the remaining one-third part to the informer, according to the law.

JOB PRAY, and ALI. versus THE BRIG RECOVERY.
Claim by Robert Morris, on behalf of the UNITED STATES.
JOB Pray and Aaron Stockholm engaged and took as prize, the brig Recovery, a
vessel belonging to the enemy; the schooner Livingston, a vessel belonging to
Robert Morris, the claimant, being in sight at the time of the capture. Pray
and Stockholm were duly commissioned by congress to cruize as privateers
against the enemy; but Kelly, the master of the Livingston, had no such
commission.

THE council for the claimant urged, that it was a principle of law -- that
prizes taken by vessels not commissioned, inured to the sovereign power, and
exhibited a transfer from congress, of all their title to any share in this
prize to Robert Morris; empowering him to prosecute a claim, in the name of the
United States, but for his own benefit. And the authorities cited in support of
this doctrine, were Carthew 474, and 12th Modern 134.

BUT neither of these authorities apply strictly to the present case. In the
one, the prize was a wreck, stranded on the shore, and great part of the booty
was taken on shore by the crews of vessels not commissioned: in the other, a
vessel without a commission, took a prize, and carried her into a foreign port,
where the captor sold her, and converted h^ money to his own use.

IN both cases, the booty was taken by persons not commissioned to take; no
vessels duly commissioned assisting in, or being present at the time of the
capture. But in the present case, the prize was in fact taken by vessels
regularly authorized for the purpose, and the non-commissioned vessel only in
sight at the time of the battle. In the cases cited, no persons were present or
assisting to whom the booty could be legally adjudged. Here the libellants, the
real captors, were duly commissioned to take, and empowered by their
commissions, and the resolve^ of congress, to possess and enjoy the property so
legally taken.

A vessel not commissioned must be considered as a mere merchantman; and
according to Lee, 237, if a merchant vessel meets an enemy in the course of the
voyage, and takes her, the prize shall belong to the captor: but if she goes
out of her course to seek plunder, she may be deemed a pirate. Now, it is not
pretended that the Livingston. took the prize in question, on the contrary, it
is in testimony, that she was running away whilst the libellants were engaged
with the enemy; and now claims a share of the prize, as having been in sight at
the time of the capture.

THE right under which a vessel in sight may claim a share of a prize taken, is
founded in a presumption of law, which supposes a vessel so in sight, and
armed, and prepared for battle, to have induced a surrender. A presumption of
law is a legal indulgence, and ought to be strictly confined within the reason
of the presumption. But no authority has been adduced to show that this
indulgence has been extended to a vessel not commissioned to take, unarmed, and
flying from the scene of action.

THE Livingston cannot claim under the presumption of law, not being within the
description; nor the United States under the general doctrine; because the
prize was in fact taken by vessels duly authorized to take, which the
Livingston was not. I adjudge, therefore, that the claim in this cause be
dismissed, and that the brig Recovery be condemned as prize to the libellants.

YOUNG versus THE SLOOP TWO FRIENDS.
Claim by Timothy Penny, for the vessel and part of the cargo; by Alden Bass,
for a quantity of glass and dry goods; and by Jerusha Fitch, for rum and dry
goods.
TIMOTHY Penny, a citizen of the United States of America, having an estate in
the island of Jamaica, obtained from congress a passport or safe conduct, for
one Joseph Dean, to go to Jamaica and purchase a vessel there, which he was to
load with "PRODUCE," on Penny's account, and to bring the said vessel and her
cargo into any port of the United States not in the possession of the enemy.

IT appears that the sloop in question was so purchased by Dean, and laden in
part on Penny's account: that Messrs. Fitch and Tyler, of Jamaica, being
friendly to Dean, and privy to the purpose for which he had purchased the
sloop, and the real destination of her voyage, put on board a quantity of rum
and dry goods -- the former, for the use of his mother, Jerusha Fitch and his
son reading at Boston; and the latter for his friend Alden Bass, at Boston, who
had charge of his (Tyler's) son: that the sloop, so laden, cleared out at the
custom-house in Jamaica for New York, then in the possession of the British
troops, and sailed under convoy of a British fleet, as for New York: that when
she arrived on the American coast, the captain made three attempts to run her
into Chesapeak Bay, but without success, notwithstanding several maneuvers to
deceive the convoy. At length, being off the capes of Delaware, by slacking
sail, under pretense of the mast's being sprung and a supposed leak, the
captain dexterously left the fleet in the night, and ran up the Delaware, where
his sloop was taken by the libellants.

IT has been admitted on the part of the libellants, that this sloop did really
intend for some port in the United States not in the possession of of the
enemy, and that the goods were bona fide shipped as set forth in the exhibits;
and for the purposes alleged. But it is urged, that the safe conduct of
congress ought to be strictly construed -- that dry goods are not the produce
of a Jamaica estate, and therefore not covered by the passport: that Fitz and
Tyler are British subjects; and the property of the goods shipped by them not
altered by the bills of lading, because those bills do not declare the use, the
appropriation being only designated in private instructions, which, the parties
might have revoked at pleasure; and that under these circumstances, being truly
British property, they ought to be condemned as prize to the captor.

ON examiming the complexion of this cause, I find that the peculiar
circumstances of the case, require that it should be viewed in the liberal
light of equity, rather than squared by the strictest rules of law. The
intention of congress in granting the passport appears to have been to permit
Timothy Penny to import the produce of his estate in Jamaica, for the benefit
of himself and family; and it is but reasonable to suppose that they meant this
should be done in the most beneficial manner. Had it been otherwise, congress
would not have vested an important restriction on a single word of equivocal
construction; but would have inserted a prohibitory clause in the passport. As
to the law respecting bills of lading, it seems not to apply fully to the
present case, because the whole arrangement of this business was framed with a
view to cover the property from seizure by British captors, and not according
to the custom of merchants in open commerce. These bills of lading and
instructions were altogether confidential.

IT must be allowed, that Fitch and Tyler, residing in Jamaica, and being
professedly British subjects, had no right to ship goods for the United States;
and as their part of the cargo is not covered by the passport, they ran great
risk of confiscation into whatever hands they might fall. If it could be made
appear, that these goods were to have been sold for their personal benefit,
they would doubtless be prize to the captors. But as it is manifest from the
testimony, and admitted by counsel for the libellants, that the goods shipped
by Fitch were for the support of his aged mother and his son at Boston,
subjects of the United States, and that those shipped by Tyler were for use of
his son, under the care of his friend Alden Bass, also American subjects, or to
discharge debts already contracted on their accounts, it seems to be one of
those cases to which the strictness of law ought not to be rigorously applied
-- more especially as there is little reason to apprehend that lenity here may
form a dangerous precedent for hereafter, because a like case will probably
never occur again -- passports of this kind being very rare.

LET the libel be dismissed; and the sloop and her cargo be delivered to the
claimants. But as there was such probable cause of capture, I adjudge that the
claimants pay the costs and charges.

N. B. From this decree the libellants appealed; but the court of appeals
confirmed the sentence.

PATRICK MAHOON and AL. versus THE BRIG GLOUCESTER.
Libel for prize money.
THE Brig Gloucester had been captured by Roger Kean in the privateer Holker,
and condemned as prize to the captors. The marshal being about to make
distribution of the booty amongst the crew, according to the list handed in by
captain Kean, was notified to stay in his hands 25 shares of the said prize,
claimed by Patrick Mahoon, and others, as being a part of the crew belonging
to, and concerned in the said privateer Holker. Notwithstanding that their
names were not to be found in the captain's return; the libel, now before the
court is for these 25 shares.

THE circumstances of this case appear, by the testimony exhibited, to be as
follows.

THE printed articles of the privateer Holker were set up at a common house of
rendezvous for the enlistment of privateer's men, according to custom. The
libellants, in common with many others, signed these articles, and made the
necessary preparations for the cruise. When the Holker was ready to sail, the
libellants, with the rest of the crew, repaired on board by order of the
captain, and the vessel set sail. When they arrived at Chester on the Delaware
(15 miles below Philadelphia) captain Kean mustered his crew upon deck, called
over their names as subscribed to the articles, and then, without giving any
reason for his conduct, selected Patrick Mahoon and 24 others, and ordered them
on shore; refusing to let them proceed on the cruise, and when they earnestly
solicited to be continued on board he forcibly drove them away, and the captain
proceeded on his voyage, leaving the libellants behind.

A few days after Kean again called his crew together, and produced to them
another printed copy of articles, which he urged them to sign. Some objected,
observing that they had already signed, and did not understand signing two sets
of articles for the same cruise; but the captain enforced them with threats and
even blows, to sign the new articles; declaring at the same time, that his view
was to exclude those men whom he had left behind from having any share of the
prizes they might take. The Brig Gloucester was captured during this cruise.

THE respondents have rested their cause principally on a plea to the
jurisdiction of this court; alleging that the injury, if any, was exclusively
of common law cognizance; because the libellants claim was founded in articles
executed on shore, within the body of a country: that although the admiralty
could determine the question of prize or no prize; yet it could not determine
to whose use, having no jurisdiction in disputes between owner and owner, owner
and captain, or captain and mariner, except only in the case of a mariner's
wages, which is allowed out of special favor, and not of right, further than
as communis error f^cit jus.

THE facts being fully ascertained, and not controverted, no difficulty arises
from that quarter. It is in proof that captain Kean forced the libellants on
shore after the voyage was begun, and compelled the remainder of the crew to
sign the new articles, with a veiw to exclude the libellants from any advantage
they might claim under the former; and it is contended that this court cannot
redress the injury, because the suit respects damages, which the common law
alone can ascertain. The truth however is, that the parties do not sue for
redress or an injury; but for their shares of a prize legally condemned to the
use of the owners, officers, and crew, and of all persons belonging to, or
concerned in the privateer Holker: of which crew, they say, they are a part.
The articles of enlistment, executed on shore, is no bar to the jurisdiction of
the admiralty. Mariners are generally engaged on shore, and always sue for
their wages in this court. In the one case the mariners are paid by monthly
wages, or by the run, in the other by a share of the booty taken. There is the
same reason in both cases. But I am of opinion that the articles are not the
true foundation of a seaman's claim. If one or more mariners should enter on
board a vessel, with the knowledge and consent of the master, should receive
his orders and perform the duties of the staion, they would be entitled to
customary wages, or a proportion of the booty taken in common with the rest of
the crew, although they had signed no articles at all, the right is not founded
in the articles, but in the service.

IT has been said, that this court can only determine the question prize or no
prize, but cannot adjudge to whose use. Broom's case in Carth. 399 and 475, is
express in point to the contrary. The admiralty not only decreed lawful prize,
but also to whose use, viz. to the King's; and Broom having converted the
property to his own use, was sued in the admiralty by the king's proctor for
the value. Broom applied for a prohibition, which was denied; because the court
of admiralty, having determined the property to be prize to the king, this
second suit was deemed to be only a continuation of the original process.

MOREOVER, it cannot be supposed but that during the many maritime wars in
which England has been engaged, contests about the rights of seamen to shares
of prizes must have frequently occurred. If then such claims were only triable
at common law, they would doubtless appear in some of the books of reports. But
no actions of this kind can be found in those books, nor even prohibitions
prayed for in such cases. The inference is, that such suits were allowed to be
exclusively of admiralty jurisdiction.

IF Captain Kean had any reasonable objections against the libellants, he
should have made those objections before he received them on board, or at least
before the vessel had weighed anchor and commenced her voyage.

AS the libellants were in fact forced from the service, I do not see why this
wrong, on the part of the captain, should deprive them of the right they had
obtained in this cruise by the enlistment, and by the captain's confirmation of
that enlistment when he received them into his service.

I adjudge that the libellants have and receive their respective shares of the
prize Brig Gloucester, and her cargo, in common with the rest of the Holker's
crew.

N. B. The respondents appealed from this decree; but the court of appeals
confirmed the sentence.

PRINGLE AND SHE vresus THE ELIZABETH.
Claim by Charles Phile.
THE Brig Elizabeth arrived with a cargo of dry goods on the 26th of February
1781 at Gloucester, in the river Delaware, from Cork in Ireland: being the
property of merchants of Cork, subjects of the king of great Britain when there
was war between Great Britain and America.

CHARLES PHILE, the claimant hearing of this arrival, procured a deputation
from the naval officer of the port of Philadelphia, dated the 27th of February;
and on the same day went down to Gloucester, and seized the vessel under
authority of his deputation, and by virtue of an act of assembly of this state.

IN this manner Phile possessed himself of the vessel, and afterward had her
brought up to the city, secured her at the wharf, and placed a guard on board.

AFTER this, viz. on the 2d of March the libellants entered on board this
vessel, and by virtue of an ordinance of congress of the 26th of December 1776,
authorizing the people of the country, or detachments from the army, to make
prize of the vessels and goods of the enemy that may happen to be taken near
the shore, -- seized the brig and her cargo as lawful prize, and on the same
day made report to the judge of admiralty, that they had so done. On the 6th
they filed their libel in the register's office; and on the same day a writ of
attachment issued, and the marshal of the court took possession of her in
behalf of the libellants.

AFTERWARD, viz. on the 10th of March, Charles Phile entered his claim in this
court for the vessel and cargo, as a captor also, under the same ordinance of
congress.

THESE transactions, as to the manner and time of the performance, stand
uncontroverted by the parties. Of the remaining testimony exhibited in this
cause, there is but one circumstance of any importance, viz. when Phile made
the seizure on the 27th of February, he was asked by the captain of the brig,
by what authority he did it? and if it was for congress? To which he answered
NO, it was for the naval officer. Then showing the captain his deputation, he
said, that was his authority.

SUCH are the materials upon which this cause has been argued, and it is urged
in behalf of the claimant, that notwithstanding the prior date of Mr. Pringle's
libel, Phile was in fact the first and real captor, and was in the actual
possession of the prize at the time of the seizure made by the libellants: that
although the claimant made his seizure by virtue of the deputation of the naval
officer, and under the act of assembly, in which indeed he was mistaken in
point of law, because the act does not touch the vessel, but the cargo only;
yet being so possessed, he acquired a right which could not be injured by his
error in judgment, and was good against any fellow-subject: that this right is
founded on two principles, viz. occupancy, in the civil, and the doctrine of
remitter, in the common law.

UNDER the first, it is said, that goods belonging to an enemy, being out of
the protection of the law, may be considered as bona vacantia, and he who can
first get possession acquires a right in them by occupancy; and that this
doctrine is the only foundation on which the right of capture is built: and,
under the second, that, where a person obtains peaceable possession of property
by an insufficient title, having a more ancient and better title, the law will
remit him to his better title, and consider him as holding under that in
preference. Both which doctrines are said to apply in favor of the claimant in
the present case, inasmuch as he had possession of the vessel before the
seizure made by the libellants and held her by occupancy; and that having a
good right under the ordinance of congress to make prize of goods belonging to
the enemy, and taken near the shore, although in fact he seized the same by
virtue of his deputation from the naval officer, yet being so possessed, the
law will not remit him to his better title.

ON the contrary it has been urged -- That when the claimant first went on
board this vessel, he stood in a two fold capacity, as a militia man of the
country, and as the deputy of the naval officer, and that the rights and powers
of these characters are as perfectly distinct in law as if they existed in two
different persons: that when he was asked in which capacity he meant to act, he
expressly declared that he made the seizure in behalf of the naval officer:
that when an agent so situate has made his election, and afterward finds
himself in the wrong, he cannot have recourse to his better power to confirm an
act done by an insufficient one: that Charles Phile, the present naval officer,
seized the vessel, but Charles Phile, the militia man, who must, in the eye of
the law, be considered as a different person, did not exercise the power given
him by the ordinance of congress, and made no capture in that capacity, and
therefore the vessel remained liable to capture by any militia man who should
think fit to make use of the right vested in him by the ordinance,
notwithstanding he might find her in the possession of the naval officer, or of
his deputy, who, as such, had no power to hold her under the act of assembly.

THAT Phile cannot claim by occupancy more than the two men who rowed him down
the river, and went on board with him; and that the doctrine of remitter does
not apply, because the ancient and better right alluded to, was not a right
peculiar to the claimant, but which every militia man in the country held in as
full force as himself, by virtue of the ordinance of congress. And finally,
that be that ancient right what it may, the claimant disavowed and rejected it
by his voluntary election, which throws the whole doctrine of remitter out of
the question, which is so purely an operation of law under particular
circumstances, that the interference of the party is fatal to its effect.

THE question which first presents in this cause is -- Whether the seizure made
by the claimant, as deputy naval officer, operated as a capture of the vessel
under the ordinance of congress or not? It is certain, that when Phile entered
on board this brig, he was possessed of two distinct powers. By the one,
derived from the act of assembly, he might have made a seizure of the cargo
only; by the other, founded in the ordinance of congress, he might have taken
as prize, both the vessel and cargo. In this situation the claimant explicitly
disavowed and rejected his right under the ordinance, not only by words, but by
unequivocal actions; and the law will not now force upon him a right so
deliberately disclaimed, to the exclusion of another claiming under the same
right, formally and expressly exercised.

IT is said, that no advantage ought to be taken of the ignorance of the
claimant on a sudden emergency. But, besides that his procuring a deputation
from the naval officer, and going four miles down the river to execute his
purpose, cannot be called a sudden act, his subsequent conduct fully evinces a
deliberate determination of the right on which he meant to depend. He made the
seizure in behalf of the naval officer, under the act of assembly, on the 27th
of February, and held the property by that title, to the 10th of March
following, during which time no libel or information was filed by him in the
admiralty office, no ship's papers produced, nor the vessel put by him into the
marshal's possession, as a prize taken from the enemy. These circumstances
operate strongly against the claimant's being considered as a captor under the
ordinance of congress.

BUT further, even supposing him to have been the first and real captor of this
vessel and her cargo under the ordinance, there yet remains a legal obstacle to
his enjoying the prize; since whatever right he might have acquired as a
captor, he forfeited it by his subsequent conduct. In the admiralty law of this
state (p. 314) it is enacted, If any person who shall have charge of, or bring
a prize into this port, shall neglect or refuse to deliver up the same to the
marshal of the court of admiralty, and libel her within three days after her
arrival, such person shall forfeit all his interest in the said prize to the
use of the commonwealth, and be subjected to the penalties of contempt, etc.
etc. It is evident, therefore, that the cla^ did not consider himself as the
captor of a prize, till after the libel fled by Pringle and She, otherwise he
would have taken care to comply with the injunctions of the admiralty law.

AS to the doctrines of occupancy and remitter, if they operated at all it must
have been at the moment the claimant first entered on board this vessel; and if
so, why does he not libel for the cargo as well as the vessel? But I am of
opinion that no force can warp those doctrines to fit the present case.

JUDGMENT in favor of the libellants.

DIXNEUF versus LACAZE.
Libel for wages.
A Parole contract was made at Cadiz, between captain Sherribeau, master of the
schooner Necessity, and Dixneuf, the libellant, to this purport -- that if
Dixneuf would enter on board, and serve as mariner and carpenter, he should
have the same wages with the other mariners on board, and should be at liberty
to leave the vessel on her arrival at Philadelphia, or to return with her to
Cadiz, at his option: that if he should not choose to return with the vessel,
he should be paid mariner's wages for the time he had served; but if he should
engage at Philadelphia to complete the voyage, the captain would then pay him
the same advance he had paid the rest of the crew.

AFTER the schooner arrived at Philadelphia it seemed as if the libellant had
made his election not to return with the vessel to Cadiz, because the captain
was heard to desire him to continue to work on board as carpenter, and promised
to pay him the same wages the carpenters of the country received. Some
difference arising afterward between the captain and Dixneuf, the captain
sailed without settling with him for his services. Whereupon Dixneuf now libels
against Lacaze, one of the owners of the schooner Necessity, for his wages as
mariner from Cadiz to Philadelphia, and for services as carpenter in the port
of Philadelphia.

JUDGMENT, that vhe libellant shall have his wages as a mariner on board the
schooner Necessity from Cadiz to Philadelphia, and that the bill be ^^^missed
so far as has respect to a demand of wages for work done as a carpenter in the
port of Philadelphia.

(1781.) MILLER versus THE RESOLUTION.
A claim filed in behalf of the shippers of the cargo; also a claim in behalf
of the owners of the ship.
THE ship Resolution, belonging to Brandlight and Sons, merchants in Amsterdam,
sailed from the Texel on the 9th of January, 1780, bound for the island of St.
Eustatius. This voyage was interrupted by stress of weather, which obliged her
to put into Lisbon, where she remained some months to refit, but afterward
arrived at St. Eustatius. From St. Eustatius she sailed for the island of
Dominica, where she arrived on the 1st of October, 1780. In March, 1781, she
sailed from Dominica for Amsterdam, with a valuable cargo of sugar and coffee,
shipped by sundry persons, certified to be capitulants in the island of
Dominica; which cargo was consigned to Messrs. Brandlight and Sons, of
Amsterdam, the owners of the vessel. Soon after the commencement of her voyage
from Dominica, she. was captured by a British armed vessel, and taken as prize
into Nevis, where admiral Rodney examined her papers, and thereupon dismissed
her. She again proceeded on her voyage, but was afterward captured by another
British vessel, from whom she was re-captured by an American privateer; from
this privateer she was again taken by a British ship, and finally retaken from
her by Peter Miller, the libellant in this cause, and sent into the port of
Philadelphia. It is not contended but that in each and every of the captures
and re-captures, she remained more than 24 hours in the possession of the
conqueror. Being thus found in the hands of the enemy, and taken from them by
force of arms, the libellants pray that both ship and cargo may be condemned as
lawful prize and booty of war.

ARGUMENT.
BUT it has been contended in behalf of the claimants -- That it appears in
testimony that the island of Dominica did on the 7th of September, 1778,
surrender by capitulation to the marquis de Bouille, general of the French
forces in the Windward Islands -- that by the terms of this capitulation, all
the property and estates in Dominica, with their produce were secured to the
inhabitants, and protected from confiscation; particularly by the 17th article,
in these words -- The merchants of the island may receive vessels to their
address. from all parts of the world (English vessels excepted) without their
being confiscated; and they may sell their merchandise, and may carry on their
trade, and the port shall be entirely free for them for that purpose, paying
the customary duties paid in the French islands. And it is alleged, that this
privilege and protection was extended to absent persons having property or
concerns in the island, by virtue of the 9th article of the same capitulation
in these words -- The absent inhabitants, and such as are in the service of his
Britannic majesty, shall be maintained in the possession and enjoyment of their
estates, which shall be managed for them by their attorneys. That these United
States being in strict alliance with the court of France, are bound by the
terms of every capitulation, convention, or treaty, which the court of France,
or any person or persons under that authority, shall make in the course of the
war, the war being a common cause, and both allies principals in the conduct of
it: -- that it was also in proof, that the king of England, by his
proclamation, dated in December; 1780, extended the effects of the capitulation
of Dominica, to Dutch vessels for four months, notwithstanding the rupture
between Great Britain and Holland, by the capture of St. Eustatius: and, that
this ship, under the sanction of the said capitulation which secured her and
her cargo from capture by the French or Americans, and under the said
proclamation, which protected her from British capture, sailed from Dominica,
with the property of capitulants on board; and that the passport of monsieur
Duchilleau, the French governor of Dominica, endorsed on the manifesto of the
cargo, ought to protect this property from being made prize of by the friends
and allies of France.

IT has been further insisted -- That a re-captor acquires no other right than
what the captor had; inferring that as the British captor could not have
procured a condemnation (as appears by the acquital of admiral Rodney) neither
can an American re-captor make this vessel legal prize -- that the British
captain should be considered as a pirate, and that the law is, that goods taken
by pirates, and again retaken from them, shall be restored to the former owner
-- that if it should be objected, that most of the real consignees of this
cargo are not inhabitants of Dominica, and therefore not within the
capitulation; it is answered, that article the 9th extends the operation of
this capitulation to absent inhabitants, even such as are in the service of the
king of Great Britain having property in the island, whose business may be
transacted by attorneys; and that if the attorney is an inhabitant, and signed
the capitulation, it is the same thing in effect as if the principal had done
it. And, lastly, that although no express authority can be produced to prove
directly that allies in war are bound by the capitulations, conventions, and
treaties of each other, reciprocally; yet a striking analogy may be found in
the case of ransom. That it cannot be denied, but that if a French vessel takes
a prize, and ransoms her for a limited time, the ransom bill would protect the
property from capture and condemnation by the Americans. If, therefore, the act
of an individual captain of a French privateer can screen the property of an
enemy from an ally, much more should the solemn capitulation of a French
general with the whole inhabitants of a captured island bind the same ally.

TO this it has been replied; that the ship Resolution and her cargo were found
in the possession of the enemy, who held the same by force as their property
for more than 24 hours which brings the case strictly within the ordinance of
congress of February last, which excludes any claims of former owners after a
possession of 24 hours by the enemy: that we have no business to enquire by
what right the enemy became possessed: it is sufficient for us that we found it
there: that the doctrine respecting pirates does not apply, because the British
as a sovereign nation has an undoubted right to wage war, and to take prizes,
which pirates have not: that if any subject of a sovereign power takes
unlawfully, let him or his prince answer the wrong, the re-captors at war with
them being altogether blameless, whose right to take from an enemy cannot be
doubted: that it appears evidently by the letters and other exhibits in this
cause, that this cargo is in fact British property, and not the property of the
inhabitants of Dominica; and although consigned to merchants in Amsterdam, the
nett proceeds were to be remitted to merchants in London, and other parts of
the British dominion: that it is absurd and untrue to suppose that the benefits
of the capitulation were designed to extend to London merchants who had never
been inhabitants of the island of Dominica, and who are and will remain British
subjects, aiding, by their wealth and influence, in the war against France and
her allies: that the captulation included only real inhabitants, either present
on the island, or absent on business at the time, and placed them in a state of
perfect neutrality with respect to the war; a character which can by no means
be applied to the real consignees of this cargo: that if the effects of this
capitulation were to be thus extended, France would have obtained a conquest
which can produce nothing but expense, trouble, and loss to her, but will tend
to strengthen and enrich the enemy; and that it would be for the present, the
interest of Great Britain to surrender all her West India islands upon the same
terms.

IT has been further urged by the counsel for the libellants, that allies are
not mutually bound by every ex part treaty or convention: that consent is
necessary to include one in the engagement made by the other; as for instance,
in a truce or cessation of hostilities: that France does not deem herself so
bound, is evident from her conduct with respect to Bermuda and the Bahama
islands, whose property congress have exempted from capture and condemnation by
Americans; yet their vessels are confiscated in the French courts of admiralty:
and that this exemption, granted by congress to Bermudians, runs strictly
parallel with the terms granted by the French general to the people of
Dominica, so far as allies in war were to be affected by such treaties.

THAT the law respecting ransoms cannot apply to the present case, because, if,
after our ally has made a capture, and discharged the prize on a, promised
ransom, we should violate the ransom bill, we should in fact plunder our friend
of his actually acquired property; and it is for this reason that allies are
bound by ransom bills: that this case coming precisely within the ordinance of
congress respecting 24 hours possession by the enemy, this court is bound to
decree according to that ordinance, and has no power to judge how far its
operation may, or may not, under particular circumstances, affect the terms of
our aliance with France, the true limits of which are only to be ascertained by
the sovereignty of the states, and are not submitted to the determination this
court.

THAT, as to the passport subscribed by monsieur Du Challeau, he did it as a
matter of course in consequence of the depositions annexed to the bills of
lading, which were taken by the British judge of the island, and who might
probably be in the interest of the parties; or, at least, that it was done with
the official negligence too usual in passing custom-house papers. It was
further suggested, that the manifest variance between the bills of lading, with
their depositions annexed, and the private letters of advice found on board;
the direct fraud manifest in some of those letters, and the mysterious
complexion of others, are alone sufficient to justify a condemnation of this
property; double papers and fraudulent clearances being legal cause of
confiscation.

IN short, that this whole business appears to be a mercantile scheme concerted
between British merchants and Brandlight and Sons, of Amsterdam, in conjunction
with the shippers at Dominica, to impose on the French governor, and to derive
an unfair advantage from the liberal terms of the capitulation: that, if this
property is to be deemed neutral, the true doctrine is, if a neutral
voluntarily puts his property on board an enemy's ship, he does it at his own
risk; but if an enemy unjustly takes neutral property, and the same is retaken,
the remedy is against the enemy who did the wrong, and not against the recaptor
who only did his duty: that it is true, that the passport of governor
Duchalleau, recommends this vessel to pass unmolested by the friends of France,
but does not say she shall not be taken from the enemy in case she should fall
into their hands: that if the inhabitants of Dominica, in their present
situation, be considered either as French or as British subjects, still the
recapture is good; if French, then the property (supposing it to belong to the
shippers) having been more than twenty four hours in the possession of the
enemy, is prize to the recaptor by the marine ordinances of France and America;
if British, it belonged to the enemy, and is therefore prize. And lastly, that
this capitulation should not be construed to extend further than the protection
of property upon the island, and within its ports and harbors, but cannot
reasonably be expected to insure safety on the high seas in the midst of a
raging war.

JUDGMENT.
THIS cause, so far as it respects the cargo of the ship Resolution, rests
principally on one question, viz. whether the United States by their alliance
with France, are, or are not to be considered as parties in the capitulation
made by the Marquis De Bouille with the inhabitants of Dominica. No authority
has been produced, and I believe that none can be, to show that ^^lies are
mutually bound in all cases. It is manifest, that it is not generally so
understood; because it is usual in forming treaties of alliance to insert
special clauses specifying those cases, wherein the promises and engagements of
the one shall bind the other: for it would be a very dangerous doctrine that
should bind sovereign powers in engagements to which they had neither expressly
or implicitly given consent, or that one ally should necessarily become a party
in the conventions which the generals and officers of the other may, under
particular straits and circumstances, make with the common enemy, unless the
ally be mentioned in the convention, and the terms thereof be afterward
acceded to by him. Thus, in the case of Dominica, had governor Stuart, when he
surrendered the island to the marquis de Bouille expected that the United
States should be bound by the terms of the capitulation, he would have made
this one of the articles, and not entrusted so important a point to a
speculative question, how far one ally may or may not be virtually bound by the
engagements of the other. This, however, he has not done, either because it
would imply an acknowledgment of the sovereignty of the United States, or
because he deemed the objects of the capitulation to be limited to property
within the island. Be this as it may, the British could not reasonably complain
that the French had violated the articles of the capitulation should the
Americans take the goods of the inhabitants of Dominica found upon the high
seas, because such an assurance made no part of the stipulation. If he who can
and ought to have explained himself clearly and plainly, has not done it, it is
the worse for him; he cannot be allowed to introduce subsequent restrictions
which he has not expressed. Vattel, B. 2. chapter 17. sec. 174.

BUT whatever doubts there may be of the right of Americans to take the
property of the people of Dominica under the present circumstances, there can
be none of taking British property, wherever found, without any danger of
impairing the friendship of our good ally. And from a scrutiny of the papers
found on board this vessel, there is strong reason to believe that this cargo,
however artificially covered, is, in fact, British property.

AS to the general doctrine respecting allies, the case of Bermudas is, I
think, strong in point. The vessels of that island were by congress exempted
from capture by Americans, and yet the French made prize of them whenever they
could; nor was it ever suggested, that they had thereby violated the faith of
the alliance. Had the British expected, or France desired, that the United
States should be parties in the capitulation of Dominica, it cannot be doubted,
but that this would have been made one of the terms of that capitulation, or
tha^ France would, ever this, have signified her desire to congress, and that
congress would have instructed the masters of privateers as to this matter.

HAVING made no national agreement to spare the property of the people of
Dominica, when found on the high seas, much less are we bound to rescue it from
the hands of an enemy at our risk and expense, in order to restore it, salvage
free, to their use. This would be to put them on a better footing than our own
merchants, whose property, after 24 hours possession by the enemy, would be
confiscated to the re-captor, whereas it is contended that no confiscation
whatever should pass on the property of the people of Dominica.

BEING fully satisfied as to this general point, it renders a minute display of
the striking contradictions between the bills of lading and letters of advice,
and other papers found on board this vessel, the less necessary. Many of them
are manifestly fraudulent* and although the property is carefully wrapped in
neutral covers, the nett proceeds appear to be finally intended for subjects of
Great Britain, residing at London or elsewhere.

WITH respect to the king of England's proclamation, I conceive that it is
founded on partial, not on general grounds. Were it not that this, with four or
five other Dutch vessels were at this time to sail from Dominica, freighted
with the property of British merchants, it is more than probable that this
proclamation had never been published.

I adjudge that the cargo of the ship Resolution be condemned as lawful prize
to the libellants; and that the ship Resolution, with her tackle, apparel and
furniture be restored to Brandlight and Sons, merchants of Amsterdam.

N. B. The claimants appealed from this decree; and, after long argument, the
judges of appeal reversed the decree, so far as the same respected the
condemnation of the cargo, which they fully acquitted, upon the shippers paying
freight to the owners of the ship.

THERE was afterward a re-hearing of this cause before the court of appeal, on
a suggestion of new testimony having been found amongst some papers taken in a
ship (the Ersten) bound from Ostend to Dominica: but the court adhered to their
judgment; except only as to some part of the cargo, which was condemned on
account of irregularities in the bills of lading, and letters of advice,
respecting those particular articles.

CASSEN versus THE TRISTRAM SHANDY.
CASSEN, commander of the privateer ship Rising Sun, sailed from the Delaware,
in company with the sloop Jane, commanded by Samuel Young, the claimant: the
sloop being under convoy of the ship. Both vessels belonged to the same owners
(one person excepted, who had a share in the sloop, but was not concerned in
the ship.) The ship was bound on a cruise, as a privateer, and the sloop on a
trading voyage. Whilst these vessels were yet in company, they discovered the
brig Tristram Shandy, a vessel belonging to the enemy, and got to windward of
her. The ship then bore down upon, and took the prize; but the sloop, without
changing her course, proceeded on her voyage. It is also in evidence, that the
sloop was observed by the crew of the prize, eight or ten minutes before she
surrendered, at the distance of about six miles. Whereupon, the owner, who is
singly concerned in the sloop, has filed a claim, in the name of Samuel Young,
qui tam, for a share of the prize, as being in sight at the time of the
capture, under the general rule of law.

AGAINST this claim it has been urged, that the sloop ought to have no share in
this prize, because it is in testimony, that she not only did nothing toward
the capture, but, in fact, avoided it, not altering her course, or manifesting
the least intention to be considered as a joint captor; insisting, that an
intention to possess is requisite to the acquirement of property -- that
although by the rule of law, it is not necessary to enquire how far a vessel in
sight, did or did not contribute to the capture of a prize, yet some attempt,
some inclination, to take, ought to appear, otherwise the law will not force
property on those who voluntarily abandon it; and the case of Rice versus
Tailor was particularly referred to, and relied upon. (Vide p. 16.)

ARBITRARY rules and presumptions of law are established in profound wisdom,
and are the result of much experience. Passing by the uncertain equity of
certain cases, they look only to general justice. All that is necessary in the
application of them is to ascertain whether the case comes within the rule or
not. If it does, the rule ought not to be violated, nor should any evidence be
admitted to defeat its operation; because the law, delighting in certainty,
will not suffer an investigation which can occasion contradictory testimony,
perjury, and endless litigation.

IN the case of Rice versus Tailor, the jury found that the claimant's vessel
did not, by her presence, contribute to the surrender of the prize; her
situation rendering it in fact impossible; and, therefore, the claim was
dismissed, the case not coming within the verge of the legal presumption. But
no such impossibility appears in the present case. Had the enemy been a match
for the ship, or made an obstinate resistance, the sloop was sufficiently near,
and in a capacity to join her force. But as the prize was not able to maintain
a contest with the ship, it is to be presumed that the sloop's continuing her
course, was not an abandonment of any share or concern in the prize, but
because that she saw that her assistance was altogether unnecessary.

THE supposed want of an intention to take, is not sufficient to exclude the
claimants from a share of the prize. The claim filed in this cause is proof of
at least an intention to possess whatever the law may award. And although it
has been suggested, that this suit is in fact brought by one of the owners, in
the name of the captain and crew of the sloop Jane, who are absent, and had no
intention of making such claim, yet the court will not allow the distinction,
but consider captain Young and his mariners as prosecuting their suit by their
proctor.

NEITHER is there any reason why the circumstance of the sloop's being under
the convoy of the ship, should affect the right of the claimants. The
assistance which one vessel may give another in battle is the reason of the
law, and this reason is as applicable to vessels under convoy as to any others.
Whenever two vessels of the same nation are in company, they are under
reciprocal protection, and mutually bound to assist each other: but when a
vessel of superior force sails out of her intended course, or is purposely sent
for the protection of another, the owners of the latter should make recompense
for the service; but this will not exclude the protected vessel from those
rights which her force, small as it may be, may entitle her to, and which the
general rule of law assigns without distinction.

JUDGMENT.
THAT the Tristram Shandy be condemned as lawful prize to the captors; and that
the claimants have a share of the said prize, in proportion to the men and guns
on board the sloop Jane at the time of the capture.

ROBESON versus THE AMELIA.
THE brig Amelia sailed from Charlestown, then in the possession of the enemy,
as a flag of truce, to the city of Philadelphia. After her arrival she began to
unlade sundry goods and merchandises: the libellants considered this as a
violation of the flag, and accordingly libelled against her in the court of
admiralty.

JUDGMENT.
THAT she be condemned as lawful prize.

NICHOLAS HAINEY vesus. THE TRISTRAM SHANDY AND DIMSDALE.
A Libel for Prize Money.
HAVING entered as a landsman on board the privateer Rising Sun, and signed
articles for a cruise of four months: the privateer was successful; and the
libellant was sent in with one of her prizes, and soon afterward fell sick.
During the cruise the Rising Sun came into port to refit. Being at
Philadelphia, a great part of the crew left her; whereupon the captain (or
owners) published an advertisement, calling upon the officers, seamen, and
mariners, belonging to the Rising Sun, to repair on board by a certain day, in
order to complete the cruise. One third of the crew, however, neglecting to
appear, the owners and officers agreed to break up the cruise, opened a new
rendezvous, and enlisted a crew under a new set of articles. The ship sailed on
this second cruise, the four months of the first having not yet expired. Soon
after her last sailing she captured the Tristiam Shandy, and the Dimsdale, both
which were condemned as prize. It appeared in testimony, that the Tristiam
Shandy was taken before the expiration of the first cruise, and the Dimsdale
some days after. The libellant did not appear on the day advertised, neither
did he sign the second set of articles, being sick at the time.

AS this cause touches a general doctrine, viz. how far owners are justifiable
in breaking up a cruise, without the consent of all concerned, it wears a face
of considerable importance. I have attended to it in this view, and am of
opinion, that shipping articles form a contract between the owners on the one
part, and the officers and crew on the other, and are for the period specified,
in full force with respect to the contracting parties. And this contract is not
made with the officers and crew as an aggregate body, but with each mariner
individually. Upon this ground, I think the contract cannot be totally
dissolved (as has been contended) by the will of any majority on either side,
however great. If a single mariner withholds his consent, and the cruise is
broke up by the rest of the concerned, and a new cruise commenced, as in the
present case, this must be done, subject to the legal claim of the unconsenting
mariner, of wages or prize money that may accrue during the term of the first
cruise for which he contracted. If it were otherwise, if owners could for their
own convenience, or from an apparent or real necessity, break up a cruise,
those of the crew who may be languishing in captivity, or may be confined on
shore by wounds or sickness incurred in the service of the ship, or otherwise,
might be excluded from the advantages of a period of time for which they had
engaged to run all hazards, and of which they may as yet have only experienced
the misfortunes.

JUDGMENT.
THAT the libellant have a landsman's share of the prize brig, Tristiam Shandy,
and that the bill be dismissed with respect to a share of the Dimsdale.

M'GEE versus THE FANNY.
JACOB Miller, and others, had formed a compact to purchase a vessel, load her
with provisions, naval stores, etc. and then clear her out from the port of
Philadelphia, as for some legal voyage; but, in fact, to take her into New
York, for the supply of the enemy. The Fanny was purchased for this purpose.
But, before the scheme was ripe for execution, one Hollingshead, who was to
have been sailing master for the voyage, divulged the secret. In consequence of
which the libellant seized the vessel at the wharf where she had lain previous
to the time when Miller purchased her for the purpose aforesaid. One Riggens,
who was also privy to the plan, confirmed the testimony of Hollingshead, as to
the general scheme. At the time of the seizure, the brig had taken in only
twenty barrels of Tar, and had not yet shipped her mariners.

THE testimony in this cause amounts to no more than a treasonable intent. Had
this vessel received her cargo on board, shipped her mariners, and hawled off
from the warf, the intent would then have been so far carried into execution,
as that the vessel and cargo might have been confiscated, and the parties
punished under the ordinance of congress. As the case stands, the owners might
have changed their minds as to the general design, or they might have thought
some other vessel more suitable to the purpose. To bring the matter properly
before this court, the identical vessel employed in an illegal design must be
taken in the fact, for the admiralty cannot confiscate one vessel for the fault
of another although belonging to the same owners. A vessel cannot be said to be
taken in pursuit of an illegal voyage whilst she remains fast at a wharf,
without a cargo on board, and without mariners.

LET the bill be dismissed.

WILLIS versus THE BRIG YORK.
THE qu^^tion before the court was, Whether the righ^ of a deceased mariner to
a share of prizes taken during a cruise, is inheritable or not? The case was:
one Joel Willis enlisted on board a privateer for a certain cruise: A short
time before the determination of the cruise, according to the articles, he fell
sick, and died on board the privateer. Soon after his death, and within the the
term of the cruise, the prize brig York was taken. Whereupon Seth Willis, the
brother and administrator of Joel, libelled for a share of the prize.

THE arguments of council respected the general principle of law; but the
judge, not willing to determine the general question, directed testimony to be
exhibited on the particular circumstances of the case. This was done, and the
cause submitted, without further argument, to a decision on the equity and
merits of the case.

WHEREUPON a share of the prize was adjudged to the administrator.

GIBBS versus THE TWO FRIENDS.
THE brig Susannah, belonging to George Gibbs, cleared out from the naval
office in the port of Rhode Island, and sailed with a cargo on board, as for
Hispaniola, but in fact for Turk's Islands. Being on her voyage she was
discovered, pursued, and captured by Josiah Crane, master of the brigantine Two
Friends, belonging to subjects of the United Netherlands, and furnished with
letters of marque and reprisal against the subjects of the king of Great
Britain. Holland had not at this time entered into any treaty with, or
acknowledged the independence of, the United States of America. Captain Crane
took out part of the crew of the Savannah, and put a prize master on board, and
ordered her for Philadelphia; but the Susannah was again captured during her
voyage to Philadelphia by a British privateer, taken to New York, and there
condemned. The Two Friends arrived at Philadelphia, where Gibbs the owner of
the Susannah libelled against her, and against captain Crane for reparation of
the loss and damage sustained.

IN considering this case, two obvious points present, viz.

FIRST. Has the brig Susannah so offended by her intended voyage to Turk's
Islands as to afford probable cause of capture and confiscation?

SECONDLY. If not, who ought to satisfy the owner for the loss of his vessel
and cargo?

ON the first point the question occurs, whether Turk's Islands, may, or may
not, be considered as property under the dominion of Great Britain? Whatever
might have been the situation of these islands in the years 1778 and 1779, it
is evident that at present they are abandoned by every nation, there having
been no officer who has exercised civil or military powers there under the
authority of any government whatever for at least these two years past. If the
British ever had legal dominion over these islands, they have abandoned their
right, and released the inhabitants from all allegiance by withdrawing all
protection. So that those people may truly be said to be in a state of nature,
unless they have formed some government of their own. What offense then can
arise from trading with those islands? It is plain, from the clearances and
entries in our own naval offices, that this trade has not been deemed
unlawful: and it is also in evidence, that American, French, and Spanish
vessels, constantly go to these islands for salt, and no body has heretofore
questioned the legality of this commerce.

BUT is said, that the variance between the office clearance and an invoice
found on board, marking the real destination of the voyage, affords probable
cause of capture, and even a sufficient ground for confiscation. I find,
however, that it is not an unusual practice for merchants to clear out as for
one legal port, but with a design of going to some other legal port, in order
to conceal the real voyage, for mercantile purposes. Nor has this practice
ever been deemed an offense, or the papers found on board a vessel under such
circumstances been considered as double pape^s, such as should induce a
condemnation.

THE next question is, Who ought to be answerable for the injury done? the
captain, or his owners, or both?

THE relation between the owners and master of a vessel has, to many purposes,
been considered as that of master and servant; and the law is clear, that the
master is bound by whatever the servant does by his order, under his authority,
or in the prosecution of his service. See ^st. Black. 429. It has been
contended, however, that captain Crane was not in the prosecution of his owners
service when he made this capture, the object of the voyage being merely
mercantile, and not to take prizes. But as this vessel was duly commissioned to
take prizes, and the owners and captain would have shared the produce of a
legal capture, this distinction cannot be admitted, but the owners and captain
must be considered as jointly answerable.

JUDGMENT in favor of the libellants for L 1305 specie, with costs.

N. B. An appeal, and the judgment confirmed.

CLINTON versus THE BRIG HANNAH AND SHIP GENERAL KNOX.
A Plea to the jurisdiction of the court was filed in this cause: and the
question was, Whether a Ship-Wright might sue in the admiralty for his contract
wages for building a ship or vessel designed for navigation on the high seas?

AFTER long argument, the judge gave his opinion as follows.

THE authorities which the libellants have urged in favor of the jurisdiction
of this court, in the present case, are Cro. Chapter 296. and 1st Roll 533. All
the other authorities adduced having reference to those, except one in 1 Stra.
707.

IN the first edition of Cro. cha. page 296, we find resolutions upon cases of
admiralty jurisdiction subscribed by all the judges of both benches, in April,
1632. Wherein, amongst other things, it is resolved, that a ship-wright may sue
in the admiralty, provided his suit be against the ship. Roll, as a faithful
abridger, gives the law as it then stood under the authority of these
resolutions. In article 19, he mentions the doctrine respecting ship-wrights,
and cites the cafe of Tasker and Gale. And in article 21, he gives the law
respecting charter parties, adding these remarkable words: As it was declared
by the court to have been lately resolved by all the judges of England. So that
those resolutions seem to be the only foundation upon which these doctrines
rest. And it is very observable, that although Croke records the resolutions as
they were subscribed in Hillary term, the eighth of Charles, yet he does not
report the case of Tasker versus Gale, although adjudged (according to Roll)
in the ninth of Charles, which must have been but a few months after. Neither
has any other reporter of that period noticed this case. From which it seems
probable, that those resolutions, and the judgment in the case of Tasker versus
Gale, were not admitted as good law even in that day.

BUT it is further observable, that when Sir Harbottle Grimestone published
Croke's reports in the year 1657, he prefixed, even to this first edition, a
declaration under the title Mantissa, that the resolutions of the judges in
Feb. 1632, were not of authority: and for this reason (according to Comyns)
those resolutions were totally omitted in the subsequent editions of that work.
Since that time no instance can be found in the books, where either these
resolutions, or the case of Tasker versus Gale adjudged thereupon, have been
referred to either by the court, or in the pleadings in any adjudged case,
except in the case of Wooward versus Bonithan, Sir. T. Raymond. p. 3: and there
the court declared, that those resolutions had been denied by several judges,
and renounced by even some of those who had subscribed them. And of this,
Danvers also takes particular notice, p. 271. Therefore the authority of these
resolutions seems to have been abolished by general consent.

BUT another case has been referred to as authority in point, viz. 1st Stra.
707. The report is very short, and in these words: On a motion for a
prohibition, it was held, that a carpenter may sue for wages in the admiralty.
This report, however, is too slight and solitary to authorize a decision
contrary to general established rules. The word carpenter does not precisely
indicate a ship-wright, but may be applicable to a mariner on board a vessel;
and as the cases referred to in the margin of this report, respecting the
officers of a ship who sued in the admiralty as mariners, the probability is,
that this also was an officer called the ship's-carpenter: A doubt having
arisen whether the subordinate officers of a ship, as well as the master, were
not prohibited from suing in the admiralty for wages.

IF the resolutions of the judges in 1632, and the decision in the case of
Tasker versus Gale, were admitted as law, and if the carpenter mentioned in 1st
Stra. 707, was the ship-wright or builder, how is it possible that the judges
so lately as the 1765, should declare in court, that no instance could be found
where both the contract and service were to be done on land, within the body of
a country, that the common law courts ever permitted the admiralty to have
jurisdiction? I refer to 2d Wilson, p. 265: and this opinion was given in the
case of a pilot suing for services done, indeed within the body of a county,
but in a case of a much stronger maritime complexion than the present.

THERE are several exceptions to the general rules of law respecting admiralty
jurisdiction, as ascertained by the statutes: such as suits for mariners wages,
and on hypothecations made by the master in foreign parts, etc. etc. which have
been so often contested, and so often allowed, for good and weighty reasons,
that they have become confirmed law, and it would be in vain now to oppose the
general rule to the general practice. But this does not appear to the case with
respect to ship-wrights; neither are the same reasons applicapable to them.
Their contract is made with persons whom they know, or ought to know; their
services are all executed within the body of the county, and mostly on dry land
above highwater mark; their wages have no reference to a voyage performed, or
to be performed; the ship-wrights have no interest or concern whatever in the
vessel after she is on float, and the merchant has paid for her; and lastly,
the practice of former times does not justify the admiralty's taking cognizance
of their suits.

LET the bill be dismissed, as not being within the jurisdiction of the court.

PIERRE DE MOITEZ versus THE SOUTH CAROLINA.
ON a plea to the jurisdiction, it was adjudged, that mariners enlisting on
board a ship of war, or vessel belonging to a sovereign independent state,
cannot libel against a ship for wages due.

KEMP versus THE EXPERIMENT.
THE schooner Experiment belonging to subjects of the United States; was on her
voyage from James river, in Virginia, to Baltimore, in Maryland, with a cargo
of rum and salt, and a few barrels of tar; the cargo being also the property of
subjects of the United States. She was taken in Chesapeak bay by some of the
enemy's boats, called refugee boats, and sent under the command of a
prize-master to New York. In her way to New York, she was re-captured by the
libellant, and sent into this port, having been several days in the possession
of the enemy.

ON the trial, one of the owners of the cargo appeared, and urged the tenor of
an ordinance of congress, passed the 26th of February, 1782, in his favor,
respecting the vessels and cargoes of subjects of the United States, going from
one port to another, and taken within any arm of the sea, etc. laden with the
produce of the country, and afterward retaken by a fellow subject: ordaining,
that the same shall be restored to the first owner, on payment of reasonable
salvage, not exceeding one fourth of the value, without any regard to the time
of possession by the enemy. But as it appeared, that the cargo was foreign
produce (except only two barrels of tar) the party withdrew his claim.

AND so the vessel and cargo were condemned as prize to the libellant.

PATRICK MAHOON, and ALI. versus THE LADY MARGARET.
PATRICK Mahoon, and twenty-four others, filed a supplimental libel against the
ship Lady Margaret, for that they having duly enlisted for a cruise, on board
the privateer Holker, and being ready and willing to perform their duty, were
forcibly turned on shore by Roger Kean, the captain, and prohibited from going
the cruise, in which the prize ship Lady Margaret was taken. Whereupon process
issued against captain Kean, et contra omnes, to answer to the said libel.

THESE are the same libellants who recovered against the Gloucester, two years
since, on a like plea. (Vide p. 55.) In the case of the Gloucester, the council
for the respondent did not minutely investigate the facts: but admitting the
testimony, as produced on the part of the libellants, respecting the force
used, rested the defense solely on points of law. The facts were now more
strictly scrutinized, and new testimony adduced, amongst which the respondent
presented the deposition of Silas Foster, one of the Holker's crew: but it was
objected, that Foster was an interested witness, and that his testimony ought
not to be admitted. After full argument thereupon, the judge decided this
point, as follows:

THE question under consideration, respects the competency of a witness
produced by the respondent in this cause. On the one side, a general principle
of law has been urged, viz. that a person interested in the event of a cause,
shall not be allowed to give testimony in that cause: and, on the other, an
exception to this general rule, viz. that if no further or better evidence can
be had, an interested party may and ought to be heard, from the necessity of
the case, his interest only affecting his credibility, not his competency. And
the danger of an unhappy precedent in the rejection or admission of the witness
now offered, has been sufficiently enlarged upon on both sides. But I cannot
see the danger apprehended, since the determination in the present case, can be
no rule for any other, unless the circumstances of both should be precisely
similar; because, the court will always take into consideration the degree and
nature of the interest, that should exclude a witness under the general rule,
and the reality of the necessity to admit him under the exception, and also
judge of the credibility, according to circumstances. To this purpose I refer
to laws of nisi prius, p. 286. Scroggs, chapter jus. said, that it ought not to be
a general rule, that members of corporations shall be admitted or denied to be
witnesses, in cases for or against their corporations: but every case stands
upon its own particular circumstances, viz. whether the interest be so
considerable as by presumption to produce partiality or not. And this exception
has of late years been much extended. In the case of the King versus Bray, lord
chief justice Hardwicke Hardwicke, p. 360.
said, that unless the objections appeared to him to carry a strong danger of
perjury, and some apparent advantage might accrue to the witness, he was
inclined to let it go to his credit only, in order to let in a proper light to
the case, which would otherwise be shut out.

IN order, therefore, to decide on the competency of the present witness, it
will be necessary to take a view of the circumstances of the case, so far as
they respect him, or his interest, in the cause.

THE ship Lady Margaret, was, by a decree of this court, condemned as prize to
the captors. The marshal, after making sale of the property, advertised as
usual for all persons who had any claim thereupon, to appear in person, or by
agent, and receive their respective shares. Foster's agent accordingly
appeared, and received his share, which was afterward paid over to him, as
appears by his receipt to the said agent. The present libellants issued no
prohibition to the marshal, to stay his proceedings, nor intimated any design
of claiming shares in this prize. The marshal, therefore, went on and completed
his business, with respect to this vessel and her cargo, and filed his accounts
and returns, dated Feb. 1781, in the register's office; by which accounts it
appears, that full distribution had been made. The present libellants having
recovered in the case of the brig Gloucester, a prize taken by the same
privateer, and in the same cruise in which the Lady Margaret was captured, now
claim shares in the Lady Margaret also, upon the principles of the former
decision in their favor. The captain of the privateer has filed his answer in
opposition to this claim, and offers Foster as witness in his behalf: but it is
alleged that Foster may have an interest in the event of this cause, upon a
suggestion, that although the marshal has in his returns, fully balanced his
accounts respecting the Lady Margaret, yet he has done it wrongfully, by
charging extravagant and illegal commissions, as appears upon the very face of
his returns. So that there is in fact a part of that prize yet in his hands, a
distributive share of which Foster will be entitled to, if the libellants
should fail in their suit, he being one of the captors of that prize.

IT seems then, that Foster's interest depends upon two contingencies -- First,
that the libellants shall fail in their present claim: and, secondly, that the
marshal shall not be able to justify the commissions he has charged.

IF this interest depended upon the first contingency only, it might be deemed
too closely connected with the event of this cause, to admit him as a witness
of full credibility: but when the nature of the second contingency is
considered, viz. that it is now full two years since the marshal made his
returns, and that neither Foster, nor any of the concerned, have objected to
the commissions charged, or manifested any expectations of receiving further
advantages from the Lady Margaret, his interest, if any, seems to be so very
remote, as not to found any reasonable presumption that it will produce
partiality, or to carry a strong danger of perjury.

THE use of testimony, is to ascertain truth, that justice may be administered.
Therefore, witnesses ought not to be rejected on slight grounds of disability,
or on mere suggestion of a distant interest, especially in maritime suits,
where from the scene of transaction, a totally disinterested testimony can
seldom be procured. But the court will always make allowance in the credit,
according to the circumstances.

LET Foster's testimony be admitted.

JUDGMENT ON THE MERITS.
IN order to determine this cause to my own satisfaction, I find i^ necessary
to state and consider three points, which will, I apprehend, include all the
principles that can affect this controversy.

THE first question is, Whether those who sign-the Holker's articles, after
notice given that her compliment of men was full, and that no more could be
received on board, and who did not go the cruise, although their not going
should be occasioned by a forcible rejection, ought to draw shares of all, or
any of the prizes taken in that cruise?

It appears by the deposition of Henry Martin, the keeper of the house of
rendezvous, that although Fletcher, one of the Holker's officers, informed many
who applied that they could not be admitted, because the privateer's compliment
of men was complete, and that they would be turned on shore if they came on
board, yet they persisted to sign the articles, and even took the advantage of
the officer's turning his back to sign those articles without his knowledge,
saying, they would run their chance. If any of the libellants should be found
in this predicament, I shall not hesitate to dismiss their claim. Because no
man ought to have an engagement forced upon him: mutual consent, expressed or
implied, being necessary to every contract.

The second question is, Whether those who regularly signed the articles, or
were duly enlisted by parole-agreement before the vessel's crew was complete,
and against whom no breach of duty is alleged, but were turned on shore
against their will, and did not go the cruise, should have shares of the prize
taken in that cruise.

BUT this point has been so fully established in favor of the libellants, in
this court and in the court of appeals, that it cannot be controverted now.
Vide page 55.


THE third question is, Whether parties under the circumstances last mentioned,
being present, and suffering the marshal to sell and distribute after public
notice given, any prize or prizes in which they might have claimed an interest,
without filing their claim, or giving any notice to the marshal that they
intend so to do, ought not to be deemed such a wilful neglect, either against
the marshal, for not having reserved their shares, or against the captain, for
omitting their names in the return of his crew?

IN clearing up this point, it may be allowed, that so long as property remains
in the marshal's hands, subject to the disposal of the court, no length of time
should bar a legal claimant from recovering his right.

THE practice is, for the marshal, after he has made sale of a prize, to
advertise in the public papers for all persons having any claim therein, to
appear by a certain day and receive their distributive shares. If, after that
day, he should find any person's names in the list of the crew handed to him
who have not appeared in person, or by agent, he makes report thereof to the
judge, who, by virtue of a law of this state, will appoint an agent for such
absent persons. After which distribution is made and the accounts closed, and
lodged in the register's office.

NOW, if any should think themselves injured by the return of the crew,
inasmuch as their names have been omitted, and yet shall stand by and see the
whole of the property distributed, without applying to the court or marshal for
their shares, or giving any legal notice of their intention to make such a
claim, it seems to be a reasonable conclusion that they have voluntarily
abandoned their right. In the present case it is remarkable, that these very
libellants brought their suit two years ago for shares in the Gloucester, and
recovered, and yet from that time to the present they instituted no claim for
shares in the Lady Margaret, although this prize was, with respect to them, in
the same predicament with the Gloucester.

IT is very true there is no statute of limitations in the admiralty, but all
things must be limited by right reason. A strong argument ab inconvenienti may
supply the place and have the force of a statute. For, if there are indeed no
limits, how long shall the marshal wait for claimants to come in before he
shall proceed to distribution? Or if, after those who are legally entitled have
received their respective shares, they are to be for ever liable to be called
upon to refund, for the satisfaction of future latent claims, when shall they
presume that what they have got is really their own? But no reasonable apology
can be made for those who have knowingly suffered distribution to be made
without making their claim.

BUT it has been suggested, and is indeed within the view of the court, that
some part of the moneys arising from the sales of the Lady Margaret and her
cargo, may yet be in the hands of the late marshal. If so, I have no doubt but
that such of the libellants, as fall within the description of the second point
or question above stated, are entitled to their respective distributive shares
thereof.

BY these principles I have examined the situations of the libellants
respectively, which I have carefully ascertained by the articles of enlistment,
and the depositions exhibited. And I find, that Charles Marmet, Thomas Ashton,
Patrick Kean, James Hamilton, Patrick M'Daniel, John Crawford, James Galloway,
Patrick Mahoon, Peter Sherkes, William Cole, Edward Geiner, Enas M'Comer,
Edward Crow, George Brand, James Murray, Benjamin Lewis, Philip Jordan, John
Blaney, and Felix Hughes, are justly entitled. And thereupon I adjudge and
decree, that they have and receive a landsman's share each from Matthew
Clarkson, late marshal, of the moneys that may remain in his hands, from the
sales of the Lady Margaret and her cargo, or proportionable dividends thereof,
in case there should not be sufficient to satisfy the whole.

AND further I adjudge, that the bill in this cause, so far as has respect to
the claims of James Barney, George Stanton Richard Fair, Charles Keasley,
Joseph Ditz, and Daniel M'Farland, be dismissed.

AND lastly, I adjudge that the libellants pay the costs of this suit.

M'CULLOCH versus THE SHIP LETHE.
M'CULLOCH had shipped on board, the Lethe, in time of war, for a certain
voyage from Philadelphia to Bourdeaux, and back again, at the wages of L. 18
per month. The ship was detained long at Bourdeaux and whilst she was there,
peace took place. The libellant performed the voyage, but was refused the wages
on account of the peace, on a suggestion that the risk, which was the occasion
of the high wages being removed, the libellant ought to have only customary
peace wages from Bourdeaux to Philadelphia.

JUDGMENT, in favor of the libellant for wages agreeable to contract. See page
123.


BRICE AND WOODROFF versus THE NANCY.
THE libellants entered on board the Nancy in January, 1783, and signed
articles, acccording to custom, for a certain voyage to L'Orient, and back
again to the port of Philadelphia. Brice engaged to serve in the capacity of
first lieutenant, and Woodroff, as surgeon, to the ship, which was an armed
letter of marque. By these articles Brice was to receive L. 18 and Woodroff L
17. per month. At this time it was war between Great Britain and the United
States of America. The ship fell down the river in order to commence her
voyage, but from various causes of delay, did not clear the Capes, so as to
enter on the high seas, before the 20th of March following. In the mean time,
viz. on the 3d of March, peace had taken place, and hostilities ceased between
the belligerent powers.

WHEREUPON, it has been alleged in behalf of the respondents, that L. 5 per
month are the customary wages in time of peace, and a full recompense for
services for navigating a ship; that all above that sum is allowed in
consideration of the risk and dangers of war. That the consideration failing,
and no risk being incurred, as peace had taken place before the ship had
entered on the field of danger, the extraordinary wages ought to abate, and
that the libellants ought to be content with peace wages for services done in
time of peace.

ON the contrary, it has been urged, that the contract was duly and regularly
made: that contracts are sacred things, and ought to be taken entire, and
strictly construed: that contracting parties should not be admitted to explain
their intentions afterward, or recede from the terms, of their bargain, on
account of future contingencies, provided there was no fraud in the case: that
the performance of the voyage, and doing the duty on board, are the true
consideration of the wages: that whether these wages are high or low is a
matter that should have been considered when the contract was made: that as it
cannot be supposed, that if the danger had been greatly increased by the
arrival from an enemy's fleet on the coast, or from any other circumstance, the
owners would have allowed increased wages, neither ought they to diminish the
wages, because the danger happened to be lessened by the intervention of peace.
And lastly, that the voyage was actually commenced when the ship left the port,
although she remained long after in the river.

JUDGMENT.
THE advanced wages above what is customary in time of peace is in
consideration of the risk and dangers incident to war: in the present case it
is clear that both parties, when they made the contract, had war in view, as is
evident from the stations the libellants were to fill, viz. the one, that of
first lieutenant, and the other, that of surgeon of the ship, offices unknown
on board of merchantmen in time of peace. Whether it would indeed be peace or
war, was a circumstance out of the reach of the parties to command. Peace,
however, did take place, seventeen days before any risk whatever was incurred
on account of the war.

THE case of insurance cited from 3d Burrow's, p. 1237, is a leading case in
point. The contract there was regularly made between parties, more competent to
be strictly bound than common mariners, viz. the owners of a ship and the under
writers, and yet it was determimed by all the judges, that this contract ought
to be liberally construed; and that the insurance premium should be returned
for such part of the voyage as had ran no risk.

THE cause lately decided in this court, M'Culloch versus Lethe, has been
quoted; but there is a manifest and essential difference between that case and
the present. In the former, the libellant had actually incurred the risk, had
subjected himself to be killed in battle, or taken prisoner, which was the real
consideration of the war wages promised; in the present case no risk from war
was at all incurred: for, although much pains has been taken to show, that the
captain and crew of the Nancy, not having heard of the peace, had sufficient
reason to think that it was war when they sailed, and conducted themselves
accordingly; yet the question is not, what might have been their apprehensions,
but what was the reality of the danger, or whether it was indeed war or peace
at the time?

HAD this vessel advanced into the scene of danger, though but for twenty-four
hours before peace had taken effect, I should have no doubt in allowing the
libellants their full wages, according to the articles, upon the same
principles on which wages were decreed to M'Culloch.

THAT the common law doctrines respecting contracts do not apply in all their
strictness to cases maritime is evident from the constant practice of this
court. The enlistment of mariners have neither the complexion nor the
formalities required by the rules of common law; and it would be hard to bind
men so ignorant as common mariners generally are, to the legal construction of
terms, nor would it be for the interest of mariners, that articles should be so
strictly construed, as the operation would probably be frequently much against
them.

IT appears, that when the libellants entered on board the Nancy, it was actual
war, and that they held themselves in readiness to do the services, and
encounter the dangers for which the stipulated wages had been promised. It was
not their fault that the vessel did not forthwith proceed on her voyage. I see
therefore no reason against their being allowed full wages for that period, and
the common usage is to allow mariners their wages from the time of signing the
articles, let the vessel sail when she may.

I adjudge that the libellants have and receive their full wages, according to
contract, from the time of signing the articles, to the 3d of March last; and
that they receive customary peace-wages from the said 3d of March, to the
completion of the voyage.

SHAW versus THE LETHE.
THOMAS Shaw, the libellant, entered on board the ship Lethe, as surgeon, and
contracted to serve in that capacity from Philadelphia to Bourdeaux, and back
again, for the wages of L. 15 per month. It was then war, and so continued till
the vessel arrived at Bourdeaux: whilst she was there in port peace took place.
The libellant continued on board, and returned with the vessel to Philadelphia,
and now demands the stipulated wages of L. 15 per month, notwithstanding the
peace.

MUCH has been said respecting the entirety of contracts on the one hand, and
the divisibility of contracts, particularly those of insurance and mercantile
agreements, on the other.

IT has been urged for the libellant, that the voyage to Bourdeaux and back
again, must be considered as one entire voyage; and that if this vessel had
been insured, or chartered, there could have been no apportionment of the
premium or hire on account of the peace.

AGAINST this doctrine, the case of Stephenson versus Snow, 3d Bur. 1237, has
been cited, and fully considered. The case was -- a ship was insured for a
certain premium, to sail from London to Halifax; the insured warranting that
she should sail with convoy from Portsmouth. She arrived at Portsmouth, but the
convoy was gone. Whereupon a return of premium was demanded, deducting only the
customary insurance from London to Portsmouth. The entirety of contracts was
here urged against the insurers, but overruled by the whole court, who
considered the contract as divisible, and having reference to two distinct
voyages, viz. from London to Portsmouth, and from thence to Halifax; and
determined that as the risk of the second voyage had never been begun, the
premium for that had never inured.

THIS case appeared at first view to apply closely to the present; but, on a
nearer inspection, I find that the warrantee to sail with convoy was the ground
of that decision. It was that alone which rendered the voyage divisible,
because it was of the essence of the contract. Had the ship sailed without, and
been lost, the insurers would not have been answerable. Had she been insured
from London to Halifax, without any condition annexed, and had stopped in her
way at Portsmouth, and proceeded no further, the voyage would not, I apprehend,
have been deemed divisible on that account, nor the premium apportioned; so
that the warrantee to sail with convey was the foundation of the contract,
which failing, the contract failed, so far as the same had respect thereto. The
voyage from London to Portsmouth seems to be no more than a necessary passage
to the place where the substantial part of the contract was to take effect;
where the premium was to be earned by the commencement of the risk under the
condition specified.

BUT I find nothing parallel with this in the articles of the ship Lethe: no
contingency mentioned; but only a simple contract for a voyage to Bourdeaux and
back again, in consideration of certain services to be performed on the one
part, and certain wages to be paid on the other. If there is any similarity in
the two cases, it consists in this: that, as in the one, the sailing with
convoy was the ground of the quantum of the premium; so in the other, the war
was the ground of the quantum of wages. In the case referred to, the
contingency was fully recognized in the contract: the ship was warranted to
sail with convoy, but no contingencies are provided for in the Lethe's
articles. If the insured vessel had sailed with the convoy, though but for one
day, and returned, it cannot be supposed that any part of the premium would
have been restored.

THAT the mere arrival of a vessel at a port or ports cannot be construed as a
division of the voyage delineated by the articles, is manifest from a current
of law and practice: so it was determined in the case of Bernon versus
Woodbridge, Douglas, 753, and numberless charter parties, insurances, and
articles for mariner's wages have reference to circuitous voyages. Nor was it
understood, that a fortuitous increase or diminution of the risk, or any
alteration of circumstances between one port of destination and another, would
affect the contract, unless provided for by the terms of the agreement.

BUT it has been strongly urged, that the high wages promised, and the nature
of the service to be performed, have reference to war only; and that as peace
took place whilst the vessel was safe in port, the voyage, from the manifest
object of the contract, became divisible: and that it would be very hard to
bind the master or owners to the most severe construction of the articles, and
make them pay for services, which, from an unforeseen change of affairs, were
rendered impracticable.

ALTHOUGH there is an equitable force in this argument, yet, under the
circumstances of the case, there seems to have been an obvious duty on the part
of the master to have entitled him to an equitable relief from the binding
force of the articles. He should have proposed to pay off the crew at
Bourdeaux, and tendered a new contract on peace establishment, protesting
against the former articles. Nor is this a mere ceremony, but what substantial
justice seems to require. The mariners, under the articles, could not leave the
ship without incurring a penalty. If then they are detained on board without
any explanation, notwithstanding the great change of circumstances, they had
sufficient reason to conclude, that they were continued in the service upon the
terms of the subsisting contract: and this reasoning will well apply if the
case be reversed. Suppose the mariner had engaged in time of peace, and war had
broke out during the voyage, and he had made no declaration that he was
dissatisfied with the terms of his contract, or expected war wages in
consideration of the risk he was to run, I believe there are few masters of
vessels who would not urge his silence as an acquiescence in the continuation
of the contract, and bind him down to the terms of the original contract.

IT is so natural to expect some declaration of the will of contracting
parties, when circumstances out of the reach of either have occurred, which
totally alters the principles upon which the contract was formed, that an
omission of such declaration can have no other interpretation, but that of
wilful neglect or deep design, neither of which is the law disposed to
countenance. Hence, probably, arose the custom of protests, in cases of wreck,
illegal capture, fire, and other unforeseen and unavoidable accidents.

ONE other argument has been urged for the respondents, viz. that freight is
the mother of wages; inferring, that as this vessel received only peace freight
from Bourdeaux to Philadelphia, no more than peace wages ought to be allowed
for that part of the voyage.

IT does not appear in testimony what freight this vessel received: but if it
did, I see no force in the argument. There is, in fact, no connection between
freight and the quantum of wages; nor are the mariners ever privy to the terms
on which a cargo has been shipped. It is only a law of policy which
arbitrarily makes the payment (not the rate per month) of the wages to depend
on the safe conduct of the cargo, in order to induce the mariners to exert
themselves in case of wreck, to save as much as possible, knowing, that if the
whole be lost, they must lose the whole of their wages. If the freight is thus
called the mother, the service performed may well be deemed the father, of the
mariner's wages, that being the real and legal consideration. There is no doubt
but the mariner shall have his wages, in cases where no freight at all is
received; as in vessels sailing with ballast only, which often happens. The
truth is, the mariner's lien is on the ship, and not on the cargo. Nor, was it
ever known, that freight could be attached in the merchant's hands to answer
for mariner's wages, but the ship is liable uoder all circumstances.

I have not noticed the ship's going to Teneriffe from Bourdeaux before she
came to Philadelphia, as this circumstance, if it has any operation at all,
must be against the master, who ought not to benefit by his own deviation from
the articles.

AFTER mature consideration, I cannot find sufficient reason to give a
different decision now, from what was lately given in the case of M'Culloch,
against the same ship. The continuation of the libellant on board, after it was
known that peace had taken place, without any declaration of the master, that
he expected the terms of the contract should be changed, is too strong a
circumstance to be got over.

BUT, as I think it a hard case, I would recommend an appeal; that the law and
arguments may be again considered by another court.

JUDGMENT.
THAT the libellant receive wages agreeably to the contract; and that he pay
one half, and the respondent the other half of the costs of suit.

N. B. An appeal -- and the court of appeals confirmed the above sentence; and
gave the appellee costs of suit, and interest on his wages, from the date of
the decree in the admiralty.

(1784.) DRAY, and AL. versus THE COLLIER.
THIS vessel was attached under an act of assembly, allowing persons concerned
in building, repairing, fitting out, and furnishing vessels for a voyage, to
sue in the admiralty, as mariners sue for wages -- passed the 27th of March,
1784.

THE bill was dismissed, and the libellant adjudged to pay costs, on account of
the badness and insufficiency of the work done.

SILAS TALBOT versus THE OWNERS OF THE BRIGS ACHILLES, PATTY, AND HIBERNIA.
IN September, 1779, Silas Talbot, being on a cruise in the sloop Argo,
discovered, and pursued the brig Betsey, a British letter of marque, about 200
tons burden, armed with 8 six pounders, and laden with 214 puncheons of rum,
and one quarter cask, and bound from Montserrat or St. Christopher's, to New
York, then in the possession of the enemy. After an engagement of two hours,
Talbot captured the Betsey; put one West on board, as prize master, together
with eleven of his crew, with written orders to the prize master to take her
into the port of New London, then not far distant, for condemnation.

THE next day after the capture, the three brigs, Achilles, Patty, and
Hibernia, belonging to the respondents in this cause, came up with the Betsey,
under British colors. Captain Talbot taking them for enemies, was obliged to
leave his prize, and fly: whereupon one of the three brigs chased the Argo,
whilst the Patty fired upon, boarded, and captured the Betsey.

WEST, the prize master, finding them to be Americans, declared that the Betsey
was a prize of captain Talbot, in the Argo, then in sight, and showed Talbot's
written orders to him: but for fear of their claiming shares of the prize, as
having been in sight when she was captured, asserted, that she had been taken
three days before. The persons who boarded the Betsey having seen a battle the
day before, between a brig and a sloop, which they believed to be the same; and
observing that the number of men on board, corresponded with the number
registered in her British papers, concluded that no credit should be given to
West's declaration. Whereupon, a consultation was held by the three captains,
According to W -- D -- 's deposition.
who finally made prize of the Betsey, took out all the Argo's men, except one
negro, and putting their own people on board, ordered her for Philadelphia. But
she was soon after captured by a British cruiser, and carried into New York --
and so lost to all parties. The three brigs pursued their respective voyages;
taking the Argo's men with them, whom they left in Spain, and other remote
parts.

THE respondents have rested their defense on two grounds of argument: First,
they allege, that they have produced sufficient testimony to prove that the
brigs Achilles, Patty, and Hibernia, were within sight, when the Argo engaged
and captured the Betsey, and acquired thereby a property in the prize,
according to the maritime law: inferring, that as their interest in the booty
was much greater than that of the Argo, they being three to one, they had a
right to order the prize where they judged best for their security and benefit;
more especially as they had reason to doubt the fidelity of West, in whose
possession they found her, on account of the falsehood he had told them:
concluding, that if any injury was done to the libellant, it only amounted to
his proportionable share of the booty, for which alone they ought to be
answerable. Secondly, that many suspicious circumstances on board the Betsey --
such as the British papers, the number of men on board agreeing therewith, and
the declaration of West, that she had been captured three days before, contrary
to their own observation, were sufficient to induce them to conclude that the
whole was an artifice; and, therefore, the^ were justifiable in taking her as
original prize, and to consider themselves as the first captors.

THESE two positions of defense are supported by the testimony of W -- D --, a
passenger on board the Patty. This deposition, on which alone the respondents
have relied, labors for the establishment of two facts which are altogether
incompatible with each other, viz. first, that the three brigs saw the Argo
engage and capture the Betsy; and, secondly, that the Betsy had not been
captured at all, or, at least, that the captains of the three brigs had good
reason to think so, and were justifiable in taking her as original prize. One
only of these positions can be true: therefore, a testimony which labors to
establish both, may, at least, be said to prove too much.

THE fact best supported by the circumstances seems to be, that the three brigs
were in sight of the battle between the Argo and Betsy. What then was their
conduct in this point of view? The next day after the engagement, of which they
had been distant spectators, they come up under British colors; they find the
Betsy in the possession, and under the protection of the Argo, her captor; they
chase away the Argo, and fire on the prize under British colors; they board
her; take out all the people placed on board by captain Talbot; man her with
part of their own crews; give her in charge to their own prize-master, and
order her for Philadelphia. Could their having been in sight, the day before,
of the engagement between the Argo and the Betsy, justify such a procedure?
Surely it could not. Besides, it is manifest, that the rule of law respecting
vessels in sight of a capture does not refer to what may have been seen by the
claimants, but by people on board the prize: for the rule is founded on a
presumption, that the crew of the captured vessel, seeing others coming up
armed and prepared for battle, were thereby induced to surrender.

FURTHER, I can on no account admit the doctrine, now for the first time
advanced, and unsupported by any authority whatever, that captains, claiming a
share in the prize they may have seen captured, have a right to order the booty
where they please, by virtue of a majority of votes, or of their superior
interest in the captured property. Their claim must follow, and depend upon the
success of the real captor. Besides, in the present case, the libellant who
fought for, and alone took the brig Betsey, had at least some right in the
prize: the captains of the three brigs therefore, ought in justice, to have
left his prize-ma^er on board to prosecute the Argo's claim, which was not done.

UPON the whole, this seems to have been an act of such unjustifiable violence
and wrong, on the part of the brigs Achilles, Patty, and H^bernia, that I am
clear in deciding in favor of the libellant in this cause. And, having
carefully ascertained the value of the property lost, I find that a brig of 200
tuns, mounting eight six-pounders, with her tackel, apparel, furniture, and
prov^sions on board, was, in October 1779, worth L 3,500 0 0 214 puncheons of
rum, averaging 100 gallons each, at 10 s0 per gallon, 10,700 0 0 1
quarter-cask, 25 gallons, 12 10 0 L. 14,212 10 0 Total, L 14,212 10 0 But as
the brig Betsey had not yet arrived in port, and allowance should be made for
the risk she had to run, which appears to be worth 10 per cent. insurance,
amounting to 1421 5 0 Which being deducted, leaves L. 12,791 5 0

JUDGMENT in favor of the libellant for L. 12,711 5 0, with costs of suit. No
di^crimination was, in this cause, attempted to be made between the ^hree
captains of the brigs Achilles, Patty, and Hibernia: the princip^l facts were
attributed to all, and the judgment was general against the respondents.

THE cause was carried by appeal, to the court of appeals in prize causes
estab^^shed by congress; but the judges rejected the cause, conceiving t^ to be
a suit between citizen and citizen for damages merely, and therefore not within
their jurisdiction. The court was soon afterward dissolved on account of the
peace. The appellants then removed their cause to the high court of errors and
appeals for the commonwealth of Pennsylvania, where, after long arguments, as
well respecting the jurisdiction, as on the merits, a decree passed in favor
of Silas Talbot for L. 11,141 5 4, with costs.




DEAN, AND OTHERS, versus JOHN ANGUS CAPTAIN OF THE HIBERNIA
Judgment on a Plea to the Jurisdiction of the Admiralty.
IN a former suit in this court, Silas Tabot libelled and recovered against
Deans, Purviance, and Harbeson, as owners of the brigantine Hibernia, and also
against certain other persons, respondents in that cause, for a wrongful
capture on the high seas. From the decree in that cause, an appeal was made to
the high court of errors and appeals for this commonwealth, where a judgment
was finally obtained against the said respondents, to a considerable amount.
And now, Dean Purviance, and Harbeson, owners of the Hibernia libel against
John Angus, their captain, for satisfaction of the damages they have sustained,
in consequence of the wrongful capture he had made.

TO this libel, Angus has filed for answer, a denial of the wrong done, and a
plea to the jurisdiction of this court in the present cause: For this, viz.
that the contract between the said libellants, and him the said Angus, and also
the damage alleged to be sustained by the said libellants, if any there be,
arose upon the land, to wit, in Philadelphia, in the county of Phidelphia.

THREE acknowledged principles of law naturally present for the solution of the
present question.

1st. WHERE the original cause of action is exclusively of admiralty, or
exclusively of common law jurisdiction, all incidental matters necessarily
flowing from or dependant upon the first cause of action, shall follow the
original jurisdiction, whatever the complexion of those matters, separately
considered, may be.

2dly. WHERE the original cause of action is partly of common law, and partly
of admiralty jurisdiction, the common law shall be preferred.

3dly. WHERE the jurisdictions are concurrent, the suit may be determined in
either.

TO one or other of these principles must the present case apply: to ascertain
the jurisdiction by which it is to be tried, and the propriety of the
application depends upon this sole question, What is the original cause of
action in this suit?

IT is alleged in support of the plea, that this is a new action between the
owners of a vessel and their captain, and has no necessary connection with the
suit brought by Silas Talbot: that it is enough, if the respondent shows that
the decree past against the libellants, not as principals in the wrongful
capture, but solely on account of the maritime law, which makes owners
answerable for the misconduct of the captains they employ; and therefore their
connection with Angus, as captain of the Hibernia, must be considered as the
true cause of the damage they say they have sustained, and the source from
which the present suit originates. And so infer, that as this connection is
grounded on a contract express or implied, made upon land, the original cause
of action must, from its nature and locality, be exclusively of common law
jurisdiction.

THE two criterions of exclusive jurisdiction are, the subject matter, and the
locality of the transaction.

IT is not doubted, but that the question, prize or no prize? when it is the
foundation of a suit, is exclusively of admiralty cognizance from the subject
matter. The authorities to this point are too precise to admit of doubt. But
some of these authorities go further; and say, that the mere taking as prize,
and all matters dependant thereupon, are also peculiarly of admiralty
jurisdiction. Ld. Chapter Jus. Lee's opinion, in the case of Rous versus Hassard,
as cited by Lord Mansfield, and again cited by justice Willis, in the case of
Le. Caux versus Eden. Douglass, 581, is full to this purpose. The great
question was, Whether an action for trespass would lie for taking a ship as a
prize? Lord chief justice Lee, having called in two civilians to his
assistance, delivered the opinion of the court. That though, for taking a ship
on the seas, tresspass would lie at common law, yet when it was taken as prize,
though taken wrongfully, though it were acquitted, and though there was no
color for the taking, the judge of the admiralty was judge of the damages and
costs, as well as of the principal matter: and he laid it down as law, that, if
such an action was brought in England, and the defendant not guilty, the
plaintiff could not recover.

IT is clear by this authority, that in order to fix the admiralty
jurisdiction, it is not necessary that the question before the court should
precisely be, prize or no prize? but that a suit for costs and damages may and
must be brought in the admiralty for a taking as prize, though wrongfully done,
and even without any color for such taking, and, as it should seem from the
case, even though the property so taken should not be in the possession of the
court.

SO also, in the case of Lindo versus Rodney and Vaughan (Douglass, 592.) Lord
Mansfield, in giving the opinion of the court, says: A thing being done upon
the high seas, does not exclude the jurisdiction of the common law; for
seizing, stopping, or taking a ship upon the high seas, not as prize, an action
will lie, but for taking as prize, no action will lie. The nature of the
question excludes not the locality. And a little further on -- The end of
prize-court is to suspend the property till condemnation, and to punish every
sort of misbehaviour in the captors.

HOW it came to pass that the case of Silas Talbot was, by the court of errors
and appeals, and still is, by concession of council in the present cause,
considered to be not of admirality jurisdiction on account of the subject
matter, I am at a loss to conceive; especially when I look at the two only
points of defense taken in that cause, viz. first, that from the papers found
on board the captured vessel, and from other concomitant circumstances, there
was a reasonable color for taking as original prize. And, secondly, that if
the Betsy was indeed prize to Silas Talbot, the three brigs were in sight at
the time of the capture, and by the maritime law, acquired thereby an interest
in the property. I say, these pleas, together with the current of the testimony
then exhibited, and the time of the transaction, being time of war, all united
in fixing that cause within the admiralty jurisdiction, from the subject
matter, and the very nature of the case.

IT is in obedience to strong conviction that I thus venture to differ in
opinion from the judgment of the honorable court of errors and appeals: a
judgment which I am inclined to believe would not have taken place, but for the
peculiar situation of Talbot's cause. The court of appeals for the United
States, in prize-causes, had rejected the appeal, because the question was not
strictly, prize or no prize? but an action for damages between citizen and
citizen. That court, as I have understood, looked at that cause in no other
point of view, and therefore refused to take cognizance of it, and soon after
was dissolved. The appeal was then carried to the high court of errors and
appeals for this commonwealth. Here the proctors had made a previous agreement,
not to contest the point of jurisdiction; and so the cause came before the
judges on the merits only, and the court proceeded to sentence without
suspecting their jurisdiction. After sentence, however, some of the judges
began to entertain scruples respecting the jurisdiction of the court; and, on
enquiry, found that the jurisdiction had only been submitted to by consent. The
court well knew that consent could not give legal jurisdiction; and thereupon
retracted or suspended the sentence until an argument should be held on that
point: and the question of jurisdiction was again agitated. In the mean time,
that is between the rejection of the cause by the court of appeals for the
United States, and its introduction into the court of the commonwealth, the
case of Le Caux versus Eden, as reported by Douglass, with Lord Mansfield's
dissertion on admiralty jurisdiction subjoined, made their first appearance
amongst us, and furnished new ideas respecting the court of admiralty. Then,
for the first time, did the distinction occur, between the prize-court and the
instance-court of admiralty. Possessed of this idea, the judges of appeal for
the state, looked at the proceedings which the court of admiralty had adopted
in the case before them, and found they had been in personam, by attachment, to
answer for damages arising from a tort committed at sea. This, it was observed,
was never the practice in the prize-court, which always proceeded in rem, by
proclamation and monition, whether the property be in fact in the possession of
the court or not: and so it was in the case of the king versus Broom, Carth.
398. by proclamation at the Royal Exchange, although the prize taken had been
previously sold at Barbados. And for this error of form in the admiralty,
Talbot's case was considered as belonging to the instance-court. The judges of
apppeal considered themselves as an instance-court of appeal, and so proceeded
to the definitive decree.

HAD the court of admiralty, when Talbot's cause first made its appearance
there, been possessed of the light which has been since thrown upon this
subject, it is very probable that the process would have been conducted
otherwise than it was. It should be observed, however, that an exclusive
jurisdiction cannot be subverted by an erroneous process.

HOW far the consideration, that if the court of appeals for the commonwealth
should reject Talbot's cause (as the court for the United States had done) the
appellants would have had no other resource, and so have been deprived of the
benefit of an appeal altogether, might have operated to induce the judges to
take that within their cognizance as an instance-court, I will not presume to
say; but the peculiar circumstances of the case ought to be remembered: and I
have mentioned them on this occasion from a sense of the duty I owe to the
jurisdiction entrusted to my care.

I come now to consider the origin of the cause now before me, and whether it
is, or is not, necessarily dependant upon, and consequential to, the case of
Silas Talbot.

IT has been said, that this suit is derived from three circumstances, viz. the
contract by which Angus was made captain of the Hibernia, the wrongful taking
at sea, and the damages the libellants have been obliged to pay in consequence
of this contract and wrongful taking. And it has been urged, that as two of
these circumstances viz. the contract and the payment of damages, happened on
the land, the common law, by the second general rule, has the exclusive
jurisdiction.

IT appears to me, however, that owners are answerable for torts done by the
captains they employ, under a general principle of law, and not by virtue of
any special contract whatever. No such responsibility can be deduced from any
articles, or failing orders given to captains of vessels. The contract may be
the ground of an action of damages for a breach of orders, respecting the
particular interests of the owners; but in cases of tort the owners are
answerable by a general law. The libellants have been obliged to pay the
damages in Talbot's case, not because they employed captain Angus, but because
they were owners of the brigs.

NEITHER can I consider the payment of moneys, according to the decree in
favor of Silas Talbot, as the origin of the present suit. We should not stop
short in the train of causes. In such a train, every circumstance is the effect
of the preceding and the cause of the subsequent link. No decree would have
past, no damages have been paid, nor would the present suit have been
instituted, but for the original wrong done at sea. To this wrong, therefore,
we must have recourse for the source of the present action.

SOME pains have been taken to apply the case of ransom bills, charter parties,
and policies of insurance, all sueable at common law, to the present suit. A
ransom bill supposes a divesture of property by the rights of war, and the bill
is a promissory note for a certain sum, in consideration of the victor's
relinquishing his right of conquest, and restoring the property. In a suit,
therefore, on a ransom bill, the question of prize or no prize can only come in
incidentally, to show whether there was value received or not. For if the
taking was wrongful, the property never divested, and of course the promissory
bill was given without consideration. Charter parties, and policies of
insurance, are written contracts, executed on land, respecting certain specific
contingencies: it is immaterial where these contingencies shall happen. The
suit is founded on the binding force of the contract, and the contingencies are
only incidental circumstances, showing that the force of the contract is to
take place and operate. But these are not parallel with the case before the
court, wherein the libellants complain of damages they have sustained in
consequence of a tort committed at sea by the captain they had employed.

WHEN the case of Silas Talbot came first before this court, the libel was
filed in the name of Silas Talbot, qui tam, against the brigs Achilles, Patty,
and Hibernia, and against certain persons in the said libel named, as owners
and captains of the said brigs. All these persons (except two, if I rightly
remember) appeared either in person or by proxy, and entered into stipulations,
according to the practice of the court. In this form the suit commenced, and
proceeded through the admiralty, and through the court of appeals. The question
was general in both courts, viz. Whether there had been a wrong done? and if
so, whether the parties who appeared as respondents to the libel, were
answerable for the damage, and to what amount? And, finally, the decree was
also general -- That the appellants should pay to the appellee certain moneys
in recompense of the injury sustained. But how far any particular captain, or
the owners of any particular vessel might have justified themselves by a
separate defense, was never the subject of enquiry. No such specific
justification having been proffered in either court. And whether it is, or is
not now too late, to make discrimination, may be the subject of future
discussion: but I mention this to show, that the present libel rises out of
Talbot's case, and that its pursuit will unavoidably force us up to the
wrongful taking as prize for the origin of the present suit. Since then, I
cannot but consider the case of Silas Talbot, as properly belonging to the
prize-court of admiralty, and that the present suit originates from, and is a
supplementary part of that transaction, I cannot (according to the first
principle stated) but overruled the present plea to the jurisdiction of this
court.

I conclude with this observation -- That in all pleas of this kind, where the
law is doubtful, the leaning of the court will be in favor of its own
jurisdiction -- not from a desire of extending the admiralty cognizance, but
for this consideration -- That if the decision in favor of the jurisdiction
should be erroneous, the doors of the common law are open for redress, and a
prohibition may be obtained. But there is no remedy for the erroneous exclusion
of parties who apply for the process of the admiralty, the benefit of the laws
by which it is governed, and the summary justice it affords.

May, 1785.
DEAN, AND OTHERS, versus JOHN ANGUS. JUDGMENT ON THE MERITS.
THE bill filed in this case states, "That John Angus, being commander of the
brig Hibernia, belonging to Joseph Dean and others, did, on a certain day,
without any license, order, or authority, from his owners, and without any
probable cause of capture, with a view to his own private interest and
emolument, combine and confederate with certain malefactors, and did pursue and
take the brigantine Betsey, then in the possession of Silas Talbot, commander
of the sloop Argo, as lawful prize and booty of war. And that the said John
Angus, not being ignorant of the premises aforesaid, but well knowing the same,
and intending to deprive the said Silas Talbot of his prize, and to defraud and
injure, as much as in him lay, his owners, the libellants in this cause, did
cause the brigantine Betsey to be sent to places unknown, etc. whereby she was
lost, etc." -- "That for this cause, the said Silas Talbot did afterward file
his bill in this court against the said John Angus, and against his owners, the
present libellants, and also against certain other persons, in the said bill
named, for the wrong and injury done; and did, by the sentence and decree of
this court, recover against them the sum of L. 12,700:5:0 damages, with costs
of suit. Whereupon, an appeal was entered to the honorable the high court of
errors and appeals for this commonwealth; in the prosecution and final issue
whereof, the said Silas Talbot did recover against the appellants the sum of L.
11,141:5:4; of which sum the lilibellants in this cause were compelled, and did
actually pay, the sum of L. 4000: and also that they had expended the further
sum of L. 450, in defending themselves against the bill of the said Silas
Talbot, and in the prosecution of their said appeal. Whereupon, they ^w pray
judgment against the said John Angus* for reparation of the damage and loss
they have so sustained."

I have found it necessary to the determination of the present question, to
consider it under the three following points of view, viz.

First, How far the cause now before the court may be considered as connected
with, or determined by the decree in the case of Silas Talbot.

Second, UNDER what circumstances owners of vessels ought to recover against
the captains they employ for damages suffered in consequence of their
misconduct.

Third, THE specific circumstances of the present case, as they stand on the
testimony, or what is called the merits of the cause.

AS to the first point -- I can see no connection between this cause, and the
case of Silas Talbot, further than this; that as it originates in the same
transaction, viz. a taking as prize on the high seas, the jurisdiction is
thereby determined. In all other respects the two causes proceed on different
principles -- The points in view in Talbot's case were -- how far owners of
vessels were answerable for torts committed by the captains they employ? and
whether the taking in question was in fact such a tort as they ought to be
answerable for? The objects in the present case are -- Under what circumstances
owners may recover against their captains, and whether captain Angus was, or
was not, particeps criminis with the wrong doers in Talbot's case.

THE complexion of the two causes being thus manifestly different, it cannot,
with any reason, be admitted, that the testimony or decree, founded thereupon
in the former, should be conclusive in the present case. The decree, in
Talbot's case, was against certain persons, who by stipulations, had made
themselves responsible for the issue of that suit on general principles. It is
not inconsistent with the record of that decree, for captain Angus, who was not
one of those stipulants, and who was no party in that suit, to come in now and
make his defense, when personally called upon to answer, and to show that he
was not one of the wrong doers, against whom that decree was obtained.

ON the second point, viz. -- Under what circumstances owners of vessels ought
to recover against the captains they employ, for damages suffered in
consequence of their misconduct? It is consonant with reason and authority,
that captains are not answerable for losses arising from unavoidable accidents,
mere errors of judgment, or failure of success, after having exercised all
reasonable diligence and discretion. It would be very difficult, and at present
unnecessary to delineate the particular circumstances and kinds of misconduct,
which should render a captain responsible to his owners. Every case that occurs
must be judged of, by its own peculiar circumstances. The present libel states,
"That John Angus did, without any authority from his owners, combine with
certain malefactors, and without probable cause of capture, take the brig
Betsey, then in the possession of Silas Talbot, as prize and booty of war: and
that he did this, not ignorantly, but well knowing the circumstances, and with
a view to injure the said Silas Talbot, and also his owners, as much as in him
lay." If these charges are supported by testimony now before the court, there
can be no doubt, but that he ought to be answerable to his owners for whatever
they have suffered by his misconduct.

AND this leads to the third point, viz. -- The consideration of the specific
circumstances of the case, as exhibited by the testimony, or the merits of the
cause.

THE facts, so far as they respect captain Angus, appear to be in substance
these:

ANGUS sailed on a trading voyage from Philadelphia to Teneriffe, in the armed
letter of marque brig, Hibernia, in company with the brigs Patty and Achilles,
also letters of marque, and bound to some ports in Europe, under the commands
of captains Prole and Thompson. Angus had received written instructions from
his owners (the present libellants) to keep company with the two brigs as long
as he should think it prudent, and had their approbation to cruise with them on
the coast for two or three weeks, if they should so agree. Being at Reedy
Island, in the Delaware, a consultation was held between the three captains,
and Prole was appointed commodore of this little squadron. Soon after they had
got out to sea, they discovered a brig and a sloop at a distance. Prole, as
commodore, gave orders to chase, which was done. Prole and Thompson, under
British colors, came up with, and took the brig, b^t the Hibernia, being a
dull sailor, was left four or five miles astern. When she came up, captain
Angus enquired what the captured vessel was, and was informed by Prole, or
Thompson, that she was a good prize, bound from Montserat to New York. To which
Angus replied, that if the brig was prize, the sloop (then in sight) must be so
too: and asked why one of their fast sailing brigs did not pursue her? To which
it was answered, that they did not choose to leave the prize till she was well
manned; but ordered him to chase the sloop, which he accordingly did, for two
or three leagues; but finding he could not come up with her, he hawled his
wind, and beat up again for the other brigs, but did not reach them till dark.
Prole then sent a boat to Angus, demanding two of his hands to man the prize,
forwarding, at the same time, a paper for Angus to sign, which appears to have
been orders drawn up by Prole, and signed by him and Thompson, for the
prize-master, to whose charge they had committed the captured brig. Angus
hastily signed this paper on the binnacle, and sent the two men required. The
wind then blowing fresh, the sea running high, and night coming on, the four
brigs separated and saw each other no more.

FROM this detail, it is manifest, that Angus had no opportunity of acquiring
information of those circumstances which were the ground of condemnation
against the respondents in the suit of Silas Talbot. The assurance of Prole,
the commodore, that the Betsey was good prize, was, in the then situation of
affairs, sufficient to convince Angus that there was at least probable cause of
capture. And if the enterprise had been a successful one, which he had no
reason to doubt, Angus would not have been justifiable in neglecting any thing
on his part to secure to his owners a share of the Betsey taken, or to add
thereto, by endeavoring to take the sloop also.

THE only circumstance which has a direct tendency to criminate captain Angus,
is his signing the orders to the prize-master put on board the Betsey,
directing to "keep to the southward, for fear of falling in with the Argo:"
There are two ways in which this may very naturally be accounted for, neither
of which are in the least contradicted by the testimony, viz, that in the hurry
of the transaction, the boat waiting along side, the sea rough, and night
coming on, he signed these orders without reading them, having confidence in
those who had drawn them up and signed before him; or, according to his last
conclusion, "if the brig was prize, the sloop must be so too," he still
conceived the Argo to be an enemy, and therefore to be avoided by the
prize-master.

BUT, without having recourse to surmises, I am clearly of opinion that the
libel is not supported by the testimony; that is, there is not sufficient proof
that the respondent "did wilfully and knowingly, and without probable cause of
capture, join with others, in taking from Silas Talbot his prize and booty of
war."

IT is manifest, indeed, from the records of the court of appeals, that the
libellants have suffered considerable damage in consequence of this transaction
at sea. But, as they had embarked themselves in a suit with real wrong-doers,
and suffered judgment to go against them on general principles, without
attempting any separate defense, this is no reason why Angus should not bring
forward such specific testimony with regard to his own conduct as may exculpate
him from the charges laid in the present libel.

SOME stress has been laid on a passage in the deposition of W -- D --,
exhibited in Talbot's cause, tending to prove that Angus was not so ignorant of
the circumstances respecting the Betsey and Argo, as he pretends. The passage
is in these words: "Afterward, captains Prole, Angus, and Thompson, in the
presence of this deponent, consulted what they should do with the brig Betsey,
and being of opinion," etc. Whatever weight this deposition might have had in
Talbot's cause, it is inadmissible in the present; but I would observe that
this circumstance is not supported by any other testimony on the records of
this court: on the contrary, from the general history of the transaction, there
seems to have been no period of time in which Angus could have left his vessel,
or the other captains have been on board the Hibernia to hold this
consultation; W -- D -- must therefore have been mistaken. Indeed this is not
the only circumstance in which he is singular. For just before, he says, "The
brigs Achilles and Hibernia endeavored to speak her (meaning the Argo) but
could not come up with her. And, upon the said Church's saying, that captain
Talbot was not a man that would run from one of them if they would not both
chase, the brig Achilles then chased alone."

NOW, the whole current of testimony agrees in this, that it was the Hibernia
and not the Achilles that chased the Argo. And as I remember, in some stage of
Talbot's suit, it was urged as an aggravating circumstance against the owners
of the Hibernia, that their captain was employed in driving off the Argo,
whilst her confederates were plundering her prize.

THESE observations on W -- D -- 's deposition cannot directly affect the
present question, because that deposition is not an exhibit in this cause; but
I mention them, because if I could find any substantial ground that Angus was
indeed particeps criminis with Prole and Thompson, or that he knew, or had any
opportunity of knowing, the circumstances which should have prohibited them
from making that unfortunate capture, I should not be so clear as I now am in
adjudging

THAT the bill in this cause be dismissed, and that the libellants pay the
costs of suit.

THE libellants; appealed and after long argument, the court adjudged in June
1785, that John Angus should pay to the appellants, L. 948:15:10, with interest
thereon, from the 22d day of January 1785.

LIEBART, BAES, DURDEYN, and Co. versus THE SHIP EMPEROR.
THIS is a suit brought on a bottomry bond, given by John Walsh to the
libellants at Ostend, whereby he hypothecates the ship Emperor, of which he was
then the captain, for 4500 florins, equal to L. 409:1:9 sterling money of Great
Britain, advanced for repairs of the said ship. Whereupon James Oellers, the
owner of this ship, and others, his assignees, come in, and answer to the
libel, alleging that this bottomry bond ought not to take effect as an
hypothecation according to the maritime law.

THE power vested in a master of a vessel to impawn his owners ship or goods
for necessaries furnished in a foreign port, is a legal indulgence, founded on
the urgency of the case, and is for the general benefit of commerce.

THERE are few rules of law more strictly defined than this of hypothecation,
and none in which the reason and intention of the law are more manifest: it is
thus delineated.

"A master of a ship has no power to take up money by bottomry, in places
where his owner or owners dwell." "But when a master is out of the country, and
where he has no owners, nor any goods of theirs, nor of his own, and cannot
find means to take up by exchange, or otherwise, and that for want of money the
voyage might be retarded or overthrown, moneys may be taken up upon bottomry."
-- Molloy, book II. chap. ii. sect. 11." -- "And the money so taken up by the
master, is done upon great extremity, and that for the completing of the
voyage, when they are in distress and want, in some foreign parts." -- Sect. 12.

ALL the books agree in the spirit of this doctrine. The extreme necessity
appears every where to be the reason of the law, and the intention to favor
commerce. Let us now take a view of the present case. The leading facts appear
from the testimony exhibited, to be these:

THE ship Emperor, John Walsh master, belonging to James Oellers, of
Philadelphia, sailed for Ostend, with a cargo of tobacco on board: the ship and
cargo being consigned by the owner to Bine, Overman and Company, merchants at
Ostend. During the voyage the vessel was so much damaged by a storm at sea,
that the captain was obliged to put into Dover in England, in distress. From
Dover, the captain sent immediate notice of his situation to the consignees at
Ostend, and they speedily furnished him with a credit on London, by which he
raised money sufficient to refit the ship. After this he sailed from Dover, and
arrived at Ostend, where the consignees took charge of the ship and cargo.

BEFORE the vessel arrived at Ostend, Bine, Overman, and Co. had accepted bills
to a considerable amount, drawn upon them by Oellers, on the credit of this
consignment. Upon closing all accounts, Bine, Overman, and Co. found that
Oellers had not only drawn upon them to the full amount of the cargo and
freight, ("the tobacco not selling so well as was expected") but that there
remained a considerable balance in their favor. To secure this balance, they
tell captain Walsh that he shall not leave the port, unless he will repay them
the moneys advanced at Dover for repairs, or hypothecate the ship. It was not
in captain Walsh's power to do the one, that is, to repay the money, and he
declined the other proposal for some time: but finding expenses accumulating,
and that he could not sail without some accommodation, he at last consented to
hypothecate the ship. Bine, Overman, and Co. then recommended him to Liebart,
Baes, Durdeyn and Co. telling him that they would lend money on bottomry; and
conducted him to their house, where he executed the bottomry bond now in
question. But no money was paid to Walsh; for the bills for repairs at Dover
had been long since discharged by the produce of the credit on London.

AFTER this, Bine, Overman, and Co. permitted captain Walsh to sail, and in due
time he arrived at Philadelphia.

DURING these transactions, Oellers had failed, and assigned this ship to his
creditors; and the question now is -- Whether this bottomry bond shall operate
to the exclusive security of the merchant's at Ostend, against all other
creditors, as a genuine hypothecation would do, on the principles of the
maritime law?

AFTER a careful consideration of the circumstances of the case, I cannot
discover one real feature of that rule of law which should be the ground of the
present suit. True it is, that the ship was in necessity, and so is evey ship
that wants essential repairs. But the owner had credit within reach. The
consignees were not far distant. The application was easy and certain, and the
consignees no sooner heard of the disaster, but they furnished the means of
relief. In fact, Bine, Overman, and Co. had the strongest inducement to exert
themselves in getting the ship repaired at Dover, that she might get round to
Ostend; for they had made themselves answerable for Oellers's bills upon the
credit of this cargo. It was, therefore, of importance to them, that the cargo
should arrive safe to their hands. So that instead of advancing money to a
distressed stranger, they were only taking care of their own security. This
motive is manifest by their letter to Walsh at Dover; and still further by
their subsequent conduct: for after they had disposed of the cargo, and found a
balance due from Oellers to them, they insist that Walsh shall not sail,
unless he will hypothecate the ship to Liebart, Baes, Durdeyn, and Co. which
from all appearances seems to be the same thing as hypothecating her to
themselves: for the captain received no money from Liebart, Baes, Durdeyn, and
Co. who were not at all interested in the transaction, and whose names were
only made use of to save appearances. For Bine, Overman, and Co. well knew,
that being consignees, the captain had no power to hypothecate the vessel to
them. And, in order to give the bottomry bond the face of a genuine
hypothecation, they selected from the general account, the moneys spent for
repairs at Dover, and compelled the captain to hypothecate his ship, as for
those particular charges, to the libellants, who had not advanced one shilling
toward that expense.

FURTHER, if we look into the accounts, we shall find, that, although this
voyage was not a very successful one, yet the ship cleared all charges accrued
after she sailed from Philadelphia, even including the repairs at Dover. But
Oellers had drawn upon Bine, Overman, and Co. on the credit of the future
voyage, long before the ship sailed from Philadelphia, to raise money to fit
her out; and it is these drafts brought into account which make a balance due
to the consignees. So that, instead of an hypothecation made to enable a ship
to complete her voyage, it was, in fact, made to enable her owners to begin
one; which was never the object of the maritime law in cases of hypothecation.
Neither was this law ever designed to give partial advantages in mercantile
connections, or secure the balance of a running account between owners and
consignees, to the exclusion of other creditors.

THE importance of the present decision to the commercial character of our
country, has been strongly urged in favor of the libellants. But I am not
apprehensive on this account. The question in view is not to be determined by
any municipal law of the country, but by a general law, universally received
and understood. And I am of opinion, that our national character would be much
more likely to suffer by an adjudged precedent, which might open a door for
dangerous collusions, by putting it in the power of captains of vessels to
saddle their owners with unnecessary obligations, or to give an unfair
advantage to foreign creditors, by a fraudulent use of that pre-eminent lien
which the law lays on a ship and goods, properly hypothecated.

I do not mean to insinuate that there has been any fraud or collusion in the
present case. It is enough, that I do not find the claim of the libellants
within the spirit or intention of the maritime law: and, therefore, I adjudge,

THAT the bill be dismissed, and that the libellants pay the costs of suit.

FROM this decision there was an appeal to the high court of errors and
appeals. T^ cause was again argued there, but the judgment (...) ^he court of
admiralty was confirmed.

THE following notes, taken at the time, contain the substance of the judgment
given ^^ the high court of errors and appeals in the above cause.

THE court observed, tha^ the power of a master to hypothecate his owner's
ship* was a necessary, but sometimes a dangerous power -- the court was
unwilling to extend this power farther than the law strictly authorized -- a
genuine hypothecation ought to be the voluntary act of the master, at the time
when, and in the places where, the moneys were advanced for necessaries or
repairs -- the money advanced, ought to be solely on the faith of the
hypothecation, and not on any personal credit -- these are incontrovertible
principles -- the present case not applicable to them -- although the
hypothecation was made to Liebart, Baes, Durd^yn, and Co. yet it was to secure
moneys advanced by ^ine, Overman, and Co. the consignees -- No authority shown,
and no authority can be shown, because none ought to be, that an hypothecation
can be made to a consignee. Great mischiefs might arise if captains could
hypothecate to consignees; no authority produced to prove that an hypothecation
can be made in any port, but that in which a vessel first arrives after the
distress and damage sustained. Bine, Overman, and Co. did not repair the vessel
on the faith of the hypothecation; but this hypothecation was made to secure to
consignees the balance of a running account.

THE court is unanimous in confirming the sentence of the admiralty.

TURNBULL, AND OTHERS, versus. THE SHIP ENTERPRISE.
THE bill in this cause is filed by certain merchants against the ship
Enterprise, for the recoveries of moneys advanced by them to the captain of the
said ship in the port of Philadelphia, to fit her out for an intended voyage.
The ostensible or real owners, or some of them, being at the time of such
advancements within the state, and known to the libellants.

AND it has been urged in support of the libel, that every contract of the
captain for necessaries for a ship implied an hypothecation, and induces a lien
on the ship in favor of the creditor, sueable in the admiralty by the rules of
civil law: and the case principally relied upon as authority for this doctrine,
is cited from Cowper, p. 636.

THE case referred to, is a suit at common law, brought by a rope-maker against
the owners of a ship, for ropes furnished to the captain. The plaintiff having
charged Harwood (the captain) and the owners of the ship, for the ropes,
without naming, or even knowing who the owners were.

THE fact was, that the owners, according to the custom of the county of Essex,
in England, where they probably resided, had leased the ship to Harwood for a
term of years on certain conditions -- and the questions were, Whether under
these circumstances, Harwood was not both captain and owner during the term?
And whether the original owners ought to be responsible for debts contracted on
account of the ship, whilst in the possession of Harwood under the lease?

LORD MANSFIELD was of opinion, that neither the lease, nor the ignorance of
the creditor as to the names or persons of the owners, could exonerate them.
And to show that the owners are bound, he says. -- "Suppose the ship had been
impounded in the admiralty, and that had happened at the end of the term, the
owners could not have had their ship without paying the debt for which she had
been impounded."

BUT this case is brought into view chiefly because Lord Mansfield in giving
his opinion, observes, that the creditor had three securities for his debt,
viz. the person of the captain with whom he contracted the specific ship, and
the owners.

IT should be remembered, however, that this was a suit at common law; that the
owners, the ship, the captain, the creditor, and the contract, were all within
the realm. And there can be no doubt but that the creditor might have his
action at law, either against the persons of the contractors, or might attach
their property, the ship, for his debt.

BUT this case has no reference whatever to the the maritime or civil law. The
doctrine of hypothecation is never once mentioned, nor is the contract of the
captain at all placed upon that ground. The principle object was to determine
whether the lease of the ship did not exonerate the lessors during the term.

SO in the case cited from Vezay. p. 154. This also was purely a common law
process; wherein the parties, and the whole transaction, appear to have been
infra corpus comitatus. "Certainly, says the lord chancellor, by the maritime
law, the master has power to hypothecate the ship during the voyage, and from
the necessity of the case; but it is different where the ship is infra corpus
comitatus, and the contract made by the owners or masters on land, and not
arising from necessity, then the laws of the land must prevail." And this is
consonant with the whole current of authorities respecting a maritime
hypothecation, viz. that it must be made during the voyage, and from the
necessity of the case.

WHEN money is borrowed on the ship before the voyage is begun, the ship is not
answerable in the admiralty -- 1st Raym. 578. So in 2d. Raym. 982. in the ^ase
of Johnson versus Shippen, chief justice H^lt says -- "If a ship be
hypothecated before a voyage begun, that is not a matter within the
jurisdiction of the admiralty; for it is a contract made here, and the owners
can give security to perform the contract."

IT appears then to be a settled doctrine, that a ship cannot be hypothecated,
according to the maritime law, before the voyage is begun, or in places where
the owners reside, even for those necessaries without which the ship could not
proceed to sea. The law means to favor the completion, not the commencement of
a voyage.

FOR this reason the legislature of Pennsylvania has, by a special act, given
to the artificers, who build or repair, and to those who furnish necessaries to
fit out a ship for sea, a lien on the vessel sueable in the admiralty before
the voyage is begun, because the maritime law does not extend to their security.

SINCE then, it appears that the advance of moneys to fit out the ship
Enterprise, was made before the commencement of her voyage, and not from
necessity, and that the captain, the owners, or some of them, and the
contractors were all within the state at the time of the transaction; and as
the suit is not brought under the act of assembly of the 27th of March, 1784, I
cannot admit this case to be of admiralty jurisdiction, and therefore I adjudge

THAT the bill be dismissed, and the libellants pay the costs of suit.

August, 1785.
EDWARD FORBES versus THE BRIG HANNAH: ANDREW HODGE, RESPONDENT.
EDWARD FORBES of Dublin, in Ireland, has libelled against the brig Hannah, for
the amount of certain bonds of bottomry, which Francis Lewis, then captain and
principal owner of the vessel, gave as security for moneys advanced by Forbes,
in the port of Dublin, for necessaries, as it is said, for the said brig, and
to enable her to complete her voyage.

THE circumstances of this case appear from the testimony to be these:

FRANCIS LEWIS, principal owner of the brig Hannah, had chartered her to one
Varlo, for a voyage from some port in America to Dublin in Ireland. Varlo
himself went passenger with his goods, and Lewis was captain for the voyage.
After their arrival at Dublin, Lewis borrowed money of Forbes, at three several
times, for which he gave three bonds of bottomry on his brig, amounting, with
premium and charges, to L.214:0:8 sterling money of Great Britain. Forbes then
put a cargo on board the brig, in which it seems that Lewis was concerned, as
he was to have one-half of the nett profits of the adventure, exclusive of
freight, and to be answerable for one-half of the loss, if any there should be,
on the sales. Lewis left Dublin with his cargo, bound for Boston in America. It
does not appear whether ever he arrived at Boston, or what he did with his
cargo; but in April last he brought the brig into the port of Philadelphia, at
which time some of his mariners sued in this court for wages due, and the brig
was attached and condemned for those wages, a mounting to L.29, Lewis making no
plea of defense against the libel. In consequence of this libel and sentence, a
writ issued to the marshal, in the usual form, directing him to sell the brig
Hannah, with her tackle, apparel, and furniture, or such parts thereof, as
might be necessary, to satisfy the decree in favor of the ma^ners, together
with the charges and costs of suit. But Lewis requested the marshal to sell the
whole of the vessel, with her tackle, etc. under the decree, and even endorsed
this request on the writ of sale. And to show that he was the sole owner of the
brig at that time, he exhibited to, and lodged with the marshal, an assignment
or bill of sale from one Simpson, who had been a part owner, of all his
interest in the brig, to Lewis.

ANDREW HODGE, respondent in this cause, purchased the vessel at the marshal's
sale, and paid down the full consideration money, out of which the marshal
deducted the mariners wages, with charges and costs of suit, and paid the
balance to Lewis as sole owner. After this, Lewis went off without saying any
thing of the bottomry bonds he had given to Forbes in Dublin. And now these
bonds have come over, and Forbes has attached the brig in the hands of Hodge
the purchaser.

ON these circumstances, two questions have arisen, viz.

First, WHETHER these bottomry bonds have hypothecated the vessel, according to
the rules of maritime law, so as to bring the cause within admiralty
jurisdiction?

Secondly, SUPPOSING it to be so, whether the sale and purchase, under the
authority of this court, have not vested the property in the respondent,
exonerated of all prior engagements?

TO determine the first point, it will be necessary to consider the
characteristic marks which distinguish an hypothecation, according to the
maritime law, from a common bottomry bond or mortgage, according to the custom
of merchants, cognizable by the common law.

BY the maritime law a master of a ship has no power to take up money by
bottomry in places where his owners dwell; but when he is out of the country,
and where he has no owners, or any goods of theirs, or his own, and cannot
find means to take up, by exchange or otherwise, and that for want of money,
the voyage might be retarded or overthrown, moneys may be taken up on bottomry.
Molloy. B. II. Chapter xi. Sec. 11.

FROM this it appears, that the true grounds of a maritime hypothecation are
the necessity of the case, and the want of personal credit. Wherever this
doctrine occurs in the books, these two circumstances are strongly pointed at.
Thus, in 3d. Mod. 244, "The reason of the civil law, which allows the pawning
of a ship for necessaries upon the high seas, seems to be plain, because there
may be an extraordinary and invincible necessity to which the admiralty
jurisdiction is limited: for if the law should be otherwise, the master might
take as much money as he will." And so the court, in that case, ordered a trial
on the necessity.

SO also, in Bridgeman's case -- Hob. 12. a prohibition was granted, because
the impawning was not shown to be occasioned by necessity.

IN 1st. Magens, there is a report of an admiralty suit on a bottomry bond, at
the conclusion of which, p. 329. the author says, "Persons living in sea ports
may learn from this case, not to believe or trust too easily a captain they do
not know; and when they propose benefiting themselves by lending money on
bottomry to such whose distresses oblige them to seek it, the lenders, for
their own satisfaction and security, ought to have proofs given that there was
a necessity for such an advance, and that the money had actually been employed
for the purposes alleged."

FURTHER, the impawning must be in foreign parts; that is, where neither the
owner, nor master has any personal credit: for this constitutes an essential
part of the necessity -- "The master can have no credit abroad but by
hypothecation." Salk. 35. -- "Where a ship in distress is forced into any port
where her owners have no correspondents to supply the master with the money
necessary to enable him to prosecute his voyage, he may take it on bottomry
from those will advance it on the easiest terms." 1st. Mag. 27.

THE reason is, the maritime law requires, that the moneys should be lent
solely on the credit of the ship, and that the security of the lender should
depend altogether on her safety: and therefore, if she be well engaged, that is
according to the principles stated, she shall be for ever obliged till
redemption -- Molloy book II. chapter ii. sec. 15. And therefore also, because of
the hazard, an unusual interest is allowed on the moneys advanced.

SUCH are the principles which designate a maritime hypothecation within
admiralty jurisdiction.

BUT bottomry bonds may be given by owners for security of mercantile or other
debts; and these may be executed either in places where the owners dwell, or in
foreign parts, by their order. They may be formed under a variety of
circumstances, and depend on many contingencies, according to the conditions or
terms of the deed or contract.

IT should seem by the necessity, so frequently urged as the ground of a
maritime hypothecation, that the ship should be driven by distress into some
other port than that of her destination; or, at least, that some extraordinary
casualty should occasion an unforeseen and inevitable expense in the port of
her voyage. Because it is hardly to be supposed, that an owner would send his
ship, much less that he would take her himself, to a place where he could not
command either money or credit for ordinary repairs and supplies.

IN the present case it does not appear, nor has it been suggested, that any
extraordinary circumstances occasioned an unforeseen necessity. The captain
(Lewis), who was also principal owner, arrives after a prosperous voyage at the
port of destination with his freighter on board. Here the voyage is completed,
and it may be presumed that he there received his freight. If so, he could not
be without money sufficient to refit his vessel for a new voyage. And that he
was not without personal credit is manifest, because Forbes entrusted him with
a new cargo, and agreed to allow him 35 s0 Irish money per ton for freight on
all the goods he should deliver: and also one half of the nett profits arising
from the sale of the cargo, he to run one half of the risk of loss. This
mercantile connection shows at least that Lewis was in some credit with Forbes.

BESIDES, if we look into the accounts, we shall find the first article charged
is L. 32:5:6 sterling paid to Varlo, by Lewis's order, to take up and cancel a
former bottomry bond. It seems strange that Lewis, after navigating Varlo and
his goods across the sea, should fall in his debt. This circumstance is not at
all accounted for. But be it as it may, Forbes should certainly have forwarded
his former bottomry bond, with an account of the occasion and expenditures for
which it was given, that a judgment might have been formed whether it was a
proper hypothecation or not: or have shown that the brig was under condemnation
of the admiralty at Dublin on account of that bond; and that the L. 32:5:6 was
paid for her redemption.

UPON a view of the circumstances of the present case, I do not find them such
as the maritime law requires to constitute a genuine hypothecation within
admiralty jurisdiction. This point being conclusive, it is unnecessary to
determine on the second general question.

I adjuge that the bill in this cause be dissmissed; and that the libellants
pay the costs of suit.

MANUEL SAGAS DE CANIZARES versus THE SANTISSIMA TRINIDAD. JUAN JOSEPH DE
AGUIRE PEREZ, Respondent.
THE libel in this cause states two separate claims of Canizares, the
complainant, against the brigantine Santissima Trinidad: the one founded on an
hypothecation of the said vessel, made by the then captain to Santiago Cupisono
at Havannah, for two hundred dollars advanced by the said Cupisono for
necessaries for the said brigantine, as it is said, and to enable her to
prosecute her voyage; which instrument of hypothecation is endorsed or assigned
over by the lender to the present libellant: and the other, founded on a
written contract between Narisco Sanchez y Serna, then captain of the vessel,
and Canizares the libellant, respecting the wages he should receive for serving
as pilot and mariner on board the said brigantine in her voyage from Havannah
to Philadelphia. As these claims arise from different contracts, it is manifest
that they must be separately considered.

TO determine on the force of this instrument of bottomry, I shall first state
the circumstances necessary to a genuine hypothecation, according to the
maritime law; and then take a view of the history of this vessel's voyage, and
her situation at Havannah when Cupisono advanced the money in question.

AS to the first, I have had occasion in three former suits in this court, to
state the law of a maritime hypothecation, and have not since found reason to
alter my opinion of the principles on which those causes were decided. The
causes to which I refer were Liebart, Baes, Durdeyn and Co. against the ship
Emperor, Turnbull against the ship Enterprise, and Forbes against the brig
Hannah. I can only now repeat the substance of what was then observed.

[ Here the judge recapitulated the doctrines advanced, and the authorities
cited, in the cases referred to.]

I shall now state the history of the voyage of this brigantine, as the same
may be deduced from the testimony.

IT appears that this vessel had been chartered on account of the king of
Spain, and was to sail from Philadelphia to Carthagena with a cargo of flour
which was to be sold there, and a cargo of dyewood purchased and brought back
to Philadelphia, or some port of the United States. Such was the designated
voyage; but it seems the captain, instead of returning to Philadelphia from
Carthagena, went to Jamaica with an adventure of his own; to what amount does
not appear: that at Jamaica he purchased dry goods fit for the Havannah market,
and then took the brig to Havannah, where he disposed of the goods he had
bought at Jamaica upon his own account: that at Havannah he borrowed two
hundred dollars of Cupisono, and executed the instrument called the
hypothecation, to engage the vessel and her freight for this sum: that part of
this money was expended in paying wages to the mariners, and part in supplying
them with fresh provisions: that the vessel was refitted at the king's arsenal,
and at the expense of the intendant: and that she sailed for, and arrived at
the port of Philadelphia.

I agree with the council for the libellant, that the validity of an
hypothecation ought not to depend on the regularity of the captain's conduct
with respect to his owners, previous to the time of his arrival in a foreign
port, and borrowing money for the relief of the ship's necessities; and will go
further, and say, that neither* ought it to be affected by the captain's
subsequent conduct; provided the lender was in no wise privy to, or knowingly
assistant in his obliquities.

IT has been urged on the other side, that the law of hppothecation was
designed solely for the benefit of the owners, and an inference drawn, that if
it can be shown, that the owners of a vessel have not been benefited, but
injured by the captains conduct, and consequent hypothecation, it ought not to
be allowed. But this law has for its object the good of commerce in general.
And no stranger would lend money on hypothecation if his lien on the ship was
to be invalidated by some future proof that the voyage was irregular, or that
the captain had deviated from the orders of his owners, and injured their
interest, either before or after the hypothecation made.

BUT where shall we find, in the present case, that necessity which should
justify the captains conduct, and be the ground of a genuine hypothecation?
This vessel was chartered for the use of the king of Spain by his agent: the
cargo on board was on the king's account, and she arrives in a lea^^^ and
disabled condition in one of his Majesty's ports, where he had an ^fficer
stationed. This officer, the intendant, orders the vessel to the public
warehouse to be discharged, and then round to the king's arsenal to be
repaired; all which was done at the king's expense. In truth, I cannot conceive
a case of less necessity, or one wherein a more certain and able relief could
be depended upon.

BUT it is said, that there were considerable delays before the intendant
interfered; and that the captain was obliged to send in five or six memorials,
and in the mean time the mariners were in great want of wages and fresh
provisions; and that in this necessity the captain applied to Cupisono for two
hundred dollars, who refused to lend them unless the vessel should be
hypothecated for his security.

IT is in testimony, however, that this money was lent by Cupisono before the
captain had made any application to the intendant, and therefore, the neglect
of the intendant could not have occasioned the necessity of borrowing from
Cupisono: that the captain of a vessel in the king's service, and in one of his
majesty's ports, should not find credit for a few days provisions until the
proper officer could be applied to, is too incredible to be seriously admitted:
still less can it be a legal ground for an hypothecation, that the mariners
must have wages paid to them in a place where it does not appear that any wages
were due; nor is it probable that any could be due, because this was neither
the conclusion of the voyage, nor even a port of delivery.

THE money ought to have been lent solely on the faith of the hypothecation and
not on any personal credit: but here was a strong and well founded credit; for
it is in the proof that Cupisono knew that this vessel was chartered for the
king's service; and it is expressly said, that the money was borrowed to pay
wages and procure fresh provisions -- " until money could be had from the
intendant."

FURTHER, in the quotation from Molloy B. II. chapter xi. sec. 11. it is said --
"When a master is out of the country, and where he has no owners, nor any
goods of theirs, nor of his own." -- Now it is confessed that the captain had
goods of his own, and, as it should seem, to a considerable amount, since it
was sufficient to induce him to violate his duty to his employers, in taking
the vessel, contrary to their orders, on a trading voyage to Jamaica for his
own benefit; that at Jamaica he bought goods suitable for the Havannah market,
and actually sold them at the Havannah though contraband; and that Cupisono,
the lender, was privy to these circumstances. So that instead of the lender's
having the vessel alone to look to for his security, he had two substantial
personal credits to depend upon, viz. the intendant, from whom he might
reasonably expect repayment of moneys advanced for the use of a vessel in the
king's employ; and the captain, whose property he might have attached before he
left the island, if satisfaction was not made. This circumstance alone, that is
to say, Cupisono's knowledge that the captain had property of his own on the
spot, sufficient to answer the present exigencies of the vessel, would have
invalidated the bond as a maritime hypothecation, inasmuch as it removes that
necessity which the law requires.

THERE is a circumstance in the present case, which although not in itself
conclusive, forms too striking a feature in the transaction to pass unnoticed.
A singularity in a maritime hypothecation is, that the law allows an
extraordinary premium or interest to the lender, to any extent, according to
the risk to be run* because, if the ship should be lost, the money lent is lost
with her. But here, a stranger lends two hundred dollars to a captain in
distress without even stipulating for common legal interest for the use of his
money: I say, this alone might not be conclusive against the hypothecation,
because a man may be as generous as he pleases; but in connection with the
other circumstances, it gives room for suspicion, that the engagement of this
vessel to Cupisono was not made within the rules or spirit of the maritime law.

FOR the above reasons, I adjudge that the bill in this cause be dismissed, so
far as the same has respect to a claim of two hundred dollars, said to have
been lent on the credit of the brigantine Santissima Trinidad.

I am now to consider the libellant's demand of wages for serving as pilot and
mariner on board this vessel from Havannah to Philadelphia.

THIS claim for wages, amounting to L.87:5:0, is founded on a written contract
made at the Havannah between Narisco Sanchez y Serna, then captain of the
vessel, and Canizares the libelant. Copy of the Account annexed to the Libel.

"The brigantine Santissima Trinidad, to Manuel Sagas de Canizares, Dr.
1788. Dec. 19. L. s. d. To cash lent in Havannah to captain Narisco Sanchez y
Serna, commander of the said brigantine, by Santiago Cupisono, 75 0 0 To 5
months and 19 days wages, from July 1, to Dec. 19, at 7 l. 10 s. 42 5 0 To 3
months pay, agreeable to contract, 22 10 0 To his passage to Havannah, 22 10 0
162 5 0 Received in Havannah 2 months advance, 15 0 0 147 5 0 To 1 month's
boarding Mr. Canizares has been obliged to find, 5 12 6 1^2 17 6


BUT it has been contended, that as this agreement is in writing, and bears a
seal, and is not, according to the terms thereof, in the usual way of agreeing
for mariners wages, it becomes a special contract, and is not properly of
admiralty jurisdiction.

ITS being in writing, however, is no more than a testimony or memorandum of
the agreement made, and does not affect the jurisdiction of this court. What is
called a seal appears to be nothing more than a printed stamp, for which a duty
is paid to the crown: certainly it is not the seal of the parties, or of either
of them. But, as to the terms of the contract, these are indeed out of the
usual course, and deserve consideration.

ONE of the reasons for allowing mariners to sue in the admiralty is, that the
debt arises from services performed, or to be peformed at sea, and a lien on
the ship given to them for their security, because the contract they make is
supposed to be on the credit of the ship.

NOW, although the wages of twenty dollars per month, promised in the present
case, appear to be extravagant, yet, as the difficulty of getting a person
qualified to serve both as a skilful pilot and able mariner might have been
great, I think the rate of wages per month ought to be allowed as contracted
for. But I cannot, upon any principle, allow that a captain has a power to
bind his owners and their vessel to the payment of a mariner's wages for three
months after his discharge, and after all services at sea and elsewhere have
ceased. If he could legally do this for three months, why not for six or
twelve; or even saddle his owners with an annuity for life to a mariner for a
few weeks actual service? How far the common law might consider this contract
as binding on the captain personally, it is not my business to say; but as
judge of admiralty, I shall be far from doing my part toward establishing a
precedent by which captains, in addition to the great power they necessarily
have over the property of their employers, may have that of obliging them to
the payment of unlimited sums for an unlimited time. The captain might have
engaged for his owners to pay wages per month during the service, or a specific
sum for the run to any amount justifiable by the circumstances and necessities
of the case; but to bind the owner to periodical payments to a mariner after a
total discharge from the service, is what I believe no captain of a vessel ever
before attempted. For whether this was to be paid all at once, or at three
several times, it matters not; the contract is for three months wages after
discharge.

THERE is another claim under this contract for sixty dollars to take the
libellant back to Havannah on being discharged here.

THE maritime custom is, that if a master or owner discharges a mariner in a
foreign port, before the completion of the voyage for which he engaged, some
reasonable allowance shall be made, over and above the wages due, to enable him
to return to his own country, or go to the port, which by the articles, should
have completed the voyage; and this allowance is usually the amount of one
month's wages: and it is a reasonable custom, where the mariner is willing to
perform articles and finish the voyage, but the master or owner thinks fit to
discharge him sooner for their own convenience, and without just cause of
complaint against the mariner. Therefore this part of the contract before us is
consistent with maritime custom, but certainly unreasonable as to the sum
promised.

WHATEVER power a captain may have by law to bind his owners by contracts made
abroad for the services of the ship, yet he cannot oblige them beyond what is
usual and customary, without showing that the unusual charge, arose from the
necessity of the case. The present charge is expressly made for conveying the
libellant back to the Havannah: I have therefore enquired what is the usual
charge for a passage from the port to the Havannah, and find that forty dollars
is an ample and generous allowance.

FRAUD and collusion between the captain and Canizares the libellant, have been
suggested, but not proved: yet if I had not found that this cause might and
ought to be determined on general principles, there are two circumstances in
the case which would have induced a more strict enquiry into the captain's
conduct. The one, which I have already noticed, is Cupisono's lending money on
hypothecation without security, or even asking for common interest, which,
though a possible, is not a usual occurrence. The other is a contract between
the captain and Canizares, which concludes with these remarkable words -- "Each
(that is the original and copy) having the same strength as if they had been
executed before a notary public at Havannah." The question naturally occurs,
and why was not this contract executed before a notary public at Havannah? An
honest captain, who is reduced to the necessity of binding his owners to hard
and usual terms, would at least take care that nothing should be wanting in
point of form and public notoriety to justify his conduct. And, besides, I
suspect that this contract, which bears? printed seal or stamp, could not be
legally execu^^^ according to the regulations of the maritime laws and customs,
but in the presence of a notary or some public officer. But it was not
necessary to clear up these appearances, as the cause may be decided on other
grounds.

UPON the whole, I adjudge and decree, that Canizares, the libellant, have and
receive from Juan Joseph de Aguire Perez, the respondent, the sum of 112
dollars and 60-90ths of a dollar, equal to L. 42:5, Pennsylvania currency: that
is to say: For 5 months and 19 days wages, from July 1st, to Dec. 19th, at 20
dollars per month, L.42 5 0 For his passage to Havannah, 15 0 0 From which
deduct 40 dollars paid in advance at Havannah, 15 0 0 There remains L. 42 5 0

WITH respect to the L. 5:12:6 added to the account, and charged for a month's
boarding, I shall take no further notice of it, than to observe, that it is
neither mentioned in the libel, nor supported by any voucher or testimony.

FINALLY, I adjudge that the libellant pay one half, and the respondent the
other half, of the costs of suit.

JOHN SMITH versus WILLIAM LEARD.
THE question was -- Whether the person of the captain could be attached in the
admiralty, in a suit for mariners wages; or whether the mariner must look to
the ship alone for his security? In the present case, the ship was not in port.

AFTER argument, it was determined, that the captain was personally answerable.
3d Ba. 593; 1st Salk. 33; 1st Molloy, 355, 356.

PAUL ANDERSON, and AL. versu^ JAMES FORBES, LATE MASTER OF THE DOLPHIN.
THE case was -- The libellants engaged in the year 1782, with James Forbes,
then captain of the ship Dolphin, for a mercantile voyage from Philadelphia to
the Havannah, and back again; for which they were to receive, not monthly
wages, but a stipulated sum, to be paid them at the Havannah. Whilst the ship
was at Havannah, the Spanish governor of Cuba had projected a military
expedition against the island of New Providence, and offered considerable
emoluments to such Americans in port as would enter their vessels in the
Spanish service, for this expedition: viz. 10 dollars per ton for their
vessels, and a gratuity of 700 dollars to each captain. Forbes, after paying
his crew the stipulated sum for the original voyage, proposed to them this new
expedition: an expedition not known, or thought of, at the time of the first
contract, and of a nature entirely different from the service for which they
stood engaged to the ship. The mariners declined this proposal, unless informed
what recompense they were to have for their time and hazard in this new
service. Whereupon Forbes assured them of at least 20 dollars per month to each
man, and hinted further emoluments from the Spanish government. Thus assured,
the mariners entered on the service, and afterward sailed with the Spanish
fleet, and were present at, and assistant in, the siege of New Providence.

THE only question seems to be, whether a contract expressly made shall be
fulfilled or not?

WHEN the Spanish governor agreed to give 10 dollars per ton for American
vessels, and a gratuity of 700 dollars to each captain, he certainly expected
that such vessels should be properly manned, and fitted for the service.
Captain Forbes knowing this, and knowing also that the proposed service could
not, by any construction, be considered as a part of the original voyage for
which the mariners had contracted, enters upon a new treaty with them. Suppose
these mariners had rejected the proposed expedition, the captain could not have
compelled them to go, but must have engaged other seamen for the purpose. And
there could have been no doubt but that the crew should be paid according to
contract. The present libellants are precisely in the situation the new crew
would have been in, and are equally entitled.

AS it is in testimony, that the libellants were at least two months in the
Spanish service, I adjudge, that they have and receive from the respondent,
fifteen pounds each; and that the respondent pay the costs of suit, except such
part of the said costs as may have accrued by the taking certain depositions,
which were not admitted as evidence, which costs the libellants are to pay.

June, 1786.
CHARLES MORAN versus ALEXANDER BAUDOIN.
THE libel in this cause states -- That Charles Moran, the libellant, entered
on board the ship l'Heureux, at Nantz, in France, on the 23d day of October,
1786, under an engagement for a voyage from the said port of Nantz to New
Orleans, in the Missisippi; from thence to go to Martinique, and from thence to
return to France: that Alexander Baudoin, the captain, had totally altered this
voyage by repeated deviations, whereby the contract was broken, and thereupon
the libellant prays a discharge, and the amount of wages due.

THE circumstances of this case, appear by the testimony, to be these:

THAT this vessel sailed from Nantz, October 3d, 1786: that the marines
understood, and were informed, that this voyage was to be from Nantz to New
Orleans; thence to the West Indies, and thence back to Nantz, or to some port
in France; and that it would continue from 10 to 15 or 16 months: that under
this expectation, the mariners were registered at the proper office at Nantz,
according to the manner of registering seamen in France: that instead of
pursuing this voyage, as designated to them, they were taken three times to New
Orleans, twice to Martinique, once to Aux Cayes, once to Havannah, and were now
brought to the port of Philadelphia: that in the course of these several
voyages, the libellant and others of the crew, made frequent complaints of the
prolongation of, and deviations from, the originally intended voyage, and had
applied to the intendants of some of the ports they were at, demanding to be
discharged, or taken back to France: but were detained in the service of the
ship, by repeated assurances of the captain, that from the then next intended
port they should sail for France: that in particular, when they were at
Martinique the second time, the whole crew complained and demanded their
discharge; whereupon the captain threw the boatswain and another sailor into
prison: and that the boatswain wrote to the commanding officer of a frigate
there, who sent for him out of prison, and obliged the captain to pay him the
wages due, and discharge him.

TO this libel and testimony, the respondent has urged in reply:

THAT no contract or articles between the captain and the crew of this ship
have been exhibited: that the libel itself is deficient in form; and that let
the deviations from the original voyage be what they may, the libellant has
for his part justified the whole, by signing a verbal process on board the
ship, on the 30th of April last, certifying that the ship l'Heureux had
suffered damage by storm, and agreeing to (...) the port of Philadelphia in
distress, which verbal process so signed, has been exhibited in this court.

AS there is no ordinance of the United States, or act of the legislature of
Pennsylvania touching the present object, the claim of the libellant, who is a
French subject, and was shipped in France, will be best determined by the
marine ordinances of the country to which he belongs, and under which he
engaged in the service of this vessel. These ordinances strictly prohibit any
captain or master of a vessel from receiving on board his ship any mariner, as
such, who is not entered in his roll d'equipage made up in the commissary's
office, or bureau de classes of the port where the vessel shall be. See, Ord.
de Mar. vol i. p. 422. and p. 715. Now as it has not been denied but that the
libellant has served on board this ship ever since she sailed from Nantz, it is
in vain to call upon him for proof of the contract made at Nantz, since the
roll d'equipage, or a copy of it, is always in the captain's hands, and never
in the mariner's. Had no such contract taken place as mentioned in the libel,
or should the libellant demand larger wages than had been agreed upon, the
captain would have shown the roll d'equipage against him. As he has not done
this, although in his power, it follows that the allegation of the libellant
must be admitted as true. Indeed it is in positive testimony, that the
libellant entered on board at Nantz, and was to receive fifty livers per month
wages, which is sufficient proof of a contract.

THE next point is to consider the repeated deviations from the original
voyage, and how far this should operate in releasing the mariner from his
contract. To lay it down as a general rule, that the least deviation from a
designated voyage should invalidate the articles and discharge the mariners
from the ship's service, would perhaps be construing those articles too
strictly, and would certainly be very injurious to commerce. Shipping articles
ought not to be judged by the same rules with a policy of insurance, or a
common law contract, their object and ground of reason being quite different.
Yet gross and unnecessary deviations shall free a mariner from his engagement.
But there is no present occasion to fix a general rule. This cause must be
determined by positive law: and there is an ordinance of France express to the
purpose Mar. Ord. vol. I. p. 548. art. 4. -- "If at any time after the arrival
and discharge of the vessel at the port of her destination, the captain or
master, instead of returning, shall freight or load his ship to go elsewhere,
the mariner may leave her if he chooses, unless it has been otherwise
determined by his special agreement." And this rule is further enforced by
Valin's commentary on the article.

THERE appears to me a strong presumption that the the boatswain, who was paid
and discharged at Martinique by order of the commander of a frigate there,
claimed the benefit of this ordinance. It is said, indeeed, that his mother was
dead, and that he had business in France; but this I think would hardly be
admitted as a sufficient reason to discharge a mariner in the midst of a
voyage. It is plain that Baudoin did not deem it sufficient, for he put the man
in prison for demanding his wages and discharge.

THE objections to the libel in point of form are not sufficient to invalidate
the suit. It is not indeed so specific as might be wished, but the substance of
the complaint is alleged, viz. an engagement for a certain voyage, a total
deviation from that voyage, and a citation prayed for, to show cause why the
wages accrued should not be paid, and the libellant discharged.

THE verbal process signed by the libellant on board the ship, is the next
circumstance relied upon by the respondent. But this cannot have the operation
expected. If the ship was really in distress, there is no doubt but that any
mariner would sign his consent to put into a strange port to avoid impending
danger, and refit the damaged rigging. But this deviation occasioned by
necessity cannot serve as a justification of former deviations where no such
necessity occured.

I am clearly of opinion, that if this cause was tried before a French court of
justice, the libellant could not be refused the benefit of the mariners
ordinance expressly in favor of his claim.

I adjudge that the libellant shall have his wages, at the rate of fifty livers
per month, from October 23d 1786; and that the respondent pay the costs of this
suit.

June 1788.
JOHN THYBOUT versus ALEXANDER BAUDOIN.
THYBOUT was a mariner belonging to the same ship and under the same
circumstances with Charles Moran, libellant in the foregoing cause, but did not
join in the libel with Moran; because, as it was said, the captain kept him on
board confined till the determination of that suit should be known. But he now
filed his complaint, claiming his wages and discharge.

COUNCIL for the respondent, in addition to their arguments in the former
cause, alleged that the last voyage from New Orleans, was authorized by
government to procure supplies for that city, which had just then suffered by a
terrible fire; and secondly, that the libellant had made a new contract at New
Orleans, and was entered accordingly on the roll d'equipage there. In proof of
these allegations, copies and translations of the ship's papers were offered in
testimony. But the libellant's council objected to the admission of these
papers. Whereupon an argument was had on this previous question. After
consideration, the judge gave his opinion as follows.

THE question now before me is -- Whether certain papers, presented to the
court as copies and translations of the manifest, roll d'equipage, etc. of the
ship L'Heureux, respecting her last voyage from New Orleans, shall be admitted
as testimony in the cause now in agitation, or not? And it is declared, that
the design in procuring these papers is to prove, first, an authorized and
necessary deviation from the original voyage contracted for at Nantz; and,
2dly, a new engagement made by the libellant at New Orleans.

THE correctness of these copies, and the authenticity of the originals, are
supposed to be established by the deposition of Mr. John Leamy; and the
fidelity of the translations are certified by the notarial seals of sworn
interpreters.

THE fidelity of the translations is, I think, sufficiently ascertained,
because the translator is officially known to the court, being commissioned by,
and answerable to government for the due execution of his trust. But it is not
so certain what evidence shall be sufficient to authenticate the instruments of
officers of a foreign country, so as to give them the force of legal testimony
in our courts. The authorities that have been cited all refer to cases, where
the originals, the copies, and the certifying officers, were all within the
realm of England, and therefore do not come up to the point in question.

MR. Leamy's deposition as to the authenticity of these papers is founded on
his belief only, and not on positive testimony, as appears on his cross
examination in these words: The said deponent being cross-examined, says, that
he does not personally know any of the persons who have signed any of the
original papers before mentioned, nor did he ever see any of them write: and
that he, the deponent, had no papers in his custody with the hands and seals of
the above mentioned persons to them, to compare the said papers with, except
the signature of the present governor, with which he did not compare them.

BUT, secondly, it is manifest, that these papers were copied and translated in
this city, pending this suit, and within the cognizance of the court. Why then
were not the originals exhibited, that the translations might be made by the
direction, and under the authority of the court, after having had the
opportunity of inspecting these originals, and judging of their authenticity?
It has been attempted to show that this could not be done The captain sailed
from the port during the suit, and took the original papers with him.
. But as the court of admiralty is always open, and as these papers were in the
city for at least some days, there was time sufficient to have them compared,
copied, and translated by authority. The court has a right to the best
testimony that can be procured with any reasonable convenience; and as the
originals of these papers were in the hands of the respondent's council, and
they have not thought fit to file them as exhibits in the cause, I shall not
now admit the copies taken by their direction. I think such a precedent might
have dangerous future consequences.

THE argument then proceeded on the merits, and nearly the same grounds were
traveled over, which had been taken in Moran's case.

AFTER advisement, judgment was given as follows:

JOHN Thybout, the present libellant, having shipped at the same time, and
under the same contract, with Charles Moran, whose suit was lately decided in
this court, the testimony exhibited in Moran's case has been applied to this.

THERE are only three new exhibits in the present cause: viz. a protest made by
captain Baudoin and his officers, soon after his arrival at Philadelphia, dated
the 17th of May last, and two depositions; one of William Matthie, a passenger
on board the l'Heureux, and the other, a second deposition of Bastian Gaudin,
who had given testimomony in the former cause. The purport of the protest is to
show, that this ship was driven by a N. N. E. storm into the port of
Philadelphia, in distress, and the tenor of the two depositions tends directly
to contradict the assertion of the protest.

FROM all that appears in testimony, this vessel was bound from New Orleans to
the port of Nantz in France: and Matthie, the passenger, received a passport
from the governor's secretary at New Orleans, to be admitted on board as a
passenger to Nantz. How then it could possibly happen, that this, or any other
vessel, being in the latitude of 25 3 north, should be driven by a violent N.
N. E. wind, to the latitude of 35 4 north, where the verbal process was made on
board, is to me quite incomprehensible. But as I do not think the libellant's
claim does at all depend upon the validity of either the verbal process, or the
subsequent protest, I shall observe no further upon them.

IT is manifest to me, that the libellant has been detained in the service of
this ship an unreasonable length of time beyond the period of the voyage
contracted for: that the original agreement made at Nantz, between the captain
and his crew, has been violated and dissolved by frequent unnecessary
deviations: that the promises of the captain, at every deviation, to return
immediately to France, have been repeatedly broken: and that, if this cause was
tried before a French court, under the marine ordinances of that country, there
is no doubt but that the libellant would recover his wages, and obtain his
discharge.

I see no reason for distinguishing this from Charles Mora^^^ case: and
therefore, I adjudge, that the libellant shall have his wages, at the rate of
30 livres per month, from the 23d of October, 1786, to the 30th of June last;
deducting 180 livres, which he acknowledges to have received: and that the
respondent pay the costs of suit.

July, 1788.
POEMS ON SEVERAL SUBJECTS.
TO THE REV. MR. WILLIAM SMITH, ON HEARING HIS SERMON UPON THE DEATH OF Mr.
WILLIAM THOMAS MARTIN.
I Call no aid, no muses to inspire,
Or teach my breast to feel a poet's fire:
Your soft expressions of a grief sincere
Bring from my soul a sympathising tear:
Taught by your voice, my artless numbers flow,
I sigh in verse, am elegant in woe,
And loftier thoughts within my bosom glow;
For when in all the charms of language dressed
A manly grief flows genuine from the breast:
What generous nature can escape the wounds,
Or steel itself against the power of melting sounds?
Oh! could I boast to move with equal art
The human soul and melt the stony heart;
My long loved friend should through my numbers shine,
Some virtue lost be wept in every line:
For virtues he had many -- 'twas confessed,
That native sense and sweetness filled his breast;
But cooler reason checks the bold intent,
And to the task refusing her consent,
This only truth permits me to disclose,
That in your own you represent my woes,
And sweeter than my song is your harmonious prose.
September, 1754.
ODE ON MUSIC.
HARK! hark! the sweet vibrating lyre
Sets my attentive soul on fire;
Through all my frame what pleasures thrill
Whilst the loud treble warbles shrill,
And the more slow and solemn bass
Adds charm to charm and grace to grace.
Sometimes in sweetly languid strains
The guilty trembling string complains:
How it delights may ravished ear
When the expiring notes I hear
Vanish distant and decay! --
They steal my yielding soul away.
Neatly trip the merry dance,
And lightly touch and swiftly glance;
Let boundless transport laugh aloud
Sounds madly ramble mix and crowd,
Till all in one loud rapture rise,
Spread through the air and reach the skies.
But when you touch the ^^lemn air,
Oh! swell each note distinct and clear;
In every strain let sorrow sigh,
Languish soft and sweetly die.
So shall the admired celestial art,
Raise and transport my ravished heart;
Exalt my soul, and give my mind
Ideas of sublimer kind.
So great the bliss it seems to prove
There must be music too above.
That from the trumpets silver sound
Of winged archangels placed around
Thy burning throne -- Oh! king of Heaven!
Most perfect harmony is given:
Whilst happy saints in concert join
To make the music more divine,
And with immortal voices sing
HOSANNAHS to their glorious KING.
SONG.
BEAUTY and merit now are joined,
An angel's form, an angel's mind
Are sweetly met in thee;
Thy soul, which all the virtues grace,
Shines forth with luster in thy face,
From affectation free.
II.
Who in thy form, too lovely maid!
Can read thy temper there displayed;
Can look and calmly see?
The face that with such beauty charms,
The breast which so much virtue warms,
Is sure too much for me!
TO MISS --, ON HER KIND ASSISTANCE IN THE VOCAL PARTS OF AN ORATORICAL
EXERCISE, PERFORMED AT THE COLLEGE OF PHILADELPHIA.
I.
THE pleasing task be mine, sweet maid!
To spread thy growing fame;
For early virtues such as thine
An early honor claim.
II.
'Twas nobly done, to lend thy voice
And soft harmonious song,
When Freedom Alluding to a song which she sung in praise of Freedom.
was the rapturous theme
That warbled from thy tongue.
III.
Yet lovely fair! thy voice, though sweet,
We should not most admire;
Good nature, and the kind intent,
A nobler praise require.
IV.
Let not the merit all be placed
In thy harmonious skill;
It Is not the deed obliges most,
The virtue's in the will.
V.
Thus still proceed, above all pride;
Such themes be ever thine:
So to the good shall thou be dear,
And favored by the Nine.
TO THE MEMORY OF MR. WILLIAM WILLCOCKS, A BELOVED FRIEND.
DRAW near ye youths, in whom soft sorrows dwell,
Whose streaming eyes your heartfelt anguish tell:
Come seek with me the tomb where Pollio lies,
Tears aiding tears, and sighs increasing sighs!
How great the grief! when genius fall a prey
In early bloom to death's unyielding sway?
When all the prospects of a father's joy,
A mother's fondest wishes for her boy,
One cruel stroke must blast, one cruel stroke destroy.
Let not the unskilful muse attempt to tell
Thy many virtues, though she knew them well;
She knew thy soul adorned with every grace,
And sure that soul was pictured in thy face.
The youths, thy fellows, shall delight to tread
The noble footsteps thy example led;
To make those virtues in their conduct shine,
Which once, dear youth, we all acknowledged thine.
How few excel! they will place thee mid that few,
Lament your loss, and striv^ to be like you.
Oh! may your fate this warning give to all,
"That old age must, and blooming youth may fall."
HERMITAGE, A POEM, INSCRIBED TO MR. JACOB DUCHE, JUN.
I.
WHILST other bards in happier lays
The fair Amanda sing,
Teach the sweet lyre her grateful praise
To waft from every string:
II.
Whilst you the softer theme prolong
Of Seraphina's voice,
And in description make your song
Harmonious as your choice:
III.
My muse delights in humble strains
To sing of sylvan scenes,
Of rural prospects, flowery plains,
And wide extended greens.
IV.
Sweet Hermitage The seat of the hon. Josiah Martin, esquire. upon Long Island.
! thy happy seat,
The muse's choice and mine;
Thy shady silent soft retreat
Shall in description shine.
V.
That secret walk of liveliest green,
That breeze inviting shade,
Appears a solemn silent scene
For contemplation made
VI.
There will I range, and to the muse
Address my ardent prayer;
In such a place she cannot refuse,
Nor would be backward there.
VII.
Often did this happy grove resound
Strains sweeter far than mine;
Here sat the Bard The rev. Mr. Smith, who resided there several years.
, and here around
Stood the indulgent Nine.
VIII.
Poetic music from his tongue
Harmonious rolled away;
The birds in dumb attention hung
To hear his softer lay.
IX.
And thou my friend, in later days,
Filled this resounding grove
With songs of matchless Delia's praise,
Soft as the breath of love.
X.
Dear pensive youth, often have you sought
At eve, this pleasing shade;
Your very soul wrapped up in thought,
As lonely here you strayed.
XI.
Or shall my fancy -- restless power!
Another scene display,
And paint thee in yon jasmine bower,
Joyful, alert, and gay.
XII.
With Delia's sprightly converse blessed
The hours unheeded glide,
And Pyllades, friend of thy breast,
Attending at thy side.
XIII.
With joy I tread the flowery green
Which thou have trod before;
Strive to repeat each happy scene,
And count thy pleasures over.
XIV.
Wherever my wondering eyes I bend,
New beauties still I find;
Here cooling vistas far extend,
The gardens bloom behind.
XV.
To distant plains I stretch mine eye,
And view the enlarged scene;
Above a vast extended sky,
Below a boundless green The great plains on Long Island.
.
XVI.
Thence, swiftly borne in airy flight,
The breezes of the spring,
To these blessed scenes of calm delight
Both health and pleasure bring.
XVII.
At early morn I love to tread
The garden's gravelly walk,
Catch Flora blushing in her bed,
Whilst dew drops bend each stalk.
XVIII.
To see the lovely blooming rose
Her choicest sweets display,
And every radiant charm disclose
To sol's inviting ray.
XIX.
Her waving foliage glittering bright,
With drops of pearly dew:
Like diamonds sparkling to the light,
They strike the distant view.
XX.
The faithful matron thus to meet
Her absent lord's return,
Her hair, her neck, her waist, her feet,
Does with rich gems adorn.
XXI.
And as she lonely spends each day
His absence to bemoan,
The minutes gliding slow away,
Whilst he her lord is gone.
XXII.
So in the dreary shades of night,
The rose her beauty veils,
'Till with returning joy and light,
The sun over all prevails.
XXIII.
But when the soft eyed eve invites
My steps from yonder glade,
Then, then, my softened soul delights
To seek the darksome shade.
XXIV.
Devotion fills my glowing breast,
And all my powers combine
To praise my God, to make me blessed,
In transports quite divine.
XXV.
Behold to raise the solemn scene
The silver moon arise;
With mildest luster gild the green,
With radiance fill the skies.
XXVI.
Her feeble inoffensive ray
Scarce glimmers through the trees,
Whose leaves with trembling murmurs play,
Shook by the passing breeze.
XXVII.
It Is silence all -- my soul arise,
Arise to prayer and praise;
Thy God looks down with friendly eyes,
He listens to thy lays.
XXVIII.
Oh thou, whose goodness knows no end,
Whose mercies I enjoy,
In praise to thee my breath I Will spend,
My latest hours employ.
XXIX.
Let me often thus thy influence know,
Oh! be thus ever kind;
The brightness of thy visage show;
Enlighten thou my mind.
XXX.
So shall my soul to heaven ascend,
And joined with angels there,
Before thy footstool lowly bend,
In more refined prayer.
ADVICE TO AMANDA.
I.
AMANDA, since thy lovely frame,
Of every charm possessed,
Hat^ power to raise the purest flame
And warm the coldest breast:
II.
Oh! think that heaven could never design,
Thou too reserved maid,
That ever beauties, such as thine,
Like unknown flowers should fade.
III.
When next you see your faithful swain,
Your Strephon at your feet;
When next you hear him sigh his pain
And tenderest vows repeat.
IV.
Then think it is fit a love so true
Should meet a kind regard;
And think it is given alone to you
His virtue to reward.
V.
If constancy, with merit joined,
Has any charms for thee,
Let Strephon thy acceptance find,
For such a swain is he.
VI.
No longer then, too cruel fair,
Defer the happy day;
But with thy love reward his care,
His tenderness repay.
VII.
So shall the indulgent eye of Heaven
The worthy choice approve,
When such victorious charms are given
A prize to faithful love.
AN EPIGRAM. ON THE DEATH OF A FAVORITE LAP DOG.
CHLOE the mu^e records thy name,
And thou, though dead, shall live in fame;
Yet know this honor, not to you,
But is to Mira's favorite due.
L'ALLEGRO.
HENCE melancholy, care and sorrow,
My heart defers you till tomorrow;
I have no room within my breast
For any dull, cold, lifeless guest --
But hither come, life raising joy,
In likeness of a laughing boy.
Thy temples crowned with opening flowers,
The late produce of vernal showers;
Around thy shoulders let there be
An azure mantle light and free;
Part shall thy graceful body bind,
And part shall loosely flow behind;
With thee let soft breezes bring
Choicest odours of the spring.
Frolic, frisky, wanton, gay,
Round and round thee let them play;
Toss thy garment high in air;
Wave thy loose luxuriant hair,
Or court the flowers that crown thy head
Enlivening sweets around to spread.
As thou thus approach'st me nigher
Let me hear the warbling lyre;
Graceful use the springy quill,
Touch it with superior skill;
But not to such soft languid airs,
Soothing sorrows, soothing cares,
With which the silly singing swain
Proclaims imaginary pain.
But strike me up sounds brisk and gay,
Sounds that may steal my soul away;
Make a soft glow of gladness rise,
And show thee sparkling in mine eyes.
Thus attend me whilst I stray;
Wild as fancy leads the way,
Over valley, hill, and plain
To the ocean's wild domain:
Over the wild seas far extending
Let me see the world's arch bending,
And behold with wondering eye
The rounded globe, the meeting sky;
Where the white clouds swimming low
Drink the waters as they go;
Where the sun soft dews and rain
Exhales to shed on earth again;
Whence skim the dusky shades away
Before the splendid source of day;
Or where the silver queen of night,
First tips the trembling deep with light.
Or let me stray through the waving groves
Where the turtle cooes her loves.
Where the linnet's warbling lay
Still attends my flowery way;
And the lark's melodious song
Charms me as I go along:
Or let me pause and view the scene,
The blooming vales, the hillocks green;
The stream, that winding in meanders,
Through the tufted meadow wanders;
The fields where flocks in safety stray,
And harmless lambkins sport and play.
Behold far off, with roaming eye,
Between two oaks a cot I spy,
Where Darby sits beside the door,
Nor envies kings their royal store:
Whilst Joan, a matron staid and sage,
Remains the comfort of his age;
And Phillis near, with voice so sweet,
Phillis their handmaid, spruce and neat,
Cheers their old hearts with merry song,
And spins and sings the whole day long.
And here beneath a friendly shade
The amorous swain is careless laid:
On oaten pipe he loves to play
And wear the tedious hours away;
Till Dolly leaves her flock behind
Her faithful Thyrsis here to find:
And there behold with anxious look
The wiley shepherd baits his hook:
The sportive fish, that nimbly glide
And cut with silver sins the tide,
Caught by his art, now helpless lie,
And flutter, pant, and gasp and die.
Thus let me pass the summer days
In blithsome scenes and jocund ease:
But when bleak winter comes amain,
With all his sullen vap'ry train,
Abroad his snowy mantle spreads,
And rattles hail stones over our heads;
Then, when the groves delight no more
Nor songsters warble as before,
But every verdant shelter's lost,
Nipt by the blasting wind and frost;
Soon as the stream through flowery ways
No more in pleasing murmurs strays,
But firmly bound to either side
In icy chains, forgets to glide;
Quick let me shun the horrid sight,
And to the city take my flight;
Where mirth knows one continual round
And pleasures ever gay abound:
Attend me, joy, attend me there,
And let thy presence banish care.
Oh! lead me where the cheerful fire
Does burn, and jest and wit inspire;
Whilst the slow revolving night
Leave ample room for long delight.
Meanwhile let Bacchus, jolly boy!
Be ^^und thy bon-companion, joy:
Let numerous friends surround the hearth,
Devoted all to glee and mirth;
Where never sorrow dare apppear,
Or thought intense, or gloomy care:
But all airy light and free --
Glad vot'ries all to jollity:
Whilst wit does still with laughter join,
And open hearts are caused by wine.
Or whilst the rigid winter yields,
Prospects of ice and snowy fields,
Soon as the hasty short-lived day
In the red west withdraws her ray,
And glittering stars with feeble light,
Bedeck the sable garb of night.
Quick to the ball-room, joy, repair,
For thou will hardly miss me there;
Where the promiscuous sparkling throng
The gayly jocund scene prolong:
Where art with native beauty joins,
And each victorious fair one shines
In all the pomp, in all the show,
That dress can give and mirth bestow.
Here in full glory may be seen
Zaphyria riv'ling beauty's queen;
Around her press the lessening throng
To hear the music of her tongue:
And whilst in Celia's robes we find
A noble air, a taste refined;
More powerful charms her features wear,
For Cupid keeps his revels there:
Soft blushes in her cheeks arise,
And love looks languid in her eyes.
Meanwhile gay wit the time beguiles,
With humors quaint and simp'ring smiles.
Dick flaunts it in his tinsel'd coat,
And Ned speaks tender lines by rote;
Chloe with blushes seems to hear
Her lovesick Damon sighing near;
Whilst Mira both their thoughts descries,
And reads soft souls in tell-tale eyes.
But hark! the music's sudden sound
Spreads universal gladness round;
Joy lightens quick in every face,
An instant buz fills all the place:
And now prepared on either hand,
The beaux and belles in order stand:
And now they trip the merry dance,
And to quick movements smoothly glance.
Each fair her partner leads astray,
Through a long labyrinthian way;
Each swain his flying fair pursues,
Who still the pleasing toil renews.
Me the shrill soaring sounds inspire,
With transports that can rise no higher;
My body skims along the floor,
I feel my willing feet no more:
The music lends me wings; and I
In waving motions seem to fly:
And beaux and belles and tapers bright,
Swim undistinguished in my sight.
IF such thy pleasures, smiling joy,
Oh! may thou ever my mind employ;
Dawn in my breast perpetual day,
And chase intruding care away.
IL PENSEROSO.
VANISH mirth, and vanish joy,
Airy pleasures quickly cloy;
Hence all ye bacchanalian rout,
And wine, and jest, and noisy shout;
And q^ and cranks, and gay grimace,
And wit, that wears a double face.
Hence every kind of jollity,
For you have no delights for me.
But welcome, welcome, melancholy,
Thou goddess sage, demure, and holy!
Exalt thy ever musing head,
And quit, oh! quit, thy sleepless bed!
With languid looks, and anxious eyes,
Divinest melancholy rise!
And thou, oh Smith! my more than friend,
To whom these artless lines I send*
Once more thy wonted candor bring,
And hear the muse thou He was the author's precepter.
taught'st to sing:
The muse that strives to win thy ear,
By themes thy soul delights to hear:
And loves, like thee, in sober mood,
To meditate on just and good:
Whilst melancholy sooths to rest
Each tumult rising in the breast.
Exalted themes! divinest maid!
Sweet melancholy, raise thy head!
With languid look, oh! quickly come,
And lead me to thy hermit home:
There let thy sorrow soothing reign,
Detain me long in pensive strain;
Exalt my thoughts, possess my soul,
Enlarge my views, and seize me whole.
Oh! give me thy delights to know,
The heart that bleeds for human woe:
The virtuous throb, the grief-swoln eye,
The falling tear, and deep-drawn sigh.
Exalted themes! divinest maid!
Sweet melancholy, raise thy head!
With languid look, oh! quickly come:
And lead me to thy hermit home.
Or be thou with me whilst I rove
Through yonder dark untrodden grove,
Where the moon is rarely seen
Glimmering through the dusky green;
Whilst an awful silence reigns
Over valleys, hills, and distant plains:
Nothing but the night-bird's cry,
Echoing through the vaulted sky;
Nothing but the ceaseless ri^^
Murmuring over its pebbles still:
Or the distant falling stood
Shakes the silence of the wood.
There I Will wander till there is found,
Stretched upon the leafy ground,
An oak, which many a summer's day
Has crumbled in a slow decay;
There down upon its mossy bed
In listless length I Will lean my head;
While the small worm that gnaws its heart,
Shall music to my soul impart.
Or let me in some crazy boat,
Along the watery surface float;
Leaning pensive over its side,
Let me view the rippling tide;
Whilst Cynthia's cold declining rays,
Who now but half her orb displays,
On the clear bosom of the deep,
In mild composure seems to sleep.
But hark! what voice so loud and shrill
From yonder dark romantic hill,
Strikes sudden on my startled ear,
And warbles forth in ditties clear?
It Is here is A night-bird, vulgarly called the Whipper-will.
-- that bird well known to fame,
The fond repeater of her name --
Proceed, sweet bird, I love thy strain,
Increasing still the solemn scene:
I Will sit attentive to thy note,
Till Cynthia's latest rays go out.
Then on the margin of a stream,
I Will lay me silent, think, and dream;
Where no pale g^impse of borrowed light
Breaks through the drowsy noon of night*
And stars in vain with feeble ray,
Attempt to give a doubtful day:
While clouds far off low lowering rise,
Possessing first the nether skies;
Thence lazy laboring to the poll,
Up the steep arch their vengeance roll,
Black as the purpose of a guilty soul.
Here retired from noise and folly,
Sober visag'd Melancholy!
On a rustling rushy bed,
With thee I Will lean the languid head;
And in the dimpled tide descry
The gathering horrors of the sky;
See the stars dancing as they go,
And view the other heaven below:
Whilst from behind the bull-rush near,
The frog's hoarse-cadenc'd voice I hear;
Whose often repeated hollow sound,
A pleasing sadness spreads around.
But hark! rude rustling through the trees,
A sudden unexpected breeze,
Swift bursting from the darksome wood,
Shakes the smooth surface of the flood;
Then slow I raise my downcast eye,
To gaze the drear presageful sky,
Where clouds high heaped, and swimming low,
Hang heavy on night's awful brow.
Around a gloomy silence reigns,
Hushed is each throat through hills and plains:
The stars but now that shone so bright,
Slide swift and vanish out of sight.
The rapid storm comes on apace,
The heavens wear one distracted face;
And ruder blasts unbounded rove
In sullen murmurs through the grove --
Down yonder dreadful depth of sky,
In ragged sheets the lightenings fly;
Peals following peals hiss through the air,
And burst in awful ruin near:
Descending quick the heavy floods
Dance on the stream, and rattle in the woods.
Whilst thus the elements engage,
And with increasing fury rage;
Oh! let me find some stony shed,
Where I may safely lodge my head,
TO enjoy the horrors of the storm,
And to its God due rites perform.
Beneath yon rock, whose mossy side
With fearful bend o'erhangs the tide,
Grotesque and wild, a cave I spy,
And to its shelter quickly fly.
But as I climb the grass-grown steep,
Whose darksome height juts over the deep;
Sent from aloft, with startled ear,
A sudden voice of woe I hear --
"RAGE on thou tempest of the sky,
"Your fiercest vengeance I defy:
"A ruder storm whirls in my breast,
"And death alone can give me rest;
"My sorrows in this stream shall sleep,
"And I" -- then plunges in the deep.
Nature awhile yet fond of life
Maintains with death an equal strife;
The lover strives to gain the shore,
But sinks, alas! to rise no more.
Save me, ye powers, from scenes so sad,
Scenes not of melancholy bred;
But sprung from furious wild despair,
In Stygian cell begot of care.
But might I hear true love complain,
In a more mild and temperate strain;
Then let my frequent feet be seen
On yonder steep romantic green;
Along whose yellow gravelly side,
Schuy^kill sweeps his lucid tide:
Where waters fall with constant roar,
Re-bellowing down the rocky shore.
All^ding to the affecting story of Theodore and Amelia, in the ^^st number
(...) the H^^mit* -- Vide Amer. Mag. for October, 1757.
Where nightly at the turf-clad grave,
In concert with the bird of e^e;
Beneath the glimpses of the moon,
The hermit mourns Amelia gone:
Till reason lifts his eye to heaven,
And mild submitting thoughts are given.
Thus, melancholy, shall thou please,
If thou will find me scenes like these:
Thus may thou ever my mind employ,
And banish every lighter joy.
But when the summer scenes are lost,
Welcome winter! welcome frost!
Then I Will spend the long, long night,
By the lamp's pale and glimmering light:
Creeping nigher still and nigher
To the half extinguished fire,
Where midst the glowing coals I view
Lambent flames of livid blue:
Or listen to the crackling tread
Of heavy foot on snowy bed:
While howling blasts around me rage,
And wind, and snow, and hail, engage;
And through a crevice in the wall,
Boreas whistles shrill and small;
And the doors, by time grown weak,
On their iron hinges creak:
There I Will muse on stories old,
By a toothless matron told;
Of a tall, wan, and slender sp'rit,
Stalking in the dead of night;
Whose long trailing winding sheet
Flows luxuriant round his feet:
Gaping wounds all over him bleed,
To disclose some horrid deed:
With beck'ning hands he seems to say,
"Haste to my grave, come, come away!"
Thus should my fancy ever find
Some dreary scene to fill my mind;
And thus I Would sit with fixed ^e,
To see tne crumbling embers die,
Fearing to turn to either side,
Lest there the horned specter glide:
Till morn, slow peeping from on high,
Should twinkle with unwelcome eye;
Then would I shun the intruding ray,
And hide me from the garish day;
Darkling to bed would silent creep,
Hushed by the howling winds to sleep.
A MORNING HYMN.
I.
ARISE! and see the glorious sun
Mount in the eastern sky:
See with what majesty he comes,
What splendour striks the eye!
II.
Life, light, and heat he spreads abroad
In ever bounteous streams;
This day shall joyful myriads own
The influence of his beams.
III.
How fresh the healthful morning air!
What fragrance breaths around!
New luster paints each opening flower
New verdure clothes the ground.
III.
No ruffling storms of wind or rain
Disturb the calm serene:
But gentle nature far abroad
Displays her softest scene.
V.
Through checkered groves and over the plains
Refreshing breezes pass,
And play with every wanton leaf,
And wave the slender grass.
VI.
See yonder silver gliding stream;
The sun's reflected ray,
Does in its watery bosom sport,
And on its surface play.
VII.
The trees that shade its flowery banks,
Are nourished by the flood;
Whilst from their branches songsters sweet,
Re-echo through the wood.
VIII.
They with their little warbling throats,
Salute the rising day;
And in untaught, but pleasing strains
Their grateful homage pay.
IX.
Oh! let us then with souls sincere
Adore that power Divine!
Who makes that orb move thus complete,
Who makes his rays to shine.
X.
Who causes every rising day
In beauty to return;
And bids the sun's meridian height
With brighter glories burn.
XI.
Who morning, noon, and evening too,
Has with his blessing blessed;
And kindly gives the night's still shades
For wearied man to rest.
AN ELEGY. ON THE DEATH OF MRS. JANE WILCOCKS.
FROM the bright glories of celestial day,
Where hosts angelic, ranged in vast array,
Salute thy soul, and with seraphic breath
Calm the rude horrors of the recent death;
Blessed shade look down, my mournful accents hear,
Oh! see me shed the the tender parting tear!
Too soon, alas! the best of friends I mourn;
To soon with cypress deck thy silent urn;
Too soon my muse employs her softest lays,
To paint my grief, and to attempt thy praise.
Oh! warm my bosom whilst thy worth I sing;
Oh! teach my hand to touch the plaintive string.
Mournful the subject, mournful be my song,
And let soft sorrows each sad line prolong;
All joy, all comfort, from my soul is fled,
Since thou art numbered with the sleeping dead.
By moon light often I lonely seek the plain,
Sooth my distress, and fondly nurse my pain;
There muse on scenes I Have past with thee before,
And weep to think those scenes can be no more.
How often in pleased attention have I hung,
While wisdom rolled harmonious from thy tongue!
In precepts formed to guide my heedless youth,
Through the bright paths of ever radiant truth.
Such were the virtues that adorned thy breast,
To know thee well, was to esteem thee best:
Heaven to the sweetness of thy sex had joined,
An active spirit, a heroic mind;
A woman soft, as far as softness can,
In noble resolution more than man.
Religion pure thy spotless bosom fired,
And all thy actions, all thy thoughts inspired:
And yet thy soul would ever turn aside
With just disdain from ostentatious pride;
Whatever fortune Heaven designed, 'twas thine,
A bright example in that sphere to shine.
'Twas thine to grace each varying state of life,
The tenderest mother, and the fondest wise;
Faithful in friendship, true to every trust,
And to thy God, thyself, and neighbor just;
As far, at least, as mortal powers can go,
For strict perfection dwells not here below.
Long had thou lived to bless thy weeping friends,
Long had thou lived for many a glorious end.
If Her son, Mr. William Wilcock's w^^ the occasion of hers.
Pollio's ghost had not forbid thy stay;
His beek'ng ghost invited thee away.
Pollio the wise, the generous, and the young,
Whose early fate the sorrowing muse has sung.
What though thy body moulders into dust,
Thy spirit joins him mid the encircling just.
Even now I see thee in those heavenly plains,
Where perfect bliss, and peace eternal reigns;
Where pain and sorrow can no more annoy,
But thy soul drinks of never ending joy:
Where all the bitterness of grief is over,
And death's cold pangs shall agonize no more:
There shall thou listen to the heavenly sound
Of cherubim and seraph chaunting round;
In songs celestial thou shall there adore,
Him that shall last when time shall be no more.
VERSES Inscribed to the officers of the 35th regiment on their embarkation for
the expedition against Louisbourg.
NOW warmer suns, once more bid nature smile,
The newborn spring peeps from the teaming soil:
From ice the streams, the fields from snow are free,
And blossoms swell on every pregnant tree:
The softened season melts in sudden showers,
And April all her flowery treasures pours;
Well might I sing the early warbling lay
Of rural songsters at the dawn of day;
The riv'let winding through the long drawn vale,
The new clothed mountain, the green tufted dale;
Or shepherd's pipe, that in melodious strains,
Welcomes the spring to valleys, hills and plains.
But these I leave, and for the aspiring muse,
A nobler theme, a loftier subject choose.
This is the season whose warm rays inspire,
Heroic bosoms with a martial fire:
To war's alarms all softer pleasures yield,
And every Briton burns to take the field.
The drums loud beat, the fife's shrill soaring lay,
The trumpet's clangor, the dread cannon's play;
All, all conspire to bid the heroes go
And thunder vengeance on the daring foe.
Ye who have rolled the winter months away,
In scenes of pleasure and in pastimes gay;
At home endowed with every art to please,
Of free politeness and becoming ease;
Abroad, the noble champions of our cause,
Protectors of our liberties and laws.
Long have you known the gently thrilling fires
Which beauty kindles and which love inspires;
Long have enjoyed the graces of the fair,
To please and to be pleased was all your care:
Far other transports now your bosoms warm,
Far other glories your ambition charm. --
Go, seek for conquest where loud tumults reign,
Where death runs liquid over the impurpled plain;
Where victor's shouts, and vanquished warriors cries
In clouds of smoke promiscuously arise,
And undistinguished reach the vaulted skies;
Where desolation stalks the tragic field,
Where Britons conquer, and where Frenchmen yield.
See on the surface of that rolling tide
Fast moored the proud expecting ^^vies ride:
They loose their streamers from each top m^st height,
And spread their wings, impatient for the fight;
Eager through seas, to waft you hence away,
Where laurels strew the field, and honour^ crown the day*
Oh! may indulgent heaven assistance to lend!
Oh! may success Britannia's arms attend:
Let every sword a keen destruction wear;
Each well aimed spear a pointed vengeance bear;
And may each hero, that we send from home,
Back to our wishing arms a glorious conqueror come.
SONG.
I.
HEAR, heavenly goddess, queen of love!
A heart that owns thy fire;
Let my distress thy pity move,
And grant my fond desire.
II.
Far absent from my soul's delight,
I languish and complain:
In tender accents day and night,
I sooth my secret pain.
III.
Pensive, I seek the lonely bower,
Where to my cheated view,
False fancy, by her magic power,
Does former scenes renew.
IV.
And Strephon's look, and Strephon's smile,
Please my deluded eye;
His fancied presence, for a while,
Affords a short-liy'd joy.
V.
Since then no longer, as before,
His converse I enjoy;
Thus let my Strephon ever more
My faithful mind employ.
VI.
Whenever soft sleep shall over me
Its happy influence shed,
Oh! let his airy image be
Still hovering round my bed!
VII.
With every native charm and grace
Adorn the lovely youth;
And in the sweetness of his face,
Paint constancy and truth.
ON THE LATE SUCCESSFUL EXPEDITION AGAINST LOUISBOURG.
AT length it is done, the glorious conflict's done,
And British valor has the conquest won:
Success our arms, our heroes, honor crowns,
And Louisbourg an English monarch owns!
Swift, to the scene where late the valiant fought,
Waft me, ye muses, on the wings of thought --
That awful scene, where the dread god of war
Over fields of death rolled his triumphant car:
There yet, with fancy's eye, methinks I view
The pressing throng, the fierce assault renew:
With dauntless front advance, and boldly brave
The cannon's thunder, and the expecting grave.
On yonder cliff, high hanging over the deep,
Where trembling joy climbs the darksome steep;
Britannia lonely sitting, from afar
Waits the event, and overlooks the war;
Thence, roll her eager wandering eyes about,
In all the dread anxiety of doubt;
Sees her fierce sons, her foes with vengeance smite,
Grasp deathless honors, and maintain the fight.
Whilst thus her breast alternate passions sway,
And hope and fear wear the slow hours away.
See! from the realms of everlasting light,
A radiant form wings her aerial flight.
The palm she carries, and the crown she wears,
Plainly denote it is Victory appears:
Her crimson vestment loosely flows behind,
The clouds her chariot, and her wings the wind:
Trumpets shrill sounding all around her play,
And laurell'd honors gild her azure way --
Now she alights -- the trumpets cease to sound,
Her presence spreads expecting silence round: --
And thus she speaks; whilst from her heavenly face
Effulgent glories brighten all the place --
"Britannia, hail! thine is at length the day,
"And lasting triumphs shall thy cares repay;
"Thy godlike sons, by this, their names shall raise,
"And tongues remote shall joy to swell their praise.
"I to the listening world will soon proclaim
"Of Wolfe's brave deeds, the never-dying fame,
"And swell with glory Amherst's patriot name.
"Such are the heroes that shall ever bring
"Wealth to their country, honor to their king:
"Opposing foes, in vain attempt to quell
"The native fires that in such bosoms dwell.
"To thee, with joy, this laurel I resign,
"Smile, smile, Britannia! victory is thine.
"Long may it flourish on thy sacred brow!
"Long may thy foes a forced subjection know!
"See, see their power, their boasted power decline!
"Rejoice Britannia! victory is thine."
Give your loose canvas to the breezes free,
Ye floating thund'rers, bulwarks of the sea:
Go, bear the joyful tidings to your king,
And, in the voice of war, declare it is victory you bring:
Let the wild crowd that catch the breath of fame,
In mad huzzas their ruder joy proclaim:
Let their loud thanks to heaven in flames ascend,
While mingling shouts the azure concave rend.
But let the few, whom reason makes more wise,
With glowing gratitude uplift their eyes:
Oh! let their breasts dilate with sober joy.
Let pious praise their hearts and tongues employ;
To bless our God with me let all unite,
He guides the conquering sword, he governs in the fight. The English forces
landed at Louisbourg, June 8, 1758, and entered the city in triumph on the 27th
of July following.

A PROLOGUE
SPOKEN BY MR. LEWIS HALLAM, AT THE OPENING OF A THEATER AT PHILADELPHIA.
TO bid reviving virtue raise her head,
And far abroad her heavenly influence shed;
The soul by bright examples to inspire,
And kindle in each breast celestial fire:
For injured innocence to waken fear;
For suffering virtue swell the generous tear;
Vice to expose in each assumed disguise,
And bid the mist to vanish from your eyes,
With keener passion, that you may detest
Her hellish form, however like virtue dressed:
The muse to cherish, genius to inspire,
Bid fancy stretch the wing, and wit take fire --
For these we come -- for these erect our stage,
And show the manners of each clime and age:
For these we come -- oh! may your smiles attend
The pleasing task, and all our toils befriend.
-- Away ye senseless, ye whom naught can move,
Vice to abhor, or virtue to approve;
Whose souls could never enjoy the thought sublime,
Whose ears never taste the muse's flowing rhyme.
But ye whose breasts the powers of softness know,
Who long have learnt to feel another's woe;
Nor blush to heave the sympathetic sigh,
Or drop the pious tear from pity's eye;
Attend our work, and may you ever find
Something to please and to improve the mind:
That as each different flower that decks the ^^^ld
Does to the be mellifluous sweetness yield:
So may each scene some useful moral show;
From each performance sweet instruction flow.
Such is our aim -- your kind assent we ask,
That once obtained, we glory in the task.
EPILOGUE FOR TAMERLANE*
SPOKEN BY MRS. DOUGLAS.
ONCE more, as custom has ordained, I come
To speak the epilogue, and learn our doom:
Oh! may you be to our endeavors kind,
And let us hope your glad applause to find!
The moral of our play I need not tell,
You who observed it sure must know it well.
In all her glory virtue stood confessed,
With just rewards and happy triumphs blessed:
Whilst sullen tyranny no more to rise,
Low in the dust, debased and vanquished lies.
Who but abhors a Bajazet to see?
Who would not wish a Tamerlane to be?
Oh! lovely virtue, such thy charms appear,
That even thy greatest foes thy name revere!
And you, ye fair! in bright Arpasia find
Merit well worthy to engage the mind.
How firmly fixed was her unshaken love,
Which neither threats nor offered crowns could move?
Too few, I fear, are like Arpasia found,
For such heroic constancy renowned.
-- But hark! -- methinks I hear a voice this way
Which seems, in angry accents, thus to say:
"Why, what a stupid epilogue is this:
"Let Us stop her serious prating with a hiss." --
Good sir, have patience, I shall soon have done*
But one short sentence more and I Will be gone.
Hail happy people! thus with freedom blessed,
By no insulting Bajazet oppressed!
Fair virtue here shall fix her radiant throne,
And ignorance and vice in fetters groan.
Here polished learning shall adorn the mind,
And merit ever due respect shall find;
Whilst British liberty -- celestial sound,
Bids every heart be gay, and nature smile around.
A PROLOGUE IN PRAISE OF MUSIC -- SPOKEN BY MR. HALLAM, At a play given for
purchasing an organ for the college-hall in Philadelphia.
WITH grateful joy encircling crowds we view,
Well pleased the friends of music are not few;
Such worthy patrons may it ever find,
And rule with gentle sway the human mind.
When the loud organ fills the sacred choir,
The pious soul is wrapped in holy fire;
The trembling isles the solemn airs resound,
And listening angels hang attentive round;
Harmonious strains with high devotion join,
And sacred themes make music more divine.
Another joy de^^^^ts yon lovesick swain,
Soft sounds alone can sooth his amorous pain,
And every warble thrills through every vein.
Whilst the bold warrior hails the loud alarms,
When drums and trumpets call to arms! to arms!
His eager soul imbibes the martial strain,
And hastes to press the yielding foe again.
Such power has music over the human soul,
Music the fiercest passions can control;
Touch the nice springs that sway a feeling heart,
Sooth every grief, and joy to joy impart.
Sure virtue's friends and music are the same,
And blessed that person is that owns the sacred flame.
CHARITY, A POEM. Delivered by the author at a public commencement in the
college of Philadelphia, May 1, 1760.
TO grace the pomp of this auspicious day,
Once more with joy, we swell the adventurous lay.
Oh! thou, who often from yon Pierian height,
Mid ether pure directs thy easy flight!
Diffusive ardor to my song impart,
And with thy fire dilate my glowing heart!
Say, who is she that first in virtue's train,
With grace celestial treads the ideal plain?
Her awful beauty dignifies the place,
And modest joy illumines all her face;
Around her form effulgent glories play,
Mild as the luster of the dawning day --
It Is Charity, the enraptured muse replies,
It Is Charity, bright offspring of the skies.
On the proud top of that aspiring height,
Stands Ostentation's fane, exposed to sight;
The front, whose summits pierce the vaulted sky,
Gay gilded glitter to the distant eye;
Over the rich portal, in a golden glare,
The name of Charity is written fair --
It Is all deception -- charity we know
Loves not to dwell mid pomp and empty show.
There rural joys in vain we hope to find,
It Is all a barren wilderness behind;
No dying music melts upon the ear,
And not one rose perfumes the sickly air.
But down in yonder vale, recluse from sight,
An humble dwelling stands, seat of delight --
Where soft eyed Charity retired is found,
'Mid thousand sweets that circle her around.
No high wrought arches lead the pompous way,
No gilded domes outshine the face of day;
A secret path enriched with many a sweet
Direct her vot'ries to the blessed retreat;
There, rural beauties all the senses please,
And liquid music floats in every breeze.
Happy, thrice happy, he whose pious breast
Detains soft Charity, a glowing guest!
Whose liberal hand, as far as power is given,
Spreads blessings round him, like the hand of heaven:
Who glows with love, generous and unconfined,
Whose bosom burns for good of all mankind:
Who rears the head of virtue in distress,
Rejoicing ever in the power to bless.
How often, in sorrows clouded, may we find
The shining traces of a generous mind?
How often does want and ignorance control
The struggling efforts of a mighty soul?
See yonder youth, whom inauspicious sat
Has sunk obscurely in a low estate:
What though by birth, no titles, wealth, or fame,
With borrowed glories deck his humble name?
Yet nature's courteous hand with care most kind,
Has formed his body, and enriched his mind:
Life glows as warm in every throbbing part,
And blood as rich flows round his beating heart.
Fast bound in ignorance, by want suppressed,
An active soul slept silent in his breast.
Oh! pious Charity: to call it forth,
And bid it rise to dignity and worth;
To warm his breast with sentiments refined,
And dawn the day of knowledge on his mind:
To teach him virtue's dictates to pursue,
And place the rocks of error in his view.
The trustees of the college, who maintain a charity school for 70 poor
children.
Some such there are, without whose friendly care,
Long had his seeds of glory slumber'd there:
Without whose bounty all his powers had been
The slaves of ignorance, perhaps of sin.
Of deeds like these, oh! who shall sing the praise,
Weak is the muse, and feeble are her lays --
But angels silver-tongu'd from heaven shall part
To whisper blessings to the bounteous heart:
And those who justly Charity regard,
Will find that virtue is her own reward.
DESCRIPTION OF A CHURCH.
AS late beneath the hallowed roof I trod,
Where saints in holy rapture seek their God;
Where heart stung sinners suing Heaven for grace,
With tears repentant consecrate the place.
Oh! how my soul was struck with what I saw,
And shrunk within me in religious awe:
The massy walls, which seemed to scorn the rage
Of battering tempest and of mouldering age;
In long perspective stretched, till breadth and height
Were almost lost in distance from the sight;
With monumental decorations hung,
They spoke mortality with silent tongue.
There, sorrowing seraphs heav'nward lift their eyes,
And little cherubs weep soft elegies.
I trod -- and started at the mighty noise;
The hollow pavement lifted up its voice;
The swelling arch received the rising sound,
Responsive to the stroke the walls around,
And sent it murmuring to the the vaults around,
Through lengthened aisles prolonged the solemn sound.
Far in the west, and noble to the sight,
The gilded organ rears its towering height:
And hark! methinks I from its bosom hear,
Soft issuing sounds that steal upon the ear
And float serenely on the liquid air.
Now by degrees more bold and broad they grow,
And riot loosely through the isles below;
'Till the full organ lifts its utmost voice,
And my heart shudders at the powerful noise:
Like the last trump, one note is heard to sound
That all the massy pillars tremble round:
The firm fixed building shivers on its base,
And vast vibration fills the astonished place:
The marble pavements seem to feel their doom,
And the bones rattle in each hollow tomb.
But now the blast harmonious dies away,
And tapers gently in a fine decay:
The melting sounds on higher pinions fly,
And seem to fall soft oozing from on high;
Like evening dew they gently spread around
And (...) the sweetness of heart-thrilling sound;
'Till grown too soft, too fine for mortal ear,
The dying strains dissolve in distant air.
Methought I heard a flight angels rise,
Most sweetly chaunting as they gained the skies:
Methought I heard their lessening sound decay
And fade and melt and vanish quite away.
Hail heaven born music! by thy power we raise
The uplifted soul to acts of highest praise:
Oh! I would die with music melting round,
And ^^o^t to bliss upon a sea of sound.
TO CELIA, ON HER WEDDING DAY.
WHILST Heaven with kind propitious ray,
Smiles, Celia, on thy nuptial day,
And every sympathising breast
With transport glows to see thee blessed;
Whilst present joys the hours beguile,
And future prospects seem to smile.
Shall not my muse her tribute bring
And gladly touch the trembling string?
I know it is usual at such times
To pay respect in pompous rhymes;
To bid the whole celestial race
With brightest glories fill the place,
And from their mansions hasten down
The nuptial rites with bliss to crown:
As if each goddess might be said
To be the poet's waiting maid:
But I who have no power at all,
Such high divinities to call,
Must lay those stratagems aside
And with plain fable treat the bride.
As Cupid through the azure way
Did late with wandering pinion stray,
The little urchin chanced to spy;
His master Hymen passing by;
Surprised with conscious guilt and shame,
Knowing his conduct much to blame,
With nimble haste he strove to shroud
His presence in a fleecy cloud.
But Hymen saw, nor could he fail
To see a wing -- oh! piteous tale!
Peep from behind the misty veil.
The observing god with eager joy,
Rushed on and seized the affrighted boy. --
"Well, master Cupid, are you caught
"At last, he cried, I almost thought
"You, far from hence, had taken flight,
"And quite forsook the realms of light;
"For whereso'er I choose to stray,
"I seldom meet you in my way. --
"Wherefore so shy? since well you know
"It is not very long ago
"Since Jove in council did decree,
"Yourself and services to me;
"That it might ever be your care,
"To warm those breasts whom I would pair
"With mutual love, and bless my bonds,
"By mingling hearts with joining hands.
"Instead of which, you rambling go,
"And sad confusions make below:
"Whilst my softest bondage often falls,
"Where custom points or interest calls.
"But Jove himself shall quickly hear,
"How much his dictates you revere;
"Yet ever we part, it is my desire,
"You kindle love's celestial fire
"In the fair Celia's peaceful breast,
"And make her amorous Strephon blessed."
With piteous tone, and tear-full eye,
Thus did the little god reply:
"This, Hymen, this I must deny,
"Do -- any other service choose,
"There Is naught but this I can refuse;
"I have my word and honor given,
"And firmly sworn by earth and Heaven,
"That love shall Celia never molest
"No dart of mine ever wound her breast.
Hymen, first made an angry pause,
Then spoke -- "Thou traitor to my cause,!
"Is It thus with mortals you conspire,
"To break my torch and quench my fire;
"I often have wondered why that maid
"My soft encircling bands delayed;
"The wonder ceases now; I find
"That you and Celia have combined,
"My power celestial to despise
"And rob me of my pairest prize.
"But Celia soon in wedlock's chain
"Shall shine the fairest of my train*
"Virtue her days with peace shall crown,
"And I will shower my blessings down;
"Her happy state shall others move,
"To seek the joys of weded love."
Much would the weeping boy have said;
But Hymen urged, and love obeyed:
A shaft he chose from out the rest,
And sunk it deep in Celia's breast.
Soft through her frame the poison crept;
And Hymen laughed and Cupid wept.
Then upwards, far from human sight,
They winged their way in speedy flight,
Wrapped in a glorious blaze of light.
A PARAPHRASE, ON THE 107th PSALM.
WITH choral voice, oh! let the nations join
And bless the Lord in harmony divine:
His tender mercy over all extends,
And vast creation on his power depends.
Let those, with grateful hearts, his goodness tell
And to his praise the solemn anthem swell;
Whom he vouchsafed with kind directing hand,
To lead in safety from a hostile land;
At once with hunger and with thirst oppressed,
The fainting soul pined in the panting breast.
In deep distress they called on God most high,
Who with his wonted mercy heard their cry:
The heavens did mana for their food distill,
And from the rock burst forth the limpid rill:
From desert wilds, where destitute they roam,
He brings at length the wearied wand'rers home;
They conquer, by his aid, the nations round,
And fill a land with cheerful plenty crowned.
Oh! that the people, with united voice,
Would in the mercies of the Lord rejoice;
His holy name in hallelujahs bless,
And all the wonders of his power confess:
To hungry souls he does his joy impart,
And with sweet comfort soothe the wounded heart.
But those who light esteemed his proffered love,
Did soon the terrors of his vengeance prove;
His injured justice will overtake his foes,
And punish all who dare his power oppose:
Long in a dungeon's dreary depth they lay,
Shut from the radiance of the cheerful day;
Where gall'ng chains their captive limbs confined,
And wasting anguish preyed upon the mind.
But when to heaven they lift their ardent prayer,
And all the miseries of their state declare;
Sincerely swell the penitential sigh,
And for offended mercy loudly cry:
The God of mercy sends a quick relief,
And songs of triumph soon dispel their grief:
He breaks their bands, wipes all their tears away,
And on their darkness pours reviving day.
Oh! that the nations, with united voice,
Would in the mercies of the Lord rejoice;
His holy name in hallelujahs bless,
And all the wonders of his power confess!
The guilty wretch is punished for his sin;
A wounded conscience tortures him within;
With growing horror, aggravated fear,
He sees the stroke of death already near:
Then, if to God his sorrowing soul returns,
And with contrition deep her trespass mourns,
The ear of pity waits on his distress,
And ready pardon will repentance bless:
The hand of mercy stops the hand of death,
The voice of love recalls his fleeting breath.
Oh! that the nations, with united voice,
Would in the mercies of the Lord rejoice;
His holy name in Hallelujahs bless,
And all the wonders of his power confess!
Those who in ships pursue their dangerous way
Through the vast empire of the trackless sea,
Behold the power of Heaven's almighty king,
And with a fearful awe his praises sing.
At his tremendous word the billows rise,
And clouds glide swiftly through the floating skies;
Sulphurous lightnings dart from pole to pole,
And over the burdened ether heavy thunders roll;
The howling tempest seems to shake the globe,
Whilst troubled nature wears her darkest robe:
Yet does the little bark the tumult brave,
And on the white top of the bursting wave
Quivering she hangs -- her masts the clouds divide,
And from beneath, hell opes her portals wide:
Confusion reigns over all the watery realm;
The astonished seamen quit the useless helm:
With growing terrors are their bosoms filled,
And in their veins the purple currents chilled:
In their distress to God they lift their prayer,
And though the tempest roars, the Lord will hear:
The same dread word that swelled the boiling main,
Commands a calm, and all is smooth again;
Their terrors vanish, whilst propitious gales
Swift to the port impel their swelling sails.
Oh! that the nations with united voice,
Would in the mercies of the Lord rejoice;
His holy name in hallelujahs bless,
And all the wonders of his power confess!
The fruitful land is blasted for the sin
Of the rebellious race that dwell therein:
The springs forget to flow, the clouds to pour,
Upon the parched plains their watery store;
In vain the husbandman with patient toil
Provokes to plenty the unyielding soil;
The drooping plant withered and barren dies,
Whilst all its vegetative moisture dries.
But unexhausted plenty from the Lord
Attend on those, who by his holy word
Direct their steps -- for them shall gardens grow
In desert wilds and bubbling fountains flow:
Their flocks, their herds, their vineyards shall increase,
And smiling plenty dwell with gentle peace.
Such are the blessings that await the just,
The lot of those who place in God their trust:
Then let the wise by virtue hope to prove,
The lasting mercies of his endless love:
For who can bear of guilt the secret sting,
Or dare to vengeance Heavens almighty king.
AN ELEGY. SACRED TO THE MEMORY OF JOSIAH MARTIN, ESQUIRE. JUN. WHO DIED IN THE
ISLAND OF ANTIGUA, JUNE 1762.
'TWAS evening mild -- the sun's declining ray,
No longer flamed from the western sky;
But stars contended with the fading day,
And creeping twilight boded darkness nigh.
With wandering step, slow pace and pensive look,
I sought the silence of the darksome grove;
Where weeping sorrow swells the murmuring brook,
And contemplation, lonely, loves to rove*
In the deep gloom the sudden sounds I hear
Of dulcet prelude from the warbling lyre;
The voice of woe stole plaintive on my ear,
And thus accorded to the trembling wire:
"Let proud ambition with her faithless throng,
As interest points, address the venal song;
Still in the paths of labored flattery toil,
And seek for virtue in a barren s^il.
Let it be thine, my artless muse, to raise,
To modest merit, well deserved praise;
For goodness lost, to bid thy numbers slow,
In the smooth strains of unaffected woe, --
From blossomed hopes, and life's most flowery height,
See Martin's spirit wings eternal flight;
Not wisdom, truth, and innocence combined,
A graceful person, an informed mind
Prevent the stroke -- he meets a hasty doom;
Death shrouds his rising glories in the tomb:
Mourn then, my muse, in strains elegiac mourn,
And deck with cypress his untimely urn.
In vain for thee, beloved youth, in vain,
We strove the heights of science to attain;
Say, can I ever forget those blissful days,
He was fellow student with (...).
When hand in hand we trod the flowery maze?
Say, can I ever forget the warmth divine
That from thy heart did in each action shine?
Each winning grace, and all thy power to move
By soft persuasion, undissembled love:
Thy strength of reason passion to control,
And the sweet temper of thy yielding soul;
Thy steady friendship, sentiments refined,
With all the gentle virtues of thy mind.
Oh! fate severe! just to overcome the toil
Of early life, and see the prospect smile
With dawning bliss; -- but never to enjoy --
Too sudden shades the rising scene destroy.
'Twas thus Moses.
the Prophet, by divine command,
From Pisgah's top beheld the promised land:
He saw -- and died; for so did Heaven ordain --
But God is just, and let not man complain.
AN EPITAPH. FOR AN INFANT.
SLEEP on, sweet babe! no dreams annoy thy rest,
Thy spirit flew unsullied from thy breast:
Sleep on, sweet innocent! nor shall thou dread
The passing storm that thunders over thy head:
Through the bright regions of yon azure sky,
A winged seraph, now she soars on high;
Or, on the bosom of a cloud reclined,
She rides triumphant on the rapid wind;
Or from its source pursues the radiant day;
Or on a sunbeam, smoothly glides away;
Or mounts aerial, to her blessed abode,
And sings, inspired, the praises of her God:
Unveiled, thence, to her extensive eye,
Nature, and Nature's Laws, expanded lie:
Death, in one moment, taught this infant more
Than years or ages ever taught before.
DISAPPOINTED LOVE. RECITATIVE.
HIGH raised in ether, from her silver throne,
The moon in melancholy mildness shone;
Nor voice, nor sound disturbed the midnight hour,
Save the sad south wind murmuring in the bower;
When sable clad, with slow and pensive mien,
Narcissa lonely passed the dusky green:
All wan with wasting grief, forsook her bed,
And sought the silent mansions of the dead;
Her bosom heaved with many a deep drawn sigh,
And the big tear stood trembling in her eye:
Then from her lips thus broke the voice of woe --
Then planets listened, and the moon moved slow.
AIR.
Farewell to all that promised joy;
No flattering hopes my thoughts employ;
A wounded heart bleeds in my breast,
And death alone can give me rest.
And thou, lamented youth, farewell!
With thee the smiling prospect fell;
Sad over thy grave, broods black despair,
For all my hopes lie buried there.
But now thy form moved in my sight,
I glowed with love and dear delight;
Thy bosom burned with equal fire,
With equal pangs of soft desire.
But now I decked me for thy bride;
Elate in youth and beauty's pride,
My throbbing heart beat quick alarms,
Whilst bliss approached in Damon's arms,
A voice soon strikes my startled ear,
Whose dismal accents yet I hear;
Forbear, fond maid, forbear, it cries,
For Damon, thy loved Damon, dies.
All strength forsakes my tottering frame;
My tongue scarce utters Damon's name;
Prostrate I fall; my eye balls roll,
And anguish wrings my tortured soul.
Yet, yet I hear the deep ton'd bell,
With minute strokes tell out his knell;
My swelling heart grows big with grief,
And not one tear vouchsafes relief.
Oh! if beneath yon pale moon's sphere,
Thy lambent spirit floats in air,
Witness my sigh's, hear me complain,
And pity my unequaled pain,
Whilst bitter grief and pining woe,
And welcome death at last will show,
How hard their fate who ever prove
The pangs of disappointed love.
AN EXERCISE: Containing a DIALOGUE The dialogue by the ^ev. Dr. Smith.
and ODE, sacred to the memory of his late gracious majesty GEORGE II. --
Performed at the public commencement in the College of Philadelphia, May 1761.
The Ode set to music by F -- H --.
EUGENIO. WHAT means that look of woe, the head reclined,
Those folded arms with which I meet Amyntor?
That eye, which wont with love and sp^rkling joy,
To beam munificent on every friend;
Why bends it thus in sorrow to the ground,
As if no view could please but dust and earth?

AMYNTOR. All things, Eugenio, are but dust and earth!
Even kings themselves -- those demigods enthroned,
Rulers of empire, thunderbolts of war,
At whose avenging nod the guilty tremble,
Nations are doomed, and millions live or die --
Even kings, themselves, are naught but dust and earth!

EUGENIO. Who knows not that, Amyntor? But why damp
This festive (...) with such untimely lectures?

AMYNTOR. What festive day can Britain or her sons
Now celebrate? The voice of joy is fled.
Let no rash hand with myrtle or with bay,
Or other flaunting foliage of the grove
Presume to deck these walls. Come baleful yew,
And weeping cypress, from your midnight shades!
None other wreathe but yours from hill or dale
Be plucked to circle academic brow.
See pale Britannia on the wave-worn shore,
Incumbent over her massy trident weeps;
And fond Ierne, sister of her grief,
Calls from her harp sad notes of Doric strain.
From pole to pole, far as old ocean heaves
His troubled waves, and bears the British flag,
The voice of woe is heard. Even here remote,
The awful genius of these barbarous woods,
That wont to roam from Indian height to height
With nature's self, in frolic ever new,
Tears from his hoary head his feathered crown,
And breaks his arrows, and his quiver rends.

EUGENIO. In mystic words, and metaphoric strains,
Why would Amyntor strive to hide the cause
Of such unbounded sorrow?

AMYNTOR -- No, Eugenio!
Amyntor would not hide, but speak the cause,
Could words be found to measure forth his grief,
And ease his laboring breast. The god-like George,
The friend of freedom, and the scourge of tyrants,
The father of his country -- sleeps in dust;
Of import dreadful from Britannia's coast,
Confirmed and full, the mournful tidings come.

EUGENIO. Illustrious monarch! not the Roman boast,
The generous Titus, joy of human kind;
Nor names of later date, William and Henry,
Or Alfred's self, shall fill a brighter page
In fame's eternal roll, than shall the name
Of gracious George. Beneath his equal sway
Oppression was not; Justice poised her scale;
No law was trampled, and no right denied:
The merchant flourished, and the peasant smiled.
And, oh! my friend, to what amazing height
Of sudden grandeur did his nursing care
Up-raise these colonies; beyond whatever
Of ancient or of modern times is told.
Prepare we then, due elegies to frame,
Such as may well accord to heart of woe.

AMYNTOR. That work is done. Behold the goodly choir,
With voice united to the deep-ton'd note
Of swelling organ, rise in act to sing
The consecrated lay -- Hark! hark! they strike! --

THE ODE.
RECITATIVE.
WHY looks the visionary maid so sad,
Ah! why, Britannia, thus in sable clad?
Oh! speak the cause from whence such sorrows flow,
That, by partaking, we may ease thy woe.
AIR.
Lend, lend your tears, ye virgin train,
Let music swell her softest strain!
Oh! make the solemn dirge resound,
And spread religious sorrow round --
With me the deep-felt loss deplore --
My son! my son! is now no more!
CHORUS.
Then let the solemn dirge begin,
Whilst we our voices join,
To swell the tenderest note of grief,
And mix our woe with thine.
A slow symphony.
AIR.
The glorious sun, Britannia's king,
Withdraws his golden light:
His setting ray
Glides swift away,
And yields to conquering night.
Down in the deep and dreary tomb
His mortal part must lie;
And every bell
Now tolls his knell,
Tears flow from every eye.
Far over the wild and watery waste,
Hear the loud cannons roar;
'Till winds convey
The sounds away,
That die along the shore.
But, lo! his sainted soul ascends
High through the etherial road;
And Briton's sighs
Like incense rise,
To waft him to his God.
EUGENIO. How soft the power of music to assuage
The pangs of grief! like balm of costly price
Poured over the streaming wound. Since then, my friend,
Due tribute has been paid to royal worth,
And royal dust; it boots us not to spend
Our fleeting hours in unavailing sorrow.
See! by the bounty of all ruling heaven,
Another George to happy Britons given:
Gay youth and glory beam around his throne,
And glad Britannia claims him as her own.
Let us embrace what heaven in kindness gives,
Since George the Second in the Third still lives.

AN EXERCISE; Containing a DIALOGUE The dialogue by the rev. Mr. Duche.
and ODE, on the accession of his present gracious majesty GEORGE III. --
Performed at a public commencement in the College of Philadelphia, May, 1762.
The Ode set to music by F -- H --.
LORENZO. ENOUGH, ye sons of science! honors meet
At your maternal shrine have now been paid.
From the fair font of Helicon divine
Pure living streams, enraptured, have ye drawn,
Of classic lore, and bade them copious flow,
To grace the prospects of this festive day.
Meanwhile, each patriot eye with transport gazed;
Each friend of worth, of science, and of man,
With cheering smiles their silent plaudit gave.
Say then, my friends, have ye no chaplets weaved,
No jocund song prepared of sprightliest strain,
To crown the labors of the learned tribe,
And sooth with warblings sweet the parting ear?

EUGENIO. Yes, my Lorenzo, grateful will we pay
All seemly tribute to this glad occasion:
Nor chaplets gay, nor song of sprightliest strain
Will we refuse. See good Amyntor's eye
Sparkles with joy, and speaks some rapturous theme.

AMYNTOR. What theme more joyous, or can better suit
The glad return of this auspicious day,
Than that which occupies my present thought,
And which the faithful index of my heart
Pointed to thy discerning? -- Know, Eugenio,
The joy that sports in thy Amyntor's breast,
And over his visage spreads this placid smile,
Springs from no other source than the loud fame
Of his young monarch's worth. -- Be this our theme.

EUGENIO. And is it thus, Amyntor? ah! how soon
To sounds of grief succeeds the voice of joy!
And gilded trappings to the garb of woe.
Far other scenes thy laboring breast disclosed,
When last I met thee at these annual rites:
With visage wan, with dark and downward brow,
When royal dust received the duteous tear;
When trembled with the dirge this stately dome,
And gloom'd these hallowed walls with wreaths funereal.

AMYNTOR. Oh! name it not, my friend! all custom'd dues
To majesty entombed were then discharged.
To dwell desponding on the mournful theme,
Or hang like statues over the kingly urn,
Pale, motionless as marble; this were impious;
A censure weak and rash of heaven's decree.
Shout then, ye favored race, ye sons of freedom,
Bound every heart with joy, and every breast
Pour the warm tribute of a grateful praise!
For over the realms of Britain reigns supreme
The darling of his people, George the Good.
Bright clust'ring round his throne the virtues stand
In meet array, obsequious at his call,
To fly, triumphant, through his wide domain,
And deal their salutary influence round.

LORENZO. Thrice happy monarch! skilled in every art
To win a nation's smile, and fix their love.
Thy youthful blossoms are the earnests sure
Of future glories to thy native land.
Hence, in the mighty rolls of British fame,
Thy reign shall shine distinguished mid the rest,
By deeds of valor, piety, and love.

AMYNTOR. Nor only in the sphere of royalty,
The wise exertions of his kingly power,
Does George illustrious move: each milder virtue,
Each soft endearing scene of private life
His tender soul embraces: modest worth,
Grace unaffected, true simplicity,
With dignity combined, each nameless joy
That Hymen twines around his silken bands,
He meets with transport in his Charlotte's arms,
The pleasing partner of his heart and throne.
But let us not in fond and growing parley
Thus waste the day. -- Begin ye choral band,
For whom the festive song has been prepared,
And with loud Poeans rend the vaulted roof.

THE ODE.
BRIGHT ascending to the skies,
See Britannia's glory rise!
Cease your sorrows, cease your fears,
Night recedes and day appears;
Another George majestic fills her throne,
And glad Britannia calls him all her own.
CHORUS.
Let the tuneful chorus join,
And high their voices raise,
To celebrate in notes divine,
The youthful monarchs praise.
AIR.
Rejoicing science with each polished art,
Beneath his reign shall with success conspire
To form the manners, humanize the heart,
And virtuous thoughts, and virtuous deeds inspire.
II.
The sweets of liberty shall care beguile,
And justice still her happy influence spread,
Religion cheer him with a sacred smile,
And bid the crown sit lightly on his head.
CHORUS.
Let the tuneful chorus join,
And high their voices raise,
To celebrate in notes divine
The pious monarch's praise.
AIR.
See resplendent at his side,
Joyful sits his royal bride:
Glowing youth and beauty join
To make the fair conspicuous shine:
Every virtue warms her breast --
How is Britain's monarch blessed!
Unsullied bliss shall crown the royal pair,
The good and great are heaven's peculiar care.
CHORUS.
Let the tuneful chorus join,
And high their voices raise,
To celebrate in notes divine
The happy monarch's praise.
AIR.
Rough war shall humbly at his feet
Her bloody laurels lay;
Him gentle peace shall kindly greet,
And smile beneath his sway.
II.
Hail! Britain, hail! these golden days;
Illustrious shall thou shine;
For GEORGE shall gain immortal praise,
And, Britain, GEORGE is thine.
To distant time he shall extend his name,
And give thy glories to a deathless fame.
CHORUS,
Let the tuneful chorus join,
And high their voices raise,
To celebrate in notes divine,
The British monarch's praise.
AN ODE Designed (...) a public commencement in the college of Philadelphia.
RECITATIVE.
WHEN heaven spreads blessings with unsparing hand,
And smiling plenty crowns the joyful land,
The happy peasants tune their rustic lay,
And back to heaven their grateful tribute pay:
And shall not we enraptured snatch the lyre,
And sing to strains which thankful hearts inspire,
When heaven consents, and men unite to bless
This seat of science with ensur'd success?
CHORUS.
Rise! rise! ye sons of science, rise!
Your loudest strains employ;
With glowing fire,
Attune the lyre
To gratitude and joy.
AIR.
His gracious majesty George III. who granted a brief for making a collection
through the kingdoms of England, Scotland and Ireland, for the benefit of this
institution.
Hail to the king! whose virtuous heart
Directs his liberal hand,
To stretch over wide extending seas,
And bless a distant land.
Oh! let the numerous throng that daily prove
The sweet effects of his paternal love,
Unite their hearts in one accord and sing
In acclamations loud, Hail to the king!
CHORUS.
Rise! rise! ye sons of science, rise!
Your loudest strains employ;
With glowing fire,
Attune the lyre
To gratitude and joy.
AIR.
The many benefactors who freely contributed on this occasion.
A generous throng demands our love,
Who in a desert wild,
Heard infant science cry for help,
And nursed the drooping child:
Though men forget, heaven will the deed record,
And to their race extend the blessed reward.
CHORUS.
Rise! rise! ye sons of science, rise!
Your loudest strains employ;
With glowing fire,
Attune the lyre
To gratitude and joy.
AIR.
And can the muse forget his The rev. Dr. Smith, who carried about the brief
and received the contributions.
toil,
Who compassed sea and land
To rear the tender plant which often
Had felt his pruning hand?
Oh! let his care and unexampled love,
Our just returns of warm affection move!
CHORUS.
Rise! rise! ye sons of science, rise!
Your loudest strains employ;
With glowing fire,
Attune the lyre
To gratitude and joy.
SCIENCE; A POEM.
Humbly inscribed to the Trustees, Provost, Vice Provost, and Professors in the
College and Academy of PHILADELPHIA. Doctrina sed vim promovet insitam,
Rectique cultus pectora r^b^rant.
HOR. 1762.
DEDICATION. To the Trustees, Provost, Vice Provost, etc.
GENTLEMEN,
It is not without great expectations from your candor and indulgence that I
am encouraged to lay this little Poem at your feet.

I do not flatter myself that your institution will hereby gain any additional
luster, but I would take this opportunity of publicly acknowledging my
affection and gratitude to that seat of Science.

May all your undertakings for its advancement meet with more than expected
success; and may it never want friends to support it with equal zeal, but
greater abilities, than I can boast.

I am, Gentlemen, Your much obliged And humble servant, F. H.

SCIENCE; A POEM.
GODDESS sublime! on whose adventurous wing,
Like the sweet lark, fleet fancy mounts to sing;
Whether it chance to please thee, youthful queen,
With airy step to grace the rural scene;
Or softly languish through the breezy grove,
In all the dying tenderness of love:
Whether through some untrodden flowery way,
With contemplation mild, thou love to stray;
Or on a tempest's rapid fury rise,
And dip thy plumage in the watery skies,
Or moonlight wandering by the wave worn shore
Wait on old Ocean's melancholy roar:
Wherever thou art, once more my prayer attend;
Once more celestial muse thy influence lend.
Fair science softening with reforming hand,
The native rudeness of a barbarous land:
Her radiant throne uprais'd by power divine,
Her numerous sons low bending at her shrine.
Joyful I sing -- oh! may my numbers seem
To flow inspired, and equal to my theme.
Ye friends of learning, patronize my song,
To you the tributary strains belong:
But chiefly The honorable James Hamilton, Esquire, Lieutenant Governor of the
province of Pennsylvania.
, thou beneath whose gentle sway
The muse delights to tune her grateful lay:
Glad science, thee, shall her Maecenas hail,
Wisdom shall smile and heavenly truth prevail!
In yonder dome -- it boasts no pompous name,
Yet not the less shall fill the page of fame,
Bright science dwells -- how honored the retreat,
Where science deigns to fix her favorite seat.
High from the throne she beams celestial day;
And distant lauds confess the enlivening ray:
The graces ever in her presence stand
And virtue blooms beneath her nursing hand.
There first her youthful vot'ry learns to please
By just expression and becoming ease --
Delightful task, with early care to teach
The lisping tongue propriety of speech.
See on the stage the little hero stands,
With eyes uplifted, with extended hands:
Or from his lips Pope's liquid numbers flow,
In streams mellifluous -- See the conscious glow
Burns on his cheek -- perhaps the strains inspire
The infant raptures of poetic fire:
Perhaps it is modesty, with native grace,
Calls forth the roses in his youthful face:
O^ now the force of eloquence he tries,
And attic lightenings kindle in his eyes.
Methinks I see the deep touched senate glow
While mimic thunders threaten from his brow;
Or now his gentle voice in borrowed lays,
Swells the smooth tribute of his Maker's praise:
See the warm ardor of the saint expressed,
As if the numbers fired his little breast:
What joy to hear; what raptures to behold,
The youthful bard, so graceful and so bold:
In virtues cause -- bright truth shall soon inspire
The living ardors of a real fire.
But now glad science to his riper age
Unfolds the treasures of the classic page:
Sweet Heliconian draughts enrich his soul;
From the pure stream he drinks without control.
Virgil for him awakes the tuneful lyre,
And lavish Pindar powers forth all his fire.
Pious Aeneas, who attends thy woe
But deeply feels the sympathetic glow!
Through every page engaging virtues shine.
And frequent precepts grace each moral line:
Whilst Horace leads the lyric muse along
With careless ease attunes the pleasing song;
The unlabored thought harmoniously expressed,
Gives gayer transport to the youthful breast:
Homer more boldly strikes the epic string;
Swift are we borne upon his rapid wing,
Where bleeding heroes stain the ensanguin'd ground,
And angry gods are heard in thunder round.
And now advanced the student loves t'engage,
More arduous heights -- the mathematic page
Invites his riper judgment to explore,
The mazy windings of her subtle lore:
The pleasing toil delights the enquiring youth,
And science guides him to the entangled truth.
At length behold to his astonished eye,
Nature's vast volume all expanded lie;
From the effect he seeks the hidden cause,
And deeply searches her mysterious laws.
Earth, air, nor sea, nor heavens extended space
Can bound the reach of man's aspiring race;
Upward he lifts the astronomic eye,
Surveys those orbs of light that roll on high:
Mid sun's and blazing stars he dares to rove,
And learn the important laws by which they move:
Sits in the center, wrapped in thought profound,
And views the radiant system rolling round.
To reason's eye there shall the cause appear,
Why various seasons form the changing year:
Spring first in mantle green and garlands gay,
Sweet smelling as she passes, leads the way.
With breezy call awakes each rural sound,
And fills with music woods and valleys round:
Then Summer comes light clad in glowing red,
Whilst the thick foliage nods around her head:
With lavish bounty from her lap she pours,
Luxuriant gifts of herbage, fruits and flowers.
In yellow garb see Autumn next appear,
To crown with plenty the rejoicing year:
Over new reaped fields with airy steps she roves,
And paints in various hue the fading groves.
Then boisterous Winter howls along the plain,
Affrighted vegetation shrinks again
Back into earth; woods, hills, and valleys stand
Stripped of their pride by his relentless hand:
In icy bonds he holds the water's fall,
And in his snowy mantle wraps them all.
Thus shall his eye important truths pursue,
And in his works the Great Creator view:
The birds on pointed pinions mounting high,
That pour shrill music from the azure sky;
The fish that sporting in the lucid stream,
Swift glide and glitter to the sun's bright beam;
The herbs medicinal that strew the ground;
The varied flowers that bloom spontaneous round;
The grove, high waving, the green tufted dale,
The pearl decked grotto, the sequestered vale;
All must the philosophic bosom move,
To wonder, gratitude, and glowing love.
But now the pupil takes his boldest flight;
See adventrous him, climb the towering height,
Of Ethic learning -- more extensive fields,
Views more enlarged, the boundless prospect yields.
His searches now pursue a nobler plan,
Now comes that grand enquiry what is man?
How formed? by whom? thence shall he learn to know
From his connections what great duties flow.
What powers are given those duties to fulfill;
How form the judgment; how direct the will;
When passion to indulge, when to restrain;
And how his happiness supreme obtain;
What is the nature of his nobler part;
Why with ambition throbs his anxious heart;
To draw the midnight curtains of the tomb,
And look for judgment and a world to come.
From such pursuits what great ideas flow?
See in his visage conscious virtue glow:
His views enlarge, enlightened is his mind;
More warm his heart, his passions more refined:
Religion kindles her celestial ray,
And truth breaks on him in a ^^ood of day!
Pier^an muse! thy favor still prolong
And let thy presence animate my song!
Now science joys to calls the youth her own
And crowns with laurel her adopted son:
His Alma matter now prepares to shed,
Her rich rewards on his distinguished head:
The vaulted hall the rising anthems rend,
And pressing crowds the solemn rite attend:
Prepared for action now he takes the field,
And speculation must to practice yield.
High on the stage, and graceful to the view,
"Adieu dear seat of bliss, he cries adieu;"
Pathetic sorrows in his bosom swell,
And with reluctant voice he sighs a last farewell.
What means my trembling pulse and throbbing breast?
Why is the scene to me so strong expressed?
Fancy again renews the awful r^te;
The encircling audience swims before my sight;
Once more my heart beats quick with anxious fear:
Once more methinks the solemn charge I hear --
" This passage alludes to the charge delivered by the provost to first
candidates for degrees in the college, amongst whom the author was one.
Go forth my sons, our first, our early pride,
"Through life's dark maze be virtue still your guide;
"Without religion, learning is but vain,
"And fruitless toil philosophy to gain:
"'It Is not sufficient that what is right you know,
"Your conduct ever should your knowledge show:
"Should injured freedom for assistance cry,
"Nor eye, nor ear, nor hand, nor heart deny;
"With pious zeal up raise her drooping head!
"There Is naught but vice and tyranny to dread."
Blessed institution, nurse of liberty!
My heart, my grateful heart, shall glow for thee:
No common pride I boast, no common joy,
That thy instructions did my youth employ.
Though not the first amongst thy sons I prove,
Yet well I feel I Am not the last in love.
Oh! may thy sacred influence never cease,
But in secure prosperity increase!
It must be so, prophetic fancy cries;
See other Newton's other Shakespeare's rise;
Each sage philosopher, each learned divine
And patriot worthies an illustrious line:
All those who nobly fill Fame's ample page,
Again revive to grace a future age. --
Blessed institution! hail, methinks I see
The shining throng ascribe their birth to thee.
Thou, Sc^uylkill, from whose cliffs I love to view,
Thy gurgling stream its rocky way pursue,
Shall own the change: the savage yell no more
With fearful sounds shall rend thy rugged shore:
Oh! let thy groves their richest beauties wear,
And for approaching happier times prepare.
Along thy banks the pensive bard shall stray;
Sweep the sweet lyre, and wake the tuneful lay:
Echo shall love to catch the pleasing sound,
And bid it soften all thy rocks around:
Even now thy flowery paths I see him tread,
And pluck thy laurels to adorn his head;
How shall thy waves elate flow proudly by,
And grow more turgid but to catch his eye?
How shall thy rural scenes bloom in his song,
And each romantic height his strains prolong?
Then whilst his breast with sacred ardor burns,
Religion, Justice, Liberty by turns;
And science too, in more harmonious strains,
Shall sweetly warble to the hills and plains:
Perhaps the bard, when highest noon prevails,
Beneath some shade shall court refreshing gales;
And whilst his wandering fancy roves more free,
May chance to think of earlier times and me.
Presumptuous thought, shall my unpolished lay,
Be borne in safety down time's rapid way?
The dangerous rocks of criticism fly,
And fearless pass Oblivion's quick sands by?
Enough for me, if with the least regard,
The The trustees of the college.
friends of science should my song reward;
No speedy death my artless strains shall know,
Not without honor will my numbers flow,
If with indulgence, they should not refuse,
To smile propitious on my humble muse.
A MORNING HYMN
ONCE more the rising source of day,
Pours on the earth his genial ray:
Withdraws the starry veil of night,
And smiles on every mountain height.
Once more my soul, thy song prepare,
Thy God approach in praise and prayer;
With early voice salute the skies,
And on the lark's fleet pinions rise.
This hand did me from danger keep
When nature lay entranced in sleep:
When every sense forsook its post,
And reason's guardian power was lost.
Soon as dark night over spreads the skies,
Colds mists and drowsy damps arise:
Contagious steams their confines break,
And slumber over the sluggish lake.
Loud shrieks the melancholy owl,
And prowling wolves through deserts howl;
(...) fancied spectre glides the green,
And midnight murder walks unseen.
Forlorn the wearied wanderer strays,
Lost in a labyrinthian maze;
Wherever he treads, is danger there,
And his soul sickens in despair.
Whilst slumbers soft my eyelids close,
And golden dreams and sweet repose,
Wear the sad hours of night away,
And hasten on the cheerful day.
My God! shall not such goodness move
My soul to gratitude an love?
Or shall my heart forget to raise,
Her loud hosannahs to thy praise?
When shall my eager spirit rise,
And soar above these floating skies?
Oh! when with hosts seraphic join,
To sing thy majesty divine?
In realms where no returns of night,
Shall ever the timorous soul affright?
But one eternal blaze of day,
Shines forth with unremitting ray?
AN EVENING HYMN.
AT length the busy day is done,
And yon bright orb, the glorious sun,
Deep in the west reclines his head,
Where misty curtains shroud his bed.
Oh! God of hosts! with this day's close,
How many sleep in death's repose?
And with the sinking sun's decline,
To thee their fleeting souls resign.
Hark! it is the tolling bell I hear,
And slow and dull it strikes mine ear:
Even whilst I tune my pensive song,
The solemn funeral moves along.
He whom this night the expecting tomb,
Shall wrap within its dreary gloom,
At y^^^^-morn, devoid of care,
Up rose and breathed the healthful air.
Gay Hope over looked the present day,
Prospects of years before him lay;
He hastened to distant joys meet,
Nor saw the grave yawn at his feet.
Ambition, stop thy mad career,
Look on that corse and drop a tear;
Even when thy hand would grasp the prize,
The stroke is given, and glory dies.
Let Avarice, feeble, gray and old,
Whilst his broad palm protects his gold,
Lift up his eyes, and sighing say,
Death is a debt we all must pay.
Let thoughtless youth, too often found,
In sensual joy's enchanting round,
Behold, and as he trembling stands,
Let Pleasure's cup fall from his hands.
And thou my soul thy thoughts employ,
On God thy glory, wealth and joy:
Virtue alone is stable here,
Naught but religion is sincere.
When mortal pangs his frame shall seize,
And the chilled blood begins to freeze;
When my fixed eyes must roll no more,
And life escapes through every pore.
Ah! what shall cheer my drooping heart.
Shall worldly honors joy impart?
Can sensual pleasure sweeten death,
Or wealth redeem one parting breath?
Therefore, my soul, thy thoughts employ,
On God, thy Glory, wealth and joy:
Virtue alone is stable here,
Naught but religion is sincere.
TO ROSALINDA, ON HER BIRTH DAY.
WELCOME! ye glories of the eastern sky!
Blessed be the dawn of this propitious day!
Oh! let the muse her willing strains employ,
And cheerful swell the tributary lay.
This happy morn gave the rejoicing earth
A treasure great as could the heavens bestow,
This happy morn gave Rosalinda birth --
Cease, cease ye floods, ye tempests, cease to blow.
Come gentle spring, like Rosalinda fair,
Like her advance, and brighten every scene:
Shed all thy odours in the ambient air,
And far abroad extend thy mantle green.
Like Rosalinda come, the source of joy!
Let nature smile, and all the world be gay:
Let every muse her willing strains employ,
To hail the spring, and Rosalinda's day.
TO ROSALINDA* ON HER BIRTH DAY.
HAIL! sacred morn! the muse's lay
Once more salutes thy rising ray:
Hail! blessed morn! thy deathless fame
Shall live in Rosalinda's name.
Dark was the sky, and through the night
The tempest winged its rapid flight;
The forest herds in caverns lay,
And looked and longed for light and day.
With glory crowned, at length was seen
Thy happy dawn, mild and serene;
Diffusive radiance paints thy sky,
And gilds Norwedian hills with joy.
Then came with thee fair Rosalind;
And came, like thee, to bless mankind:
The storms are hushed, the muses sing,
And ^on arose the jocund spring.
The feathered choirs from every tree,
My Rosalinda, welcome thee;
With them on this auspicious day,
Oh! let me join my annual lay.
The morn gave luster to thy face,
The gentle spring, each winning grace;
Thus morn and spring their beauties joined,
And gave the world fair Rosalind.
TO ROSALINDA, ON HER BIRTH DAY.
THE wasting tide slow ebbing from her shore,
Wave after wave reluctant forced away,
Down to her channel shrinks, as if no more
Old ocean would her borrowed stream repay.
But soon the waters with impatient flow,
Over the broad strand in sprightly murmurs glide;
From the green bank the sedges stooping low,
With eager joy kiss the returning tide.
But time his ever ebbing course pursues
Along eternity, tha^ ^oundless shore;
No kind reflux the wasting stream renews;
The moment wave, once spent, recoils no more.
Life is a narrow span contracting fast;
And yet the anxious heart, or pressed with fear,
Would make it less, and wish the present past;
Or hope would bring some distant period near.
Time is the great deceiver of mankind,
Each day some long expected joy beguiles;
Each day some new created hope we find,
Rising to view, and still the prospect smiles.
This, gentle Rosalinda, is thy day,
And claims the annual tribute of my song:
Kindly accept the muse's moral lay,
For moral subjects should to thee belong.
Thrice happy they, who like thee, timely wise,
See years expire, and see without alarm;
To thee each birth day shall serenely rise,
To fix some virtue, or improve some charm.
The glow of modesty shall paint thy face;
Fair innocence, thy days with peace shall crown;
Gay wit shall heighten every sprightly grace,
And mild religion lead thee gently on.
Till tired of life, thou shall this life resign,
And rise a seraph from a sleeping fair
To heaven -- where angels with their harps divine
Shall celebrate thy happier birthday there.
EXTEMPORE VERSES FROM THE TOP OF MOUNT PARNASSUS, A LOFT^ HILL IN LANCASTER
COUNTY.
ONCE more my heart dilates with joy,
To climb this craggy height;
To yonder distant hills once more
I stretch my ra^ish'd sight.
The known delight my bosom feels
Parnassian ground to tread;
And where the purest ether floats,
I Will raise my lofty head.
Fair Rosalinda standing by,
Assists my flowing song,
And passing gales through waving groves,
Shall bear my strains along.
She is my muse, and does my soul
With glowing thoughts inspire:
Her cheering smiles shall make me feel
More than a poet's fire.
With anxious care, let others strive
Uncertain bliss to find,
And for expected wealth and fame
Resign their peace of mind.
In some such blessed retreat as this,
Let me my hours employ,
And Rosalinda still be near,
To brighten every joy.
DIRTILLA, A POEM.
THOU goddess sable clad, Dirtilla, hail!
Thee I invoke to aid my daring muse,
To rise with sooty wing and sing thy praise.
Never yet attempted by adventurous bard.
Thee I invoke -- whether thou love to show
Thy marbled visage in the troubled pool,
Or spread'st thy bounty over the smutted face
Of chimney sweeping elf; or over the plain,
Rolling in clouds by summer breezes born,
Salute the traveller in shape of dust:
Whether in furnace or in noisy forge,
With fiend-like colliers thou vouchsafest to dwell,
And fix with Vulcan thy coequal reign;
Or soft recline upon a scullion's lap,
Or on the schoolboys jacket smile serene,
Rebellious beaux, and washer-women strive,
But strive in vain with never ending war
To overcome thy power -- still thou return'st,
And still they labor on with fruitless toil,
Sworn foes to thee, thou sober-visag'd dame;
Not so thy bard -- full well he knows to gain;
And having gained, thy favor still to keep,
Even now wide spreading over my honored coat
Full many a spot, full many a greasy smear,
Thy influence benign and power declare;
Driving for thence, of new impressed cloth
The gaudy glare -- never to return again.
Oh! mortals blind to truth, whose anxious souls
Impatient wait, till from the taylor's hand,
The sumptuous garb, long looked for, comes complete.
Success no sooner crowns their wearied hope,
But, new distractions fill their troubled mind,
And cloud their joy; lest, in some guardless hour,
A dreaded spot should sully all their pride.
See at the festive board in new brocade
And lawn, as yet unstained, Sophronia sits:
In vain rich wines of various sort and hue,
In order ranged, the glittering side-boards grace;
And pleasant vi^nds smoke in vain around:
Nor these, nor yet th'exhilirating song,
Or needle point of stimulating wit,
Provoke to joy her ever anxious heart;
Should the rude servant with unhallowed foot,
And overflowing glass, approach too near
The magic circle of her spreading robe:
Her eager hands collect the darling silk
In closer folds, and in her sparkling eye
New lightnings kindle at the bold assault.
Thus have I seen within some farmer's yard,
Whilst busy Partlet for her chirping brood
The dunghill scratched; to them a mine of wealth:
Should fierce grimalkin from beneath the mow,
Or neighboring barn, creep fly with deadly paw:
Alarmed, she gathers all her little train
Beneath her sheltering wings: she swells with rage,
And brist'ling feathers awe the daring foe.
Oh! goddess most benign, beneath thy sway,
I eat and drink with pleasure unallay'd;
Nor c^^e I ought, if from the dripping spoon,
The falling drops enrich my sullied garb:
Oh! could I like Lunanius boast thy love,
Thy favorite vot'ry he, far, far beyond
My utmost reach, my greatest hope aspires.
His honored chamber thou vouchsaf'st to make
Thy chosen seat, thy undisturbed abode;
Where never broom thy ministers annoy,
But spiders, white with age, their webs extend
And see their numerous offspring do the same.
Methinks I see him scated on the floor,
With all his dirty papers scattered round;
While lengthened cobwebs from the ceiling's height,
Hang pendant over his head in waving rows.
Not such as Betty from the parlour sweeps
With nimble hand: but such as often are found
In dungeons deep, black with the dust of years.
Methinks I see upon his broken hearth,
On either side, a heap of ashes rise:
The sad remains of a whole winter's fire:
Nor would he yield them to the chandler's pence.
For they, oh! cursed art; by dire process,
Would soon convert them into cleansing soap.
And here, a kettle stands, which never felt
The wasting torture of a scullion's hand;
Impenetrable crusts guard it without,
And scale on scale the solid sediment
Of constant use, uncleans'd, line it within;
And there a Delphin mug, embossed once
With many a winding leaf and opening flower,
Of which no traces now are to be found,
Obliterated all with hardened grime.
But, above all, methinks I see his bed,
The throne, oh! goddess! where thou reign'st supreme;
The tester bends beneath the load of dust,
Which time has scattered with unsparing hand,
And curtains, tawny, with incessant smoke,
Hang graceful round in many a smutted fold.
To shake the bed, or cleanse the tottering frame,
On which it lies, no hand has yet presumed;
But unmolested myriads wanton there.
Thus lives Lunanius; nor can ought avail
To move his firm allegiance unto thee,
And may thou, goddess, ever such vot'ries find.
Wrapped in prophetic vision, I behold
The times approach, when all thy foes,
Humbled in dust, shall own thy general sway:
For well we know, that all things are but dirt --
And beaux and belles, and all the soapy train
Of washing-women, and of scouring men,
Must yield to thee, and into dust return.
A SENTIMENT: Occasioned by a conversation with Mr. P -- M --, one of the
principal men among the Christian Society, called DUNKARS, at EPHRATA, in the
province of PENNSYLVANIA.
THE Lord Supreme, from his exalted throne
Surveys at once earth, heaven, and worlds unknown;
All things existing must before his eye
Like the plain tracings of a picture lie:
Unutter'd thoughts deep in the heart concealed,
In strong expression stand to him revealed.
Thousands, and twice ten thousands every day,
To him or feigned or real homage pay:
Like clouds of incense rolling to the skies,
In various forms their supplications r^se;
Their various forms with him can naught avail,
The secret motives only will prevail;
And the true source of every offered prayer,
To his all-searching eye must plain appear.
Some place religion on a throne superb,
And deck with jewels her resplendant garb:
Painting and sculpture all their art display,
And lofty tapers dart their lucid ray:
High on the full-ton'd organ's buoyant sound,
The pleasing anthem floats serenely round:
Harmonic strains their thrilling powers combine,
And lift the soul to ecstacy divine.
Deep in Ephreta's gloom you fix your seat,
And seek religion in the dark retreat:
In sable weeds you dress the heaven-born maid,
And place her pensive in the lonely shade:
Recluse, unsocial you, your hours employ,
And fearful, banish every harmless joy.
Each may be right in their peculiar way,
If proper motives should their worship sway:
If but the love divine of God is there,
The spirit genuine of unfeigned prayer;
It Is true devotion; and the Lord of love
Such prayers and praises kindly will approve.
Whether from golden altars they should rise,
And wrapped in sound, roll to the lofty skies,
Or from Ephrata's seat, so meek, so low,
The soft and silent aspirations flow.
Oh! let the Christian bless that glorious day,
When outward forms shall all be done away;
When we in spirit and in truth alone
Shall bend oh! God! before thy awful throne;
When thou our purer worship shall approve,
And make returns of everlasting love.
THE TREATY; A POEM This poem was written upon the banks of the river Lehigh,
in the year 1761, when the author served as secretary in a solemn conference
held between the government of Pennsylvania and the chiefs of several Indian
nations.
, Humbly inscribed to the honorable THOMAS and RICHARD PENN, proprietors of
the province of Pennsylvania.
'MID the deep murmur of luxuriant groves,
Waving over Lehigh's sylvan painted stream,
All fancy-fir'd, the muse retiring loves
Lonely to rove, wrapped in poetic theme.
Serpentine waters with majestic flow,
Now lost -- now shining, lead the astonished eye,
To distant scenes where endless forests grow,
And dusky mountains melt into the sky.
Gushing abruptly from between the hills
Far off is heard the plunging torrent's roar;
From massy rocks here the cool stream distills,
And gentle dashings sound along the shore.
The gay musicians of the groves around,
In cadence sweet attune their warbling song;
Their warbling song the darksome caves resound,
And light-wing'd breezes bear the strains along.
Here never bard has swelled the harmonic lay,
Then let me eager to the bliss aspire
The first, ye rocks! to hear your echoes play,
Your virgin echoes to the dulcet lyre.
For thee, illustrious Penn! my song I raise,
Oh! let the muse thy wonted favor claim:
For thee I lonely tread the rustling maze,
And bid thy woods resound their master's name.
With rigid sway too long has ignorance reigned,
And spread her gloom over this benighted land:
These solemn groves too often with blood been stained,
Shed by barbarian's unrelenting hand.
Witness, ye ghosts! that to the waining moon,
Join, with the owl, shrill shrieks and plaintive moan;
Witness ye innocents, by fate too soon
Condemned beneath a savage yoke to groan
-- Here pause awhile! -- these grass-grown ruins view,
They call attention; they implore a tear!
These once the sound of social converse knew,
And peace, content, and jollity were here.
Alas! how changed! the hospitable hearth
No more shall blaze to cheer the evening friend:
No more inspire the roar of rustic mirth,
When, with the setting day, its labors end. --
Alas! how changed! what a confused mass,
The scattered ruins of the cottage lie!
Here hissing serpents slide along the grass,
And here the owl lifts her distressful cry.
As calm and still the peaceful household lay,
At dead of night a savage yell was heard;
Affright'd sleep winged her aerial way,
And death in horror's darkest robe appeared.
Warm from the father's wound the reeking blade
With mortal point hangs over the mother's breast:
Vain are her cries, her loudest cries for aid;
She groans in agony and sinks to rest.
A fate more hard the little offspring know;
Through breaks and thorns they tread their weary way,
Their guides, upitying, urge their steps, too slow;
And chide them often as through the wild they stray.
How shall the muse, oh! thou ill-fated fair!
In numbers equal to thy weight of woe,
Thy sad distress, thy lot severe declare,
And bid for thee the tears of pity flow!
Rosetta, fairest maid that graced the plains,
Of all the village long remained the boast,
Struck with her lovely form contending swains,
Were daily striving who should please her most:
But happy Doris, with his gentle mien,
Had won her heart, the soft relenting fair,
Often met her faithful shepherd on the green,
And Doris breathed his tender passion there.
One eve, Rosetta from the cottage stray'^,
To seek a wandering lambkin of her fold,
A merciless troop seized the unwary maid,
And grasped her, trembling, in their savage hold.
Full of fond hopes as Doris passing by,
Pursued his way, contemplative and slow,
Amazed he heard his fair one's well known cry,
And, fearless, rushed upon the numerous foe;
Long did the youth the unequal fight maintain;
But what, alas! could valor then avail?
An Alexander must have strove in vain,
Superior force and numbers will prevail.
The captive lovers locked in close embrace,
With silent tears their mutual grief express:
The tawny victors haste to leave the place,
Unmoved, unpitying of their sad distress.
Two parties formed, one takes the weeping fair,
The other Doris for their easy prize;
A silent gloom shuts in his dark despair;
The woods re-echo to her mournful cries.
Six times the moon her fullest orb had shown,
Since sad Rosetta with incessant grief,
Had mourned her liberty and lover gone,
Without one cheering prospect of relief,
Forced from her hospitable home to stray,
O'r craggy rocks her tender feet must go;
Through the sharp thorns she makes her gloomy way
And bears about a constant load of woe.
Often times when shivering in the inclement air,
On the damp ground she sought for lost repose;
Her mother's fondness and her father's care,
And Doris's love to sad remembrance rose.
At length the chiefs a solemn feast prepare,
And gather numerous from the nations round;
Each brings his spoils of war, and prisoners there,
And through the woods triumphant echoes sound.
A horrid tragedy must now succeed,
My swelling heart beats quick within my breast,
How shall the sympathising muse proceed
To dip her hand in blood, and paint the rest?
Six tawny heroes in their battles slain,
Sully the luster of their festive day;
For them six captives with tormenting pain,
Must yield their lives the fatal debt to pay.
Absorbed in sorrow on a turf reclined!
Rosetta lay, all wan with wasting grief;
Her lot severe, she pondered in her mind,
And looked from death alone to find relief --
She starts alarmed at a sudden cry,
The well known voice of Doris strikes her ear,
Half-rais'd she looks around with tearful eye,
To see if much loved Doris was not near:
Oh! mournful object for a soul distressed!
Fast to a tree she sees her shepherd bound:
A mortal arrow planted at his breast,
And his life bubbling from the recent wound!
Struck with an instant frenzy of despair,
Through all her frame she feels the chill of death;
Flies to her just expiring love, and there
Sinks at his feet with closing eyes, and sighs her latest breath*
But cease my muse, such tragic scenes no more,
From pity's eye shall draw the tender tear;
Heaven shall our interrupted peace restore,
And with the danger banish all the fear.
All hail! the dawn of more enlightened days!
Accept, great Penn, the praise to merit due;
The angel peace, her olive wreath displays,
And smiling, as she rises, points to you.
When the famed Cortes to his monarch gave
Another empire in a distant land,
He bore his thunders through the foaming wave,
And fatal steel gleam'd dreadful in his hand.
Nor pity moved, nor justice swayed his breast;
To fraud or force the injured natives yield;
Low in the dust he treads the warrior's crest,
And stands triumphant in a bloody field.
Not so the gentler patron of distress,
By lawless force would large possessions gain:
Illustrious Penn! still be it thine to bless,
Not to inflict unnecessary pain.
Thine is the skill in soft encircling chains
Of justice, truth, and charity to bind
The hand that spreads destruction round the plain^,
And quell the fierceness of th'untutor'd mind:
From lofty mountains, and from valleys low,
From the broad lakes, and plains, that wide extend,
From every quarter whence the winds can blow,
Some of their tribes the various nations send.
But most from where Ohio's waters roll
To Lehigh's lucid stream, the chiefs repair;
Led by the glittering center of the pole,
To meet in love their Christian brethren there.
In yonder bower behold the council meet,
Solemn and grand, without the help of art;
Of justice, commerce, peace, and love, they treat,
Whilst eloquence unlabored speaks the heart.
See from the throng a painted warrior rise,
A savage Cicero, erect he stands,
Awful, he throws around his piercing eyes,
Whilst native dignity respect commands.
High over his brow wantons a plumed crest,
The deep vermilion on his visage glows,
A silver moon beams placid round his breast,
And a loose garment from his shoulders flows.
One nervous arm he holds to naked view,
The checkered wampum glittering in his hand;
His speech does all the attic fire renew,
And nature dictates the sublime and grand.
Untouched by art, even in the savage breast,
With native luster, how does reason shine!
Science never taught him how to argue best,
The schools never strove his language to refine.
What noble thoughts, what noble actions rise
From in-born genius, unrestrained and free?
A tinctured medium often deceives our eyes,
And art should prune, but not distort the tree.
Even those who much their tutored reason boast,
And in the sacred seats of learning dwell;
Too often obscure the paths of virtue most,
And only study how to puzzle well.
Why let the stream through levelled parterres glide
Its lazy course to marble bounds confined;
Give me the bubbling fountain's mossy side,
In contemplation sweet to lull my mind.
From nature's store the warrior's speech is dressed,
More pure the council fire begins to glow:
He bids the brightened chain of friendship last,
Long as the sun shall burn or waters flow.
Their mutual faith by firm assurance bound,
The chiefs, well pleased from solemn treaty rise,
Their brethren's bounty richly spreads the ground
And they with grateful joy divide the prize.
How fair is charity, celestial maid!
And this is charity sincere indeed,
To see our foes with tenderest care repaid,
To cloth the naked and the hungry feed.
Now over the plain the swarthy heroes bring
A numerous tribe, devising pastimes gay:
With sportive shouts they make the mountains ring,
And with athletic feats conclude the day.
Some with loose tresses floating in the wind,
In the swift race for victory contend;
A fierce ambition fires each youthful mind:
They strain each sinew, every limb extend.
To smite the ball, some wield the massy oak,
And send it hissing, bounding over the plain;
Till counter-check'd by repercussive stroke,
Swift the clastic ball returns again.
Their nicer skill the dext'rous archers try,
And eager strive for victory and fame;
From the tough bow the feathered arrows fly,
And pierce the center of their distant aim.
No keener joy the youths of Greece inspired,
No brighter glories kindled in their eyes;
When they pressed forward with ambition fired
To win and claim the fair Olympic prize.
Now palid vesper mourns departing day,
The frequent tears that trickle from her eye,
Fall brilliant stars, and mark her spangled way,
Over the vast concave of the dusky sky:
And now the chiefs for awful rites prepare,
And hand in hand in horrid rounds unite,
Where curling blazes lash the misty air,
And pierce their radiance through the gloom of night.
-- The dance of war begins, their eye balls roll,
And dart their fierce enraged glances round;
More than infernal madness fills the soul,
And distant rocks their fearful yells resound.
No greater frenzy ever the priestess shook,
When on the sacred tripod mounted high,
Her tender, shivering, panting frame was struck
With the rough presence of the deity.
Each visage now convulsed looks aghast,
Their limbs are all in rude contortions thrown,
Their wild enthusiasm heightens fast,
And they for devils, not for men are known:
Till wasted nature can no more sustain,
And down in sleep their wearied bodies fall;
Silence profound resumes her awful reign,
And midnight's thickest mantle covers all.
AN ELEGY SACRED TO THE MEMORY OF MRS. ANN GRAEME, AND HUMBLY INSCRIBED TO MRS.
ANN STEDMAN AND MISS ELIZA GRAEME, SURVIVING DAUGHTERS OF THE DECEASED: As a
testimony of his sincere affection and regard by their much obliged Friend,
FRANCIS HOPKINSON.
I heard a voice from Heaven, saying unto me, Write, from henceforth, blessed
are the dead which die in the Lord, Even so says the spirit: for they rest
from their labors. -- Rev. xiv.13.
WHY move the marble jaws of yonder tomb?
Why gleams the day light on her sacred gloom?
Why does she thus her dark abode prepare?
And what new guest is soon expected there?
Oh! see she comes; amidst a weeping throng,
In solemn pomp Monimia's born along:
Monima's breast has heaved its latest groan,
And dust and ashes claim her as their own --
Away false world -- away, from reason's eye;
All trifling objects, vain ideas fly!
More awful scenes are present to my view,
And in my bosom leave no room for you.
The drooping pall; the bell's slow sullen sound;
The gaping grave; the weeping friends around;
By sacred priests the solemn service read;
Monimia numbered with the silent dead.
These, these are serious subjects, and I find
My soul to serious sentiments inclined,
Monimia's gone! up to the lofty skies
Methinks I see her sainted spirit rise;
Methinks I hear her voice triumphant sing,
" Grave where is thy victory? Death where is thy sting?
Say shall we mourn because her conflict's over?
Say, shall we weep, because she weeps no more?
Before the fullness of the Christian's joy,
Death must this transitory frame destroy;
Earth must to earth, the spirit to her flight,
For with its parent source shall each unite.
Full of desires unsatisfied through life,
The anxious soul maintains continual strife:
Fast locked in clay, amid surrounding foes,
She pants and longs for freedom and repose.
With beck'ning hand, and a deceitful smile,
Here stands temptation ready to beguile:
With gloomy aspect, there a fearful train,
Of poignant sorrows and distracting pain:
And last of all, comes her tremendous foe,
The king of terror strikes the fatal blow;
The heart grows sick, unequal throbs express,
Nature's last labor, and extreme distress:
Oh! who can tell the agonizing throws;
When the lips tremble and the eyelids close;
When the soul, struggling in another birth,
Strives to get loosened from encumb'ring earth,
When Horror's blackest midnight would prevail,
And all the help the world can give must fail;
Whilst the cold sweat oozes through every pore*
Till suffering nature can endure no more.
Oh! What is life, and all this life can give,
We taste, but not enjoy; we breath, not live!
True joy and real life are fixed above,
The only objects worthy of our love:
Lament not then, that loved Monimia's gone,
Her time of trial's past, her work is done;
Her hope did firmly on her God depend,
She stood Christ's faithful soldier to the end,
And shall that crown of victory obtain,
Which saints expect, and martyrs died to gain.
Not to this period were her views confined,
A prospect nobler far engaged her mind;
Arrayed in immortality to stand,
Beyond the reach of time at God's right hand;
To lift her voice with ecstacy divine;
And join the song where shining myriads join,
Till Heaven itself feels the prevailing sound,
And everlasting kingdoms tremble round:
To view his glory with undazzled eye,
Who for his carpet spread yon glittering sky;
Who from his throne looks downward to behold,
Worlds glide over worlds, systems over systems rolled;
To stretch the wings of thought from place to place,
Pierce the dark regions of unbounded space;
In full fruition every hope destroy,
And drop belief to grasp the real joy.
Such were the objects of her souls desire;
These did each virtue, every grace inspire,
The word of truth, her still unerring guide,
Faith, Hope, and Christian charity, supplied:
A noble fortitude, false fear disarmed,
A steady piety her bosom warmed;
She lived a bright example to mankind:
Peaceful she died, contented and resigned.
Oh! may I strive her foosteps to pursue,
And keep the Christian's glorious prize in view:
Like her defy the stormy waves of life,
And with heroic zeal maintain the strife:
Like her find comfort in the arms of death,
And in a peaceful calm resign my breath.
Graeme Park July 1765.
VERSES Wrote in a blank book which once belonged to Mr. Shenstone the poet,
and was given by the Lord Bishop of Worcester.
COME little book, the giver's hand,
Shall add such worth to mine,
That I will hold thee highly prized,
And joy to call the mine.
Come little book; nor in my care,
An humbler lot refuse,
Though Worcester owned thee once, though once
Designed for Shenstone's muse.
Had Shenstone in thy spotless page
In glowing numbers placed,
All that is pleasing great, and, good,
With every virtue graced:
Filled thee with gentleness and love,
With piety and truth;
The wisdom of experienced years,
The brilliant powers of youth;
With all the condescending ease
Of manners most refined,
Then had thou been an emblem fit,
Of Worcester's generous mind.
Come little book; and let me boast
No small, no common fame,
That in thy once so honored page,
I write my humble name.
Hartlebury Castle, in Wocrcestershire, 1767.
TO A VERY YOUNG LADY.
SO young, so skilful, and so fair!
Such praise thy merits claim,
The muse with rapture should prepare,
To celebrate thy fame.
If thus thy morn of youth displays
So much of virtue's light;
Oh! who can tell the glorious blaze
Of life's meridian height?
Gay hope with joy to future years,
Extends her eager view;
A pleasing prospect there appears,
She smiles, and points to you.
Through life she sees thee take thy way,
Elate in beauty's pride.
The graces all around thee play,
And virtue is thy guide.
Fair innocence with peace and love,
Strew flowers where ever you tread;
And mild religion from above,
Sheds blessings on thy head:
Then shall thy worth some bard inspire,
In more exalted lays,
To bid the gazing world admire,
And give thee all thy praise.
London, 1767.
AN ODE Set to Music on Mrs. B -- 's Birth Day.
RECITATIVE.
WHEN Caesar's birthday glads Britannia's isle,
The earth exults and nature seems to smile:
The uplifted trumpet's awful sound,
United acclamations round,
And thundering cannon's awful roar,
Shake with rude transport Albion's shore.
AIR.
But in more soft and pleasing lays
Let us our joy display;
Oh! swell the tenderest note of praise
To hail Eliza's day.
For with fair truth and love divine,
Her peaceful soul is blessed;
And all the winning virtues shine
Serenely in her breast.
Like some pure placid stream that flows
Gently and free from stain,
Dispensing blessings as it goes,
Along the flowry'ry plain:
So she through life her equal way
Glides on with spotless name:
Oh! may this often returning day
Increase her modest fame!
Hartlebury Castle, 1766.
THE HUMBLE PETITION Of the D^cks, (...) and nettles Hartlebury Farm, to the
Lord ^ishop of Worcester.
ILLUSTRIOUS Worcester; let thy patient ear,
Receive our sorrows, and with pity hear;
Oh! haste, and shield with thy protecting hand
The thistles, docks, and nettles of this land.
There was a time when our increasing race,
Had long in calm possession held this place:
See yon fair park, those blooming gardens see,
Beside each stream, and underneath each tree,
We reared our lofty crest, and all around,
With unmolested foilage spread the ground;
Those days of peace, alas! are now no more*
Who shall to us those days of peace restore?
Our numerous race destroyed, our empire lost;
Nor garden, park, nor stream, nor shade we boast; These lines were occasioned
by Mrs. I -- 's, my Lord's sister, rooting out the thistles, etc. from the
gardens, walks, and park with uncommon industry and care.

Up rose our foe, with unrelenting hand,
And fatal steel, to root us from the land;
Amongst our tribes destruction marks her way,
To us it is mortal, but to her it is play;
None, none escape! young, old, and short and tall,
Before her powerful arm unpitied fall;
Docks, thistles, nettles round her mangled lie,
And in one common heap of ruin die.
In vain, we thistles, our high lineage bring,
From ancient thrones; the pride of Scotland's king;
Ah! what avails! that born through war's alarms,
Our sacred flower graced Caledonia's arms;
Waved in her banner, glittered on her shield,
And spurred her hero to the martial field;
In vain we claim a kingdom for our own,
Or boast that now we deck the British throne.
Soon as from earth we spring erect and gay,
And spread our purple tassels to the day;
With fatal steel her hands our stalks divide,
And to the dust bring down our withering pride.
And yet, oh! strange to tell! the courteous fair,
To all around, extends her nursing care;
With placid smiles and with benignant mind,
To other's gentle, but to us unkind:
Oh! say what dire offense has caused our woe,
And made that breast, where pity dwells, a foe?
Or rather say, what can our state restore,
And sooth her rage that she destroy no more.
Nor her alone we fear The author.
, a hostile hand,
Over the seas wafted from a distant land,
Pours dire destruction on our harmless race,
And fills with heaps of slaughter every place.
When western breezes with a murmuring sound
Shook the small leaf and waved the groves around,
We little thought the soft and pleasing gale,
Filled for our mortal foe the swelling sale:
Un welcome guest! thy coming we deplore,
And wish thee back upon thy native shore.
Are there no thistles there thy hands t'employ?
Are there no docks or nettles to destroy?
But must we fall, and whilst we sue in vain,
Be lopt and left to languish on the plain?
In vain has nature with indulgent care,
On wings of down high poised our seed in air,
And bid the winds the little treasures bear;
For in their cells, ever they are learnt to fly,
Cut off, unfledged the seeds prolific die.
In this distress on thee, our Lord we call;
Save us from ^uin, ever we perish all!
Oh! greet and good to mercy still inclined,
Let this our prayer with thee acceptance find.
Small our request -- not where thy harvests glow,
Do we desire, or would presume to grow;
In humble state beneath each hedge to stand,
Is all we ask from thy benignant hand.
So shall our tribes exult in harmless joy,
Nor ever with pointed sting thy hands annoy;
But through these fields we'll celebrate thy fame,
And thistles yet unsown shall bless great Worcester's name.
Hartlebury Castle, 1766.
To MYRTILLA.
WITH sprightly air, and graceful mien,
Easy and ever gay;
Myrtilla trips along the green,
And steals all hearts away.
Good Humor smiling in her face,
Seems sorrow to defy;
Wit lights up every sprightly grace,
And sparkles in in her eye.
Fair is her form, her spotless mind
With every virtue blessed;
And no offense could ever find
A harbor in her breast.
Ye swains, with caution pass this way;
For should you meet the fai^,
You must to beauty fall a prey;
Love would your hearts ensnare.
Hartlebury Castle, 1766.
TO MYRTILLA.
SOON Myrtilla must thy friend,
Hasten to a distant shore;
May propitious gales attend,
May they waft him safely over!
When to pensive joys inclined,
Through my native groves I stray,
Thy dear image to my mind
Soothing pleasures shall convey.
Fancy, often, in airy flight,
Will direct her course to you;
Bringing scenes of past delight
Back to my enraptured view.
Often shall Schuylkill's rocky shore,
With her waving woods around,
Thy fond name, repeating over,
Strive to swell the pleasing sound.
Thus with friendship most sincere,
Shall my faithful bosom glow;
All thy virtues I Will revere,
With such love as angels know.
Hoping still though far from thee,
I Have a place in thy regard;
Which delightful thought shall be
My firm constancy's reward.
AN EVENING AT SEA.
MORE pleasing far, than all the glare of day,
The evening mild invites the muse's lay.
Our gallant ship, with every turgid sail,
Glides smoothly on before the pressing gale:
Whilst the full moon, fair regent of the night,
Pours over the sea a flood of silver light:
No noise is heard except the pleasing sound,
Of waves that roll and swell and break around;
Ever responsive to the watchman's song,
Who treads the deck, and trills his ditties long
With voice melodious, and with heart so true,
To lovely Nancy, or to black eyed Sue.
Far on a distant shore, with curious eye,
Our anxious friends consult the uncertain sky;
Longing they look, and with impatience burn,
To see in safety our tall bark return.
On that blessed period we with no less joy,
Our eager hopes our constant thoughts employ.
Haste happy day! when with sincere delight
Our hands shall join; and social hearts unite.
Pennsylvania Packet, 1766.
VERSES Wrote near the Conclusion of a very tedious Voyage.
HAIL to the near approach at last,
Of that long looked for day!
When hope enjoyed, and dangers past,
Shall former cares repay.
The happy hour is now at hand,
When we shall wish no more,
But with exulting pleasure stand
Firm on our native shore.
Let ocean swell his angry wave;
Let winter blasts arise;
Their fury we no more will brave,
Nor trust uncertain skies.
But in secure and calm delight
Our peaceful hours employ;
And crown revolving day and night,
With every social joy.
Thus the good man with tranquil mind
At close of life's career,
Goes cheerful on, in hopes to find
A happy harbor near.
Nor would he tempt those storms again,
Which shook his virtuous breast;
But, well rememb'ring former pain,
Contented to sinks to rest.
TO DELIA, WROTE ON A LEAF IN HER POCKETBOOK.
GO little leaf, and to the fair,
The mistress of my heart;
My truth and constancy declare,
My ardent love impart.
But how shall thy small page contain
That which no bounds control?
Or how shall feeble words explain
The transports of the soul?
Go, tell her then that nothing less
Than a whole life of love,
Can all my joy in her express,
Can my fixed passion prove.
That naught but death can from my mind,
Her dear idea part,
And lovely Delia never shall find
A rival in my heart.
Go, tell her all our peaceful years
In mutual bliss we'll spend;
And hope to meet beyond the spheres,
When this frail life shall end.
May, 1768.
SONG.
SOFT ideas love inspiring,
Every placid joy unite;
Every anxious thought retiring,
Fill my bosom with delight.
Soft ideas, gently flowing,
On your tide, so calm and still;
Bear me, where sweet zephyrs blowing,
Wave the pines on Borden's-Hill At Bordentown on Delaware.
.
Where the breezes odours bringing,
Fill the grove with murmuring sound;
Where shrill notes of birds sweet singing,
Echo to the hills around.
To the pleasing gloom convey me,
Let my Delia too be there;
On her gentle bosom lay me,
On her bosom soft and fair.
Whilst I there, with rapture burning,
All my joy in her express
Let her love for love returning,
Me with fond caresses bless.
On his little wings descending,
Bring the god of soft delight:
Hymen too with torch attending,
Must our hands and hearts unite.
She the source of all my pleasure
Shall my breast with transport fill:
Delia is my soul's best treasure,
Delia, pride of Borden's-Hill.
July, 1768.
TO MYRTILLA. THE NEST.
AS in the glowing noon of day,
Stretched careless on the ground,
Beneath the breezy pines I lay,
Lulled by their murmuring sound:
A little nest aloft I spied,
Of feathers white as snow,
With strong, though slender, cordage tied
Fast to the top-most bough.
With eager haste I seized the prize,
And found a beauteous pair:
Love yet unfledged with friendship lies,
Together nestling there.
Delia my captive, love detains
In Hymen's silken clue;
Friendship, Myrtilla, yet remains
An offering fit for you.
THE WASP.
WRAPPED in Aurelian filth and slime,
An infant wasp neglected lay;
Till having doz'd the destined time,
He woke, and struggled into day.
Proud of his venom bag and sting,
And big with self-approved worth:
Mankind, he said, and stretched his wing,
Should tremble when I sally forth.
In copious streams my spleen shall flow,
And satire all her purses drain;
A critic born, the world shall know
I carry not a sting in vain.
This said, from native cell of clay,
Elate he rose in airy flight;
Thence to the city changed his way,
And on a steeple chanced to light.
Ye gods, he cried, what horrid pile
Presumes to rear its head so high --
This clumsy cornice -- see how vile:
Can this delight a critic's eye?
With poisonous sting he strove to wound
The substance firm: but strove in vain;
Surprised he sees it stands its ground,
Nor starts through fear, nor writhes with pain.
Away the enraged insect flew;
But soon with aggravated power,
Against the walls his body threw,
And hoped to shake the lofty tower.
Firm fixed it stands; as stand it must,
Nor heeds the wasp's unpitied fall:
The humbled critic rolls in dust,
So stunned, so bruised, he scarce can crawl.
TO T -- M --, ESQUIRE.
AS I sat by the fire, the newspaper read,
And waited for breakfast, my wife being in bed;
It came in my mind that I could not do better
Than to call for some paper, and write you a letter.
It Is true I have nothing material to say,
But will mention what incidents fell in my way;
Our leaving Newcastle, and how we got hither,
Half tired to death, through wind and foul weather.
I mounted at nine, and set off on my journey,
Along with my brother-in-law the attorney;
Who took with him papers, so many and bulkly,
He found it convenient to ride in his sulky.
We traveled, and chatted, and made ourselves merry,
And who should we meet a few miles from the ferry,
But the great little man: the justice I mean,
Revered and beloved by the swains of Christeen.
You know that at present, however, he labors
Beneath a sad quarrel with one of his neighbors;
And then to Newcastle was going to show
What homage the vulgar to justices owe.
He stopped us, and while we stood still in our places*
Related his story, and cited some cases,
To prove how exceeding important the trust is,
And what veneration is due to a justice.
My brother assented, or seemed to assent,
To all that was urged -- away then he went,
Whilst we on our journey pursued as before,
Till we came to the ferryman's house on the shore.
Now this ferryman happened to be the vile brute
Who affronted his worship, and raised this dispute:
He likewise related his case to the lawyer
In such agitation, he worked like a sawyer;
Whilst I stood impatient, unable to stir,
For his story was tedious, and caused a demur:
At length I exclaimed -- as I am a sinner,
We Have no time to lose, we shall miss of our dinner:
But the man fully bent to wipe off his attainder,
Stepped into the boat, and there told the remainder;
The lawyer assented, or seemed to assent,
To all that was said -- then forward we went.
Nothing afterward happened that is worthy relating,
Till arrived at Chester, the place of our bating;
And here we divided, as was our intent;
At Cowpland's he stopped, and to Withy's I went:
Here the rooms were all full -- naught but bustle and rout,
And overgrown booby-heads stalking about;
For this was the time when the lawyers resort,
From all quarters round to attend Chester court:
Attorneys and clients here lovingly meet,
The one to be cheated, the other to cheat.
Now dapper lawyers crowd each street,
Dressed fine to cut a dash;
Saluting every one they meet,
In hopes of getting cash.
How do thou friend, 'twould give me joy
To serve you with my skill;
For if you please, I can destroy,
Or can confirm a will.
Say, has your neighbor's deed a flaw?
Your title got a wound?
The breach I Will widen by the law,
By law will make yours sound.
"A widow, sir, there is oppressed,
"And by a wealthy knave;
"Oh! then assist the poor distressed,
"Her all from ruin save;
"Her thanks and prayers she will freely give,
"'It Is all you can obtain;
"For she has scarce enough to live,
"And children to maintain."
"Her case is bad -- I cannot defend her --
"Go tell her so from me;
"Besides, my conscience is too tender
"To plead without a fee.
"Sir, sir," cries another, "you're generous indeed,
"For the present, I think myself very well fe'ed:
"By what you have said, I can plainly discover;
"If you bring an ejectment you will surely recover;
"The law is as plain as the nose on your face;
"I remember lord Raymond has just such a case,
"And what though the tenant has long held the land,
"I warrant we'll soon wrest it out of his hand;
"And therefore I think you may safely depend on it,
"In a very few years we shall oust the defendant."
Quite tired of nonsense, and noisy discourse,
I swallowed my dinner, and mounted my horse:
But scarce had proceeded a mile on my way,
Before it turned out a very soul day;
The wind and the rain met me full in the face,
Yet I traveled along at a pretty round pace;
Though I buttoned up close, and flapp'd down my hat,
I was wet to the skin, like an half-drowned rat.
At length I got home, well pleased you may guess,
And by a great fire soon changed my dress.
And now I suppose you may think by this time,
I have teiz'd you enough with my nonsense in rhyme:
Before I conclude -- my compliments pay
To fat Mrs R -- d, and to fair Mrs. C -- y;
Remember me too to your neighbor V -- e,
Though gray as a badger, and old as a weazel;
To Mr. V -- h, who leather can tan,
And justice M'W -- m, that good-natured man;
To Johnny the barber, who hobbles about,
And takes the best man in the town by the snout.
Thus you see in good time, without any confusion,
My letter is brought to a happy conclusion.
TO THE MEMORY OF MRS. MARY M'KEAN.
TO yonder new made grave I Will go,
And there indulge my swelling grief:
There shall the tears of friendship flow,
And give my wounded heart relief.
To yonder grave, oh! muse, repair,
And whilst I breathe my tender sighs,
Attune thy plaintive lyre, for there
The loved, the lost Maria lies.
Blessed be the ground where thou art laid;
Let no unhallowed foot presume
Upon thy tufted grave to tread;
No hostile hand profane thy tomb.
Angelic hosts assembled here,
Shall guard the consecrated ground;
In robes of radiant light appear,
And spread seraphic music round.
The winds that through the midnight gloom,
Wild howling over the mountains fly;
Shall cease their rage, when near thy tomb,
And pass in plaintive murmurs by.
When at the board with festive glee,
Gay pleasures social bosoms cheer;
Even mirth shall pause to think on thee,
And, thinking, drop a silent tear.
With grateful hearts the poor distressed,
Shall to thy grave lamenting go;
Then shall thy hand be duly blessed,
That hand which loved to soften woe.
Often when the moon with placid ray
Gleams over the dew-bespangled green,
Here shall my silent footsteps stray,
Here shall my pensive form be seen.
Thy worth, dear saint, shall then arise
All bright to contemplation's view:
Review thy life with weeping eyes,
And weeping strive to copy you.
Remembrance long shall hold thee fast;
Thy form, thy virtues never shall die:
I Will love thee thus whilst life shall last,
And bless thee with my latest sigh.
THE EPITAPH.
FAIR was her form, serene her mind,
Her heart and hopes were fixed on high:
Her hand beneficent and kind
Often wiped the tear from sorrow's eye.
The sweets of friendship softened care;
Love, peace, and joy, her soul possessed:
Meekness perfumed each rising prayer,
And every rising prayer was blessed.
In heaven we trust, her sainted spirit sings
Glad Hallelujahs to the King of Kings.
March, 1773.
POLITICAL BALLADS, WRITTEN IN THE YEAR 1777. Date Obolum Bellesario.
AS I traveled over the plain,
About the close of day,
I chanced to wander in a lane,
A lane of mire and clay.
'Twas there a dirty drab I saw,
All seated on the ground,
With oaken staff and hat of straw,
And tatters hanging round.
At my approach she heaved a sigh,
And due obeisance paid,
First wiped a tear from either eye,
Then her petition made.
"A wretch forlorn, kind sir, you see,
"That begs from door to door;
"Oh! stop and give for charity,
"A penny to the poor!
"Though now in tatters I appear,
"Yet know the time has been,
"When I partook the world's good cheer,
"And better days have seen.
Proceed, said I, whilst I attend
The story of thy woe;
Proceed, and charity shall lend
Some help before I go.
"If blooming honors men delight,
"If charms in wealth they see,
"My fame once soared a glorious height,
"And who more rich than me.
"Of sons and daughters I can boast
"A long illustrious line;
"Of servants could command a host,
"For large domains were mine.
"But George my youngest faithless bo^*
"Has all my powers overthrown;
"And in the very beds of joy
"The seeds of sorrow sown.
"He thirsting for supreme command,
"Contemned my wise decrees,
"And with a sacrilegious hand,
"My dearest rights did seize.
"A magic wand I once possessed,
"A cap aloft it bore;
"Of all my treasures this the best,
And none I valued more.
"Ruthless he broke the sacred rod,
"The cap he tumbled down;
"Destroying thus, what with their blood
"His ancestors had won.
"An orphan child fell to my care,
"Fair as the morn was she,
"To large possessions she was heir,
"And friendly still to me.
"But George, my son, beheld the maid,
"With fierce lascivious eye;
"To ravish her a plan he laid,
"And she was forced to fly.
"She Is young and will no more depend
"On cruel George or me;
"No longer now my boasted friend,
"Nor of my family.
"Bad measures often end in worse,
"His fell intent to gain;
"He sent in rage a mighty force,
"To bring her back again.
"But to defend the injured maid,
"Her faithful household came;
"In battle strong they stood arrayed,
"And gained immortal fame.
"'Among these a god-like hero rose
"Wise, ^erous and brave,
"He checked the frenzy of her foes,
"His arm was strong to save.
'So near perfection, that he stood
"Upon the bound'ry line,
"Of infinite from finite good,
"Of human from divine.
"Defeated thus in all his schemes,
"My foolish, wick'd son,
"Awaked from his delusive dreams,
"And found himself undone.
"Mean time I suffered, in disgrace,
No comfort could I find,
"I saw distress come on a pace,
"With ruin close behind.
"At length distracted quite with grief,
"I left my native home,
"Depending now on chance relief,
"Abroad for bread I roam.
"A shield and lance once graced these hands,
"Perhaps you have heard my fame,
"For I was known in distant in lands,
" Britannia is my name.
" Britannia now in rags yon see;
"I beg from door to door --
"Oh! give, kind fire for charity,
"A penny to the poor,
THE BATTLE OF THE KEGS.
GALLANTS attend and hear a friend,
Trill forth harmonious ditty,
Strange things I Will tell which late befell
In Philadelphia city.
'Twas early day, as poets say,
Just when the sun was rising,
A soldier stood on a log of wood,
And saw a thing surprising.
As in amaze he stood to gaze,
The truth cannot be denied, sir,
He spied a score of kegs or more
Come floating down the tide, sir,
A sailor too in jerkin blue,
This strange appearance viewing,
First damned his eyes, in great surprise,
Then said some mischief's brewing.
These kegs, I Am told, the rebels bold,
Packed up like pickling herring;
And they are come down to attack the town,
In this new way of ferrying.
The soldier flew, the sailor too,
And scared almost to death, sir,
Wore out their shoes, to spread the news,
And ran till out of breath, sir.
Now up and down throughout the town,
Most frantic scenes were acted;
And some ran here, and others there,
Like men almost distracted.
Some fire cried, which some denied,
But said the earth had quaked;
And girls and boys, with hideous noise,
Ran through the streets half naked.
Sir William he, snug as a flea,
Lay all this time a snoring,
Nor dreamed of harm as he lay warm,
In bed with Mrs. L -- g.
Now in a fright, he starts upright,
Awaked by such a clatter;
He rubs both eyes, and boldly cries,
For God's sake, what is the matter?
At his bedside he then espied,
Sir Erskine at command, sir,
Upon one foot, he had one boot,
And the other in his hand, sir.
"Arise, arise, sir Erskine cries,
"The rebels -- more's the pity,
"Without a boat are all afloat,
"And ranged before the city.
"The motly crew, in vessels new,
"With Satan for their guide, sir.
"Packed up in bags, or wooden kegs,
"Come driving down the tide, sir.
"Therefore prepare for bloody war,
"These kegs must all be routed,
"Or surely we despised shall be,
"And British courage doubted."
The royal band, now ready stand
All ranged in dread array, sir,
With stomach stout to see it out,
And make a bloody day, sir.
The cannons roar from shore to shore,
The small arms make a rattle;
Since wars began I Am sure no man
Ever saw so strange a battle.
The rebel dales, the rebel vales,
With rebel trees surrounded;
The distant wood, the hills and floods,
With rebel echos sounded.
The fish below swam to and fro,
Attacked from every quarter;
Why sure, thought' they, the devil's to pay,
Amongst folks above the water.
The kegs, it is said, though strongly made,
Of rebel staves and hoops, sir,
Could not oppose their powerful foes,
The conquering British troops, sir.
From morn to night these men of might
Displayed amazing courage;
And when the sun was fairly down,
Retired to sup their porrage.
An hundred men with each a pen,
Or more upon my word, sir.
It is most true would be too few,
Their valor to record, sir.
Such feats did they perform that day,
Against these wick'd kegs, sir,
That years to come, if they get home,
They Will make their boasts and brags, sir.
N. B. This ballad was occasioned by a real incident. Certain machines, in the
form of kegs, charged with gun powder, were sent down the river to annoy the
British shipping then at Philadelphia. The danger of these machines being
discovered, the British manned the wharfs and shipping, and discharged their
small arms and cannons at every thing they saw floating in the river during the
ebb tide.

A CAMP BALLAD.
MAKE room, oh! ye kingdoms in history renowned
Whose arms have in battle with glory been crowned,
Make room for America, another great nation,
Arises to claim in your council a station.
Her sons fought for freedom, and by their own brav'ry
Have rescued themselves from the shackles of slavery.
America's free, and though Britain abhorred it,
Yet fame a new volume prepares to record it.
Fair freedom in Briton her throne had erected,
But her sons growing venal, and she disrespected;
The goddess offended forsook the base nation,
And fixed on our mountains a more honored station.
With glory immortal she here sits enthroned,
Nor fears the vain vengeance of Britain disowned,
Whilst Washington guards her with heroes surrounded,
Her foes shall with shameful defeat be confounded.
To arms then, to arms, it is fair freedom invites us;
The trumpet shrill sounding to battle excites us;
The banners of virtue unfurled, shall wave over us,
Our hero lead on, and the foe fly before us.
On Heaven and Washington placing reliance,
We'll meet the bold Britton, and bid him defiance:
Our cause we'll support, for it is just and it is glorious
When men fight for freedom they must be victorious.
THE TOAST.
IT IS Washington's health -- fill a bumper around,
For he is our glory and pride;
Our arms shall in battle with conquest be crowned,
Whilst virtue and he is on our side.
It Is Washington's health -- and cannons should roar,
And trumpets the truth should proclaim;
There cannot be found, search the world all over,
His equal in virtue and fame.
It Is Washington's health -- our hero to bless,
May heaven look graciously down:
Oh! long may he live our hearts to possess,
And freedom still call him her own.
The BIRDS, the BEASTS, and the BAT. A FABLE.
A WAR broke out in former days,
If all is true that Aesop says,
Between the birds that haunt the grove,
And beasts that wild in forests rove:
Of fowl that swim in water clear,
Of birds that mount aloft in air;
From every tribe vast numbers came,
To fight for freedom, as for fame:
The beasts from dens and caverns deep,
From valleys low and mountains steep;
In motly ranks determined stood,
And dreadful howlings shook the wood.
The bat, half bird, half beast was there,
Nor would for this or that declare;
Waiting till conquest should decide,
Which was the strongest, safest side:
Depending on this doubtful form,
To screen him from the impending storm.
With sharpened beaks and talons long,
With horny spurs and pinions strong,
The birds in fierce assault, it is said,
Amongst the foe such havoc made,
That panic struck, the beasts retreat
Rmaz'd, and victory seemed complete.
The observant bat, with squeaking tone,
Cries, Bravo, birds the day's our own;
"For now I Am proud to claim a place
"Amongst your bold aspiring race;
"With leathern wings I skim the air,
"And am a bird though clad in hair."
But now the beasts ashamed of flight,
With rallied force renew the fight,
With threatening teeth, uplifted paws,
Projecting horns and spreading claws,
Enraged advance -- push on the fray,
And claim the honors at the day.
The bat still hovering to and fro,
Observed how things were like to go,
Concludes those best who best can fight,
And thinks the strongest party right;
"Push on, quoth he, our's is the day
"We'll chase these rebel birds away,
"And reign supreme -- for who but we
"Of earth and air the Lords should be;
"That I Am a beast I can make out,
"by reasons strong beyond a doubt,
"With teeth and fur 'twould be absurd,
"To call a thing like me a bird;
"Each son and daughter of my house,
"Is styled at least a flying mouse."
Always uncertain is the fate,
Of war and enterprises great:
The beasts exulting pushed too far
Their late advantage in the war;
Sure of success, insult the foe,
Despise their strength and careless grow;
The birds not vanquished, but dismayed,
Collect their force, new powers displayed;
Their chief, the eagle, leads them on,
And with fierce rage the war's begun.
Now in their turn the beasts must yield,
The bloody laurels of the field;
Routed they fly, disperse, divide,
And in their native caverns hide.
Once more the bat with courtly voice,
Hail, noble birds! "much I rejoice
In your success, and come to claim
My share of conquest and of fame."
The birds the faithless wretch despise;
Hence, traitor, hence the eagle cries;
No more, as you just vengeance fear,
Amongst our honored ranks appear.
The bat, disowned in some old shed,
Now seeks to hide his exiled head;
Nor dares his leathern wings display,
From rising morn to setting day:
But when the gloomy shades of night,
Screens his vile form from every sight,
Despised, unnotic'd, flits about;
Then to his dreary cell returns,
And his just fate in silence mourns.
THE MOST GRACIOUS ADDRESS OF ADMIRAL COLLIER AND GENERAL TRYON TO THE PEOPLE
OF CONNECTICUT. -- JULY, 1779.
WHAT can ye hope, rebellious crew,
But vengeance dire to traitors due;
Whilst you support this insurrection,
Refusing to our king subjection?
Why so ungen'rous, so unkind?
Why to your own true interest blind?
It Is fact -- and take it on our word,
If you will submit to George the Third,
You Will surely find it better far
Than carrying on this bloody war*
You Will only be of slaves a nation,
From generation to generation:
And what is that, compared with all
The mischiefs which may now befall,
If you unwisely still persist in
This naughty practice of resisting.
Your towns, yourselves, you cannot deny,
Within the grasp of power lie:
And that we can with greatest ease,
Clap paw upon you when we please.
That you have a house to put your head in,
Have pots or kettles, beds or bedding,
Is to our great forbearance owing,
And tender mercy ever flowing.
What you, presumptuous, call your own,
You only have from us on loan;
And if we ask it back again,
You know resistance would be vain.
Therefore your houses, goods, and land,
As monuments of mercy stand:
But we are in hopes you now begin
To see, and soon will own your sin:
The very continent we are told Vide the orginal address, of which this is in
substance a just translation throughout.

Begins to blush, though late so bold;
Conscious of many heinous crimes,
And therefore would repent by times.
And you, who thus at mercy lie,
Should first to our protection fly:
And save yourselves from fell perdition,
The sure reward of black sedition.
Would you submit, 'twould be a sample
For others -- and the good example
Might draw in many worthy folks
To poke their necks into our yokes;
And so become -- oh! blessed thing,
The slaves of our most gracious king.
And now we think it not amiss
To leave you to reflect on this:
And do most graciously dcelare,
That we will all those culprits spare,
Who stay at home in peace and quiet,
Disclaiming this unnat'ral riot;
We'll spare their dwellings -- and what more is,
Be kind as How to Jersey tories:
Yet rebels of the military,
Must still remain in sad quandary;
And those who fill departments civil,
Will sure go headlong to the devil;
Unless they will their follies own,
And pardon ask on marrow-bone.
But do not think, because we are kind,
We may be always of one mind;
And that our goodness has no end,
Because as yet we have been your friend:
Should you perversely still proceed,
We shall be very wroth indeed;
And when we are angry -- you know what --
Connecticut must go to pot.
Too late you will find yourselves mistaken,
And not a man will save his bacon:
Therefore beware -- you may rely on
The words of Collier and of Tryon.
IN MEMORY OF MR. JAMES BREMNER.
SING to his shade a solemn strain,
Let music's notes complain;
Let echo tell from shore to shore,
The swain of Schuylkill is no more. He died on the banks of the Schuylkill,
Sept. 1780.

AIR.
From Scotia's land he came,
And brought the pleasing art
To raise the sacred flame
That warms a feeling heart.
The magic powers of sound,
Obey at his command,
And spread sweet influence round,
Waked by his skilful hand.
Oh! sanct^* the ground,
The ground where he is laid;
Plant roses all around,
Nor let those roses fade.
Let none his tomb pass by,
Without a generous tear,
Or sigh -- and let that sigh,
Be like himself sincere.
SONG I.
I.
COME, fair Rosina, come away,
Long since stern Winter's storms have ceased;
See! Nature, in her best array,
Invites us to her rural feast:
The season shall her treasure spread,
Her mellow fruits and harvests brown,
Her flowers their richest odours shed,
And every breeze pour fragrance down.
II.
At noon we'll seek the wild wood's shade,
And over the pathless verdure rove;
Or, near a mossy fountain laid,
Attend the music of the grove;
At eve, the sloping mead invites
'Midst lowing herds and flocks to stray;
Each hour shall furnish new delights,
And love and joy shall crown the day.
SONG II.
I.
MY love is gone to sea,
Whilst I his absence mourn,
No joy shall smile on me
Until my love return.
He asked me for his bride,
And many vows he swore;
I blushed -- and soon complied,
My heart was his before.
II.
One little month was part,
And who so blessed as we?
The summons came at last,
And Jemmy must to sea.
I saw his ship so gay
Swift fly the wave-worn shore;
I wiped my tears away --
And saw his ship no more.
III.
When clouds shut in the sky
And storms around me howl;
When livid lightnings fly,
And threatening thunders roll;
All hopes of rest are lost,
No slumbers (...) me;
My anxious thoughts are tossed
With Jemmy on the sea.
SONG III.
I.
BENEATH a weeping willow's shade
She sat and sang alone;
Her hand upon her heart she laid
And plaintive was her moan.
The mock bird sat upon a bough
And list'ned to her lay,
Then to the distant hills he bore
The dulcet notes away.
II.
Fond echo to her strains replied,
The winds her sorrows bore;
Adieu! dear youth -- adieu! she cried,
I never shall see thee more.
The mock-bird sat upon a bough
And list'ned to her lay,
Then to the distant hills he bore
The dulcet notes away.
SONG IV.
I.
ENRAPTURED I gaze when my Delia is by,
And drink the sweet poison of love from her eye;
I feel the soft passion pervade every part
And pleasure unusual plays round my fond heart.
II.
I hear her sweet voice, and am charmed with her song --
I think I could hear her sweet voice all day long;
My senses enchanted, are lost in delight
When love and soft music their raptures unite.
III.
Beyond all expression my Delia I love,
My heart is so fixed that it never can rove;
When I see her I think it is an angel I see,
And the charms of her mind are a heaven to me.
SONG V.
I.
SEE down Maria's blushing cheek
The tears of soft compassion flow;
Those tears a yielding heart bespeak --
A heart that feels for others' woe.
May not those drops, that frequent fall,
To my fond hope propitious prove,
The heart that melts at Pity's call
Will own the softer voice of love.
II.
Earth never produced a gem so rare
Nor wealthy ocean's ample space
So rich a pearl -- as that bright tear
That lingers on Maria's face.
So hangs upon the morning rose
The crystal drop of heaven refined,
A while with trembling luster glows --
Is gone -- and leaves no stain behind.
SONG VI.
OVER the hills far away, at the birth of the morn
I hear the full tone of the sweet sounding horn;
The sportsmen with shoutings all hail the new day
And swift run the hounds over the hills far away.
Across the deep valley their course they pursue
And rush through the thickets you silvered with dew;
Nor hedges nor ditches their speed can delay --
Still sounds the sweet horn over hills far away.
SONG VII.
I.
MY generous heart disdain^
The slave of love to be,
I scorn his servile chains,
And boast my liberty.
This whining
And pining
And wasting with care,
Are not to my taste, be she ever so fair.
II.
Shall a girl's capricious frown
Sink my noble spirits down?
Shall a face of white and red
Make me droop my silly head?
Shall I set me down and sigh
For an eye-brow or an eye?
For a braided lock of hair,
Curse my fortune and despair?
My generous heart di^^^ins, etc.
II^
Still uncertain is tomorrow,
Not quite certain is today --
Shall I waste my ti^^ in sorrow?
Shall I languish life away?
All because a cruel maid,
Has not Love with Love repaid.
My generous heart disdains, etc.
SONG VIII.
I.
THE traveller benighted and lost,
Over the mountains pursues his ^one way;
The stream is all candy'd with frost
And the icicle hangs on the spray,
He wanders in hope some kind shelter to find
"whilst through the sharp hawthorn keen blows the cold wind."
II.
The tempest howls dreary around*
And rends the tall oak in its flight;
Fast falls the cold snow on the ground,
And dark is the gloom of the night.
Lone wanders the trav'ler a shelter to find,
"Whilst through the sharp hawthorn still blows the cold wind."
III.
No comfort the wild woods afford,
No shelter the trav'ler can see --
Far off are his bed and his board
And his home, where he wishes to be.
His hearth's cheerful blaze still engages his mind
"Whilst through the sharp hawthorn keen blows the cold wind."
N. B. The last eight Songs were set to Music by the Author.

AN ORATION, WHICH MIGHT HAVE BEEN DELIVERED TO THE STUDENTS IN ANATOMY, ON THE
LATE RUPTURE BETWEEN THE TWO SCHOOLS IN THIS CITY.
The ARGUMENT.
ADDRESS -- the folly and danger of dissension -- the Orator enumerates the
enemies of the fraternity -- reminds them of a late unseasonable interruption
-- a night scene in the Potter's Field -- he laments the want of true zeal in
the brotherhood -- and boasts of his own -- the force of a ruling passion --
the earth considered as a great animal -- the passion of love not the same in a
true son of Esculapius as in other men -- his own amor -- a picture of his
mistress in high taste -- shows his learning in the description of her mouth,
arm and hand -- his mistress dies -- his grief -- and extraordinary consolation
-- his unparalled fidelity -- he apologizes for giving this history of hi^
amor -- the great difficulties Anatomists have to encounter in the present
times, arising from false delicacy, prejudice and ignorance -- a strong
instance in proof that it was not so formerly -- curious argument to prove the
inconsistency of the present opinions respecting the practice -- he mentions
many obstacles in the road to science -- and reproaches them for their
intestine broils, at a time when not only popular clamor is loud, but even the
powers of government are exerted against them -- he then encourages his
brethren with hopes of better times founded on the establishment of the College
of Physicians -- is inspired with the idea of the future glory of that
institution -- and prophesies gr^^^ things.

AN ORATION, WHICH MIGHT HAVE BEEN DELIVERED, etc.
FRIENDS and associates! lend a patient ear,
Suspend intestine broils and reason hear.
Ye followers of -- your wrath forbear --
Ye sons of -- your invectives spare;
The fierce dissension your high minds pursue
Is sport for others -- ruinous to you.
SURELY some fatal influenza reigns,
Some epidemic rabies turns your brains --
Is this a time for brethren to engage
In public contest and in party rage?
Fell discord triumphs in your doubtful strife
And, smiling, whets her anatomic knife;
Prepared to cut our precious limbs away
And leave the bleeding body to decay --
SEEK ye for foes! -- alas, my friends, look round,
In every street, see numerous foes abound!
Methinks I hear them cry, in varied tones,
"Give us our father's -- brother's -- sister's bones."
Methinks I see a mob of sailors rise --
Revenge! -- revenge! they cry -- and damn their eyes --
Revenge for comrade Jack, whose flesh they say,
You minced to morsels and then threw away.
Methinks I see a black infernal train --
The genuine offspring of accursed Cain --
Fiercely on you their angry looks are bent,
They grin and gibber dangerous discontent
And seem to say -- "Is there not meat enough?
"Ah! massa cannibal, why eat poor CUFF?"
Even hostile watchmen stand in strong array
And over our heads their threatening staves display,
Howl hideous discord through the noon of night
And shake their dreadful lanthorns in our sight.
SAY, are not these sufficient to engage
Your high wrought souls eternal war to wage?
Combine your strength these monsters to subdue
No friends of science and sworn foes to you;
On these -- on these your wordy vengeance pour
And strive our fading glory to restore.
AH! think how, late, our mutilated rites
And midnight orgies, were by sudden frights
And loud alarms profaned -- the sacrifice,
Stretched on a board before our eager eyes,
All naked lay -- even when our chieftain stood
Like a high priest, prepared for shedding blood;
Prepared, with wondrous skill, to cut or slash
The gentle sliver or the deep drawn gash;
Prepared to plunge even elbow deep in gore
Nature and nature's secrets to explore --
Then a tumultuous cry -- a sudden fear --
Proclaimed the foe -- the enraged foe is near --
In some dark hole the hard got corse was laid
And we, in wild conclusion, fled dismayed.
THINK how, like brethren, we have shared the toil
When in the Potter's Field The Negro Burial ground.
we sought for spoil,
Did midnight ghosts and death and horror brave --
To delve for science in the dreary grave. --
Shall I remind you of that awful night
When our compacted band maintained the fight
Against an armed host? -- fierce was the fray
And yet we bore our sheeted prize away.
Firm on a horse's back the corse was laid,
High blowing winds the winding sheet displayed;
Swift flew the steed -- but still his burden bore --
Fear made him fleet, who never was fleet before;
Over tombs and sunken graves he cours'd around,
Nor ought respected consecrated ground,
Mean time the battle raged -- so loud the strife,
The dead were almost frightened into life --
Though not victorious, yet we scorned to yield,
Retook our prize and left the doubtful field.
IN this degenerate age, alas! how few
The paths of science with true zeal pursue?
Some trifling contest, some delusive joy
Too often the unsteady minds of youth employ.
For me -- whom ESCULAPIUS has inspired --
I boast a soul with love of science fired;
By one great object is my heart possessed --
One ruling passion quite absorbs the rest --
In this bright point my hopes and fears unite;
And one pursuit alone can give delight.
To me things are not as to vulgar eyes,
I would all nature's works anatomize --
This world a living monster seems, to me,
Rolling and sporting in the aerial sea;
The soil encompasses her rocks and stones
As flesh in animals encircles bones.
I see vast ocean, like a heart in play,
Pant systole and dias^ole every day,
And by unnumber'd venous streams supplied
Up her broad rivers force the arterial tide.
The world's great lungs, monsoons and trade-winds show
From east to west, from west to east they blow
Alternate respiration --
The hills are pimples which earth's face defile,
And burning Aetna, an eruptive boil:
On her high mountains hairy forests grow,
And downy grass o'erspreads the vales below;
From her vast body perspirations rise
Condense in clouds and float beneath the skies.
Thus fancy, faithful servant of the heart,
Transforms all nature by her magic art.
EVEN mighty LOVE, whose power all power controuls,
Is not, in me, like love in other souls --
Yet I have loved -- and CUPID's subtle dart
Has through my pericardium pierced my heart.
Brown CADAVERA did my soul ensnare,
Was all my thought by night and daily care --
I longed to clasp, in her transcendent charms,
A living skeleton within my arms.
LONG, lank and lead, my CADAVERA stood,
Like the tall pine, the glory of the wood --
Often times I gazed, with learned skill to tr^ce
The sharp edged beauties of her bony face --
There rose Os frontis prominent and bold,
In deep sunk orbits two large eye balls rolled,
Beneath those eye balls, two arched bones were seen
Whereon two flabby cheeks hung loose and lean;
Between those cheeks, protuberant arose,
In form triangular, her lovely nose,
Like EGYPT's pyramid it seemed to rise,
Scorn earth, and bid defiance to the skies;
Thin were her lips, and of a sallow hue,
Her open mouth exposed her teeth to view;
Projecting strong, protuberant and wide
Stood incisores -- and on either side
The canine ranged, with many a beauteous flaw,
And last the grinders, to fill up the jaw --
All in their alveoli fixed secure,
Articulated by gomphosis sure.
Around her mouth, perpetual smiles had made
Wrinkles wherein the loves and graces played;
There, stretched and rigid by continual strain,
Appeared the zygomatic muscles plain,
And broad montanus over her peeked chin
Extended to support the heavenly grin.
In amorous dalliance of I stroak'd her arm,
Each rising muscle was a rising charm.
Over the flexores my fond fingers played,
I found instruction with delight conveyed --
There carpus, cubitus and radius too
Were plainly felt and manifest to view.
No muscles on her lovely hand were seen,
But only bones envelop'd by a skin.
Long were her fingers and her knuckles bare,
Much like the claw-foot of a walnut chair.
So plain was complex metacarpus shown
It might be fairly counted bone by bone.
Her slender phalanxes were well defined,
And each with each by ginglymus combined.
Such were the charms that did my fancy fire
And love -- chaste scientific love inspire.
AT length my CADAVERA fell beneath
The fatal stroke of all subduing death --
Three days in grief -- three nights in tears I spent,
And sighs incessant gave my sorrows vent.
FEW are the examples of a love so true --
Even from her death I consolation drew,
And in a secret hour approached her grave
Resolved her precious corse from worms to save;
With active haste removed the incumbent clay,
Seized the rich prize and bore my love away.
HER naked charms now lay before my sight,
I gazed with rapture and supreme delight,
Nor could forbear, in ecstasy, to cry --
Beneath that shrivelled skin what treasures lie!
Then feasted to the full my amorous soul,
And skinn'd and cut and slashed without control.
'TWAS then I saw, what long I Would wished to see,
That heart which panted often for love and me --
In detail viewed the form I once adored,
And nature's hidden mysteries explored.
ALAS! too truly did the wise man say
That flesh is grass, and subject to decay --
Not so the bones -- of substance firm and hard
Long they remain the anatomist's reward.
Wise nature, in her providential care,
Did, kindly, bones from vile corruption spare,
That sons their fathers' skeletons might have
And heaven born science triumph over the grave.
MY true love's bones I boiled -- from fat and lean
These hands industrious scraped them fair and clean,
And every bone did to its place restore,
As nature's hand had placed them long before;
These fingers twisted every pliant wire
With patient skill, urged on by strong desire.
Now what remains of CADAVERA's mine,
Securely hanging in a case of pine.
OFTTIMES I sit and contemplate her charms,
Her nodding skull and her long dangling arms,
'Till quite inflamed with passion for the dead
I take her beauteous skeleton to bed --
There stretched, at length, close to my faithful side
She lies all night a lovely grinning bride. --
EXCUSE, my friends, this detail of my love,
You must the intent, if not the tale approve;
By facts exemplary I meant to show
To what extent a genuine zeal will go.
A mind, so fixed, will not be drawn aside
By vain dissentions or a partial pride;
But every hostile sentiment subdue
And keep the ruling passion still in view.
FALSE delicacy -- prejudices strong,
Which no distinctions know 'twixt right and wrong,
Against our noble science spend their rage
And mark the ignorance of this vulgar age.
TIME was, when men their living flesh would spare
And to the knife their quivering nates bare,
That skilful surgeons noses might obtain
For noses lost -- and cut and come again --
But now the living churlishly refuse
To give their dead relations to our use;
Talk of decorum -- and a thousand whims --
Whenever we hack their wives' or daughters' limbs;
And yet their tables daily they supply
With the rich fruits of sad mortality;
Will pick, and gut and cook a chicken's corse,
Dissect and eat it up without remorse;
Devouring fish, flesh, fowl, whatever comes,
Nor fear the ghosts of murdered hecatombs.
Now where is the difference? -- to the impartial eye
A leg of mutton and a human thigh
Are just the same -- for surely all must own
Flesh is but flesh, and bone is only bone;
And though indeed, some flesh and bone may grow
To make a monkey -- some to make a beau,
Still the materials are the same, we know.
Nor can our anatomic knowledge trace
Internal marks distinctive of our race. --
WHENCE, then, these loud complaints -- these hosts of foes
Combined our useful labors to oppose?
How long shall foolish prejudices reign?
And when shall reason her just empire gain?
AH! full of danger is the up-hill road,
That leads the youth to learning's high abode:
His way thick mists of vulgar errors blind,
And sneering satire follows close behind;
Sour envy strews the rugged path with thorns,
And lazy ignorance his labor scorns.
IS this a time, ye brethren of the knife,
For civil contest and internal strife?
When loud against us general clamours cry,
And persecution lifts her lash on high?
When government -- that many headed beast --
Against our practice rears her horrid crest,
And, our nocturnal access to oppose,
Around the dead a penal barrier A law past at New York, making it penal to
steal bodies from the burial ground.
throws?
To crush our schools her awful power applies,
And even forbids the gibbet's just supplies. The wheelbarrow of Pennsylvania.

YET in this night of darkness, storms and fears,
Behold one bright benignant star The Medical College.
appears --
Long may it shine, and, ever it is course is run,
Increase* in size and splendor, to a sun! --
Me^^inks I see thi^ s^n of future days,
Spread (...) abroad his diplomatic rays --
See life and health submit to his control,
And like a planet, death arou^^ him roll.
METHINKS I see a stately fabric rise,
Reared on the skulls of these our enemies:
I see the bones of our invet'rate foes
Hang round its walls in scientific rows.
There solemn sit the learned of the day
Dispensing death with uncontrouled sway,
And by prescription regulate with ease
The sudden crisis or the slow disease.
THEN shall physicians their millenium find,
And reign the real sov'reigns of mankind:
Then shall the face of this vile world be changed --
And nature's healthful laws all new arrang'd --
In min'ral powders all her dust shall rise,
And all her insects shall be Spanish flies:
In medicated potions streams shall flow,
Pills fall in hail-storms, and sharp salts in snow;
In every quagmire bolusses be found,
And slimy cataplasms spread the ground --
Nature herself assume the chymist's part,
And furnish poisons unsublim'd by art.
THEN to our schools shall wealth in currents flow,
Our theaters no want of subjects know;
Nor laws nor mobs the Anatomist shall dread,
For graves shall freely render up their dead.
FINIS.

