A CHARGE Delivered to the Brethren of the AFRICAN LODGE

On the 25th of June, 1792.

At the Hall of Brother WILLIAM SMITH, IN CHARLESTOWN.

By the Right Worshipful Master PRINCE HALL.

Printed at the Request of the Lodge.

Printed and Sold at the Bible and Heart, Cornhill, Boston.

A CHARGE, etc.
DEARLY and well beloved Brethren of the African Lodge, as through the goodness
and mercy of God, we are once more met together, in order to celebrate the
Festival of St. John the Baptist; it is requi^^^^ that we should on these
public days, and when we appear in form, give some reason as a foundation for
our so doing, but as this has been already done, in a discourse delivered in
substance by our late Reverend Brother John Marrant, and now in print,

I shall at this time endeavor to raise part of the superstructure, for
howsoever good the foundation may be, yet without this it will only prove a
Babel. I shall therefore endeavor to show the duty of a Mason; and the first
thing is, that he believes in one supreme Being, that he is the great Architect
of this visible world, and that he governs all things here below by his
almighty power, and his watchful eye is over all our works. Again we must be
good subjects to the laws of the land in which we dwell, giving honor to our
lawful Governors and Magistrates, giving honor to whom honor is due; and that
we have no hand in any plots or conspiracies or rebellion, or side or assist in
them: for when we consider the bloodshed, the devastation of towns and cities
that has been done by them, what heart can be so hard as not to pity those our
distressed brethren, and keep at the greatest distance from them. However just it
may be on the side of the oppressed, yet it does not in the least, or rather
ought not, abate that love and fellow-feeling which we ought to have for our
brother fellow men.

The next thing is love and benevolence to all the whole family of mankind, as
God's make and creation, therefore we ought to love them all, for love or
hatred is of the whole kind, for if I love a man for the sake of the image of
God which is on him, I must love all, for he made all, and upholds all, and we
are dependant upon him for all we do enjoy and expect to enjoy in this world
and that which is to come. -- Therefore he will help and assist all his
fellow-men in distress, let them be of what color or nation they may, yea even
our very enemies, much more a brother Mason. I shall therefore give you a few
instances of this from Holy Writ, and first, how did Abraham prevent the storm,
or rebellion that was rising between Lot's servants and his? Says Abraham to
Lot, let there be no strife I pray thee between me and thee, for the land is
before us, if you will go to the left, then I will go to the right, and if you
will go to the right, then I will go to the left. They divided and peace was
restored. I will mention the compassion of a blackman to a Prophet of the Lord,
Ebedmelech, when he heard that Jeremiah was cast into the dungeon, he made
intercession for him to the King and got liberty to take him out from the jaws
of death. See Jer. xxxviii 7-13.

Also the prophet Elisha after he had led the army of the Framites blindfold
into Samaria, when the King in a deriding manner said, my Father (not
considering that he was as much their Father as his) shall I smite, or rather
kill them out of the way, as not worthy to live on the same earth, or draw the
same air with himself; so eager was he to shed his brethren's blood, that he
repeats his blood-thirsty demand, but the Prophet after reproaching him
therefore, answers him no, but set bread and water before them; or in other
words, give them a feast and let them go home in peace. See 2 Kings, vi.22.23.

I shall just mention the good deeds of the Samaritan, though at that time they
were looked upon as unworthy to eat, drink or trade with their fellow-men, at
least by the Jews; see the pity and compassion he had on a poor distressed and
half dead stranger, see Luke x. from 30 to 37. See that you endeavor to do so
likewise. -- But when we consider the amazing condescending love and pity our
blessed Lord had on such poor worms as we are, as not only to call us his
friends, but his brothers, we are lost and can go no further in holy writ for
examples to excite us to the love of our fellow-men. -- But I am aware of an
objection that may arise (for some men will catch at any thing) that is that
they were not all Masons, we allow it, and I say that they were not all
Christians, and their benevolence to strangers ought to shame us both, that
there is so little, so very little of it to be seen in these enlightened days.

Another thing which is the duty of a Mason is, that he pays a strict regard to
the stated meetings of the Lodge, for masonry is of a progressive nature, and
must be attended to if ever he intends to be a good Mason; for the man that
thinks that because he has been made a Mason, and is called so, and at the
same time will wilfully neglect to attend his Lodge, he may be assured he will
never make a good Mason, nor ought he to be looked upon as a good member of the
craft. For if his example was followed, where would be the Lodge; and besides
what a disgrace is it, when we are at our set meetings, to hear that one of our
members is at a drinking house, or at a card table, or in some worse company,
this brings disgrace on the Craft: Again there are some that attend the Lodge
in such a manner that sometimes their absence would be better than their
Company (I would not here be understood a brother in disguise, for such an one
has no business on a level floor) for if he has been displeased abroad or at
home, the least thing that is spoken that he thinks not right, or in the least
offends him, he will raise his temper to such a height as to destroy the
harmony of the whole Lodge; but we have a remedy and every officer ought to see
it put in execution. -- Another thing a Mason ought to observe, is that he
should lend his helping hand to a brother in distress, and relieve him, this we
may do various ways; for we may sometimes help him to a cup of cold water, and
it may be better to him than a cup of wine. Good advice may be sometimes better
than feeding his body, helping him to some lawful employment, better than
giving him money; so defending his case and standing by him when wrongfully
accused, may be better than clothing him; better to save a brother's house
when on fire, than to give him one. Thus much may suffice.

I shall now cite some of our forefathers, for our imitation: and the first
shall be Tertullian, who defended the Christians against their heathen false
accusations, whom they charged with treason against the empire and the Emperor,
because of their silent meetings: he proved that to be false for this reason,
for in their meetings, they were wont to pray for the prosperity of the Empire,
of Rome, and him also; and they were accused of being enemies to mankind, how
can that be, said he, when their office is to love and pray for all mankind.
When they were charged with worshipping the Sun, because they looked toward
the East when they prayed; he defended them against this slander also, and
proved that they were slandered, slighted and ill-treated, not for any desert
of theirs, but only out of hatred of them and their profession. -- This friend
of the distressed was born in Carthage in Africa, and died Anno Christi, 202.

Take another of the same city, Cyprian, for his fidelity to his profession was
such, that he would rather suffer death than betray his trust and the truth of
the gospel, or approve of the impious worship of the Gentiles: He was not only
Bishop of Carthage, but of Spain and the cast, west and northern churches, who
died anno Christi, 259.

But I have not time to cite but one more (out of hundreds that I could count
of our Fathers, who were not only examples to us, but to many of their nobles
and learned,) that is Augustine, who had engraven on his table these words

He that does love an absent Friend to jeer,

May hence depart no room is for him here.

His saying was that sincere and upright Prayer pierces heaven, and returns
not empty. That it was a shelter to the soul. A sacrifice to God and a scourge
to the Devil. There is nothing, said he, more abateth pride and sin than the
frequent meditation on death he cannot die ill, that lives well; and seldom
does he die well, that lives ill: Again, if men want wealth, it is not to be
unjustly gotten, if they have it they ought by good works to lay it up in
heaven: And again, he that has tasted the sweetness of divine love, will not
care for temporal sweetness. The reasonable soul made in the likeness of God,
may here find much distraction, but no full satisfaction; not to be without
afflictions, but to overcome them is blessedness. Love is as strong as death;
as death kills the body, so love of eternal life kills worldly, desires and
affections. He called Ingratitude the Devil's sponge, wherewith he wipes out
all the favors of the Almighty. His prayer was, Lord give first what thou
requirest, and then require of me what thou will. -- This good man died anno
Chrsti, 430. --

The next is Fulgentius, his speech was, why travel I in the world which can
yield me no future, nor durable reward, answerable to my pains. Thought it
better to weep well, than to rejoice ill, yet if joy be our desire, how much
more excellent is their (...), who have a good conscience before God, who dread
nothing but sin, study to do nothing but to accomplish the precepts of Christ.
Now therefore let me change my course, and as before I endeavored amongst my
noble friends, to prove more noble, so now let my care and employment be among
the humble and poor servants of Christ and become more humble that I may help
and instruct my poor and distressed brethren.

Thus my brethren I have quoted a few of your reverend fathers, for your
imitation, which I hope you endeavor to follow, so far as your abili^^^s (...)
permit in your present situation and the disadvantages you labor under on
account of your being deprived of the means of education in your younger days,
as you see it is at this day with our children, for we see notwithstanding we
are rared for that, and other Town charges, we are deprived of that blessing.
But (...) discouraged have patience, and look forward to a better day: Hear
what the great Architect of the (...) world ^aith. ^^t^iopia shall stretch
forth her hands (...). (...) also the strange, but bold and consider language of
J. Husk, who just before the Exec^^ioner gave the last stroke, said I challenge
you to (...) me an hundred years hence. But in the mean time let us lay by our
recreation, and all superfluitites, so that we may have that to educate our
rising generation, which was spent in those follies. Make you this beginning,
and who knows but God may raise up some friend of body of friends, as he did in
Philadelphia, to open a School for the blacks here, as that friendly city has
done there.

I shall now show you what progress masonry has made since the the siege, and
taking of Jerusalem in the year 70, by Titus Vespasian, after a long, and
bloody siege, a million of souls having been slain, or had perished and the
eity, it was taken by storm and the city set on fire. There was an order of men
called the order of St. John, who besides their other engagements, subscribe to
another, by which they bound themeslves to keep up the war against the Turks,
these men defended the temple when on fire, in order to save it, so long, that
Titus was amazed and went to see the reason of it; but when he came so near as
to behold the Sanctum Sanctorum, he was amazed, and shed tears, and said, no
wonder these men should so long to save it. He honored them with many honors,
and large contributions were made to that order from many kingdoms; and were
also knighted. They continued 88 years in Jerusalem, till that city was again
retaken by the Turks, after which they resided 104 years in the Cyrean city of
Ptolemy, till the remains of the Holy Conquest were lost. Whereupon they
settled on the Island of Cyprus, where they continued 18 years, till they found
an opportunity to take the Island Rhodes, being masters of that they maintained
it for 213 years, and from thence they were called knights of Rhodes, till in
the year 1530, they took their residence in the Issland of Malta, where they
have continued to this day, and are distinguished by the name of the knights of
Malta. Their first Master was Villaret in the year 1099. Fulco Villaret in the
year 1322, took the Island of Rhodes, and was after that distinguished by the
title of Grand-Master, which has devolved to his Successors to this day.

Query, Whether at that day, when there was an African church, and perhaps the
largest Christian church on earth, whether there was no African of that order;
or whether, if they were all whites, they would refuse to accept them as their
fellow Christians and brother Masons; or whether there were any so weak, or
rather so foolish, as to say, because they were Blacks, that would make their
lodge or army too common or too cheap? Sure this was not our conduct in the
late war; for then they marched shoulder to shoulder, brother soldier and
brother soldier, to the field of battle; let who will answer; he that despises
a black man for the sake of his color, reproacheth his Maker, and he has
resented it, in the case of Aaron and Miriam. See for this Numbers xii. --

But to return: In the year 1787 (the year in which we received our charter)
there were 489 lodges under charge of his late Royal Highness the Duke of
Cumberland; whose memory will always be esteemed by every good Mason.

And now, my African brethren, you see what a noble order you are members of.
My charge to you is, that you make it your study to live up to the precepts of
it* as you know that they are all good; and let it be known this day to the
spectat^rs, that you have not been to a feast of Bacchus, but to a refreshment
with Masons; and see to it that you behave as such, as well at home as abroad;
always to keep in your minds the obligations you are under, both to God and
your fellow men* And more so, you my dear brethren of Providence, who are at a
distance from, and cannot attend the Lodge here but seldom; yet I hope you will
endeavor to communicate to us by letters of your welfare; and remember your
obligations to each other, and live in peace and love as brethren -- We thank
you for your attendance with us this day, and with you a safe return.

If thus, we by the grace of God, live up to this our Prosession; we may
cheerfully go the rounds of the compass of this life. Having lived according to
the plumb line of uprightness, the square of justice, the level truth and
sincerity. And when we are come to the end of time, we may then bid farewell to
that delightful Sun and Moon, and the other planets, that move so beautifully
round her in their orbits, and all things here below, and aseend to that new
Jerusalem, where we shall not want these tapers, for God is the Light thereof;
where the Wicked ccase from troubling, and where the weary are at rest

Then shall we hear and see and know,
All we desired and wished below,
And every power find sweet employ,
In the eternal world of joy.
Our sleth shall slumber in the ground,
Till the last trumpet's joyful found,
Then barst the chains with sweet surprise,
And in our Savior's image rise.

