A GENUINE AND CORRECT ACCOUNT OF THE Captivity, Sufferings and Deliverance OF
Mrs. Jemima How, OF HINSDALE, IN NEW HAMPSHIRE.

Taken from her own mouth, and written, by the Rev. BUNKER GRAY, A. M. Minister
of Hinsdale, in a letter to the Author of the History of New Hampshire,
extracted from the third volume of said History, by consent of the Author.

In this account the mistakes of Col. HUMPHREYS, relating to Mrs. HOW, in his
"life of General PUTNAM," are rectified.

PRINTED AT THE Apollo Press, IN BOSTON, BY BELKNAP AND YOUNG. NORTH SIDE OF
THE STATE-HOUSE STATE-STREET. MDCCXCII.

AN ACCOUNT OF THE Captivity, Sufferings and Deliverance, OF Mrs. Jemima How.
AS Messrs. July 27, 1755.
Caleb How, Hilkiah Grout, and Benjamin Gaffield, who had been hoeing corn in
the meadow, west of the river, were returning home, a little before sunsent, to
a place called Bridgman's Fort, they were fired upon by twelve Indians, who had
ambushed their path. How was on horseback, with two young lads, his children,
behind him. A ball, which broke his thigh, brought him to the ground. His horse
ran a few rods and fell likewise, and both the lads were taken. The Indians in
their savage manner, coming up to How, pierced his body with a spear, tore off
his scalp, stuck a hatchet in his head, and left him in this forlorn condition.
He was found alive the morning after, by a party of men from Fort Hinsdale; and
being asked by one of the party whether he knew him, he answered, yes, I know
you all. These were his last words, though he did not expire until after his
friends had arrived with him at Fort Hinsdale. Grout was so fortunate as to
escape unhurt. But Gaffield, in attempting to wade through the river, at a
certain place which was indeed fordable at that time, was unfortunately
drowned. Flushed with the success they had met with here, the savages went
directly to Bridgman's Fort. There was no man in it, and only three women and
some children, viz. Mrs. Jemima How, Mrs. Submit Grout, and Mrs. Eunice
Gaffield. Their husbands, I need not mention again, and their feelings at this
juncture I will not attempt to describe. They had heard the enemies guns, but
knew not what had happened to their friends. Extremely anxious for their
safety, they stood longing to embrace them, until at length, concluding from
the noise they heard without that some of them were come, they unbarred the
gate in a hurry to receive them; when lo! to their inexpressible disappointment
and surprise, instead of their husbands, in rushed a number of hideous Indians,
to whom they and their tender offspring became an easy prey; and from whom they
had nothing to expect, but either an immediate death, or a long and doleful
captivity. The latter of these, by the favor of Providence, turned out to be
the lot of these unhappy women and their still more unhappy, because more
helpless, children. Mrs. Gaffield had but one, Mrs. Grout had three, and Mrs.
How seven. The eldest of Mrs. Howe's was eleven years old, and the youngest
but six months. The two eldest were daughters, which she had by her first
husband, Mr. William Phipps, who was also slain by the Indians, of which, I
doubt not but you have seen an account in Mr. Doolittle's history. It was from
the mouth of this woman that I lately received the foregoing account. She also
gave me, I doubt not, a true, though to be sure, a very brief and imperfect
history of her captivity, which I here insert for your perusal. It may perhaps
afford you some amusement, and can do no harm; if after it has undergone your
critical inspection, you should not think it (or an abre^^^tion of it) worthy
to be preserved among the ^^ords you are about to publish.

The Indians (she says) having plundered and put fire to the Fort, we marched
as near as could judge, a mile and a half into the wools, where we encamped
that night. When the morning came, and we had advanced as much farther, six
Indians were sent back to the place of our late abode, who collected a (...)
more plunder, and destroyed some other (...) that had been left behind,; but
they did not return until the day was so far spent, that it was judged best to
continue where we were, through the night. Early the next morning we set off
for Canada, and continued our march eight days successively, until we had
reached the place where the Indians had left their canoes, about fifteen miles
from Crown Point. This was a long and tedious march; but the captives, by
divine assistance, were enabled to endure it with less trouble and difficulty,
than they had reason to expect. From such savage masters, in such indigent
circumstances, we could not rationally hope for kinder treatment than we
received. Some of us, it is true, had a harder lot than others; and, among the
children, I thought my son Squire had the hardest of any. He was then only four
years old, and when we stopped to rest our wearly limbs, and he sat down on his
master's pack, the savage monster would often knock him off; and sometimes too,
with the handle of his hatchet. Several ugly marks, indented in his head by the
cruel Indians, at that tender age, are still plainly to be seen.

At length we arrived at Crown Point, and took up our quarters there, for the
space of near a week. In the mean time some of the Indians went to Montreal,
and took several of the weary captives along with them, with a view of selling
them to the French. They did not succeed, however, in finding a market for any
of them. They gave my youngest daughter, Submit Phipps, to the Governor, de
Vaudreuil, had a drunken frolic, and returned again to Crown Point, with the
rest of their prisoners. From hence we set off for St. John's, in four or five
canoes, just as night was coming on, and were soon surrounded with darkness. A
heavy storm hung over us. The found of the rolling thunder was very terrible
upon the waters, which at every flash of expansive lightning, seemed to be all
in a blaze. Yet to this we were indebted for all the light we enjoyed. No
object could we discern any longer than the flashes lasted. In this posture we
sailed in our open tottering canoes, almost the whole of that dreary night. The
morning indeed had not yet begun to dawn, when we all went ashore; and having
collected a heap of sand and gravel for a pillow, I laid myself down, with my
tender infant by my side, not knowing where any of my other children were, or
what a miserable condition they might be in. The next day, however, under the
wing of that ever present and all-powerful Providence, which had preserved us
through the darkness, and imminent dangers of the preceding night, we all
arrived in safety at St. John's.

Our next movement was to St. Francois, the metropolis, if I may so call it, to
which the Indians, who led us captive, belonged. Soon after our arrival at
their wretched capital, a council, consisting of the chief Sachem, and some
principal warriors of the St. Francois tribe, was convened; and after the
ceremonies usual on such occasions, were over, I was conducted and delivered to
an old squaw, whom the Indians told me, I must call my mother. My infant still
continuing to be the property of its original Indian owners. I was nevertheless
permitted to keep it with me a while longer, for the sake of saving them the
trouble of looking after it, and of maintaining it with my milk. When the
weather began to grow cold, shuddering at the prospect of approaching winter, I
acquainted my new mother that I did not think it would be possible for me to
endure it, if I must spend it with her, and fare as the Indians did. Listening
to my repeated and earnest solicitations, that I might be disposed of among
some of the French inhabitants of Canada, she, at length, set off with me and
my infant, attended by some male Indians, upon a journey to Montreal, in hopes
of finding a market for me there. But the attempt proved unsuccessful, and the
journey tedious indeed. Our provisions were so scanty as well as insipid and
unsavory, the weather was so cold, and the traveling so very bad, that it
often seemed as if I must have perished on the way. The lips of my poor child
were sometimes so benumbed, that when I put it to my breast, it could not, till
it grew warm, imbibe the nourishment requisite for its support. While we were
at Montreal, we went into the house of a certain French gentleman, whose lady,
being sent for, and coming into the room where I was, to examine me, seeing I
had an infant, exclaimed suddenly in this manner, Damn it, I will not buy a
woman that has a child to look after. There was a swillpail standing near me,
in which I observed some crusts and crumbs of bread swiming on the surface of
the greasy liquor it contained: Sorely pinched with hunger, I skimmed them off
with my hands and eat them; and this was all the refreshment which the house
afforded me. Some where in the course of this visit to Montreal, my Indian
mother was so unfortunate as to catch the small pox, of which distemper she
died, soon after our return, which was by water, to St. Francois.

And now came on the season when the Indians begun to prepare for a winter's
hunt. I was ordered to return my poor child to those of them, who still claimed
it as their property. This was a severe trial. The babe clung to my bosom with
all its might; but I was obliged to pluck it thence, and deliver it, shrieking
and screaming, enough to penetrate a heart of stone, into the hands of those
unfeeling wretches whose tender mercies may be termed cruel. It was soon
carried off by a hunting party of those Indians, to a place called Messiskow,
at the lower end of Lake Champlain, whither, in about a month after, it was my
fortune to follow them. I had preserved my milk, in hopes of seeing my beloved
child again. And here I found it, it is true, but in a condition that afforded
me no great satisfaction; it being greatly emaciated, and almost starved. I
took it in my arms, put its face to mine, and it instantly bit me with such
violence, that it seemed as if I must have parted with a piece of my cheek. I
was permitted to lodge with it that, and the two following nights; but every
morning that intervened, the Indians, I suppose on purpose to torment me, sent
me away to another wigwam, which stood at a little distance, though not so far
from the one in which my distressed infant was confined, but that I could
plainly hear its incessant cries, and heart rending lamentations. In this
deplorable condition I was obliged to take my leave of it, on the morning of
the third day after my arrival at the place. We moved down the Lake several
miles the same day; and the night following was remarkable on account of the
great earthquake November 18, 1755.
which terribly shook that howling wilderness. Among the islands hereabouts we
spent the winter season, often shifting our quarters, and roving about from one
place to another; our family consisting of three persons only, besides myself,
viz. my late mother's daughter, whom therefore I called my sister, her sanhop,
and a pappoose. They once left me alone two dismal nights; and when they
returned to me again, perceiving them smile at each other, I asked what is the
matter? They replied, that two of my children were no more: One of which, they
said, died a natural death, and the other was knocked on the head. I did not
utter many words, but my heart was sorely pained within me, and my mind
exceedingly troubled with strange and awful ideas. I often imagined, for
instance, that I plainly saw the naked carcases of my deceased children hanging
upon the limbs of the trees, as the Indians are wont to hang the raw hides of
those beasts which they take in hunting. It was not long, however, before it
was so ordered by kind Providence, that I should be relieved in a good measure
from those horrid imaginations; for as I was walking one day upon the ice,
observing a smoke at some distance upon the land, it must proceed, thought I,
from the fire of some Indian hut, and who knows but some one of my poor
children may be there. My curiosity, thus excited, led me to the place, and
there I found my son Caleb, a little boy between two and three years old, whom
I had lately buried, in sentiment at least; or rather imagined to have been
deprived of life, and perhaps also denied a decent grave. I found him likewise
in tolerable health and circumstances, under the protection of a fond Indian
mother; and moreover had the happiness of lodging with him in my arms one
joyful night. Again we shifted our quarters, and when we had traveled eight or
ten miles upon the snow and ice, came to a place where the Indians manufactured
sugar which they extracted from the maple trees. Here an Indian came to vist
us, whom I knew, and could speak English. He asked me why I did not go to see
my son Squire. I replied that I had lately been informed that he was dead. He
assured me that he was yet alive, and but two or three miles off, on the
opposite side of the Lake. At my request he gave me the best directions he
could to the place of his abode. I resolved to embrace the first opportunity
that offered of endeavoring to search it out. While I was busy in contemplating
this affair, the Indians obtained a little bread, of which they gave me a small
share. I did not taste a morsel of it myself, but saved it all for my poor
child, if I should be so lucky as to find him. At length, having obtained of my
keepers leave to be absent for one day. I set off early in the morning, and
steering, as well as I could, according to the directions which the friendly
Indian had given me, I quickly found the place, which he had so accurately
marked out. I beheld, as I drew nigh, my little son without the camp; but he
looked, thought I, like a starved and mangy puppy, that had been wallowing in
the ashes. I took him in my arms, and he spoke to me these words, in the Indian
tongue: "Mother, are you come?' I took him into the wigwam with me, and
observing a number of Indian children in it, I distributed all the bread which
I had reserved for my own child, among them all, otherwise I should have given
great offense. My little boy appeared to be very fond of his new mother, kept
as near me as possible while I staid, and when I told him I must go, he fell as
though he had been knocked down with a club. But having recommended him to the
care of Him that made him, when the day was far spent, and the time would
permit me to stay no longer, I departed, you may well suppose with a heavy load
at my heart. The tidings I had received of the death of my youngest child had,
a little before, been confirmed to me beyond a doubt, but I could not mourn so
heartily for the deceased, as for the living child.

When the winter broke up, we removed to St. John's; and, through the ensuing
summer, our principal residence was at no great distance from the fort at that
place. In the mean time, however, my sister's husband having been out with a
scouting party to some of the English settlements, had a drunken frolic at the
fort, when he returned. His wife, who never got drunk, but had often
experienced, the ill effects of her husband's intemperance fearing what the
consquence might prove, if he should come home in a morose and turbulent
humor, to avoid his insolence, proposed that we should both retire, and keep
out of the reach of it, until the storm abated. We absconded accordingly, but
so it happened, that I returned, and ventured into his presence, before his
wife had presumed to come nigh him. I found him in his wigwam, and in a surly
mood; and not being able to revenge upon his wife, because she was not at home,
he laid hold of me, and hurried me to the fort; and, for a trifling
consideration, sold me to a French gentleman, whose name was Saccapee. It Is an
ill wind certainly that blows no body any good. I had been with the Indians a
year lacking fourteen days; and, if not for my sister, yet for me, 'twas a
lucky circumstance indeed, which thus at last, in an unexpected moment,
snatched me out of their cruel hands, and placed me beyond the reach of their
insolent power.

After my Indian master had disposed of me in the manner related above, and the
moment of sober reflection had arrived, perceiving that the man who bought me
had taken the advantage of him in an unguarded hour, his resentments begun to
kindle, and his indignation rose so high, that he threatened to kill me if he
should meet me alone, or if he could not revenge himself thus, that he would
set fire to the fort. I was therefore secreted in an upper chamber, and the
fort carefully guarded, until his wrath had time to cool. My service in the
family to which I was now advanced, was perfect freedom, in comparison of what
it had been among the barbarous Indians. My new master and mistress were both
as kind and generous toward me as I could any ways expect. I seldom asked a
favor of either of them, but it was readily granted: In consequence of which I
had it in my power, in many instances, to administer aid and refreshment to the
poor prisoners of my own nation, who were brought into St. John's during my
abode in the family of the abovementioned benevolent and hospitable Saccapee.
Yet even in this family such trials awaited me as I had little reason to
expect, but stood in need of a large stock of prudence, to enable me to
encounter them. Must I tell you then, that even the good old man himself, who
considered me as his property, and likewise a warm and resolute son of his, at
that same time, and under the same roof, became both excessively fond of my
company; so that between these two rivals, the father and the son, I found
myself in a very critical situation indeed, and was greatly embarrassed and
perplexed, hardly knowing many times, how to behave in such a manner as at once
to secure my own virtue, and the good esteem of the family in which I resided,
and upon which I was wholly dependent for my daily support. At length, however,
through the tender compassion of a certain English gentleman, Col. Peter
Schuyler, then a prisoner.
the Governor de Vaudreuil being made acquainted with the condition I had
fallen into, immediately ordered the young amorous Saccapee, then an officer in
the French army, from the field of Venus to the field of Mars, and at the same
time also wrote a letter to his father, enjoining it upon him, by no means to
suffer me to be abused, but to make my situation and service in his family as
easy and delightful as possible. I was moreover under unspeakable obligations
to the Governor upon another account. I had received intelligence from my
daughter Mary, the purport of which was, that there was a prospect of her being
shortly married to a young Indian of the tribe of Saint Francois, with which
tribe she had continued from the beginning of her captivity. These were heavy
tidings, and added greatly to the poignancy of my other afflictions. However,
not long after I had heard this melancholy news, an opportunity presented, of
acquainting that humane and generous gentleman, the commander in chief, and my
illustrious benefactor, with this affair also, who in compassion for my
sufferings, and to mitigate my sorrows, issued his orders in good time, and had
my daughter taken away from the Indians, and conveyed to the same nunnery where
her sister was then lodged, with his express injunction; that they should both
of them together, be well looked after, and carefully educated, as his adopted
children. In this school of superstition and bigotry, they continued while the
war in those days between France and Great Britain lasted. At the conclusion of
which war, the Governor went home to France, took my oldest daughter along with
him, and married her then to a French gentleman, whose name is Cron Lewis. He
was at Boston with the fleet under Count de Estaing, [1778] and one of his
Clerks. My other daughter still continuing in the nunnery, a considerable time
had elapsed after my return from captivity, when I made a journey to Canada,
resolving to use my best endeavors not to return without her. I arrived just
in time to prevent her being sent to France. She was to have gone in the next
vessel that sailed for that place. And I found it extremely difficult to
prevail with her to quit the nunnery and go home with me. Yea, she absolutely
refused, and all the persuasions and arguments I could use with her, were to no
effect, until after I had been to the Governor, and obtained a letter from him
to the superintendant of the nuns, in which he threatened, if my daughter
should not be immediately delivered into my hands, or could not be prevailed
with to submit to my parental authority, that he would sent a band of soldiers
to assist me in bringing her away. Upon hearing this she made no farther
resistance. But so extremely bigoted was she to the customs and religion of the
place, that after all, she left it with the greatest reluctance, and the most
bitter lamentations, which she continued as we passed the streets, and wholly
refused to be comforted. My good friend, Major Small, whom we met with on the
way, tried all he could to console her; and was so very kind and obliging as to
bear us company, and carry my daughter behind him on horseback.

But I have run on a little before my story, for I have not yet informed you of
the means and manner of my own redemption, to the accomplishing of which, the
recovery of my daughter just mentioned, and the ransoming of some of my other
children, several gentlemen of note, contributed not a little; to whose
goodness, therefore, I am greatly indebted, and sincerely hope I shall never be
so ungrateful as to forget. Col. Schuyler in particular was so very kind and
generous as to advance 2700 livres to procure a ransom for myself and three of
my children. He accompanied and conducted us from Montreal to Albany, and
entertained us in the most friendly and hospitable manner a considerable time,
at his own house, and I believe entirely at his own expense.

I have spun out the above narrative to a much greater length than I at first
intended, and shall conclude it with referring you, for a more ample and
brilliant account of the captive heroine, who is the subject of it, to Col.
Humphrey's history of the life of Genesis Israel Putnum, together with some
remarks upon a few clauses in it. I never indeed had the pleasure of perusing
the whole of said history, but remember to have seen, some time ago, an extract
from it in one of the Boston newspapers, in which the Colonel has extolled the
beauty and good sense, and rare accomplishments of Mrs. How, the person whom
he endeavors to paint in the most lively and engaging colors, perhaps a little
too highly, and in a style, that may appear to those who are acquainted with
her at this day, romantic and extravagant. And the Colonel must needs have
been misinformed with respect to some particulars that he has mentioned in her
story. Indeed, when I read the extract from his history to Mrs. Tute, (which
name she has derived from a third husband, whose widow she now remains) she
seemed to be well pleased, and said, at first, is was all true, but soon after
contradicted the circumstance of her lover's being so bereft of his senses when
he saw her moving off in a boat at some distance from the shore, as to plunge
into the water after, in consequence of which he was seen no more. It is true,
she said; that as she was returning from Montreal to Albany, she met with young
Saccapee on the way, That she was in a boat with Col. Schuyler, that the French
officer came on board the boat, made her some handsome presents, took his final
leave of her, and departed, to outward appearance, in tolerable good humor.

She moreover says, that when she went to Canada for her daughter, she met with
him again, that he showed her a lock of her hair; and her name likewise,
printed with vermilion on his arm. As to her being chosen agent to go to
Europe, in behalf of the people of Hinsdale, when Col. Howard obtained from the
government of New York a patent of their lands on the west side of Connecticut
river, it was never once thought of by Hinsdale people until the
abovementioned extract arrived among them, in which the author has inserted it
as a matter of undoubted fact.

THE END.

