"HE took them up in his arms and BLESSED them."


A DISCOURSE TO CHILDREN. BY THE REV. MOSES HEMMENWAY, D. D. ALSO, THE
CONVERSION AND DEATH OF JOSEPH: AN AFFECTING STORY, FOUNDED ON FACT.
EMBELLISHED WITH TWO ELEGANT ENGRAVINGS.

PUBLISHED ACCORDING TO ACT OF CONGRESS.

PRINTED AT PORTLAND, BY THOMAS ^. WAIT. 1792.

A DISCOURSE TO CHILDREN, etc.
MARK X. 13, 14, 16. And they brought young children to him, that he should
touch them; and his disciples rebuked those that brought them. But when Jesus
saw it, he was much displeased, and said, suffer little children to come unto
me, and forbid them not, for of such is the kingdom of heaven. -- And he took
them up in his arms, put his bands upon them, and blessed them.
THERE are several things contained in this history, very worthy of notice. --
Parents as well as children may hence be instructed, and encouraged in their
duty. But what I have now to offer is directed to you who are children. And be
assured, (...) our friend who addresses you; who wishes your good and happiness
as sincerely as he does his own; who has himself been a child like you; who
knows the heart, and remembers well the feelings of a child; and is much
concerned that you may escape the dangers, and improve the advantages of this
early part of life. The importance of this you may not be so sensible of at
present, as they who have had opportunity for longer observation and experience.

Will you attend now to a few observations on the text you have heard read? viz.

First. That Christ loves little children, and takes kind notice of them.
Secondly. That he would have them come to him, and is much displeased with
those who hinder or discourage them. Thirdly. That children belong to the
kingdom of heaven. Fourthly. That the blessing of Christ shall be upon such
children, as come to him for it.
I. Christ has great love for little children. He takes as much notice of them,
and has as much kindness for them, as for any. How kindly and lovingly did he
treat these children who were brought to him. He did not chide them for coming.
He would not let them go, till he had taken them up into his arms, put his
hands upon them, prayed for them, and given them his blessing. His words and
his actions toward them were full of love and tenderness.

Among the Jews, good men used to put their hands upon the heads of their
children, and upon others who desired their blessing, and to pray for them. And
it has also been a pious custom, among christians, for children to ask their
parents blessing, and to receive it, kneeling. And though it may not be much
practiced at present, yet it seems to have been a fit means of cherishing, in
parents and children, a sense of their duty toward each other. I mention this,
that you may better understand why these children were brought to Christ. It
was, that he might put his hands upon them and bless them.

When Christ's disciples would have hindered their coming, it greatly displeased
him. Such was his love for children that he could not bear to have them
slighted, or rebuked, when they were coming to him. And he is as much
displeased now with those who discourage children from seeking the blessings of
his grace. No man ever had, or showed so much love to little children as
Christ. You have heard what kind words he spoke concerning them. Suffer little
children to come to me, and forbid them not, for of such is the kingdom of
heaven. If you had heard him speak these words, and then seen him take them up
in his arms to bless them, would it not have affected you? Could you ever have
forgotten such expressions of love?

It was for the love he had for children, as well as others, that Christ came
into the world, and went through much labor and hardship, and at last died
upon the cross. All this he did to save them from the pains of everlasting
death, to which they were exposed, beacuse of sin. For alas! we are all
sinners, and have offended God our maker. Our hearts incline to be wicked. We
often do, what we ought not, and neglect to do what God has commanded. We are
full of evil thoughts. We often speak and act amiss. -- Now, sin displeases
God, who is angry with the wicked; and the word of God assures us, that "The
wages of sin are death." Children, as well as others, are sinners, and so must
be in a sad condition, unless they be forgiven, and reconciled to God.

Though God be merciful and willing to forgive sinners, upon their repentance,
yet none can be delivered from sin and death without a Savior. God, in his
great mercy, appointed Christ, his eternal son, to be the savior of men. And
so great was the love of Christ, that he was willing to be the savior, to come
into the world, and become a man, to live a life of affliction, and suffer the
pains of death, for our salvation. This shows the greatness of his love to us.
And remember, that Christ has done and suffered all this for children, as well
as others, that they might be saved. Parents have great love for their
children. You cannot conceive the tender concern they feel for you, when you
are in trouble, or in danger. But no parents ever had so much love for their
dearest children, or were willing to do and suffer so much for them, as Christ
has done.

When he took flesh upon him, he showed his great love to children, by becoming
a child himself. He had a design herein of special kindness; that he might,
from his own experience, have a fellow feeling of the afflictions and
infirmities of that tender age; that children might be the more encouraged to
carry all their complaints to him, who knows how to pity and comfort them;
remembering, that himself was once a child. Another design which Christ had, in
becoming a child like you, was to teach children, by his example, how they
should behave. -- When you read, that Jesus increased in wisdom, and in favor
with God and man, this should teach you, that children must endeavor to learn
every thing that is good, and behave so well, that God and all good men may
love them. They should be dutiful and obedient to their parents, as Christ was.
-- They should attend religious duties, in the house of God, as well as in
private, as the child Jesus went up to the temple to worship with his parents.
All this shows the peculiar love of Christ to children.

And though he has left this world, and gone up to heaven, where he reigns over
all, upon a glorious throne, he has now the same love for children. He does not
forget you, though you are so apt to forget him. He sees and takes notice of
you by day and night. -- He keeps you alive, and in health. He feeds and
clothes you, and gives you all your good things. If he send affliction upon
you, he means it for your good; as parents, sometimes, correct children, when
they are wicked, in hopes it will do them good. When your friends are kind to
you, it is Christ, who puts it into their hearts. He also takes care, that you
have all the good instruction you receive from the word of God, from good
books, and from your friends, that you may know what you must do to be saved.
And if you get good by the instructions, which you receive, if ever you feel
any desire to forsake sin, and become religious, it is Christ, who by his
grace, has given this turn to your minds, and made you sensible of the wisdom
and happiness of remembering your creator, in the days of your youth. And now
Christ is in heaven, he is preparing a place, for those little ones, who belong
to him, who love, and obey him.

Ought you not, then, dear children, to give Christ your hearts and endeavor to
please him? When children are wicked, they greatly displease Christ. But when
they love him, and strive to do, as he commands, to learn that which is good,
to obey their parents, to worship God, and behave themselves, as Christ did,
when he was a child; and if they offend are sorry for it, beg forgiveness for
Christ's sake, and are careful to do so no more, this is pleasing to him, and
he loves them the more. If Christ were here in the world, would you not wish to
go to him, to see him, to hear him speak, to be acquainted with him, instructed
by him, and become his disciples? -- I have then something to tell you, which
you have great reason to hearken to with joy and thankfulness: And that is,

II. That Christ would have little children come to him. This you may remember
was the second observation on the text.

You have heard that Christ was much displeased with his disciples, when they
would have hindered those little children who were coming to him. 'Let them
come,' says he, 'and forbid them not.' And it is now his will, that children
should come to him, and he is as free as ever to receive and bless them. He
would have parents bring their little babes who cannot come themselves. These
he would have brought, and given to him in baptism. It is his will, that
children come, and give themselves to him, as soon as they are capable. Parents
should teach and encourage their children, lead and guide them to Christ, that
they may know him, become acquainted with him, and receive his blessing. Christ
now invites you all to come, and would receive you as gladly as ever a kind
parent took up his little child, that went to him.

But it may be asked, how shall we come to Christ, now he is in heaven, and we
upon earth?

I answer, though our bodies cannot come to his body, now he is in heaven, and
we upon earth, yet we may go to him with our minds, and hearts, by thinking of
him, believing on him, loving him, seeking instruction from his word,
consenting, heartily, to have him for our Savior, to obey his commands, and
submit to his disposal; trusting in his promises, and hoping for pardon and the
favor of God, only, for the sake of his merits. If you believe that he is such
a person as the scriptures declare him to be, if you desire and seek Salvation
from him, as he encourages and directs you; this is coming to him with your
hearts, this is what he calls and invites you to do. And he is willing to save
every one of you, from sin and ruin, if you thus look to him for it.

But that you may understand what it is to come to Christ in a right manner,
and as he would have you do, I will endeavor to instruct ^ou, as plainly as I
can in a few words.

You must be sensible that you are sinners, that as such the great God is very
angry with you, and you must be forever undone, if you die without being
forgiven, and reconciled to him.

You must be convinced, that Christ only can save you from sin, and everlasting
destruction, and make your peace with God, that he is able and willing to save
all, who desire and seek Salvation from him, as it is offered in the gospel.

You must be sensible, that you can do nothing for which you can deserve, that
God should show you mercy, pardon your sins, and save your souls, that you are
not able of yourselves to change your wicked hearts, and make yourselves good
-- that if you are pardoned and saved, it must be for the sake of Christ's merit
and his interceding for you with God; and that he by his grace must incline
your hearts to love and fear God, and keep his commandments. You must not
therefore depend upon your own righteousness and strength for Salvation, but on
the righteousness and grace of Christ.

You must be truly willing and desirous to have Christ for your Savior, to be
taught by his word and spirit and to own him as your master and Lord, to govern
and keep you from sin and danger, and bring you safely to heaven. You must give
yourselves wholly to him, and to God, through him; heartily sorrowing for all
your sins, and resolving without delay to forsake them all, and to do your duty
to God and man; hoping for assistance and acceptance, through the grace and
merit of Christ. This must be your steady resolution and endeavor, as long as
you live.

In this manner Christ would have all children come to him, as soon as they are
capable. And they are capable, as soon as they have understanding to receive
instruction, concerning their need of a savior, and that Christ is able and
willing to save them, upon their seeking Salvation from him, according to the
gospel.

The displeasure Christ expressed at those, who would have kept children away
from him, shows, that it was his will, that they should come. He plainly
expressed his willingness when he said "Suffer little children to come to me,
and forbid them not." His coming into the world, and doing and suffering so
much to save them, from the pains of everlasting death, is a clear proof, that
he would most willingly have them come, and receive the blessings of grace,
which he has purchased for children, as well as others, with his precious blood.

Should not parents then be concerned to be workers together, with Christ, for
the salvation of their children, by training them up in the way wherein they
should go, by praying with and for them, and leading them by their example,
that so they may be the instruments of guiding and leading them to Christ, that
they may be blessed in him?

And ought you not, my dear children, to give yourselves up, most freely, to
the kind and most merciful Savior who would have you come to him, that you may
have everlasting life, and is waiting with open arms, to receive and bless you?

Will you slight and disobey the invitation of him, who only can save you? If
any of you should persist in refusing him, and the grace and mercy he offers,
you will be miserable creatures. How shall we escape, if we neglect so great
salvation!

But if you will receive, and give yourselves to Christ and submit to him, as
your teacher, your Lord, and Savior, now in the days of your youth, you will
be happy forever. God, and Christ, and angels, and good men, will rejoice over,
and love you. You shall want nothing that is for your real good. You shall find
more comfort and joy, in serving God than in all the pleasures which sin or the
world can give. You shall be happy in life and in death, and you cannot
conceive how great your happiness will be in heaven, after this life is ended.

Remember, that now is the accepted time, and day of Salvation. You must not
delay one day or moment. If you do not now come to a full and hearty resolution
to hear the voice of Christ, in his word, and give yourselves up to God through
him, I fear greatly that I have lost my labor, and done you no good. -- "O that
you were wise to consider your latter end," and "that you would know, in this
your day, the things which belong to your peace." You know that children may
die, as well as others. And if any of you should die, without an interest in
Christ, and before your peace is made with God, my heart aches to think what
must become of you. To day, then if you will hear the voice of Christ, harden
(...) your hearts. Seek the Lord while he (...) be found, call upon him, while
he is nea^.

I might further press the exhortation from the consideration of those vows and
bonds under which, I suppose, the most of you have been laid in your baptism,
when the token of your interest in the covenant, and of your being members of
the church, was put upon you. This is a good reason, why children should come
to Christ. It is the reason which Christ himself has given -- "Suffer little
children to come to me, and forbid them not, for of such is the kingdom of
heaven -- But this brings us to the third observation.

III. Little children belong to the kingdom of heaven. -- There will be no need
of arguing this point after Christ himself has affirmed it. He is a faithful
and true witness.

It gives me joy, and may well fill you with wonder and thankfulness, that
Christ has assured you, that children belong to the kingdom of heaven.

If we understand by the kingdom of heaven, the state of the blessed after this
life is ended, little children are capable of enjoying the happiness of heaven,
and many of them are heirs of this blessedness. Young babes will go to heaven
as well as older people. And so may children of some age and understanding,
such as you are. Some good thing was found in young Abijah; and Josiah, while
he was yet young, began to seek God. And many while they were very young, have
been lovely examples of early piety. You may read an account of several of
these in the Token for children and other books. Now such as are good, however
young they may be, are heirs of the kingdom of glory.

Or if the kingdom of heaven be understood to mean the visible church (which I
take to be the meaning of the word in our text) it is still true, that children
belong to the church, as well as their parents. God has taken them into his
covenant, and therefore they are baptized and are to be watched over by the
church, that they be not drawn into wicked practices, but taught to know and
fear and serve God. They are bound to this by the covenant God has put them
under, and by their baptism, in which they are given to God, and Christ to be
his servants.

And as it is a special favor for you to have been born members of the church,
and so belong to the kingdom of heaven upon earth, this is a special reason why
you should be concerned to come and freely give up yourselves to Christ, and to
God through him, now you are grown to some measure of capacity and
understanding in things of religion. God's covenant, which you are under, binds
you to him. You are of the number of his people, and planted in his vineyard.
It is required and expected that you should be an example to those whom he has
not thus taken into the number of his covenant people, and admitted as members
of his church. It will be a sad aggravation of the wickedness of children, when
they forsake their fathers' God, after they have been laid under the bonds of
the covenant, and have had greater advantages than others for knowing and
serving him. God will be more displeased with such, and deal more severely with
them, than with those who have not been so favored by him. Such wicked children
of the kingdom will be case out into outer darkness, and heaten with many
stripes. "For to whom much is given, of them shall much be required."

But it should also be seriously considered, that children who belong to the
church, have special encouragement to come to Christ for the blessings of
grace, to seek their father's God, and devote themselves to him. Special
encouragements are proposed to early seeking -- "They who seek me early shall
find me." The children of the covenant may plead this their relation to God, in
their prayers to him, for his converting grace. "Turn thou me and I shall be
turned, for thou art the Lord my God." And there are many promises in the word
of God, which express his gracious purpose of showing special favor and mercy
to such children as are in covenant with him: that he will give them a new
heart: that he will circumcise their hearts to love him: that he will pour his
spirit and blessing upon them. These promises give you great reason to hope,
that your seeking the Lord will not be in vain -- "He has not said to the seed
of Jacob, the children of the covenant, seek ye me in vain." And though these
promises do not make it certain that all such children shall have their hearts
inclined to love and serve God, yet these promises make it certain, that God
will bestow his special, converting, sanctifying grace on the children of the
church. And as you are of that number, you have special reason to hope and seek
for it.

Should not this encourage your hopes, and enliven your endeavors, in seeking
such great and necessary blessings when come so near to you? God forbid, that
any of you should miss of obtaining salvation, after his promise has brought it
home to your house. I know not how to express my love and concern for you
better than in the words of king David to his beloved son -- "My son, know thou
the God of thy father, and serve him with a perfect heart, and willing mind;
for the Lord searches all hearts, and understands all the imaginations of
the thoughts. If thou seek him he will be sound of thee, but if thou forsake
him, he will cast thee off forever."

I have a few things more to mention before I finish this head.

Your being children of the kingdom of heaven is a consideration which should
move you to take care not to keep company with such as are wicked* For what
communion has light with darkness -- what fellowship can the servants of
Christ have with the children of the wicked one? Have no fellowship with the
works of darkness, nor be partakers with other men's sins; but rather reprove
them, and so keep yourselves pure. Be companions of those who fear God. "He
that walks with the wise shall be wise, but a companion of fools shall be
destroyed." Again,

Remember that you are under the (...) of the church. And always receive
instruction and admonition from ministers, from parents, and other christian
friends, with thankfulness and due respect. Have an obedient ear for good
counsels and reproofs, and make the best improvement of them. Further,

Attend diligently upon those ordinances which Christ has given to the church,
for the spiritual benefit of its members particularly, study the word of God
which is a special privilege committed to the church, that you may, as was said
of Timothy, know the scriptures from your childhood. They are able to make you
wise to salvation. Attend the worship and means of instruction in the house of
God whenever you can, and endeavor to get good by them. And though children are
not to come to the Lord's table till they appear to be, in a measure, capable
and disposed to do this in a pious remembrance of Christ, agreeably to the
nature and design of this holy ordinance; yet they should labor after such
seize in Christianity as to be prepared to come. And as soon as evidence
of this appears, they should no longer delay to offer themselves, and ask to be
admitted to the table of the Lord.

And forget not in your prayers to ask the blessing of Christ upon the church
of which you are members, and particularly upon your teachers. Yea, I would, in
the words of the Apostle, beseech you for the Lord Jesus Christ's sake, and for
the love of the spirit, that you strive together with me in your prayers to God
for me.

Presume not that your state is safe, or that you are entitled to the
blessedness of the kingdom of glory, merely because you are children of the
kingdom of heaven as outwardly administered upon earth. "Think not to say with
yourselves, we have Abraham to our father" -- This will not avail if we have
not the faith, and walk not in the steps of Abraham, and are not, as he was,
"the friends of God." Not every one who says Lord, Lord, shall enter into the
kingdom of heaven, but he that does the will our father who is in heaven. If
you continue in the word of Christ, then are you his disciples indeed: and you
shall know the truth, and the truth shall make you free and happy. But remember
that many of the children of the kingdom will be cast out. To such of them as
are workers of iniquity, Christ will say, I know you not, depart from me.
Christ has asserted your right to the privileges of the church to encourage you
to come to him, but not to embolden you to forsake him.

IV. To draw to a close. If you come to Christ as you are invited in the
gospel, in obedience to his call, and upon the encouragements he holds forth,
you shall receive his blessing. And then you will be blessed indeed. This you
may remember was the fourth remark from the text which was mentioned for your
notice and consideration.

The story I have been endeavoring to improve for your instruction, informs us,
that Christ took the little children into his arms and blessed them. Then might
have been seen the fulfillment of the words of the prophet, spoken concerning
him -- "He shall gather the lambs in his arms and carry them in his bosom."

Happy children! you will say, whom Christ held in his arms and blessed. Yea
rather, I would say, happy are you, if you hear his voice to day, when he
speaks to you from heaven, inviting you to him. For blessed are they who have
not seen him, and yet believe. Blessed are they who hear his word and keep it.

I am not able to represent the number and excellency of the blessings, he will
then bestow upon you. He will bless you, by giving himself and his unsearchable
riches to you. He will bless you with the pardon of all your sins, and a right
to all the privileges of the children of God. He will bless you, in adorning
your souls with the robes of a perfect righteousness, and with the beauties of
holiness. He will bless to you all your blessings, and all your troubles. What
shall I say more? He will bless you by giving you grace, and glory, and all
good things.

Choose you then this day, my dear children, the glorious redeemer for your Lord
and Savior. Give him you whole hearts. Come to him. Take his yoke upon you and
learn of him, for he is meek and lowly in heart: then you shall find rest to
your souls. He will be your never failing friend till you die, and then he will
come and carry you up to heaven, where you will be happy forever.

The grace of the Lord Jesus Christ, the love of God, and the communion of the
Holy Ghost be with you.

AMEN.
"Divide if among the poor friends of the LORD JESUS."


THE STORY OF JOSEPH.
IN London there lived a poor ignorant man, named Joseph. It was his employment
to go on errands and carry parcels. One day as he passed the streets, his
attention being excited by music, from a neighboring place of worship, he drew
near and entered.

It was Dr. Calamy's church. The text was, "this is a faithful saying, and
worthy of all acceptance, that Christ Jesus came into the world to save
sinners, of whom I am chief."

From this passage the Dr. preached in the clearest manner, the ancient
apostolic gospel.

While the gay and polite audience admired more the ingenuity, than the piety
of the preacher, poor Joseph, in tattered clothing, fixed his eyes on the Dr.
and listened with eagerness and wonder. After service, as he went homeward, he
often said to himself "Joseph never heard this before: Jesus Christ came into
the world to save sinners, like Joseph; and this is a true and faithful saying."

Not many days after be was taken sick, with a fever, and often repeated
"Joseph is the chief of sinners! Joseph is the chief of sinners! But Jesus
Christ came into the world to save sinners, and Joseph loves him for this."
Some pious persons asked him how he felt in his mind. He answered, Joseph has
nothing to say for himself, only that he is the chief of sinners, and as Christ
Jesus came into the world to save such, why may not Joseph, after all, be
saved? A gentleman having found out where Joseph heard the words, upon which he
dwelt with so much constancy and delight, went and informed Dr. Calamy.

The Dr. readily hastened to see Joseph, but found him extremely feeble and
low. The instant the Dr. spoke, he knew his voice, and exclaimed with a
trembling tone, "Oh sir, you are the friend of the Lord Jesus whom I heard the
other day speak so well of him, and I love you for what you then said. Joseph
is the chief of sinners, Jesus Christ has come to save such, and why not poor
Joseph? Oh, pray to that Jesus for me, tell him that Joseph thinks he loves
him, for coming to save such sinners as he is." The Dr. prayed. Joseph very
affectionately thanked him. Then reaching his hand under his pillow, drew from
thence an old rag, in which were tied five guineas.

He thus addressed the Dr. looking earnestly at him, "Joseph laid up this to
keep him in his old age. But Joseph will never see old age. Take it and divide
it among the poor friends of the Lord Jesus, and tell them Joseph gave it them
for his sake, who came into the world to save sinners, of whom he is the
chief." Having said this, he instantly expired; leaving the world a memorable
proof of the efficacy of the christian religion, and a useful lesson of
humility, of love to the Savior of men, and of charity to his poor.

Dr. Calamy left this tender scene, not however till he had shed many tears
over poor Joseph. He had, in so artless a manner, discovered his sincere love
to the Lord Jesus, his hope in his mercy, and his unaffected kindness and
charity to his poor friends, as quite overcame, and melted the Doctor's heart.

He used, often, to relate this story, as one of the most affecting occurrences
of his life.


