HISTORICAL COLLECTIONS OF THE INDIANS IN NEW ENGLAND.

OF THEIR SEVERAL NATIONS, NUMBERS, CUSTOMS, MANNERS, RELIGION AND GOVERNMENT,
BEFORE THE ENGLISH PLANTED THERE.

Also a true and faithful Account of the present state and condition of the
Praying Indians (or those who have visibly received the gospel in New England)
declaring the Number of that people, the situation and place of their Towns and
Churches, and their manner of worshipping God, and diverse other matters
appertaining thereto.

Together with a brief Mention of the Instruments and Means, that God has been
pleased to use for their Civilizing and Conversion, briefly declaring the
prudent and faithful endeavors of The Right Honorable the Corporation at
London, for promoting that affair.

Also suggesting some Expedients for their further Civilizing and propagating
the Christian faith among them.

By DANIEL GOOKIN, GENTLEMAN.

One of the Magistrates of Massachusetts Colony in New England, who has been
for sundry years past, and is at present, betrusted and employed for the civil
government and conduct of the Indians in Massachusetts Colony, by order of the
General Court there.

Ps. ii.8. Ask of me, and I shall give thee, the heathen for thine inheritance,
and the uttermost parts of the earth for thy possession.

Ps. lxxii.8, 9. He shall have dominion also from sea to sea, and from the
river unto the ends of the earth. They that dwell in the wilderness shall bow
before him; and his enemies shall lick the dust.

Is. xlix.6. And he said, It is a light thing that thou should be my servant
to raise up the tribes of Jacob, and to restore the preserved of Israel: I will
also give thee for a light to the gentiles, that thou may be my salvation
unto the end of the earth.

Now first printed from the Original Manuscript.

AT THE APOLLO PRESS; IN BOSTON, By BELKNAP and HALL. MDCCXCII.

THE EPISTLE DEDICATORY.
To the High and Mighty Prince Charles, by the grace of God, King of
Great Britain, France, and Ireland, Defender of the faith, etc. ROYAL SIR,
I HAVE read that Artaxerxes Mnemon, king of Persia, going his progress, the
people used to present him with their several gifts in the way; and among the
rest a countryman, having nothing else to present him with, ran to the river,
and taking up his hands full of water, presented him with that. Artaxerxes was
so taken therewith, that he gave the fellow a considerable beneficence.

So have I, dread Sovereign, presumed to offer this poor mite, as a testimony
of my affection. I must acknowledge it is most unworthy to kiss your royal
hands, being so meanly apparelled in an Indian garb. But the matter therein
contained, being a true account of the progress of the gospel among the poor
Indians, within your dominions, and that under the influence of your royal
favor, this, as I conceive, is not unmeet for your Majesty's knowledge.
Therefore let it please your Majesty graciously to accept and peruse these
Collections, and especially that humble proposal made in Chap. 12. Sect. 5. as
a necessary expedient to promote this great work, and which must have its life,
under God, from the rays of your Majesty's favor.

The God of heaven and earth bless your Majesty with all temporal, spiritual,
and eternal blessings in Christ Jesus; and make you more and more a nursing
father to his church; that under your shadow it may rejoice, and every
individual person thereof be encouraged in all ways of godliness and honesty.

So prays he that is one of the most unworthy, yet desirous to be reckoned
among the number of your Majesty's most dutiful and loyal subjects.

DANIEL GOOKIN.
Cambridge in New England, December 7th, 1674.
AN EPISTLE GRATULATORY AND SUPPLICATORY.
To the Right Honorable the Corporation for propagating the gospel in America;
residing in London; and particularly for the Hon. ROBERT BOIL, Esquire,
Governor thereof. RIGHT HONORABLE,
THESE Collections do, in a special manner, implore your favorable aspect and
protection; for God has been pleased to honor and employ you, as eminent
instruments to encourage and promote this great affair of his kingdom in this
western world, for propagating the gospel of Christ among the poor and desolate
Indians.

The unworthy penman hereof desires in all humility, to offer three words to
your Honors.

First, with all cordial acknowledgment, I thank your Honors for all that
great condescension and labor of love, that from time to time you have showed
in your zealous and faithful promoting of this work, committed unto your care
and trust by his Majesty.

Secondly, to supplicate your unwearied countenance therein, and putting forth,
not only your prayers, but vigorous endeavors to further it; for truly the
work is great, and that in special as it relates to the glory and honor of the
great God, and his only Son, our Savior Jesus Christ, in the salvation of
these poor gentiles.

Thirdly, that you will please to peruse, and seriously to consider, and, if it
may suit with your wisdoms, put in practice, these proposals, that I have
presumed to make in the 12th Chap. of this tractate, as a means, under God, to
civilize the barbarous Indians, and propagate religion among them; especially
in setting up some free schools, to teach them to speak, read, write, and
understand, the English tongue.

So praying unto the God of all grace, to multiply upon every one of you, his
richest and best blessings, I take leave, and remain,

Right Honorable, your humble servant, DANIEL GOOKIN, Sen.
Cambride, in N. E. Dec. 7 th, 1674.
AN EPISTLE TO THE READER.
COURTEOUS READER,
I HAVE here, through the grace of Christ, transmitted to thy view a true and
faithful account concerning the Indians, not clothed in elegancy of words and
accurate sentences; but rather I have endeavored all plainness that I can,
that the most vulgar capacity might understand, and be thereby excited to
praise and glorify God, and provoked to pray earnestly and constantly unto the
most high God, that he will please to carry on this his work, and turn many
more of them from darkness to light, and from the power of Satan unto God, that
they may receive an inheritance among them that are sanctified through faith in
Christ. I am not ignorant that there are some persons, both in Old and New
England, that have low thoughts of this work, and are very prone to speak
diminutively thereof; but I entreat it may be considered, that this frame of
spirit is no new thing; for the servants of God heretofore have complained of
it, and with reference to the greatest and best tidings that ever was declared
unto men. Hence it is that the prophet Isaiah, in 53. Isaiah, 1. says, Who
has believed our report? and to whom is the arm of the Lord revealed? And our
Lord Jesus confirmed the same in John xii. 37, 38. But it is the wisdom of all
to be cautioned by the Lord's words, that follow in verse 40. Left God has
blinded men's eyes, and hardened their hearts. I shall humbly desire all such,
not to despise the day of small things, but to turn their doubtings into
prayers, which will be more for God's honor and their comfort; and seriously
to consider the words of our Lord Jesus, Mat. xi. 4, 5, 6. Jesus answered and
said unto them, Go and show John again those things which you do hear and see:
the blind receive their sight, the lame walk, the lepers are cleansed, and the
deaf hear, and the dead are raised up, and the poor have the gospel preached to
them: And blessed is he that shall not be offended in me. These miracles are
wrought spiritually among the poor Indians; of which we bear record. Thus, with
my hearty prayers to God in Christ, that the candid and ingenious christian
peruser hereof may be comforted and edified, and the objector convinced and
reformed, I commit thee to God, and remain.

Thine in all service of love, D. G.
Cambridge, in N. E. November 16th, 1674.
HISTORICAL COLLECTIONS OF THE INDIANS IN NEW ENGLAND.
CHAP. I. Several Conjectures of their Original.
. 1. CONCERNING the original of the Savages, or Indians, in New England, there
is nothing of certainty to be concluded. But yet, as I conceive, it may
rationally be made out, that all the Indians of America, from the straits of
Magellan and its adjacent islands on the south, unto the most northerly part
yet discovered, are originally of the same nations or sort of people. Whatever
I have read or seen to this purpose, I am the more confirmed therein. I have
seen of this people, along the sea coasts and within land, from the degrees of
34 unto 44 of north latitude; and have read of the Indians of Magellanica,
Peru, Brasilia, and Florida, and have also seen some of them; and unto my best
apprehension, they are all of the same sort of people.

The color of their skins, the form and shape of their bodies, not and eyes,
demonstrate this. Their skins are of a tawny color, not unlike the tawny Moors
in Africa; the proportion of their limbs, well formed; it is rare to see a
crooked person among them. Their hair is black and harsh, not curling; their
eyes, black and dull; though I have seen, but very rarely, a grey-eyed person
among them, with brownish hair. But still the difficulty yet remains, whence
all these Americans had their first original, and from which of the sons of
Noah they descended, and how they came first into these parts; which is
separated so very far from Europe and Africa by the Atlantic ocean, and from a
great part of Asia, by Mar del Zur, or the South sea; in which sea Sir Francis
Drake, that noble hero, in his famous voyage about the world, sailed on the
west o^ America, from the straits of Magellan, lying about 52 degrees of south
latitude, unto 38 degrees of north latitude; where he possessed a part of the
country, and received subjection from those very tractable Indians, in the
right of the English nation, and his sovereign prince, the famous queen
Elizabeth, then reigning, and her successors, and gave it the name of New
Albion; which country lies west northerly of Massachusetts in New England; for
Boston lies in 42 30'. and New Albion in 48 of north latitude, which is near
six degrees more northerly.

There are diverse opinions about this matter.

. 2. First, some conceive that this people are of the race of the ten tribes of
Israel, that Salmanasser carried captive out of their own country, A. M. 3277,
of which we read in II. Kings, xviii. 9 -- 12; and that God has, by some means
or other, not yet discovered, brought them into America; and herein fulfilled
his just threatening against them, of which we may read, II. Kings, xvii. from
6. to the 19 verse; and has reduced them into such we^^l blindness and
barbarism, as all those Americans are in; yet has reserved their posterity
there; and in his own best time, will fulfill and accomplish his promise, that
those dry bones shall live, of which we read Ezekiel. xxxvii. 1 -- 24. A reason
given for this is taken from the practice of sundry Americans, especially of
those inhabiting Peru and Mexico, who were most populous, and had great cities
and wealth; and hence are probably apprehended to be the first possessors of
America. Now of these the historians write, that they used circumcision and
sacrifices, though oftentimes of human flesh; so did the Israelites sacrifice
their sons unto Moloch. II. Kings, xvii. 17. But this opinion, that these
people are of the race of the Israelites, does not greatly obtain. But surely
it is not impossible, and perhaps not so improbable, as many learned men, think.

. 3. Secondly, another apprehension is, that the original of these Americans is
from the Tartars, or Scythians, that live in the northeast parts of Asia; which
some good geographers conceive is nearly joined unto the north west parts of
America, and possibly are one continent, or at least, separated, but by some
narrow gulf; and from this beginning have spread themselves into the several
parts of the north and south America; and because the sourthern parts were more
fertile, and free from the cold winters incident to the northern regions, hence
the sourthern parts became first planted, and most populous and rich. This
opinion gained more credit than the former, because the people of America are
not altogether unlike in color, shape, and manners, unto the Scythian people,
and in regard that such a land travel is more feasible and probable, than a
voyage by sea so great a distance as is before expressed, from other inhabited
places, either in Europe, Asia, or Africa; especially so long since when we
hear of no sailing out of sight of land, before the use of the lodestone and
compass was found. But if this people be sprung from the Tartarian or Scythian
people, as this nation asserts, then it is to me a question, why they did not
attend the known practice of that people; who, in all their removes and
plantations, take with them their kine, sheep, horses, and camels, and the like
tame beasts; which that people keep in great numbers, and drive with them in
all their removes. But of these sorts and kinds of beasts used by the Tartars,
none were found in America among the Indians. This question or objection is
answered by some thus. First, possibly the first people were banished for some
notorious offenses; and so not permitted to take with them of these tame
beasts. Or, secondly, possibly the gulf, or passage, between Asia and America,
though narrow, comparatively, is yet too broad to waft over any of those sort
of creatures; and yet possibly men and women might pass over it in canoes made
of hollow trees, or with barks of trees, wherein, it is known, the Indians will
transport themselves, wives, and children, over lakes and gulfs very
considerable for breadth. I have known some to pass with like vessels forty
miles across an arm of the sea.

. 4. But before I pass to another thing, suppose it should be so, that the
origination of the Americans came from Asia, by the northwest of America, where
the continents are conceived to meet; very near, which indeed is an opinion
very probable: yet this does not hinder the truth of the first conjecture, that
this people may be of the race of the ten tribes of Israel: for the king of
Assyria who led them captive, as we heard before, transported them into Asia,
and placed them in several provinces and cities, as in II. Kings, xvii. 6. Now
possibly, in process of time, this people, o^ at least, some considerable
number of them, whose custom and manner it was to keep themselves distinct from
the other nations they lived amongst; and did commonly intermarry only with
their own people; and also their religion being so different from the heathen,
unto whom they were generally an abomination as they were to the Egyptians; and
also partly from God's judgment following them for their sins: I say, it is not
impossible but a considerable number of them might withdraw themselves; and so
pass gradually into the extreme parts of the continent of Asia; and wherever
they came, being disrelished by the heathen, might for their own security, pass
further and further, till they found America; which being unpeopled, there they
found some rest; and so, in many hundred of years, spread themselves in America
in that thin manner, as they were found there, especially in the northern parts
of it; which country is able to contain and accommodate millions of mankind
more than were found in it. And for their speech, which is not only different
among themselves, but from the Hebrew, that might easily be lost by their often
removes, or God's judgment.

. 5. A third conjecture of the original of these Indians, is, that some of the
tawny Moors of Africa, inhabiting upon the sea coasts, in times of war and
contention among themselves, have put off to sea, and been transported over, in
such small vessels as those times afforded, unto the south part of America,
where the two continents of Africa and America are nearest; and they could not
have opportunity or advantage to carry with the small vessels of those times
any tame beasts, such as were in that country. Some reasons are given for this
notion. First, because the Americans are much like the Moors of Africa.
Secondly, the seas between the tropicks are easy to pass, and safe for small
vessels; the winds in those parts blowing from the east to the west, and the
current setting the same course. Thirdly, because it is most probable, that the
inhabitants of America first came into the south parts; where were found the
greatest numbers of people, and the most considerable cities and riches.

. 6. But these, or any other notions, can amount to no more than rational
conjecture; for a certainty of their first extraction cannot be attained: for
they being ignorant of letters and records of antiquity, as the Europeans,
Africans, and sundry of the Asians, are and have been, hence any true knowledge
of their ancestors is utterly lost among them. I have discoursed and questioned
about this matter with some of the most judicious of the Indians, but their
answers are diverse and fabulous. Some of the inland Indians say, that they came
from such as inhabit the sea coasts. Others say, that there were two young
squaws, or women, being at first either swimming or wading in the water: The
froth or foam of the water touched their bodies, from whence they became with
child; and one of them brought forth a male; and the other, a female child; and
then the two women died and left the earth: So their son and daughter were
their first progenitors. Other fables and figments are among them touching this
thing, which are not worthy to be inserted. These only may suffice to give a
taste of their great ignorance touching their original; the full determination
whereof must be left until the day, wherein all secret and hidden things shall
be manifested to the glory of God.

. 7. But this may upon sure grounds be asserted, that they are Adam's
posterity, and consequently children of wrath; and hence are not only objects
of all christians' pity and compassion, but subjects upon which our faith,
prayers, and best endeavors should be put forth, to reduce them from barbarism
to civility; but especially to rescue them out of the bondage of Satan, and
bring them to salvation by our Lord Jesus Christ; which is the main scope and
design of this tractate.

CHAP. II. Of the principal Indians that inhabit New England.
. 1. THE principal nations of the Indians, that did, or do, inhabit within the
confines of New England, are five: 1. Pequots; 2. Narragansitts; 3.
Pawkunnawkuts; 4. Massachusetts; and, 5. Pawtucketts.

. 2. The Pequots, or Pequods, were a people seated in the most southerly bounds
of New England; whose country the English of Connecticut jurisdiction does now,
for the most part, possess. This nation were a very warlike and potent people,
about forty years since; at which time they were in their meridian. Their chief
sachem held dominion over diverse petty sagamores; as over part of Long Island,
over the Mshegans, and over the sagamores of Quinapeake, yea over all the
people that dwelt upon Connecticut river, and over some of the most southerly
inhabitants of the Nipmuck county, about Quinabaag. The principal sachem lived
at, or about, Pequot, now called New London. These Pequots, as old Indians
relate, could in former times, raise four thousand men, fit for war; and held
hostility with their neighbors, that lived bordering upon them to the east and
north, called the N^rragansitts, or Ne^hegansitts; but now they are few, not
above three hundred men; being made subject unto the English, who conquered and
destroyed most of them, upon their insolent deport^^^nt and just provocation,
Anno 1638: of which we shall have occasion to speak more particularly in the
sequel of our history. See the Postscript.


. 3. The Narragansitts were a great people heretofore; and the territory of
these sachem extended about thirty or forty miles from Sekunk river and
Narragansitt bay, including Rhode Island and other islands in that bay, being
their east and north bounds or border, and so running westerly and southerly
unto a place called Wekapage, four or five miles to the eastward of Pawcutuk
river, which was reckoned for their south and west border, and the eastermost
limits of the Pequots. This sachem held dominion over diverse petty governors;
as part of Long Island, Black Island, Cawesitt, Ni^ntick, and others; and had
tribute from some of the Nipmuck Indians, that lived remote from the sea. The
chief seat of this sachem was about Narragansitt bay and Cannonicut island. The
Narragansitts were reckoned, in former times, able to arm for war more than
five thousand men as ancient Indians say. All do agree they were a great
people, and oftentimes waged war with the Pawkunnawkutts and Massachusetts, as
well as with the Pequots. The jurisdiction of Rhode Island and Providence
plantations, and part of Connecticut people, possess their country. These
Indians are now but few comparatively: all that people cannot make above one
thousand able men.

. 4. The Pawkunnawkutts were a great people heretofore. They lived to the east
and northeast of the Narragansitts; and their chief sachem held dominion over
diverse other petty sagamores; as the sagamores upon the island of Nantuckett,
and Nope, or Martha's Vineyard, of Nawsett, or Mannamoyk, of Sawkattukett,
Nobsquasitt, Matakees, and several others, and some of the Nipmucks. Their
country, for the most part, falls within the jurisdiction of New Plymouth
colony. This people were a potent nation in former times; and could raise, as
the most credible and ancient Indians affirm, about three thousand men. They
held war with the Narragansitts; and often joined with the Massachusetts, as
friends and confederates against the Narragansitts. This nation, a very great
number of them, were swept away by an epidemical and unwonted sickness, An.
1612 and 1613, about seven or eight years before the English first arrived in
those parts, to settle the colony of New Plymouth. Thereby divine providence
made way for the quiet and peaceable settlement of the English in those
nations. What this disease was, that so generally and mortally swept away, not
only these, but other Indians, their neighbors, I cannot well learn. Doubtless
it was some pestilential disease. I have discoursed with some old Indians, that
were then youths; who say, that the bodies all over were exceeding yellow,
describing it by a yellow garment they showed me, both before they died, and
afterward.

. 5. The Massachusetts, being the next great people northward, inhabited
principally about that place in Massachusetts bay, where the body of the
English now dwell. These were a numerous and great people. Their chief sachem
held dominion over many other petty governors; as those of Weechagaskas,
Neponsitt, Punkapaog, Nonantam, Nashaway, some of the Nipmuck people, as far as
Pokomtacuke, as the old men of Massachusetts affirmed. This people could, in
former times, arm for war, about three thousand men, as the old Indians
declare. They were in hostility very often with the Narragansitts; but held
amity, for the most part, with the Pawkunnawkutts, who lived on the south
border, and with the Pawtucketts, who inhabited on their north and northeast
limits, In An. 1612 and 1613, these people were also sorely smitten by the hand
of God with the same disease, before mentioned in the last section; which
destroyed the most of them, and made room for the English people of
Massachusetts colony, which people this country, and the next called Pawtuckett.
There are not of this people left at this day above three hundred men, besides
women and children.

. 6. Pawtuckett is the fifth and last great sachemship of Indians. Their
country lies north and northeast from the Massachusetts, whose dominion
reaches so far as the English jurisdiction, or colony of the Massachusetts,
does now extend, and had under them several other smaller sagamores; as the
Pennakooks, Agawomes, Naamkeeks, Pascatawayes, Accomin^as, and others. They
were also a considerable people heretofore, about three thousand men; and held
amity with the people of Massachusetts. But these also were almost totally
destroyed by the great sickness before mentioned; so that at this day, they are
not above two hundred and fifty men, besides women and children. This country
is now inhabited by the English under the government of Massachusetts.

CHAP. III. Of the Language, Customs, Manners, and Religion of the Indians.
. 1. THE Indians of the parts of New England, especially upon the sea coasts,
use the same sort of speech and language, only with some difference in the
expressions, as they differ in several countries in England, yet so as they c^^
well understand one another. Their speech is a distinct speech from any of
those used in Europe, Asia, or Africa, that I ever heard of. And some of the
inland Indians, particularly the Mawhawks, or Maquas, use such a language, that
our Indians upon the coast do not understand: So the Indians to the southward,
upon the sea coast about Virginia, use a speech much different from those in
New England.

. 2. The customs and manners of these Indians were, and yet are, in many
places, very brutish and barbarous in several respects, like unto several
savage people of America. They take many wives; yet one of them is the
principal or chief in their esteem and affection. They also put away their
wives; and the wives also leave their husbands frequently, upon grounds of
displeasure or disaffection. They are very revengeful, and will not be
unmindful to take vengeance upon such as have injured them or their kindred,
when they have opportunity, though it be a long time after the offense was
committed. If any murder, or other great wrong upon any of their relations or
kindred, be committed, all of that stock and consanguinity look upon themselves
concerned to revenge that wrong, or murder, unless the business be taken up by
the payment of wompompeague, or other satisfaction, which their custom admits,
to satisfy for all wrongs, yea for life itself.

. 3. They are much addicted to idleness, especially the men, who are disposed
to hunting, fishing, and the war, when there is cause. That little tillage or
planting used among them, was principally done by the women. Also in their
removals from place to place, which they are inclined to, for their fishing and
hunting at the several seasons, the women carry the greatest burden: they also
pepare all the diet. They are naturally much addicted to lying and speaking
untruth; and unto ^^^ling, especially from the English. The men and women are
very loving and indulgent to their children.

. 4. Their houses, or wigwams, are built with small poles fixed in the ground,
bent and fastened together with barks of trees oval or arbour-wise on the top.
The best fort of their houses are covered very neatly, (...), and w^rm, with
barks of trees, ^ipped from their bodies, at such seasons when the sap is up;
and made into great flakes with pressures of weighty timber, when they are
green; and so becoming dry, they will retain a form suitable for the use they
prepare them for. The meaner sort of wigwams are covered with mats, they make
of a kind of bulrush, which are also indifferent tight and warm, but not so
good as the former. These houses they make of several sizes, according to their
activity and ability; some twenty, some forty feet long, and broad. Some I have
seen of sixty or a hundred feet long, and thirty feet broad. In the smaller
sort they make a fire in the center of the house; and have a lower hole on the
top of the house, to let out the smoke. They keep the door into the wigwams
always shut, by a mat falling thereon, as people go in and out. This they do to
prevent air coming in, which will cause much smoke in every windy weather. If
the smoke beat down at the lower hole, they hang a little mat, in the way of a
skreen, on the top of the house, which they can with a cord turn to the
windward side, which prevents the smoke. In the greater houses they make two,
three, or four ^res, at a distance one from another, for the better
accommodation of the people belonging to it. I have often lodged in their
wigwams; and have found them as warm as the best English houses. In their
wigwams, they make a kind of couch or mattresses, firm and strong, raised about
a foot high from the earth; first covered with boards that they split out of
trees; and upon the boards they spread mats generally, and sometimes bear skins
and deer skins. These are large enough for three or four persons to lodge upon;
and one may either draw nearer, or keep at a more distance from the heat of the
fire, as they please; for their mattresses are six or eight feet broad.

. 5. Their food is generally boiled maize, or Indian corn, mixed with
kidney-beans, or sometimes without. Also they frequently boil in this pottage
fish and flesh of all sorts, either new taken or dried, as shads, eels,
alewives or a kind of herring, or any other sort of fish. But they dry mostly
those sorts before mentioned. These they out in pieces, bones and all, and boil
them in the aforesaid pottage. I have wondered many times that they were not in
danger of being choked with fish bones; but they are so dexterous to separate
the bones from the fish in their eating thereof, that they are in no hazard.
Also they boil in this furmenty all sorts of flesh, they take in hunting; as
venison, beaver, bear's flesh, moose, otters, rackoons, or any kind that they
take in hunting; cutting this flesh in small pieces, and boiling it as
aforesaid. Also they mix with the said pottage several sorts of roots; as
Jerusalem artichokes, and ground nuts, and other roots, and pompions, and
squashes, and also several sorts of nuts or masts, as oakac^ons, chestnuts,
walnuts: these husked and dried, and powdered, they thicken their pottage
therewith. Also sometimes they beat their maize into meal, and sift it through
a basket, made for that purpose. With this meal they make bread, baking it in
the ashes, covering the dough with leaves. Sometimes they make of their meal a
small sort of cakes, and boil them. They make also a certain sort of meal of
parched maize. This meal they call nokak^. It is so sweet, toothsome, and
hea^y, that an Indian will travel many days with no other food but this meal,
which he eats as he needs, and after it drinks water. And for this end,
when they travel a journey, or go a hunting, they carry this nokake in a
basket, or bag, for their use.

. 6. Their household stuff is but little and mean. The pots they sees their
food in, which were heretofore, and yet are, in use among some of them, are
made of clay or earth, almost in the form of an egg, the top taken off, but now
they generally get kettles of brass, copper, or iron. These they find more
lasting than those made of clay, which were subject to be broken; and the clay
or earth they were made of, was very scarce and dear. Their dishes, and spoons,
and ladles, are made of wood, very smooth and artificial, and of a sort of wood
not subject to split. These they make of several sizes. Their pails to fetch
their water in, are made of birch barks, artificially doubled up, that it has
four corners and a handle in the midst. Some of these will hold two or three
gallons; and they will make one of them in an hour's time. From the tree where
the bark grows, they make several sorts of baskets, great and small. Some will
hold four bushels, or more; and so downward, to a pint. In their baskets they
put their provisions. Some of their baskets are made of rushes; some, of bents;
others, of maize husks; others, of a kind of silk grass; others, of a kind of
wild hemp; and some, of barks of trees; many of them, very neat and artificial,
with the portraitures of birds, beasts, fishes and flowers, upon them in
colors. Also they make mats of several sorts, for covering their houses and
doors, and to sleep and sit upon. The baskets and mats are always made by their
women; their dishes, pots, and spoons, are the manufacture of the men. They
have no other considerable household stuff except these; only of latter years,
since the English came among them, some of them get tin cups and little pails,
chests of wood, glass bottles, and such things they affect.

. 7. Their drink was formerly no other but water, and yet it does continue, for
their general and common drink. But of late years some of them planted orchards
of apples, and make cider: which some of the worst of them are too prone to
abuse unto drunkenness; though others of them that are christians, use it or
any other strong drink with great sobriety. Many of the Indians ar^ great
lovers of strong drink, as aqua vitae, rum, brandy, or the like, and are very
greedy to buy it of the English: and though all strong drink is strickly
prohibited to be sold to any Indian in the Massachusetts colony, upon the
penalty of forty shillings a pint; yet some ill-disposed people, for filthy
lucre's sake, do fell unto the Indians secretly, though the Indians will rarely
discover these evil merchants -- they do rather suffer whipping or fine than
tell. Hereby they are made drunk very often; and being drunk, are many times
outrageous and mad, fighting with and killing one another, yea sometimes their
own relations. This beastly sin of drunkenness could not be charged upon the
Indians before the English and other christian nations, as Dutch, French, and
Spaniards, came to dwell in America; which nations especially the English in
New England, have cause to be greatly humbled before God, that they have been,
and are, instrumental to cause these Indians to com^^it this great evil and
beastly sin of drunkenness.

. 8. The Indians' clothing in former times was of the same matte^ as Adam's
was, viz. skins of beasts, as de^r, moose, beaver, otters, rackoons, foxes, and
other wild creatures. Also some had mantles of the feathers of birds, quilled
artificially; and sundry of them continue to this day their old kind of
clothing. But, for the most part, they fell the skins and furs to the English,
Dutch and French, and buy of the^ for clothing a kind of cloth, called duffils,
or trucking cloth, about a yard and a half wide, and for matter, made of coarse
wool, in that form as our ordinary bed blackets are made, only it is put into
colors, as blue, red, purple, and some use them white. Of this sort of cloth
two yards make a mantle, or coat, for men and women, and less for children.
This is all the garment they generally use, with this addition of some little
piece of the same, or of ordinary cotton, to cover their secret parts. It is
rare to see any among them of the most barbarious, that are remiss or negligent
in hiding those parts. But the christian and civilized Indians do endeavor,
many of them, to follow the English mode in their habit. Their ornaments are,
especially the women's, bracelets, necklaces, and head bands, of several sorts
of beads, especially of black and white wompom, which is of most esteem among
them, and is accounted their chief treasure.

. 9. The wompompague is made artificially of a part of the wilk's shell. The
black is of double ^alue to the white. It is made principally by the
Narragunsitt black islanders So written in the M. S. probably by mistake for
Block Island.
and Long Island Indians. Upon the sandy flats and shores of those coasts the
wilk shells are found. With this wompomp^ague they pay tribute, redeem
captives, satisfy for murders and other wrongs, purchase peace with their
potent neighbors, as occasion requires; in a word, it answers all occasions
with them, as gold and silver does with us. They delight much in having and
using knives, combs, scissors, hatchets, hoes, guns, needles, awls, looking
glasses, and such like necessaries, which they purchase of the English and
Dutch with their peague, and then fell them their peltry for their wompeague.

Their weapons heretofore were bows and arrows, clubs, and tomahawks, made of
wood like a pole axe, with a sharpened stone fastened therein; and for defense,
they had targets made of barks of trees. But of latter years, since the
English, Dutch, and French have trafficked with them, they generally difuse
their former weapons, and instead thereof have guns, pistols, swords, rapier
blades, fastened unto a staff of the length of a half pike, hatchets, and axes.

. 10. For their water passage, travels, and fishing, they make boats, or
canoes, either of great trees, pine or chestnut, made hollow and artificially;
which they do by burning them; and after with tools, scraping, smoothing,
shaping them. Of these they make greater or lesser. Some I have seen will carry
twenty persons, being forty or fifty feet in length, and as broad as the tree
will bear. They make another sort of canoes of birchen bark, which they close
together, fewing them with a kind of bark, and then smearing the places with
turpentine, of the pine tree. These kinds of canoes are very neatly and
artificially made, being strengthened in the inside with some few thin timbers
and ribs; yet are they so light, that one man will, and does, ordinarily carry
one of them upon his back several miles, that will transport five or six
people. When in their huntings or wars, they are so pass falls of rivers, or
necks of land, into other rivers or streams, they take up their canoes upon
their backs, and others carry their arms or provisions; and so embark again,
when their difficulty is past, and proceed in their journey or voyage. But
these kind of canoes are much more ticklish and apt to overset, than the
former. But the Indians are so used to them, and sit so steady, that they
seldom overturn with them; and if they should, they can all swim well and save
their lives, though sometimes they may lose their peltry, arms, and provisions.

. 11. They used to oil their skins and hair with bear's grease heretofore, but
now with swine's fat, and then paint their faces with vermilion, or other red,
and powder their heads. Also they use black and white paints; and make one part
of their face of one color; and another, of another, very deformedly. The
women especially do thus; and some men also, especially when they are marching
to their wars; and hereby, as they think, are more terrible to their enemies.
The women, in the times of their mourning, alter the death of their husbands or
kindred, do paint their faces all over black, like a negro; and so continue in
this posture many days. But the civilized and christian Indians do leave these
customs. The men, in their wars, do use turkey or eagle's feathers, stuck in
their hair, as it is traced up in a roll. Others wear deer shuts, made in the
fashion of a cock's comb died red, crossing their heads like a half moon.

They are addicted to gaming; and will, in that vein, play away all they have.
And also they delight much in their dancings and revellings; at which time he
that danceth (for they dance singly, the men, and not the women, the rest
singing, which is their chief music) will give away in his frolic, all that
ever he has, gradually, some to one, and some to another, according to his
fancy and affection. And then, when he has stripped himself of all he has,
and is weary, another succeeds and does the like: so successively, one after
another, night after, resting and sleeping in the days; and so continue
sometimes a week together. And at such dancings, and feastings, and revellings,
which are used mostly after the ingathering of their havests, all their
neighbors, kindred, and friends, meet together; and much impiety is committed
at such times. They use great vehemence in the motion of their bodies, in their
dances; and sometimes the men dance in greater numbers in their war dances.

They are much given to hospitality in their way. If any strangers come to
their houses, they will give him the best lodging and diet they have; and the
strangers must be first served, by themselves. The wife makes ready; and by her
husband's direction, delivers to the strangers, according to their quality, or
his affection.

ERRATA.
-- Page 5, line 30, read notion. P. 7, l. 20, real Mohegans. Ibid. l. 3, from
bot. read Block-Island. P. 8, l. 15, from bot. read Nonantum. P. 12, l. 22,
read wompompeague.



. 12. Their government is generally monarchical, their chief s^chem or
sagamore's will being their law; but yet the sachem has some chief men, that
he consults with as his special counselors. Among some of the Indians their
government is mixed, partly monarchical, and partly aristocratical; their
sagamore doing not any weighty matter without the consent of his great men, or
petty saggamores. Their sachems have not their men in such subjection, but that
very frequently their men will leave them upon distaste or harsh dealing, and
go and live under other sachems that can protect them: so that their princes
endeavor to carry it obligingly and lovingly unto their people, lest they
should desert them, and thereby their strength, power, and tribute would be
diminished.

. 13. Their religion is as other gentiles are. Some for their God, adore the
sun; others the moon; some the earth; others, the fire; and like vanities. Yet
generally they acknowledge one great supreme doer of good; and him they call
Woonand, or Ma^nitt: another that is the great doer of evil or mischief; and
him they call Mattand, which is the devil; and him they dread and fear, more
than they love and honor the former chief good which is God.

There are among them certain men and women, whom they call powows. These are
partly wizards and witches, holding familiarity with Satan, that evil one; and
partly are physicians, and make use, at least in show, of herbs and roots, for
curing the sick and diseased. These are sent for by the sick and wounded; and
by their diabolical spells, mutterings, exorcisms, they, seem to do wonders.
They use extraordinary strange motions of their bodies, insomuch that they will
sweat until they foam; and thus continue for some hours together, stroking and
hovering over the sick. Sometimes broken bones have been set, wounds healed,
sick recovered; but together therewith they sometimes use external applications
of herbs, roots, splintering and binding up the wounds. These powows are
reputed, and I conceive justly, to hold familiarity with the devil; and
therefore are by the English laws, prohibited the exercise of their diabolical
practices within the English jurisdiction, under the penalty of five pounds, --
and the procurer, five pounds, -- and every person present, twenty pence. Satan
does strongly endeavor to keep up this practice ^^ong the Indians: and these
powows are factors for the devil, and great hinderers of the Indians embracing
the gospel. It is no small discouragement unto the Indians in yielding
obedience unto the gospel, for then, say they, if we once pray to God, we must
abandon our powows; and then, when we are sick and wounded, who shall hea^ our
maladies?

Upon this occasion I shall relate a true history, that happened about five and
twenty years since, at their first beginning to pray to God.

. 14. At the island of Nope, or Martha's Vineyard, about the year 1649, one of
the first Indians that embraced the christian religion on that island, named
Hiacoomes who is living at this day, and a principal teacher among them, and is
a grave and serious christian, and has had a great blessing since upon his
posterity; for his sons and his daughters are pious, and one, if not more of
his sons, teachers to them; and his eldest son, called Joel, of whom we shall
speak afterward, was bred a scholar at Cambridge in New England, and was not
only a good and diligent student, but a pious man, -- though he was taken away
by death, before he came to maturity: -- This Hiacoomes, as I said before, not
long after he had embraced the gospel; his wife also being a good woman and a
believer; she, being great with child, fell into travail of child birth and had
great pains and sorrowful throws for sundry days, and could not be delivered;
-- which is a thing unusual with the Indian women, who are ordinarily quickly
and easily delivered; and many times are so strong; that within a few hours
after the child's birth, they will go about their ordinary occasions: -- But
this woman, the wife of Hiacoomes, was, as I said, in sore labor and travail
in child birth several days, and could not be delivered; insomuch than nothing
less than death was expected by herself and husband. In this strait, several of
their carnal and unconverted kindred and relations applied themselves unto
Hiacoomes and his wife, pressing them to send for a powow, and use that help
for release. But both husband and wife utterly refused their temptation; the
man being willing to submit to God's disposal; and lose his wife, though he
loved her dearly, rather than take assistance from the devil and his
instruments, whom he had renounced; and the ^^^man, who was the sufferer, yet,
through the grace of God, was ^^owed with such christian fortitude, that she
also utterly refused this method for her deliveran^e, and would rather lose her
life than seek help that way. In this exigence, they earnestly cried to God in
prayer, to show mercy to them for Jesus Christ's sake; imploring also the
prayers of Mr. Thomas Mayhew junior, their teacher, and other English
christians, living nigh them. Mr. Mayhew, being affected with the case, got
together some godly christians to meet together; and those kept a day of
fasting and prayer, to implore the help of God for these poor, distressed,
christian Indians. And the Lord was graciously pleased to hear and answer their
prayers, and shortly after gave the woman safe deliverance of a daughter; which
the father named by a word in the Indian language, which signified in English,
Return. When Mr. Mayhew, the minister, understood this, he demanded of
Hiacoomes the reason, why he gave his daughter that name; whose answer was to
this effect: Sir, said he, a little while since, you know, I, and my wife and
children, were traveling on a pace in the broad way to hell and all misery,
and going from God; but now, since you preached to us, I, and my wife and
children, are, through God's grace, returning back the contrary way, with our
faces set toward God, heaven, and happiness. Secondly, you know, before my
wife was delivered of this child, how great peril of life she was in, and God
seemed to be very angry with us; but he was entreated and heard our prayers,
and is returned to us with mercies, in my wife's safe deliverance of this
daughter. And for these two reasons. I call this child Return. This story is
most certainly true; and was told me distinctly by Mr. Thomas Mayhew junior,
their minister, Hiacoomes being present, in traveling on foot between
Watertown lecture and Cambridge, the Indian that was the principal person
concerned being with him; and this he related not long after the thing was
done: and although it be a digression, yet the example being so instructive, I
thought it might be of good use to insert it here; there being apparently much
faith and love to God, great christian fortitude, prudence, and thankfulness,
resisting of Satan, overcoming temptation, encouragement to prayer, and hope
and reliance on God in cases of difficulty and distress; and all this
wonderfully exemplified in poor Indians, newly come to the faith, out of the
depth of ignorance and barbarism: all which does greatly tend to magnify and
illustrate the free and powerful virtue of God's grace in Christ Jesus.

CHAP. IV. Of the Inland Indians, and particularly of the Mawhawks, or Maquas.
. 1. THE inland Indians are of several nations; but by our sea coast Indians,
are generally denominated the Maquas, however distinguished among themselves. I
shall speak a little of several of them; and then in special of those Indians,
which are properly called Mawhawks, or Maquas, that live upon a breach of
Hudson river, about fifty miles from fort Oranje, now fort Albany, near unto
certain great lake^ that have recourse unto the great river of Canada.

. 2. Diverse of the Indian nations, that live to the west of Massachusetts, upon
the great river of Canada and the lakes thereunto belonging (of which there are
great numbers) that hold commerce with the French, and also sundry of our
Indians, in their hunting journeys, converse and traffic with those Indians,
and understand each other's language; these do properly belong to, and are
within the lines of the Massachusetts charter, which extends from the
Atlantic sea, west, through the main land, unto the West or South sea, and is
in breadth about two degrees, viz. from 42 to 44. and odd minutes; and so is
not improperly a subject of our discourse, which is designed to speak of the
Indians in New England. But these Indians being at a considerable distance from
the English, not less than a hundred and fifty, or two hundred miles, we are
not capable to give so particular an account of them, but what we have from our
Indians, that often travel unto them, and converse with them, as I said before.
The Indians of those parts, so far as I can learn, are of a tractable and quiet
disposition, and capable to receive impressions. We are informed, that some of
the fathers of the Romish religion do travel among them, and have distilled
some of their corrupt principles into them, and have baptized sundry of them,
and also taught them image worship, which our Indians do despise and contemn,
as a thing below rational men, to fall down and pray to a painted board and
dead image. But I trust in God, in due time he will open a way, for the true
and saving light of the gospel to break forth unto them from these parts; when
it shall please God to raise up more instruments, both English and Indians,
that may have some encouragement to travel into those parts, to drive on this
excellent and spiritual traffic, to convert souls unto the christian faith.
The names of the nations I cannot distinctly learn; but there are great numbers
of them, and well inclined; for they live in peace with the French; and I have
not heard they have treacherously conspired against the christians, but have
and do traffic, and hold good correspondence with them. Indeed these Canada
Indians have been, for many years, a prey to the Maquas, who are seated between
the English and these Indians; and do, by rapine and spoil, rob these poor
savages of the fruit of their labors, and heretofore sold the same to the
Dutch; of which I shall have occasion to speak more particularly in the story
of the Maquas.

. 3. There is a numerous race of Indians, that live upon a great lake, or sea.
Some report it to be salt water; others fresh. This lies from Boston about west
and by south. The nearest part of the said lake, or sea, is apprehended, by the
most intelligent Indians' information, to be above three or four hundred miles
from Boston; and then a hundred miles less from the English towns upon the
Connecticut river, that do belong to Massachusetts jurisdiction. This people, I
conceive, are the same that Captain Smith, in his History of Virginia, This
curious work was printed in London, 1627, and is now in very few hands.
in several places, does call Massawomeks; as in lib. 2. page 24. in lib. ^.
page 33. "The Massawomeks, says he, as the savages report, inhabit upon a
great salt water, which by all likelihood is either some part of Canada, some
great lake, or some inlet of some sea, that falls into the South sea. These
Massawomeks are a great nation and very populous." And again in lib. 3. page
57. "They much extolled a great nation, called Massawomeks." Again in lib. 3.
page 60. where he relates an encounter he had with the Massawomeks. Now the
place, where he met with and heard of this great people of Massawomeks, was at
the head of Chesapeak bay, or gulf, which lies in the latitude of 40 degrees
nearest; and he says, they had recourse thither; coming from the lakes or
seas, where they lived, and making canoes of barks of trees, which is the
manner of these inland Indians, they passed down those rivers, that fall into
the great bay, or gulf, which descends from the northwest, or near it, as the
maps do show. So that these Massawomeks, however denominated by other names or
titles, are the same nation and people that we are here speaking of; and that
live upon a great salt or fresh water, lying, as I said before, west and by
south, or more southerly from Boston, that is in 42. 30'. Of this nation, that
live upon this port, it is reported for a truth by our Indians, that they are a
very great and numerous people, and do speak, or at least understand, the same
language that is used by our Indians. Upon this consideration and intelligence,
about two years since, there was a journey attempted unto this people. There
was employed in this design six or seven Indians, one of them a teacher, and
other persons to assist them, that could speak both the English and Indian
tongue. They were provided and accommodated with all things necessary and
convenient for their journey, to the expense of about thirty or forty pounds,
as I was informed. They took with them Indian bibles, primers, catechisms, and
other books, translated into the Indian language, and other things to present
to those Indians, for their encouragement to entertain christianity. Being thus
fitted, they set forth in the spring of the year, as I remember; and after they
had traveled so far as the English plantations reach upon Connecticut river,
which was about a hundred miles on their way, their pilot, as they pretended,
fell lame or sick, and other difficulties presented: so they returned back, re
infecto, and all the cost expended to no purpose.

. 4. Upon this occasion I shall take liberty to suggest my apprehension
touching this discovery. And first, I shall presume, that it is unto me an
undoubted truth, upon clear demonstration, that there is such a lake, or arm of
the sea, about such a distance as was before mentioned from us. Secondly, that
this place is well replenished with a great people of Indians, is a truth
asserted by the concurrent testimony of all Indians, French, and Dutch, that
have had occasion to travel and inquire of the matter. Thirdly, that this place
is a good climate, and probably not only very fertile, whereby provision is
found for so numerous a people, but also they are otherwise furnished with furs
and other desirable things. Fourthly, that although a full and perfect
discovery of this vast lake, or part of the sea, will be a costly thing; yet,
in the issue, it may also be greatly advantageous unto the discoverers, not
only in using means for conveying and communicating the christian religion unto
so many poor, ignorant souls, which is the greater, -- but also in accumulating
external riches, as well as honor unto the first undertakers and perfecters of
this discovery. These things premised being seriously considered, I humbly
conceive, if any thing be further attempted, which I hear the Right Honorable
the Corporation for propagating the gospel in New England, living in London,
have again suggested to be prosecuted by the commissioners here, it should be
attempted strongly, and by such means as in probability of reason may attain
the end desired; which, I apprehend, cannot be effected without a considerable
expense; for this cannot be done by a few Indians or English men, sent on that
errand, who, if they should escape and return in safety, cannot satisfy us in
much more, than what we know already, that there is such a place and people.

I shall offer this therefore, as an expedient for this undertaking, that there
be not less than forty or fifty English men, with some Indians: such persons as
are fit and able for that employ, under wise and prudent conduct: some of them
mariners; some, ship carpenters; and some house carpenters; with all materials
and necessaries suitable, both of apparel, arms, tools, victuals, ammunition,
and whatever else is requisite; with considerable company of horses, to carry
their men and furniture. These to set forth early in the spring of the year,
and to have their victuals provided ready at the frontier English plantations
upon Connecticut river. So traveling, until they find some part of that sea,
or lake, or some navigable river running into it: and there searching for a
suitable place, both for good soil, and timber to make and build a convenient
house, and a good sort for defense against Indians and French. But first with
all speed, to prepare for and build a good pinnace, or large boat, with a deck,
able to accommodate twenty men, and victuals and arms, and also a little one to
come with it: With which vessel, after it is fitted and furnished, twenty of
the men, whereof two or three to be good artists and men of prudence and
conduct, to proceed to the said lake, or sea, and make discovery thereof,
leaving the rest of the men to keep the fort, for a place of rendezvous. In the
interi^, some of the men ashore may be employed in clearing land, fit to plan^
co^^ the year ensuing, and others to fish and fowl. Some few also may be sent
back to the English towns with some of the horses, to recr^^^ provisions, and
to give information. Those that go for discovery in the vessel, should be
instructed to treat civilly yet warily, -- for many Indians are very
treacherous, -- with the first Indian people they can discover; and to
endeavor first to traffic with them, especially to buy provision, if the
Indians can accommodate them with it; also ^o trade for furs or other things
vendable. To this end they must be furnished with such Indian trucking stuff,
as may be suitable. And after they have made a discovery of any people, and
driven a trade with them, then to leave one or two hostages, and take some from
them, and return back to the fort, and land their corn and other provisions or
furs, and give information of what they have discovered, and then return again
upon discovery, and proceed further; and so employ that summer, returning to
the fort, as often as may be convenient to give intelligence and receive fresh
recruits and supplies. Especially in all these discoveries and converse with
the Indians, d^^ care should be taken, that something of christian religion may
be instilled into them, and to that end some pious and religious Indians must
be procured to accompany the English in their discovery; and some of them may
be left behind among those Indians, if they find encouragement, to be
instructing them in the knowledge of the true God, and our Lord Jesus Christ.
Care also must be had, that a good minister, physician, and surgeon, be sent
with this company. And these means being used, by the blessing of God,
something may be discovered to good purpose, the first summer; and then, being
there settled, the next year, a more perfect and ample discovery may be made:
for I apprehend, one year will not suffice to complete this discovery,
considering the time that will be expended in building a vessel, and a fort and
houses, before they can proceed in the enterprise.

Before I leave this theme, give me your favor to add a relation I had from a
very intelligent Indian now living at Natick, and whose father is a pious
person, and of the church there. This young man, their son, called Thomas, came
home from the French that dwell upon the river of Canada, about three or four
years since. He had lived with those French about three years, at a trading
fort, about sixty miles up the river of Canada, above Quebec. This Indian told
me for a certain truth, that both Indians and French at that place, with one
voice informed him of this great lake, or sea; the extent thereof they do not
know: And that abundance of Indians lived there; and that in the most westerly
or southerly parts thereof, the Indians and French report, there are cattle and
sheep, and men clothed, and silver and great riches. Said he, the French are
very jealous left the English discover and settle the place first; and they
have no way from Canada river to pass to this place by water, so much as with a
canoe; and the Indians are many and potent, and they dare not go to them, and
the French are but weak in those parts. Besides, they have a good trade for
furs with the Indians by them; and hence seek not much after new discoveries at
present. This is the substance of this Indian's relation to me, at his return
home.

. 5. Besides these Massawomeks and the Canada Indians, there are diverse other
Indians, that live within land and upon the sea coasts; as the Pokomtakukas,
the Squakeays, the Quabaugs, and the Mohegans, the Pennakooks, diverse that live
upon or near unto the English of Connecticut, also upon Long Island, and upon
Hudson's river, and Delaware bay river, and upon the sea coasts between
Delaware and New Jersey. Also there are several Indian people inhabiting to the
eastward, both upon the sea coasts, and within land, without the bounds of the
Massachusetts, and yet bordering upon the English of New England. All which do
sit in darkness and the shadow of death. And it is a thing to be desired, that
the word of God's grace, declared in the gospel of his Son, may run and be
glorified, and spread far and near, like leven, until it leven the whole lump
of these Indians; and thereby we may see the predictions of the scriptures
fulfilled, -- that our Lord Jesus Christ shall become salvation unto the poor
gentiles, unto the ends of the earth; and that seraphick prediction of holy
Herbert, that excellent poet, be accomplished, which he elegantly declared in
that poem: Herbart, Church Militant. 190, 191, page.

"Religion stands on tiptoe in our land,
Ready to pass to the American strand.
When height of malice and prodigious lusts,
Impudent sinning, witchcrafts, and distrusts,
The mark of future bane, shall fill our cup
Unto the brim, and make our measure up;
When Seine shall swallow Tiber, and the Thames,
By letting in them both, pollutes her streams;
When Italy of us shall have her will,
And all her calendar of sins fulfill,
Whereby we may foresee what sins next year
Shall both in France and England domineer;
Then shall religion to America flee,
They have their times of gospel even as we.
My God, thou do prepare for them a way,
By carrying first their gold from them away,
For gold and grace did never yet agree;
Religion always sides with poverty.
We think we rob them, but we think amiss:
We are more poor -- they are more rich.
By this thou will revenge their quarrel, making grace
To pay our debts, and leave our ancient place,
To give to them, while that which now their nation
But lends to us, shall be our desolation."
. 6. Now we are come to speak of the Maquas more particularly, which I promised
in the beginning of this chapter. These Maquas live near unto certain lakes,
about fifty miles from fort Oranje, now called fort Albany, upon a branch of
Hudson's river. The place they live at, is reported to be a fertile and
pleasant country. It lies between the French that live upon Canada, and the
English and Dutch that live upon Hudson's river. Those Indians are greatly
addicted to war, spoil, and rapine. They heretofore lived in towns, or forts,
not far one from another; but were all in confederacy with each other. Their
manner was to rob, kill, and spoil, their neighbor Indians far and near; and
with the beavers and other furs, thus taken by violence, to barter heretofore
with the Dutch upon Hudson's river, now with the English that possess that
country, for those necessaries they wanted, especially for guns, powder, and
shot, and other weapons for war. They took their spoil principally from the
Indians of Canada, and the branches and lakes thereunto belonging; which
Indians, as was before hinted, are an industrious and peaceable people,
exercising themselves much in hunting for and taking much beaver, otters, and
other furs, which those watery regions are plentifully stored with. These
Indians traffic with the French, living at Quebec and other places upon that
river. But these warlike Maquas would attack, rob, and plunder them, as they
return home from their huntings; and also for sundry years used hostility
against the French upon that river, spoiling and taking prisoners many of them.
These doings of the Maquas greatly obstructed their trade with the Indians: and
hereby the French were much provoked and incensed against the Maquas; bu^
wanting sufficient strength to deal with them, about the year 1646 and 1647,
the French did, by their agent, Monsieur Marie, a person of orders, and most
probably a Jesuit, apply themselves with earnest solicitations, unto the
government of Massachusetts, for assistance to subdue the M^quas, offering
great pay for such succor; but the English were not willing to engage
themselves in that affair, forasmuch as the Maquas had never done any injury to
the English, and in policy and reason were like to be a good bulwark between
the English and French, in case a time should come of hostility between these
two nations. For these and other reasons M. Marie returned without succor.
Since which time, An. 1663, or 1664, the French, having received a considerable
supply from France, with a new governor, and seven or eight hundred soldiers,
this new governor, by his lieutenant and other commanders, with about six or
seven hundred soldiers, did march against the Maquas in the dead of winter,
when the rivers and lakes were covered with a firm ice, upon which they
traveled the most direct way. In truth they passed through very much
difficulty by reason of the cold season, digging into the snow upon the edges
of the rivers and lakes, to make their lodgings in the night, and carrying
their victuals, and arms, and snow shoes at their back; (I have spoken with
some Frenchmen, that were soldiers in this exploit, who related the story) and
by this difficult and hazardous attempt, at such a season as was never expected
by their enemies, they fell upon the Maquas at unawares; and thereby made an
ample conquest of them, and free^ themselves from their former rapine and
insolences; and ever since have held them under a kind of subjection. Yet this
victory was not so absolute, but many of the Indians escaped with their lives,
but lost all they had, for the French took the spoil, and burnt their three
forts or towns; but afterward those that escaped, which were far the greater
number of men, made treaties of peace with the French, and their country was
restored to them, where they yet live, but paying some tribute to the French.

. 7. These Maquas, as I said before, are given to rapine and spoil; and had,
for several years, been in hostility with our neighbor Indians; as the
Massachusetts, Pawtucketts, Pennakooks, Kennebecks, Pokomtakukes, Living at
Deerfuld.
Quabaugs, all the Nipmuck Indians, and Nashaway, or Weshakim Indians. And in
truth, they were in time of war, so great a terror to all the Indians before
named, though ours were far more in number than they, that the appearance of
four or five Maquas in the woods would frighten them from their habitations,
and cornfields and reduce many of them to get together in forts; by which means
they were brought to such straits and poverty, that had it not been for relief
they had from the English, in compensation for labor, doubtless many of them
had suffered famine. For they were driven from their planting fields through
fear, and from their fishing and hunting places; yea they durst not go into the
woods, to seek roots and nuts to sustain their lives. But this good effect the
war had upon some of them, namely, to turn them from idleness; for now
necessity forced them to labor with the English in hoeing, reaping, picking
hops, cutting wood, making hay, and making stone fences, and like necessary
employments, whereby they got victuals and clothes.

These Maquas had great advantages over our poor Indian neighbors; for they
are inured to war and hostility; ours, not inured to it. Besides, the manner of
the Maquas in their attempt, gives them much advantage, and puts ours to
terror. The Maquas' manner is, in the spring of the year, to march forth in
parties several ways, under a captain, and not above fifty in a troop. And when
they come near the place that they design to spoil, they take up some secret
place in the woods for their general rendezvous. Leaving some of their company
there, they divide themselves into small parties, three, or four, or five in a
company; and then go and seek for prey. These small parties repair near to the
Indian habitations, and lie in ambushments by the path sides, in some secure
places; and when they see passengers come, they fire upon them with guns; and
such as they kill or wound, they seize on and pillage, and strip their bodies;
and then with their knives, take off the skin and hair of the scalp of their
head, as large as a satin or leather cap: and so leaving them for dead, they
pursue the rest, and take such as they can prisoners, and serve them in the
same kind; excepting at sometime, if they take a pretty youth or girl that they
fancy, they save them alive: and thus they do, as often as they meet any
Indians. They always carefully preserve the scalps of the head, drying the
inside with hot ashes; and so carry them home as trophies of their valor, for
which they are rewarded.

And now I am speaking of their cruel and murtherous practices, I shall here
mention a true and rare story of the recovery of an Indian maid, from whose
head the Maquas had stripped the scalp in the manner before mentioned, and broken
her skull, and left her for dead; and afterward she was found, recovered, and
is alive at this day. The story is thus.

In the year 1670, a party of Maquas, being looking after their prey, met with
some Indians in the woods, belonging to Naamkeek, or Wamesit, upon the north
side of Merrimak river, not far from some English houses; where, falling upon
these Indians, that were traveling in a path, they killed some, and took
others, whom they also killed; and among the rest, a young maid of about
fourteen years old was taken, and the scalp of her head taken off, and her
skull broken, and left for dead with others. Some of the Indians escaping, came
to their fellows; and with a party of men, they went forth to bring off the
dead bodies, where they found this maid with life in her. So they brought her
home, and got Lieutenant Thomas Henchman, a good man, and one that has
inspection over them by my order, to use means for her recovery; and though he
had little hope thereof, yet he took the best care he could about it; and as
soon as conveniently he could, sent the girl to an ancient and skilful woman
living at Woburn, about ten miles distant, called Goodwife Brooks, to get her
to use her best endeavors to recover the maid; which, by the blessing of God,
she did, though she were about two years or more in curing her. I was at
Goodwife Brooks' house in May, 1673, when she was in cure; and she showed me a
piece or two of the skull, that she had taken out. And in May last, 1674, the
second day, I being among the Indians at Pawtuckett, to keep court, and Mr.
Eliot, and Mr. Richard Daniel, and others, with me, I saw the maid alive and in
health; and looked upon her head, which was whole, except a little spot as big
as a sixpence might cover, and the maid fat and lusty: but there was no hair
come again upon the head, where the scalp was slayed off. This cure, as some
skilful in surgery apprehend, is extraordinary and wonderful; and hence the
glory and praise is to be ascribed to God, that works wonders without number.

. 8. Although these Maquas were very afflictive and cruel, in this war with our
neighbor Indians, for several years; yet we may observe two things very
remarkable, wherein the favor of God is to be acknowledged in a distinguishing
manner.

First, toward the English nation, who live many of them in the woods, far
from neighbors; and frequently travel in the wilderness, from town to town,
and to other colonies, and that without any other arms, except a riding rod;
sometimes, one alone; sometimes, two or three together; against whom the Maquas
had advantage, and opportunities daily to kill and destroy the English, and no
certain knowledge who were the actors: But it pleased God so to restrain them,
that not the least hurt was done unto any English person; only sometimes
possibly they might kill an Englishman's cow or swine, when they wanted food;
but this very seldom, and possibly might be charged as well upon other Indians,
as upon the Maquas.

Secondly, toward the praying Indians. They killed but one or two of them,
about one praying town, called Wamesit; but never were seen near to Natick or
Hassanamesitt, where the churches are planted now; yet they were at some other
praying towns of Indians. Doubtless the great God, who is compassionate to his
poor children, did so guide and order their motions, that they never shot a
bullet or arrow at any person near those towns: but yet the poor praying
Indians were under great fears and terrors, and were very much distressed and
discouraged by their fears; but yet, through God's grace and favor, they had
no hurt.

Before I leave this discourse of the Maquas, I shall give you a short
narrative of five armed Maquas, that were apprehended and imprisoned in
Cambridge, in September, 1665, as I remember.

. 9. There were five Mawhawks, or Maquas, all stout and lusty young men, and
well armed, that came into one John Taylor's house, in Cambridge, in the
afternoon. They were seen to come out of a swamp, not far from the house. The
people of the house, which I think were only two women and a lad then at home,
seeing them so armed; for they had every one of them a firelock gun, a pistol,
an helved hatchet, a long knife hanging about their necks, and every one had
his pack, or knapsack, well furnished with powder and bullets, and other
necessaries; and also the people perceived that their speech was different from
our neighbor Indians; for these Maquas speak hollow and through the throat
more than our Indians; and their language is understood but by very few of our
neighbor Indians: -- I say, the people of the house suspected them, sent
privily to them that had authority, a little distance in the town, to give
order and direction in this matter. Hereupon a constable with a party of men
came to the house, and seized them without any resistance. Some think they were
willing to be apprehended, that they may better see and observe the English
manner of living. The constable was ordered to carry them to prison, and secure
them there, until such time as they might be examined; which was done, and they
were all put in irons, and their arms and things taken from them and secured.
The English had heard much, but never saw any of those Maquas until now. They
differ nothing from the other Indians, only in their speech. At their being
imprisoned and their being laden with irons, they did not appear daunted or
dejected; but, as the manner of those Indians is, they sang night and day, when
they were awake.

Within a day or two after, they were removed with a guard, from Cambridge to
Boston prison, at which time the court sat; before whom they were examined at
several times, upon diverse interrogations, too long to insert. The sum of their
answer was, that they came not hither, with an intent to do the least wrong to
the English, but to avenge themselves of the Indians, their enemies. They were
told, it was inhumanity, and more like wolves than men, to travel and wander so
far from home, merely to kill and destroy men, women, and children, -- for they
could get no riches of our Indians, who were very poor, -- and to do this in a
secret, sculking manner, lying in ambushment, thickets, and swamps, by the way
side, and so killing people in a base and ignoble manner: whereas, if they were
men of courage, valor, and nobleness of spirit, they would fight with their
enemies openly and in a plain field, which our Indians would gladly accept and
engage with them, and make an end of the cruel war, one way or other; but thus
to be destroyed gradually, in such a manner, was altogether inhuman and
barbarous. To these things they answered shortly: It was their trade of life:
they were bred up by their ancestors, to act in this manner toward their
enemies.

The Indians, our neighbors, flocked into Boston, in great numbers, not only
to see those Maquas, but earnestly to solicit the court, not to set them
escape, but to put them to death, or, at least, to deliver the Maquas to them
to be put to death. For, said they, these Maquas are unto us, as wolves are to
your sheep. They secretly seize upon us and our children, wherever they meet
us, and destroy us. Now, if we had taken five wolves alive, and should let them
go again, and not destroy them, you Englishmen would be greatly offended with
us for such an act: and surely, said they, the lives of men are of more worth
than beasts.

These kind of arguings and solicitations of our neighbor Indians, put the
court upon serious thoughts, how to manage this affair, as became wise and
christian men. For as, on the one hand, the Maquas had never done any wrong to
the English; and that we should begin a breach with them, in taking away these
men's lives, we well knew the temper and spirit of that people was so cruel,
and bloody, and revengeful, that they might, and probably would, in a secret
and sculking way, destroy many of our people, so that none could be safe in
their goings out and comings in: on the other hand, it was considered, that our
neighbor Indians would be offended, that we did not gratify their desires. But
of these two evils the court chose to avoid the former; forasmuch as we had
more ties and obligations upon our neighbors, both of christianity, and
sobriety, and commerce, than upon the others; and hence did endeavor at
present, and might have opportunity hereafter, to quiet and compose their
minds, declaring unto them; First, that it was not becoming the prudence or
honor of so great a people as the English were, not suitable to the christian
profession, to begin a war with a people, that had not killed or slain any
Englishmen. Secondly, for the English to espouse the Indians' quarrel, the
cause whereof we knew not, or which party were the aggressors, was not lawful
for the English to do. Thirdly, to take away the lives of five men, that were
now in our power by their own voluntary coming into one of our towns, and had
not done us any wrong, personally considered, it would be great injustice.

These and some other reasons were given to our neighbor Indians, who, though
not satisfied at the present, yet were quiet. The result of the court in this
matter was, to dismiss these five Maquas, with a letter from the court sent by
them to their chief sachems, of this import: That although the English had
seized five of their men, that came armed into one of the English houses, and
had examined them; yet we had released them, and secured them from the Indians,
and conducted them in safety out of our borders, and have re^^rned all their
arms and things unto them, and given them coats; and have sent this letter by
them to their chief sachem, to forbid any of that people, for the future, to
kill and destroy any of the Indians under our protection, that lived about
forty miles from us on every side; which they might distinguish from other
Indians, by their short hair, and wearing English fashioned apparel. Secondly,
they were required not to come armed into any of our towns. But if any of them
were sent, and came upon any business to us, they were to repair to the
magistrate, and get the first Englishman they met withal, to conduct them to
whom they were to declare their errand. With this letter, and a convoy of horse
to conduct them into the woods, clear of the Indians, their enemies, they were
dismissed, and we heard no more of them since.

. 10. After this, as I best remember, in the summer, 1669, the war having now
continued between the Maquas and our Indians, about six years, diverse Indians,
our neighbors, united their forces together, and made an army of about six or
seven hundred men; and marched into the Maquas' country, to take revenge of
them. This enterprise was contrived and undertaken without the privity, and
contrary to the advice, of their English friends. Mr. Eliot and myself, in
particular, dissuaded them, and gave them several reasons against it, but they
would not hear us: but the praying Indians were so cautioned by our advice,
that not above five of them went; and all of them were killed but one. The
chiefest general in this expedition, was the principal sachem of Massachusetts,
named Josiah, alias Chekatabutt, a wise and stout man of middle age, but a very
vicious person. He had considerable knowledge in the christian religion; and
sometime, when he was younger, seemed to profess it for a time; -- for he was
bred up by his uncle, Kuchamakin, who was the first sachem and his people to
whom Mr. Eliot preached, as we shall afterward declare; -- and was a
catechized Indian, and kept the sabbath several years; but after turned
apostate, and for several years last past, separated from the praying Indians,
and was but a back friend to religion. This man, as I said, was the chief; but
there were diverse other sagamores and stout men that assisted.

Their march unto the Maquas forts was about two hundred miles: and the Indians
are ill accomodated for such an undertaking, having no other carriages for
their arms, ammunition, and victuals, but their backs: and they are slow in
their marches, when they are in a body; for they are fain to provide food, as
they travel, by hunting, fishing, and gathering roots: and if, in their march,
they are to pass any Indian towns or plantations; which they will go out of
their way to visit and find quarters in, rather than pass them; at such places
they will stay several days, until they devour all they can get; boasting,
vapouring, and prating of their valor. Hereby their designs are known, and
their enemies better prepared; and their provisions, especially their
ammunition, wasted; for they are, when they have opportunity, much addicted to
vapor, and shoot away their powder in the air.

This Indian army at last came to the Mawhawks' nearest fort; which their
enemies had by this time well strengthened, fortified, and furnished with men
and victuals, to endure a longer siege, than they knew the other could make.
The Massachusetts, or sea coast army, set down before the fort, besieging it
some days; they within and those without, firing at each other, without any
considerable loss, except the expenses of powder and shot. Once a stout party
of the Maquas sallied out upon the besiegers; and they fought stoutly on both
sides, and several men were slain on both sides. At length, when the besieged
s^w cause, they retired again into their hold.

After some days, the army lying in this posture, their provision being
exhausted, and their munition well spent, and some of their people sick, and
that they saw the impossibility to get the hold by assault, they broke up the
siege, and retreated homewards about twenty or thirty miles. Shortly after they
were gone, a strong party of the Maquas issued forth to pursue them; and
fetching a compass, got before them, -- for the army marched slowly, many being
sick, and the best, not very strong, -- and placed themselves in ambushment at
^ pass opportune for their purpose, where were thick swamps on each side their
way. Here the Maquas lodged themselves very near to them, as was most
advantageous to their design; and then the Maquas fired upon them, and killed
and wounded many at the first firings. Our Indians did what they could for
their defense, and to offend the enemies: and many of the principal men fought
valiantly, especially their general before named, and several others: yea
almost all their stoutest leaders and sagamores, that accompanied him, pursued
the Maquas into the thickets; and under such great disadvantage, most of these
valiant men lost their lives, and the general also. About fifty of their chief
men, they confess, were slain in this fight; but I suppose, more; but how many
the Maquas lost, is not known. At last, night coming on, the Maquas contenting
themselves with this victory, retreated; and the remainder of the army
hastened, as fast as they could, homeward.

This was the last and most fatal battle, fought between the Maquas and our
Indians; who returned home ashamed, with lamentations and mourning for the loss
of most of their chief men. Then were they effectually convinced of their
folly, in attempting this design contrary to the counsel of their best friend.

It was two years and more after this battle, before a peace was made between
our Indians and the Maquas. But little or no action was done of either side:
only both parties, kept in fear of each other; our Indians retiring close under
the wings of the English; the Maquas, not over forward to invade; for I
apprehend, that in these wars they felt damage, and lost many men, and were
willing to be quieter than formerly they were. In the year 1671, as I take it,
by the mediation of one Captain Salisbury, commander in chief at fort Albany,
and other English and Dutch living there, being solicited thereunto by some of
the English magistrates of the English colonies, there was a peace concluded
between the Maquas and our Indians; who have been much frighted, scattered,
impoverished, and discouraged by this war; but now are quiet, and are returned
to their plantations, some whereof during this war were deserted; and the
Indians of several places gathered together in forts, to their great suffering
and inconveniences.

To sum up all concerning these Maquas, -- you may see in the foregoing
discourse, that they are a stout, yet cruel people; much addicted to bloodshed
and cruelty; very prone to vex and spoil the peaceable Indians. Therefore it
were a most desirable thing, to put forth our utmost endeavors to civilize,
and convert these Indians to the knowledge of the gospel; which is the only
means to turn this curse into a blessing. Then those gracious promises will be
fulfilled to this people, that are mentioned in Isaiah xi. 6-9; in Is. lxv. 25;
and again in Is. xxxv. 4-9. These and abundance of other gracious promises
shall be fulfilled to these poor Indians, when they receive the gospel in truth
and power; which the Lord grant for Jesus Christ's sake. Amen.

CHAP. V. Of the Instruments and Means that God has used, for the Civilizing
and Conversion of some of the New England Indians.
. 1. HAVING, in the former chapters, declared some short hints concerning the
Indians in general, I shall now, by God's assistance, speak more particularly
of the civilized and religious Indians, which I shall denominate by the name of
Praying Indians, a title generally understood; and in this chapter, begin first
to speak of the instruments, that the blessed God has raised up and used in
this matt^^. In the first place, we are to ascribe all glory, honor, and
praise, unto God in Jesus Christ, who was, and is, the first mover and
efficient in this work, wherein he has remembered, and begun to fulfill, unto
this forlorn and outcast people, those gracious promises made unto his son, our
Lord Jesus Christ: Ps. ii. 8. Ask of me and I will give thee, the heathen for
thine inheritance, and the uttermost parts of the earth for thy possession. And
in Ps. lxxii. 8. He shall have dominion from sea to sea, and from the river
unto the ends of the earth.

. 2. For second causes, that which, in the first place, is deservedly to be
mentioned, is the Lord's gracious inclining, disposing, and fitting; that pious
servant of God, Mr. John Eliot, the only teacher of the church of Christ at
Roxbury in New England; for his colleague, Mr. Thomas Weld, was a little before
removed for England. Yet notwithstanding the weight of the work, incumbent upon
him in that church, was sufficient to take up the time and strength of one man;
but that God who is the God of the spirits of all flesh did endow him with an
extraordinary spirit suitable for the work. This reverend, learned, and worthy
man, in the year of our Lord 1646, as I take it, and about the forty second
year of his age, did intensely set upon the work of preaching Christ to the
Indians in New England; and was so divinely assisted by the spirit of God, that
it was not long after he set upon the work of learning the Indian language: but
be attained such a measure thereof, that he adventured to make beginning to
preach the glad tidings of salvation unto their competent understanding. The
first place he began to preach at, was Nonantum, The east part of Newton.
near Watertown mill, upon the south side of Charles river, about four or five
miles from his own house; where lived at that time Waban, one of their
principal men, and some Indians with him.

. 3. His manner of teaching them was, first to begin with prayer, and then to
preach briefly upon a suitable portion of scripture; afterward to admit the
Indians to propound questions; -- and diverse of them had a faculty to frame
hard and difficult questions, touching something then spoken, or some other
matter in religion, tending to their illumination; -- which questions Mr.
Eliot, in a g^ve and christian manner, did endeavor to resolve and answer to
their satisfaction.

Within a short time after this first attempt, finding the Indians, at least
some of them, inclined to meet together to hear him, and th^^ God was pleased
graciously to assist him, and increase his knowledge of their language; he set
up another lecture at a place, called Neponsitt, Neponsitt river separates
Dorchester from Milton.
within the bounds of Dorchester, about four miles from his house southward;
where another company of Indians lived, belonging unto the sachem Kuchamakin.
Among these Indians there were fundry grave and intelligent persons. But at
Nonantum especially, one of most remark was named Waban, a grave and sober
person, of whom we shall have occasion to speak more hereafter. God was pleased
to open the understanding, and affect the heart, of this man, that be became,
by his example and activity, a leader and encourager to many others. And thus
Mr. Eliot continued to preach these two lectures at Nonantum and Neponsitt, for
several years with good success.

Besides his preaching to them, he framed two catechisms in the Indian tongue,
containing the principles of the christian religion; a lesser for children, and
a larger for older persons. These also he communicated unto the Indians
gradually, a few questions at a time, according unto their capacity to receive
them. The questions he propounded one lecture day, were answered the next
lecture day. His manner was, after he had began the meeting with prayer, then
first to catechize the children; and they would readily answer well for the
generality. Then would he encourage them with some small gift, as an apple, or
a small biscuit, which he caused to be bought for that purpose. And by this
prudence and winning practice, the children were induced with delight, to get
into their memories the principles of the christian religion. After he had done
the children, then would he take the answers of the catechetical questions of
the elder persons; and they did generally answer judiciously. When the
catechizing was past, he would preach to them upon some portion of scripture,
for about three quarters of an hour; and then give liberty to the Indians to
propound questions, as I intimated before; and in the close, finish all with
prayer.

This worthy man has been all along to this day, exceeding diligent and
careful to instruct the Indians in the found principles of the christian
religion: so that there is none of the praying Indians, young or old, but can
readily answer any question of the catechism; which, I believe, is more than
can be said of many thousands of English people; the more cause of mourning!
Besides, the praying Indians have been so instructed and learned, that they
generally pray in their families morning and evening, and that with much
affection and reverence. This is a practice, which, I fear, is neglected in
many English, as well in New England, as in Old England.

. 4. In this work did this good man industriously travail sundry years, without
any external encouragement, from men I mean, as to the receiving any salary or
reward. Indeed verbal encouragements, and the presence of diverse persons at his
lectures, he wanted not. The truth is, Mr. Eliot engaged in this great work of
preaching unto the Indians upon a very pure and sincere account: for I being
his neighbor and intimate friend, at the time when he first attempted this
enterprise, he was pleased to communicate unto me his design, and the motives
that induced him thereunto; which, as I remember, were principally these three.

First, the glory of God, in the conversion of some of these poor, desolate
souls.

Secondly, his compassion and ardent affection to them, as of mankind in their
great blindness and ignorance.

Thirdly, and not the least, to endeavor, so far as in him lay, the
accomplishment and fulfilling the covenant and promise, that New England people
had made unto their king, when he granted them their patent or charter, viz.
that one principal end of their going to plant these countries, was, to
communicate the gospel unto the native Indians; which in truth is a clause in
the charter, as will in the following book appear. The III. Book of the History
of New England. See the Postscript.


By that which has been said in this particular, it does evidently appear,
that they were heroic, noble, and christian principles, that induced this
precious servant of Christ to enter upon this work, and not any carnal or
by-ends: for in those times nothing of outward encouragement did appear. Indeed
it must be acknowledged to the praise of God, that he has made good that
gracious promise. First seek the kingdom of heaven and the righteousness
thereof, and all other things shall be added unto thee. The truth is, that God
is so good a master, that never any man did lose by his service; and although
not always paying them with things of this life, -- for the promise of those
things is conditional, so far as shall be for our good and his glory, -- but in
the inward consolations and communications of spiritual good things (the least
whereof is worth the whole world) whilst we are in this life, and abundant
recompense in heaven is most sure and certain. But sometimes it pleases God to
bestow his beneficence in both kinds, as he did unto this good man. For after
some years' travail in this work, the Lord was pleased to stir up diverse worthy
and pious persons in Old England (and if I knew their names, I would here
record them, for their eternal honor, and for example to posterity, -- though,
I believe, many of them had such a measure of the spirit of Christ, not willing
to let their left hand know what their right did, and would be offended, if I
should mention them) to be benefactors unto this good work: and from that
beneficence this blessed instrument had some annual encouragement; which, I
have heard him say, he never expected, but yet with abundant acknowledgment and
thankfulness to God and men for it.

Hereby he was enabled to educate his five sons then living, viz. John, Joseph,
Samuel, Aaron, and Benjamin, in learning, both at the schools, and after in the
college at Cambridge. But Aaron died soon after his entering the college; and
all lived to take their degrees of bachelors and masters of art. And also it
was his great desire and earnest prayer to God, that he would incline and fit
them all to engage with him in teaching the Indians; to which he was willing,
as much as in them lay, to dedicate them to God for that work. And although God
saw not meet to grant him his full desire in that respect, yet his prayers and
endeavors were very graciously answered: for all his sons have given
demonstrations, not only of their sufficiency in learning, but of their true
piety. All of them became preachers of the gospel.

His eldest son, John, was not only pastor of an English church at Cambridge
village, Now Newton.
and a very excellent preacher i^ the English tongue; but also, for sundry
years, he preached the gospel unto the Indians, once a fortnight constantly at
Pakemitt, In Stoughton.
and sometimes at Natick and other places: and the most judicious christian
Indians esteemed very highly of him, as a most excellent preacher in their
language, as I have often heard them say. But God was pleased to put an end to
his work and life, October 11, 1668, and to carry him with full fail to heaven,
there to receive his crown: of whom I shall say no more in this place; for he
well deserves a station among the worthies in New England, which is designed in
the sequel of this our history. The VI. Book of the History of New England. See
the Postcript.


His second son, Joseph, is now pastor of a church of Christ at Guildford in
New England: a preacher inferior to few in this country, for his age and time.

His third son, Samuel, before his death, gave abundant demonstration of his
piety, ability, gravity, and excellent temper. He was a fellow of Harvard
college in Cambridge in New England. He left this world and ascended to glory,
after he had taken his second degree in the college. He has undoubtedly
arrived to his highest degree in the empyreal heaven. He was a person of whom
the world was not worthy.

His fourth and youngest son, Benjamin, is a person approved for piety and
ability. He has diverse times been invited to places that wanted a minister;
but yet is not settled, but lives at home with his parents. Benjamin was
afterward settled at Roxbury, and was, during many years, his father's
assistant. The venerable apostle Eliot outlived all his sons, and died at the
advanced age of eighty-six, A.D. 1690. For the particulars of his life and
character, see Mather's Magnalia, Book III. page 17^.


I have been the larger in mentioning God's blessing upon this good man and his
posterity, to set forth the gracious goodness and loving kindness of God
extended to him thereby, making good what he has said: Them that honor me, I
will honor, 1 Samuel ii. 30. Behold, that thus shall the man be blessed, that
fears the Lord, and walks in his ways. The Lord shall bless thee out of
Zion; and thou shall (...) the g^^d of Jerusalem all the days of thy life. Yea,
thou shall see thy childrens' children, and peace upon Israel. Ps. cxxviii, 1,
4, 5, 6. And again, Trust in the Lord, and do good, so shall thou dwell in the
land, and verily thou shall be fed. Delight thyself also in the Lord; and he
shall give thee the desires of thine heart. Ps. xxxvii. 3, 4.

. 5. This worthy and active instrument, Mr. Eliot, who was, and is, and, I
believe, will be, to his dying day unwearied in his endeavors to promote the
salvation of the poor Indians, contented not himself with preaching to those
people at the places before mentioned; but went further into the country diverse
ways, far and near, preaching the gospel to the wild and barbarous Indians; and
sometimes reaped fruit of his labor.

Moreover he stirred up diverse other ministers and scholars, in our own and
other colonies, by his words and letters, to fit themselves to labor in this
Indian harvest, and that not without some good success. For in Plymouth colony,
one Mr. Bourne, having some skill in the Indian language, entered upon this
service, and has had a great blessing upon his endeavors, as will be declared
in the sequel. Also Mr. John Cotton, now pastor at Plymouth, has gained the
Indian language, and did sometime at Martha's Vineyard, and now at Plymouth and
places adjacent, labor herein. Also at Martha's Vineyard and Nantucket,
Messrs. Thomas Mayhew, father and son, attempted this enterprise, which God
has greatly blessed, as will be declared hereafter. Again Mr. Pierson
heretofore, and Mr. Fitch at present, did and does preach to some Indians in
Connecticut colony; of whom afterward.

But besides his industry to provoke others, and his frequent travels and
preaching among the Indians, he set up that great work of translating the bible
into the Indian language; which the Honorable Corporation for propagating the
gospel in New England, residing in London, did greatly encourage, and out of
the revenues belonging to that ^tock, which then was more considerable than now
it is, did pay for the printing thereof. There are s^veral copies of Eliot's
Indian B^^le in the lib^ary of Harvard College.
Besides, he framed and translated into the Indian language diverse other books;
as Indian catechisms, a grammar, primer, singing psalms, the Practice of Piety,
Baxter's Call to the U^converted, and other things; all which are printed at
the charge of the Corporation stock.

. 6. Moreover he took great care, that schools should be planted among the
praying Indians; and he taught some himself to read, that they might be capable
to teach others; and by his procurement, some of the choice Indian youth were
put to school with English schoolmasters, to learn both the English, Latin, and
Greek tongues.

There was much cost out of the Corporation stock expended in this work, for
fitting and preparing the Indian youth to be learned and able preachers unto
their countrymen. Their diet, apparel, books, and schooling, was chargeable. In
truth the design was prudent, noble, and good; but it proved ineffectual to the
ends proposed. For several of the said youth died, after they had been sundry
years at learning, and made good proficiency therein. Others were disheartened
and left learning, after they were almost ready for the college. And some
returned to live among their countrymen; where some of them are improved for
schoolmasters and teachers, unto which they are advantag^d by their education.
Some others of them have entered upon other callings: as one is a mariner;
another, a carpenter; another went for England with a gentleman, that lived
sometimes at Cambridge in New England, named Mr. Drake, which Indian, as I
heard, died there not many months after his arrival.

I remember but only two of them all, that lived in the college at Cambridge;
the one named Joel, Son of Hiacoomes, mentioned chap. iii. ^. 14.
the other, Caleb; both, natives of Martha's Vineyard. These two were hopeful
young men, especially Joel, being so ripe in learning, that he should, within a
few months, have taken his first degree of bachelor of art in the college. He
took a voyage to Martha's Vineyard to visit his father and kindred, a little
before the commencement; but upon his return back in a vessel, with other
passengers and mariners, suffered shipwreck upon the island of Nantucket; where
the bark was found put on shore; and in all probability the people in it came
on shore alive, but afterward were murdered by some wicked Indians of that
place; who, for lucre of the spoil in the vessel, which was laden with goods,
thus cruelly destroyed the people in it; for which fault some of those Indians
was convicted and executed afterward. Thus perished our hopeful young prophet
Joel. He was a good scholar and a pious man, as I judge. I knew him well; for
he lived and was taught in the same town where I dwell. I observed him for
several years, after he was grown to years of discretion, to be not only a
diligent student, but an attentive hearer of God's word; diligently writing the
sermons, and frequenting lectures; grave and sober in his conversation.

The other called Caleb, not long after he took his degree of bachelor of art
Caleb Ch^^^ how much took his degree of bachelor of arts, A. D. 166^
at Cambridge in New England, died of a consumption at Charlestown, where he
was placed by Mr. Thomas Danforth, who had inspection over him, under the care
of a physician in order to his health; where he wanted not for the best means
the country could afford, both of food and physic; but God denied the
blessing, and put a period to his days.

Of this disease of the consumption sundry of those Indian youths died, that
were bred up to school among the English. The truth is, this disease is
frequent among the Indians; and sundry die of it, that live not with the
English. A hectic fever, issuing in a consumption, is a common and mortal
disease among them. I know some have apprehended other causes of the mortality
of these Indian scholars. Some have attributed it unto the great change upon
their bodies, in respect of their diet, lodging, apparel, studies; so much
different from what they were inured to among their own countrymen.

These awful providence of God, in frustrating the hopeful expectations
concerning the learned Indian youth, who were designed to be for teachers unto
their countrymen, concurring with some other severe dispensations of God
obstructive to this work, -- some whereof may be hereafter mentioned, -- caused
great thoughts of heart unto the well willers and promoters thereof. Some
conceived, God was not pleased yet to make use of any of the Indians to preach
the gospel; and that the time of the great ha^vest of their ingathering is not
yet come, but will follow after the calling of the Jews. Others thought that
this honor of their instruction and conversion shall be continued with
Englishmen. Others were of opinion, that Satan, the great enemy and opposer of
men's salvation, who had for many years held these poor barbarians under his
dominion, did use all his stratagems and endeavors to impede the spreading of
the christian faith, that he might the better keep possession of his kingdom
among them. But others, whose faith I hope in God was active and vigorous, did
conclude that there was nothing more in th^se providence and remora's, than
did usually attend and accompany all good designs, tending to the glory of God
and salvation of souls; whereof plentiful examples are recorded in holy
scriptures, especially in the primitive times; which in several chapters of the
Acts of the Apostles may be demonstrated. Therefore it is our duty to persist
and go on in a good work, looking by the eye of faith unto our Lord Jesus
Christ, the great captain and conductor of all affairs, and especially those of
this kind. He is the king, priest, and prophet of his church; who has
commanded and encouraged his servants, that he calls to engage under him, in
the wars of the Lord, against sin and Satan, etc. to be strong and very
courageous, etc. for I will be with thee; I will not fail thee, nor forsake
thee. Josh. i. 5, 6, 7. Heb. xiii. 5. Yea Christ has promised all his servants
and ambassadors, that he employs in this work, that he will be with them
always, and unto the end of the world. Mat. xxviii. 19, 20.

. 7. In the former part of this chapter, I briefly touched the godly care,
zeal, and industry of Mr. Eliot, in setting upon the translating of the
scriptures into the Indian tongue. This work being a considerable time in hand,
it pleased God in his divine providence so to order it, that the new testament,
being first printed, was finished about the time of his Majesty's return to his
crown in peace; for whom God had reserved the honor of the dedication thereof;
as may appear by the Epistle Dedicatory, to him presented by the Commissioners
of the united colonies in New England; which here follows.

"To the High and Mighty Prince, Charles the second, by the grace of God, King
of England, Scotland, France, and Ireland, Defender of the faith, etc.

"The Commissioners of the United Colonies in New England wish increase of all
happiness.

"Most dread Sovereign,

"If our weak apprehensions have not misled us, this work will be no
unacceptable present to your Majesty, as having a greater interest therein,
than we believe is generally understood, which upon this occasion we conceive
it our duty to declare.

"The people of these four colonies (...), Plymouth, Connecticut, and New Haven.
(confederate for mutual defense, in the times of the late distractions of our
dear native country) your Majesty's natural born subjects, by the favor and
grace of your royal father and grandfather of famous memory, put themselves
upon this great and hazardous undertaking, of planting themselves at their own
charge in these remote ends of the earth; that without offense or provocation
to our dear brethren and countrymen, we might enjoy that liberty to worship
God, which our own conscience informed us was not only our right but duty; as
also that we, if it so pleased God, might be instrumental to spread the light
of the gospel, the knowledge of the son of God, our savior, to the poor,
barbarous heathen; which by his late Majesty, in some of our patents, is
declared to be the principal aim.

"These honest and pious intentions have, through the grace of God and our
kings, been seconded with proportionable success. For, omitting the immunities
indulged by your Highness's royal predecessors, we have been greatly encouraged
by your Majesty's gracious expressions of favor and approbation, signified
unto the address made by the principal of our colonies; to which the rest do
most co^dially subscribe; though wanting the like seasonable opportunity, they
have been till now deprived of the means to congratulate your Majesty's happy
restitution, after your long sufferings; which we implore may yet be graciously
accepted, that we may be equal partakers of your royal favor and moderation;
which has been so illustrious, that to admiration, the animosities of
different persuations of men have been so soon composed, and so much cause of
hope, that, unless the sins of the nation prevent, a blessed calm will succeed
the late horrid confusions of church and state. And shall not we, dread
sovereign, your subjects of these colon^^s, of the same faith and belief in all
points of doctrine with our countrymen and other reformed churches, though
perhaps not alike persuaded in some matters of order, which in outward respects
has been unhappy for us, -- promise and assure ourselves of all just favor
and indulgence from a prince so graciously and happily endowed?

"The other part of our errand hither has been attended with endeavors and
blessing; many of the wild Indians being taught, and understanding, the
doctrine of the christian religion, and with much affection attending such
preachers as are sent to teach them. Many of their children are instructed to
write and read; and some of them have proceeded further to attain the knowledge
of the Latin and the Greek tongues, and are brought up with our English youth
in university learning. There are div^rs of them that can and do read some
parts of the scripture, and some catechisms which formerly have been translated
into their own language: which has occasioned the undertaking of a great work,
viz. the printing the whole bible: which, being translated by a painful
labou^er among them, who was desirous to see the work accomplished in his days,
has already proceeded to the finishing of the new testament; which we here
humbly present to your Majesty, as the first (...) and accomplishment of the
pious design of your royal ancestors. The old testament is now under the press,
wanting and craving your r^y^l favor and assistance for the perfecting thereof.

"We may not conceal, though this work has been begun and prosecuted by such
instruments as God has raised up here; yet the chief charge and cost, which
has supported and carried it thus far, has been from the charity and piety of
diverse of our well affected countrymen in England; who, being sensible of our
inability in that respect, and studious to promote so good a work, contributed
large sums of money, which were to be improved according to the direction and
order of the then prevailing powers; which has been faithfully and religiously
attended, both there and here, according to the pious intentions of the
benefactors. And we most humbly beseech your Majesty, that a matter of so much
devotion and piety, tending so much to the honor of God, may suffer no
disappointment through any legal defect, without the fault of the donors, or
poor Indians, who only receive the benefit; but that your Majesty be graciously
pleased to establish and confirm the same; being contrived and done, as we
conceive, in that first year of your Majesty's reign, as this book was begun
and now finished the first year of your establishment: which does not only
prefage the happy success of your Highness's government, but will be a
perpetual monument, that by your Majesty's favor, the gospel of our Lord Jesus
Christ was made known to the Indians; an honor whereof, we are assured, your
Majesty will not a little esteem.

"Sir, the shine of your royal favor upon these undertakings will ma^^ these
tender plants to flourish, notwithstanding any malevolent aspect from those
that bear evil will to this Sion; and render your Majesty more illustrious and
glorious to after generations.

"The God of heaven long preserve and bless your Majesty with many happy days,
to his glory, the good and comfort of his church and people. Amen."

This epistle was framed, and the Indian translation of the new testament
finished, printed, and set forth, in September 5th, 1661; from whence we may
infer, that as it was a credit to this work to have so great a prince to offer
it unto; so it was no less an honor to his Majesty, that one of his subjects
should put the holy scriptures into the Indian language; and that himself
should be the first christian prince, unto whom a work of this nature should be
presented and dedicated.

One thing falls in here fi^ly to be spoken of, as a means intended for the
good of the Indians; which was the erecting a house of brick at Cambridge in
New England, which passes under the name of the Indian college. It is a
structure strong and substantial, though not very capacious. It cost between
three or four hundred pounds. It is large enough to receive and accommodate
about twenty scholars with convenient lodgings and studies; but not hitherto
has been much improved for the ends intended, by reason of the death and
failing of Indian scholars. It has hitherto been principally improved for to
accomodate English scholars, and for placing and using a printing press
belonging to the college. This house was built and finished at the charge, and
by the appointment, of the Honorable Corporation for propagating the gospel in
New England.

CHAP. VI. Of the other Means and Instruments, used and improved for Civilizing
and reducing the Indians from Barbarism.
. 1. FORASMUCH as a pious magistracy and christian government is a great help
and means for promoting, cherishing, encouraging, and propagating, the
christian religion among any people, especially a nation so circumstanced, as
these rude, uncultivated, and barbarous Indians were; care was taken by the
general court of the Massachusetts, at the motion of Mr. Eliot, to appoint some
of the most prudent and pious Indians, in every Indian village that had
received the gospel, to be rulers and magistrates among them, to order their
affairs both civil and criminal, and of a more ordinary and inferior nature.
These rulers were chosen by themselves, but approved by a superior authority.

But moreover the general court appointed and empowered one of the English
magistrates, to join with the chief of their rulers, and keep a higher court
among them; extending the power of this court to the latitude of a county court
among the English; from the jurisdiction whereof nothing for good order and
government, civil or criminal, is expected, Probably the author meant excepted.
but appeals, life, limb, banishment, and cases of divorce. The first English
magistrate, chosen to be ruler over the praying Indians in the colony of
Massachusetts, was first Mr. D. G. the author of these Collections; and this
was in A. D. 1656. But not long after his occasions called him for England for
two or three years; one Major Humphrey Atherton Major General Atherton, of
Dorchester.
was appointed to conduct this affair, which he did about three years. But then
the Lord taking him to himself, by death, and the author being returned back,
in the year 1660, a year or more before Major Atherton's death, was again
called and reinstated in that employ A. D. 1661, and has continued in that
work hitherto.

For the better clearing of things, I shall here insert the orders of the
general court touching this matter. Law Book, page 77.. 8, 9.

Whereas one end in planting these parts was to propagate the true religion
unto the Indians; and that diverse of them are become subject to the English,
and have engaged themselves to be willing and ready to understand the law of
God: It is therefore ordered, that such necessary and wholesome laws, which are
in force, and may be made from time to time, to reduce them to civility of
life, shall be once a year, if the times be safe, made known to them, by such
fit persons as the general court shall appoint. And again,. 9.

For the better ordering and governing the Indians subject to us, especially
those of Natick, Punkapaog, etc. it is ordered, that whosoever the court shall
appoint, do take care that all such Indians, do live according to our laws, as
far as they are capable: and to that end shall be authorized to constitute and
appoint Indian commissioners in their several plantations, to hear and
determine all such matters that do arise among themselves, as one magistrate
may do amongst the English; with officers to execute all commands and warrants,
as marshal and constables. And further they jointly shall have the power of a
county court, to hear and determine all causes arising among them; the English
magistrate appointing time and place of the court, and consenting to the
determination and judgment. And all other matters beyond their cognizance,
shall be issued and determined by the court of assistants. There are diverse
other laws and orders, made by the general court of Massachusetts, relating
unto the Indians, which are printed and published, but are too long here to
recite particularly. The heads of them are 1. Declaring the Indians' title to
lands, from Genesis i. 28. Chap. ix. 1. Ps. cxv. 16. -- 2. The civil Indians to
have lands granted them for towns. -- 3. Indians not to be dispossessed of what
lands they have subdued, or from their fishing places. -- 4. None to buy lands
from the Indians without license of the court. -- 5. All strong liquors
prohibited to be sold or given to the Indians, unless in case of sickness, by
permission. -- 6. Powows, or wizards and witches, prohibited upon penalty. --
7. Orders to restrain and prevent drunkenness; and some others. I have only
transcribed the former, being pertinent to our present subject.

. 2. Besides the work above mentioned, transacted by the English magistrate and
his assistants, there are sundry other things done by him in order to their
good; as the making of orders, and giving instructions and directions, backed
with penalties, for promoting and practicing morality, civility, industry, and
diligence in their particular callings: for idleness and improvidence are the
Indians' great sin, and in a kind of second nature to them, which by good
example and wholesome laws, gradually applied, with God's blessing, may be
rooted out.

Likewise it is the care of this English magistrate, entrusted with this
affair, to make and execute good orders for keeping holy the sabbath day; and
that the people do attend the public worship of God; and that schools for the
education of youth be settled and continued among them; and to provide that the
Indian teachers and rulers have some small encouragement distributed among
them, according to the people's ability, which is done out of the tenths of
their yearly increase of all sorts of grain and pulse. This tithe is set apart
at the ingathering and threshing of their grain, and brought into one place in
each town, as due unto the Lord; and is disposed of by order of the court, for
support of those that attend public service in both orders, in that place
proportionably.

Perhaps this custom introduced among the Indians, will be censured by some, as
favoring too much of judaism and antichristianism. But it is hoped, others
will be candid and charitable, especially toward good Mr. Eliot, who first led
them into this way; and this he did, not without good reason. First, taken from
the moral equity of the duty, for encouragement of such public persons.
Secondly, from the rule and example prescribed in God's word, and the practice
of the people of God. So Melchizedek, being king and priest, received the tenth
of Abraham. Genesis xiv. 20. Heb. vii. 4. Doubtless some part of every man's
estate is due to God, who is the giver of all. If any part, why not a tenth
part, if the people agree to it; seeing there is such ample precedent for it,
both before the ceremonial law, and in the time of it, and since it was
abrogated? But it is not my work here to dispute the point.

Besides the particulars above mentioned, there are sundry other things, that
fall under the consideration of the English magistrate, that have great
influence into their religious concern, and has frequent occasions and
opportunities to press christian exhortations upon them for their soul's good.

. 3. The reason, why the English government is concerned with the Indians'
affairs in point of rule and order, is because all those praying Indians in
Massachusetts colony did long since, before they began to worship God, actually
and solemnly submit themselves unto the jurisdiction and government of the
English in the Massachusetts, as the records do declare.

Besides the care taken, as before, for their government, the general court of
Massachusetts has bounded, stated and settled, several townships and
plantations of lands unto these praying Indians, of which we shall speak
hereafter more particularly. Some of these villages are of a larger; others, of
lesser dimensions, according to their numbers; and as there may be occasion,
the general court will grant more villages to the Indians.

The reasons inducing to this are: First, to prevent differences and contention
among the English and Indians in future times about the propriety of land.
Secondly, to secure unto them and their posterity places of habitation; this
being a provision in all those grants, that they shall not fell or alienate any
part of those lands unto any Englishman, without the general court's consent:
for the Indians being poor, as well as improvident, are very prone to sell
their land to the English, and thereby leave themselves destitute. A third
reason is, that they may cohabit together, without which neither religion or
civility can well prosper.

If any should object, that it is not necessary, that the English should grant
them land, forasmuch as it was all their native country and propriety, before
the English came into America; the answer is ready: First, that the English
claim right to their land, by patent from our king. Secondly, yet the English
had the grant of most of the land within this jurisdiction, either by purchase
or donation from the Indian sachems and sagamores, which were actually in
possession, when the English came first over. Therefore the propriety is in the
English; and it is necessary for the Indians, as the case stands, for their
present and future security and tranquillity, to receive the lands by grant
from the English, who are a growing and potent people, comparatively to the
Indians.

. 4. Before we conclude this chapter, it may not be impertinent, for the better
clearing of things, to remark, that the English magistrate attending this
service among the Indians, never had any compensation for his travail and
expenses in this kind, either from Indians or English in New England; though it
is well known, he has, as well as their teacher, Mr. Eliot, had many weary
journies among them yearly, and under sundry trials, when he is forced to lodge
in their woods and wigwams. But the Honorable Corporation at London, for
propagating the gospel among the Indians in New England, have been pleased of
late years, by the hands of their delegates, the honored Commissioners of the
united colonies in New England, to confer upon him out of the public stock, at
first fifteen pounds, now twenty pounds, New England money, per annum, and as
an honorarium for his service among the praying Indians. This is spoken here to
declare, that those that labor in this harvest, are first to endeavor to
learn perfectly that first lesson in Christ's school, I mean self denial.
Secondly, to keep the eye of faith fixed upon God, whose work it is, who will
never fail to recompense either here or hereafter, all that work in his
harvest. Indeed if he please to employ and accept us in Christ Jesus, it is a
sufficient reward. Lastly, let not any be so uncharitable, as to think that
what is here mentioned, is to reflect upon any, or to repine at God's bounty in
the portion allotted, being it is far more than was expected. When the work was
engaged in and undertaken, the principles and motions thereunto were, through
grace, of higher alloy than gold, yea than fine gold.

CHAP. VII. Of the Number, Names, and Situation of the Indian praying towns,
within the Colony of Massachusetts, with the Churches gathered in some of them,
the Quantities of Land belonging to them, a Conjecture at the Number of
Families and People that inhabit in them, with other matters thereunto
appertaining.
[ A leaf of the M. S. equal to about three fifths of a page of this printed
edition, is here torn out, and we ^ea^, irrecoverably lost. We have filled up
the chasin with some particulars collected from other authors, and from
tradition.
. 1. THE first town of praying Indians in Massachusetts is Natick. The name
signifies a place of hills. Our authority for this was D^acon Ephraim, a
Natick Indian lately deceased: The Indian name for hills, in the Massachusetts
Psalter, is wadch^ash. In Roger Williams's Key into the language of America, we
find the word nittauke, which signifies, my land.
It lies upon Charles river, eighteen miles south west from Boston, and ten
miles north west from Dedham. It has twenty nine families, which, computing
five persons to a family, amount to one hundred and forty five persons. See the
note ** at the end of the 17th ^.
The town contains about six thousand acres. The soil is good and well watered,
and produces plenty of grain and fruit. The land was granted to the Indians,
at the motion of Mr. Eliot, by the general court of Massachusetts; Hubbard's
M.S. His. chap. lviii.
and in the year 1651, a number of them combined together, and formed a town,
which is the place of the greatest name among the Indians, Mather's Magnalia.
Book iii. page 197.
and ^here their principal courts are held. Huth. Hist. vol. I. page 167, note.


As soon as the Indians had fixed their settlement, they applied to Mr. Eliot
for a form of civil government; and he advised them to adopt that which Jethro
proposed to Moses for the Israelites in the wilderness, Exodus xviii. 21.
Accordingly, on the sixth of August, about one hundred of them met together,
and chose one ruler of a hundred, two rulers of fifties, and ten rulers of
tens. After this they entered into the following covenant.

We are the sons of Adam. We and our fathers have a long time been lost in our
sins; but now the mercy of the Lord begins to find us out again. Therefore,
the grace of Christ helping us, we do give ourselves and our children to God,
to be his people. He shall rule us in all our affairs, not only in our religion
and affairs of the church, but also in all our works and affairs in this world.
God shall rule over us. The Lord is our judge; the Lord is our lawgiver; the
Lord is our king: he will save us. The wisdom which God has taught us in his
book, that shall guide us, and direct us in the way. O Jehovah, teach us wisdom
to find out thy wisdom in the scriptures. Let the grace of Christ help us,
because Christ is the wisdom of God. Send thy spirit into our hearts, and let
it teach us. Lord, take us to be thy people, and let us take thee to be our
God. Neal's Hist. of N. Eng. chap. vi. page 235.
. 2. This town consists of three long streets; two on the north side of the
river; and one, on the south; with house lots to every family. There is a
handsome large fort, of a round figure, palisaded with trees; and a foot bridge
over the river, in form of an arch, the foundation of which is secured with
stone. There is also one large house built after the English manner. The lower
room is a large hall, which serves for a meeting house, on the Lord's day, and
a school house, on the week days. The upper room is a kind of wardrobe, where
the Indians hang up their skins, and other things of value. In a corner of this
room Mr. Eliot has an apartment partitioned off, with a bed and bedstead in it.
Ibid. page 23^.
] Their other houses in this town are generally after their old mode before
described; though some they have built in this and other of the praying
villages, after the English form. But these being more chargeable to build and
not so warm, and cannot be removed so easily as their wigwams, wherein there is
not a nail used, to avoid annoyance by fleas, and themselves being generally
artists in building and finishing their own wigwams: for these and like
reasons, they do incline to keep their old fashioned houses.

3. In this town was the first church of Indians imbodied, in the year of our
Lord 1660. Unto this church some pious Indians of other places, both men and
women, are since joined. The number of men and women, that are in full
communion in this church, are about In the year 1670 there were between forty
and fifty communicants belonging to the church of Natick. Hutch. vol. I. page
167.
; and baptized,

Here we are to consider, that all those we call praying Indians are not all
visible church members, or baptized persons: which ordinance of baptism is not
to be administered unto any that are out of the visible church, until they
profess their faith in Christ and obedience to him, but the infants of such as
are members of the visible church are to be baptized: this being sound
doctrine, as we believe, asserted in that excellent lesser catechism of the
assembly of divines, in their answer to the 95th question; and according to
this doctrine it is practiced among the Indians.

Here I shall take the liberty, though it be a digression, to relate a story of
remark concerning a child at Natick, a youth of about eleven years of age, who
was of a sober an^ grave carriage, and an attentive hearer of the word,
considering his age and capacity, but he had a weak body and was consumptive.
This child hearing Mr. Eliot preach upon a time at Natick, when the ordinance
of baptism was to be administered unto some children, whose parents had made
profession of their faith and were joined to the church; upon which occasion
Mr. Eliot said, that baptism was Christ's mark, which he ordered to be set upon
his lambs, and that it was a manifest token of Christ's love to the offspring
of his people to set this mark upon them; this child taking special notice of
this passage, did often solicit his father and mother, that one or both of them
would endeavor to join to the church, that he might be marked for one of
Christ's lambs before he died. The parents who were well inclined, especially
the mother, and being also very affectionate to their child, as the Indians
generally are, did seriously ponder the child's reiterated entreaties; and not
long after, first the mother, and then the father of the child, joined to the
church. Soon after the lad was baptized; in which he did greatly rejoice and
triumph, that now he was marked for one of Christ's lambs; and now said he to
his father and mother, I am willing to die; which shortly after came to pass;
and I doubt not, but as the child had Christ's name set upon him in baptism and
by faith, so his immortal soul is now in glory, rejoicing in communion with
Christ.

This relation, which is a most true and certain thing, should methinks be
argumentative to persuade the Antipaedobaptists of our age to so much affection
and humanity unto their offspring, as the poor Indians had to their child, to
offer them up to God, that his mark and name in baptism might be set upon them.

There are many Indians that live among those that have subjected to the
gospel, that are catechized, do attend public worship, read the scriptures,
pray in their family morning and evening; but being not yet come so far, as to
be able or willing to profess their faith in Christ, and yield obedience and
subjection unto him in his church, are not admitted to partake in the
ordinances of God, proper and peculiar to the church of Christ; which is a
garden enclosed, as the scripture says.

. 4. The manner practiced by these Indians in the worship of God, is thus. Upon
the Lord's days, fast days, and lecture days, the people assemble together at
the sound of a drum, -- for bells they yet have not, -- twice a day, in the
morning and afternoon, on Lord's days, but only once upon lecture days; where
one of their teachers, if they have more than one, begins with solemn and
affectionate prayer. Then, after a short pause, either himself or some other
thereunto appointed, reads a chapter distinctly out of the old or new
testament. At the conclusion thereof a psalm, or part of a psalm, is appointed,
rehearsed, and solemnly sung. Then the minister catechises and prays before his
sermon; and so preaches from some text of scripture. Then concludes with
prayer, and a psalm, and a blessing pronounced. Sometime, instead of reading
the chapter, some persons do answer some part of the catechism.

In all these acts of worship, for I have been often present with them, they
demean themselves visibly with reverence, attention, modesty, and solemn^ty;
the menkind sitting by themselves and the womenkind by themselves, according to
their age, quality, and degree, in a comely manner. And for my own part, I have
no doubt, but am fully satisfied, according to the judgment of charity, that
diverse of them do fear God and ^^e true believers; but yet I will not deny but
that there may be some of them hypocrites, that profess religion, and yet are
not found hearted. But things that are secret belong to God; and things that
are revealed, unto us and our children.

. 5. Their teachers are generally chosen from among themselves, -- except some
few English teachers, -- of the most pious and able men among them. If these
did not supply, they would generally be destitute: for the learned English
young men do not hitherto incline or endeavor to fit themselves for that
service, by learning the Indian language. Possibly the reasons may be: First,
the difficulty to attain that speech. Secondly, little encouragement, while
they prepare for it. Thirdly, the difficulty in the practice of such a calling
among them, by reason of the poverty and barbarity, which cannot be grappled
with, unless the person be very much mortified, self denying, and of a public
spirit, seeking greatly God's glory; and these are rare qualifications in young
men. It is but one of an hundred that is so endowed.

Mr. Eliot has of late years fallen into a practice among the Indians, the
better to prepare and furnish them with abilities to explicate and apply the
scriptures, by setting up a lecture among them in logic and theology, once
every f^^tnight, all the summer, at Natick; whereat he is present and ready,
and reads and explains to them the principles of those arts. And God has been
pleased graciously so to bless these means, that several of them, especially
young men of acute parts, have gained much knowledge, and a^e able to speak
methodically and profitably unto any plain text of scripture, yea as well as
you can imagine such little means of learning can advantage them unto. From
this church and town of Natick has issued forth, as from a seminary of virtue
and piety, diverse teachers that are employed in several new praying towns; of
which we shall hear more. God willing, hereafter,

In the town they have residing some of their principal rulers, the chief
whereof is named Waban, who is now above seventy years of age. He is a person
of great prudence and piety. I do not know any Indian that excels him. Other
rulers there are living there, as Nattous and Piam Boohan, and others. These
are good men and prudent, but inferior to the first. The teachers of this town
are Anthony and John Speen, which are grave and pious men. They have two
constables belonging to this place, chosen yearly; and there is a marshal
general belonging to all the praying Indian towns, called Captain Josiah, or
Pennahannit. He does attend the chief courts kept here, but he dwells at
another place, called Nashobah.

I have been the larger in speaking of this place, because it is the chiefest
town and eldest church; and what is said of this does agree to all the rest in
diverse things. Natick was incorporated into an English district in the year
1761; and into a town, in the year 1781. It still retains its Indian name.


. 6. The next town is Pakemitt, or Punkapaog. Within the limits of Stoughton.
The signification of the name is taken from a spring, that arises out of red
earth. This town is situated south from Boston, about fourteen miles. There is
a great mountain, called the Blue Hill, lies north east from it about two
miles: and the town of Dedham, about three miles north west from it. This is a
small town, and has not above twelve families in it; and so about sixty souls.
This is the second praying town. The Indians that settled here, removed from
Neponsitt mill. The quantity of land belonging to this village, is about six
thousand acres; and some of it is fertile, but not generally so good as in
other towns. Here they worship God, and keep the sabbath, in the same manner as
is done at Natick, before declared. They have a ruler, a constable, and a
schoolmaster. Their ruler's name is Ahawton; an old and faithful friend to the
English. Their teacher is William Ahawton, his son; an ingenious person and
pious man, and of good parts. Here was a very able teacher, who died about
three ye^^s since. His name was William Awinian. He was a very knowing person,
and of great ability, and of genteel deportment, and spoke very good English.
His death was a very great rebuke to this place. This town has within this ten
years, lost by death several honest and able men; and some have turned
apostates, and removed from them: which dispensations of God have greatly
damped the flourishing condition of this place. Here it was that Mr. John
Eliot, junior, before mentioned, preached a lecture once a fortnight, for
sundry years, until his decease. In this village, besides their planting and
keeping cattle and swine, and fishing in good ponds, and upon Neponsitt river
which lies near them; they are also advantaged by a large cedar swamp; wherein
such as are laborious and diligent, do get many a pound, by cutting and
preparing cedar shingles and clapboards, which fell well at Boston and other
English towns adjacent.

. 7. Hassanamesitt Now generally pronounced Hassanamis^^. Grasi^n.
is the third town of praying Indians. The name signifies a place of small
stones. This place lies about thirty-eight miles from Boston, west fourtherly;
and is about two miles to the eastward of Nipmuck river; Blackstone river.
and near unto the old road way to Connecticut. It has not above twelve
families; and so, according to our computation, about sixty souls; but is
capable to receive some hundreds, as generally the other villages are, if it
shall please God to multiply them. The dimensions of this town is four miles
square; and so about eight thousand acres of land. This village is not
inferior unto any of the Indian plantations for rich land and plenty of
meadow, being well tempered and watered. It produces plenty of corn, grain,
and fruit; for there are several good orchards in this place. It is an apt
place for keeping of cattle and swine; in which respect this people are the
best stored of any Indian town of their size. Their ruler is named Anaweakin; a
sober and discreet man. Their teacher's name is Tackuppa-willin, his brother; a
pious and able man, and apt to teach. Their aged father, whose name I remember
not, is a grave and sober christian, and deacon of the church. They have a
brother that lives in the town, called James, that was bred among the English,
and employed as a press man in printing the Indian bible; who can read well,
and, as I take it, write also. The father, mother, brothers, and their wives,
are all reputed pious persons, and the principal studs of the town. Here they
have a meeting house for the worship of God after the English fashion of
building, and two or three other houses after the same mode; but they fancy not
greatly to live in them. Their way of living is by husbandry, and keeping
cattle and swine; wherein they do as well, or rather better, than any other
Indians, but yet are very far short of the English both in diligence and
providence. In this town was the second Indian church gathered, about three
years since, in summer, 1671. The pastor of this church is Tackuppawissin; the
ruling elder, Piambow; the deacon, father to the pastor. There are in full
communion in this church, and living in the town, about sixteen men and women;
and about thirty baptized persons; but there are several others, members of
this church, that live in other places. This is a hopeful plantation. The Lord
give his blessing to it. The way of their worship and civil order, is here as
in other Indian towns before mentioned.

. 8. Okommakamesit, alias Marlborough, is situated about twelve miles north
north east from Hassanamesitt, about thirty miles from Boston wetterly. This
village contains about ten families, and consequently about fifty souls. The
quantity of land appertaining to it is six thousand acres. It is much of it
good land, and yields plenty of corn, being well husbanded. It is
sufficiently stored with meadow, and is well wooded and watered. It has
several good orchards upon it, planted by the Indians; and is in itself a very
good plantation. This town does join so near to the English of Marlborough,
that it was spoken of David in type, and our Lord Jesus Christ, the antitype,
Under his shadow ye shall rejoice: but the Indians here do not much rejoice
under the English men's shadow; who do so overtop them in their number of
people, stocks of cattle, etc. that the Indians do not greatly flourish, or
delight in their station at present. Their ruler here was Onomog, who is lately
deceased, about two months since; which is a great blow to that place. He was a
pious and discreet man, and the very soul, as it were, of that place. Their
teacher name is Hutchinson says his name was Solomon. Vol. 1. page 167.
. Here they observe the same decorum for religion and civil order, as is done
in other towns. They have a constable and other officers, as the rest have. The
Lord sanctify the present affliction they are under by reason of their
bereavements; and raise up others, and give them grace to promote religion and
good order among them.

. 9. Wamesit (...)
is the fifth praying town; and this place is situate upon Merrimak river,
being a neck of land, where Concord river falls into Merrimak river. It is
about twenty miles from Boston, north north west, and within five miles of
Billerica, and as much from Chelmsford: so that it has Concord river upon the
west north west; and Merrimak river, upon the north north east. It has about
fifteen families; and consequently, as we compute, about seventy-five souls.
The quantity of land belonging to it is about twenty five hundred acres. The
land is fertile, and yields plenty of corn. It is excellently accommodated
with a fishing place; and there is taken variety of fish in their seasons, as
salmon, shads, lamprey eels, sturgeon, bass, and diverse others. There is a
great confluence of Indians, that usually resort to this place in the fishing
seasons. Of these strange Indians diverse are vicious and wicked men and women;
which Satan makes use of to obstruct the prosperity of religion here. The ruler
of this people is called Numphow. He is one of the blood of their chief
sachems. Their teacher is called Samuel; son to the ruler, a young man of good
parts, and can speak, read, and write, English and Indian competently. He is
one of those that was bred up at school, at the charge of the Corporation for
the Indians. These Indians, if they were diligent and industrious, -- to which
they have been frequently excited, -- might get much by their fish, especially
fresh salmon, which are of esteem and good price at Boston in the season; and
the Indians being stored with horses of a low price, might furnish the market
fully, being at so small a distance. And diverse other sort of fish they might
salt or pickle, as sturgeon and bass; which would be much to their profit. But
notwithstanding diverse arguments used to persuade them, and some orders made to
encourage them; yet their idleness and improvidence does hitherto prevail.

At this place, once a year, at the beginning of May, the English magistrate
keeps his court, accompanied with Mr. Eliot, the minister; who at this time
takes his opportunity to preach, not only to the inhabitants, but to as many of
the strange Indians, that can be persuaded to hear him; of which sort, usually
in times of peace, there are considerable numbers at that season. And this
place being an ancient and capital feat of Indians, they come to fish; and this
good man takes this opportunity to spread the net of the gospel, to fish for
their souls. Here it may not be impertinent to give you the relation following.

May 5th, 1674, according to our usual custom, Mr. Eliot and myself took our
journey to Wamesit, or Pawtuckett; and arriving there that evening, Mr. Eliot
preached to as many of them as could be got together, out of Mat. xxii. 1-14.
the parable of the marriage of the king's son. We met at the wigwam of one
called Wannalancet, about two miles from the town, near Pawtuckett falls, and
bordering upon Merrimak river. This person, Wannalancet, is the eldest son of
old Pasaconaway, the chiefest sachem of Pawtuckett. He is a sober and grave
person, and of years, between fifty and sixty. He has been always loving and
friendly to the English. Many endeavors have been used several years to gain
this sachem to embrace the christian religion: but he has stood off from time
to time, and not yielded up himself personally, though for four years past he
has been willing to hear the word of God preached, and to keep the sabbath. --
A great reason that has kept him off, I conceive, has been the indisposition
and averseness of sundry of his chief men and relations to pray to God; which
he foresaw would desert him, in case he turned christian. -- But at this time,
May 6th, 1674, it pleased God so to influence and overcome his heart, that it
being proposed to him to give his answer concerning praying to God, after some
deliberation and serious pause, he stood up, and made a speech to this effect:

Sirs, you have been pleased for four years last past, in your abundant love,
to apply yourselves particularly unto me and my people, to exhort, press, and
persuade us to pray to God. I am very thankful to you for your pains. I must
acknowledge, said he, I have, all my days, used to pass in an old canoe
(alluding to his frequent custom to pass in a canoe upon the river) and now you
exhort me to change and leave my old canoe, and embark in a new canoe, to which
I have hitherto been unwilling: but now I yield up myself to your advice, and
enter into a new canoe, and do engage to pray to God hereafter.

This his professed subjection was well pleasing to all that were present, of
which there were some English persons of quality; as Mr. Richard Daniel, a
gentleman that lived in Billerica, about six miles off; and Lieutenant
Henchman, a neighbor at Chelmsford; besides brother Eliot and myself, with
sundry others, English and Indians. Mr. Daniel before named desired brother
Eliot to tell this sachem from him, that it may be, while he went in his old
canoe, he passed in a quiet stream; but the end thereof was death and
destruction to soul and body: But now he went into a new canoe, perhaps he
would meet with storms and trials; but yet he should be encouraged to
persevere, for the end of his voyage would be everlasting rest. Moreover he and
his people were exhorted by brother Eliot and myself, to go on and sanctify the
sabbath, to hear the word, and use the means that God has appointed, and
encourage their hearts in the Lord their God. Since that time, I hear this
sachem does persevere, and is a constant and diligent hearer of God's word, and
sanctifies the sabbath, though he does travel to Wamesit meeting every
sabbath, which is above two miles; and though sundry of his people have
deserted him, since he subjected, to the gospel, yet he continues and persiils.

In this town they observe the same civil and religious orders, as in other
towns, and have a constable and other officers.

This people of Wamesit suffered more in the late war with the Mawhawks, than
any other praying town of Indians: for diverse of their people were slain;
others, wounded; and some, carried into captivity: which providence has much
hindered the prosperous estate of this place.

. 10. Nashobah Littleton.
is the sixth praying Indian town. This village is situated in a manner in the
center between Chelmsford, Lancaster, Groton, and Concord. It lies from Boston
about twenty five miles, west north west. The inhabitants are about ten
families, and consequently about fifty souls. The dimensions of this village is
four miles square. The land is fertile, and well stored with meadows and woods.
It has good ponds for fish adjoining to it. The people live here, as in other
Indian villages, upon planting corn, fishing, hunting, and sometimes laboring
with the English. Their ruler of late years was John Ahatawance, a pious man.
Since his decease, Pennakennit Or Pennahannit. See. 5.
is the chief. Their teacher is named John Thomas, a sober and pious man. His
father was murdered by the Maquas in a secret manner, as he was fishing for
eels at his wear, some years since, during the war. He was a pious and useful
person; and that place sustained a great loss in him. In this village, as well
in other old Indian plantations, they have orchards of apples, whereof they
make cider; which some of them have not the wisdom and grace to use for their
comfort, but are prone to abuse unto drunkenness. And although the laws be
strict to suppress this sin, and some of their own rulers are very careful and
zealous in the execution of them; yet such is the madness and folly of man
naturally, that he does eagerly pursue after that which tends to his own
destruction. I have often seriously considered what course to take, to restrain
this beastly sin of drunkenness among them; but hitherto cannot reach it. For
if it were possible, as it is not, to prevent the English selling them strong
drink; yet they having a native liberty to plant orchards and sow grain, as
barley and the like, of which they may and do make strong drink that does
inebriate them: so that nothing can overcome and conquer this exorbitancy, but
the sovereign grace of God in Christ; which is the only antidote to prevent and
mortify the poison of sin.

Near unto this town is a pond, wherein at some seasons there is a strange
rumbling noise, as the Indians affirm; the reason whereof is not yet known.
Some have conceived the hills adjacent are hollow, wherein the wind being pent,
is the cause of this rumbling, as in earthquakes.

At this place they attend civil and religious order, as in the other praying
towns: and they have a constable and other officers.

This town was deserted during the Maquas' war, but is now again repeopled, and
in a hopeful way to prosper.

. 11. Magunkaquog Pronounced at present Magunkook. -- Hopkinton.
is the seventh town where praying Indians inhabit. The signification of the
place's name is a place of great trees. It is situated partly within the bounds
of Natick, and partly upon land granted by the country. It lies west southerly
from Boston, about twenty four miles, near the midway between Natick and
Hassanamesitt. The number of its inhabitants are about eleven families, and
about fifty five souls. There are, men and women, eight members of the church
at Natick, and about fifteen baptized persons. The quantity of land belonging
to it is about three thousand acres. The Indians plant upon a great hill, which
is very fertile. These people worship God, and keep the sabbath, and observe
civil order, as do the other towns. They have a constable and other officers.
Their ruler's name is Pomhaman; a sober and active man, and pious. Their
teacher is named Job; a person well accepted for piety and ability among them.
This town was the last setting of the old towns. They have plenty of corn, and
keep some cattle, horses, and swine, for which the place is well accommodated.

. 12. Having now spoken briefly of the seven old towns of praying Indians, I
shall endeavor more briefly to give an account of seven towns more of praying
Indians, within the jurisdiction of Massachusetts; which for distinction sake
we call, the new praying towns in the Nipmuck country. The Indians of some of
these towns began to hearken unto the gospel about three years since, or
thereabouts. In July, 1673, Mr. Eliot and myself made a journey to visit some
of them, and to encourage and exhort them to proceed in the ways of God.

This year again, on the 14th of September last, 1674, we both took another
journey. Our design was to travel further among them, and to confirm their
souls in the christian religion, and to settle teachers in every town, and to
establish civil government among them, as in other praying towns. We took with
us five or six godly persons, who we intended to present unto them for
ministers.

The first of these new praying towns is Manchage, Oxford.
which lies to the westward of Nipmuck river, about eight miles; and is from
Hassanamesitt, west and by south, about ten miles; and it is from Boston about
fifty miles, on the same rhumb. It is seated in a fertile country for good
land. To it belongs about twelve families, and about sixty souls: but the
people were generally from home, though we spoke with some of them afterward.
For this place we appointed Waabesktamin, a hopeful young man, for their
minister, whom the people, with whom we spoke afterward, accepted. There is no
land yet granted by the general court to this place, nor to any other of the
new praying towns. But the court intends shortly, upon the application and
professed subjection of these Indians unto the yoke of Christ, to do for them
as they have done for other praying Indians.

. 13. About five miles distant from hence is a second town called
Chabanakongkomun. Dudley.
It has its denomination from a very great pond, about five or six miles long,
that borders upon the south end of it. This village is fifty five miles, west
and by south, from Boston. There are in it about nine families, and about forty
five souls. The people are of a sober deportment, and better instructed in the
worship of God, than any of the new praying towns. Their teacher's name is
Joseph, who is one of the church of Hassanamesitt; a sober, pious, and
ingenious person, and speaks English well, and is well read in the scriptures.
He was the first that settled this town, and got the people to him about two
years since. It is a new plantation, and is well accommodated with upland and
meadows. At this place dwells an Indian called Black James, who about a year
since was constituted constable of all these new praying towns. He is a person
that has approved himself diligent and courageous, faithful and zealous to
suppress sin; and so he was confirmed in his office another year." Mr. Eliot
preached unto this people, and we prayed and sung psalms with them, and they
were exhorted by us to stand steadfast in the faith. A part of one night we
spent in discoursing with them, and resolving variety of questions propounded
by them, touching matters of religion and civil order. The teacher Joseph and
the constable James went with us unto the next town, which is called

. 14. Maanexit, The north-east part of Woodstock.
which is a third village, and lies about seven miles westerly from
Chabanakongkomun. It is situated in a fertile country, and near unto a fresh
river, upon the west of it, called Mohegan river. Now called Quinabaug river,
which falls into Shetucket river, two miles above Norwich Landing.
It is distant from Boston about sixty miles, west and by south. The
inhabitants are about twenty families, and, as we compute, one hundred souls.
Mr. Eliot preached unto this people out of the xxivth Ps. 7. to the end: Lift
up your heads, O ye gates, and be ye lift up, ye everlasting doors, and the
king of glory shall come in, etc. After sermon was ended, we presented unto
them John Moqua, a pious and sober person there present, for their present
minister, which they thankfully accepted. Then their teacher named, and set,
and rehearsed, a suitable psalm, which being sung, and a conclusion with
prayer, they were exhorted, both the teacher to be diligent and faithful, and
to take care of the flock, whereof the holy Ghost had made him overseer, and
the people also to give obedience and subjection to him in the Lord.

. 15. Quantisset The south-east part of Woodstock.
is a fourth village, which lies about six miles to the south of Maanexit, and
within four miles of the south line of Massachusetts colony. This place has
about twenty families, and one hundred souls. We went not to it, being
straitened for time; but we spoke with some of the principal people at
Wabquissit. For them we appointed a sober and pious young man of Natick, called
Daniel, to be minister, whom they accepted in the Lord.

. 16. Wabquissit The south-west corner of Woodstock. Woodstock is in
Connecticut; but it was formerly considered as within the limits of
Massachusetts. See Huth. Hist. vol, II. page 202-206.
is a fifth town, which lies about nine or ten miles from Maanexit, upon the
west side, six miles, of Mohegan river; and is distant from Boston west and by
south, about seventy two miles. It lies about four miles within the
Massachusetts south line. It has about thirty families, and one hundred and
fifty souls. It is situated in a very rich soil, manifested by the goodly crop
of Indian corn then newly ingathered, not less than forty bushels upon an acre.
We came thither late in the evening, upon the 15th of September, and took up
our quarters at the sagamore's wigwam, who was not at home: but his squaw
courteously admitted us, and provided liberally, in their way, for the Indians
that accompanied us. This sagamore inclines to religion, and keeps the meeting
on sabbath days at his house, which is spacious, about sixty feet in length,
and twenty feet in width.

The teacher of this place is named Sampson; an active and ingenious person. He
speaks good English, and reads well. He is brother unto Joseph, before named,
teacher at Chabanakongkomun; being both the only sons of one Petavit, alias
Robin, one of the late rulers of Hassanamesitt, who died not above three days
before our coming thither, after about a year's sickness of the stone. He was
in his time a courageous and stout man for God and religion; and was one that
stood in the gap against the pride and insolency of wicked Indians, although
sagamores, who sometimes would ruffle against religion and good order in his
presence. He would venture him to oppose them, to good success. I remember
sundry years since, a sagamore that lived up in the inland country, came to
Hassanamesitt, and brought with him a rundlet of strong liquors; and lodging in
his house, Petavit in the morn sent for the constable, and ordered him, and
according to law, seized the rundlet of liquors. At which act the sagamore drew
a long knife, and stood with his foot at the rundlet, daring any to seize it.
But Petavit thereupon rose up and drew his knife, and set his foot also to the
rundlet, and commanded the constable to do his office. And the sagamore (...).
Some other actions of the like kind he did. In truth God has magnified his
grace to his two sons; being both hopeful, pious, and active men; especially
the younger before named Sampson, teacher at Wabquissit, who was, a few years
since, a dissolute person, and I have been forced to be severe in punishing him
for his misdemeanors formerly. But now he is, through grace, changed and become
sober and pious; and he is now very thankful to me for the discipline formerly
excercised toward him. And besides his flagitious life heretofore, he lived
very uncomfortably with his wife; but now they live very well together. I
confess this story is a digression. But because it tends to magnify grace,
and that to a prodigal, and to declare how God remembers his covenant unto the
children of such, as are faithful and zealous for him in their time and
generation, I have mentioned it.

We being at Wabquissit, at the sagamore's wigwam, diverse of the principal
people that were at home came to us, with whom we spent a good part of the
night in prayer, singing psalms, and exhortations. There was a person among
them, who sitting mute a great space, at last spoke to this effect: That he was
agent for Unkas, sachem of Mohegan, who challenged right to, and dominion over,
this people of Wabquissit. And said he, Unkas is not well pleased, that the
English should pass over Mohegan river, to call his Indians to pray to God.

Unto which speech Mr. Eliot first answered, that it was his work to call upon
all men every where, as he had opportunity, especially the Indians, to repent
and embrace the gospel; but he did not meddle with civil right or jurisdiction.

When he had done speaking, then I declared to him, and desired him to inform
Unkas what I said, that Wabquissit was within the jurisdiction of
Massachusetts, and that the government of that people did belong to them; and
that they do look upon themselves concerned to promote the good of all people
within their limits, especially if they embraced christianity. Yet it was not
hereby intended to abridge the Indian sachems of their just and ancient right
over the Indians, in respect of paying tribute or any other dues. But the main
design of the English was to bring them to the good knowledge of God in Christ
Jesus; and to suppress among them those sins of drunkenness, idolatry, powowing
or witchcraft, whoredom, murder, and like sins. As for the English, they had
taken no tribute from them, nor taxed them with any thing of that kind.

Upon the 16th day of September, being at Wabquissit, as soon as the people
were come together, Mr. Eliot first prayed, and then preached to them in their
own language, out of Mat. vi. 33. First seek the kingdom of heaven, and the
righteousness thereof, and all other things shall be added unto you. Their
teacher Sampson first reading and setting the cxix. Ps. 1st part, which was
sung. The exercise was concluded with prayer.

Then I began a court among the Indians. And first I approved their teacher
Sampson, and their constable Black James; giving each of them a charge to be
diligent and faithful in their places. Also I exhorted the people to yield
obedience to the gospel of Christ and to those set in order there. Then
published a warrant or order, that I had prepared, empowering the constable to
suppress drunkenness, sabbath breaking, especially powowing and idolatry. And
after warning given, to apprehend all delinquents, and bring them before
authority, to answer for their misdoings; the smaller faults to bring before
Wattasacompanum, ruler of the Nipmuck country; for idolatry and powowing to
bring them before me: So we took leave of this people of Wabquissit, and about
eleven o'clock, returned back to Maanexit and Chabanakongkomun, where we lodged
this night.

. 17. We took leave of the christian Indians at Chabanakongkomun, and took our
journey, 17th of the seventh month, by Manchage, to P^kachoog; which lies from
Manchage, north west, about twelve miles. We arrived there about noon. This
village lies about three miles south from the new road way that leads from
Boston to Connecticut; about eighteen miles, west southerly, from Marlborough;
and from Boston about forty four miles. It consists of about twenty families,
and has about one hundred souls therein. This town is seated upon a fertile
hill; This seems to be the same hill, which in the description of Worcester,
page 11^, is called Boggachoag. It is situated partly in Worcester, and partly
in Ward. Boggachoag brook runs on the west side of it.
and is denominated from a delicate spring of water that is there.

We repaired to the sagamore's house, called John, alias Horowanninit, who
kindly entertained us. There is another sagamore belonging to this place, of
kindred to the former, whose name is Solomon, alias Wooanaskochu. This man was
also present, who courteously welcomed us. As soon as the people could be got
together, Mr. Eliot preached unto them; and they attended reverently. Their
teacher, named James Speen, being present, read and set the tune of a psalm,
that was sung affectionately. Then was the whole duty concluded with prayer.

After some short respite, a court was kept among them. My chief assistant was
Wattasacompanum, ruler of the Nipmuck Indians, a grave and pious man, of the
chief sachem's blood of the Nipmuck country. He resides at Haffanamesitt; but
by former appointment, calls here, together with some others. The principal
matter done at this court, was, first to constitute John and Solomon to be
rulers of this people and coordinate in power, clothed with the authority of
the English government, which they accepted: also to allow and approve James
Speen for their minister. This man is of good parts, and pious. He has
preached to this people almost two years; but he yet resides at Hassanamesitt,
about seven miles distant. Also they chose, and the court confirmed, a new
constable, a grave and sober Indian, called Mattoonus. Then I gave both the
rulers, teacher, constable, and people, their respective charges; to be
diligent and faithful for God, zealous against sin, and careful in sanctifying
the sabbath.

Moreover at this court it was agreed to send a grave and pious Indian there
present, called Jethro, belonging to Natick, to be a teacher unto a people
living about ten miles more to the northward, at a place called Weshakim, alias
Nashaway, near unto an English town called Laneaster. These have been a great
people in former times; but of late years, have been consumed by the Maquas'
wars and other ways; and are not above fifteen or sixteen families. I gave this
Jethro a letter or order of the purport following.

For the sagamore Shoshanim and the Indian people that live with him at
Weshakim, Grace, mercy, and peace be multiplied.
Whereas the Honorable General Court of the Massachusetts, has appointed and
authorized me to rule and govern the Indians within this jurisdiction; and in a
special manner to endeavor the promoting of religion and civility among them;
I have thought it expedient, with the concurrence of Mr. John Eliot, principal
teacher unto the Indians, and approbation of several of the rulers and teachers
belonging to the churches of Natick and Hassanamesitt, to send unto you Jethro,
a man approved in the church of Natick, to be a minister and teacher among you,
and to instruct you in the good knowledge of the Lord God, and in the gospel of
his son, our Lord Jesus Christ. We pray you therefore to receive him in the
Lord, and yield ready obedience to the word of the Lord dispensed by him. And
in a special manner, we exhort you, to keep the sabbath carefully, and abstain
from drunkenness, whoredom, and powowing, and all other evils. In ready
compliance herewith you will promote your own temporal and eternal happiness.
So committing you to the Lord, and the word of his grace; praying for blessing
upon the means, for God's glory and your good; I remain your loving and
affectionate friend, for promoting your everlasting welfare,

DANIEL GOOKIN.
Dated at Pakachoog, the 17th September, 1674.

Letters of the same import are intended to be given to the teachers of the
other new praying Indian towns.

After this business was over, it being night before we had finished the court,
there was an Indian present, which came into the wigwam about an hour before.
He was belonging to Weshakim, or Nashaway. This Indian desired liberty to
speak; which being admitted, he made a speech with much affection and gravity
to this effect: To declare that he belonged to Weshakim near Nashaway; and that
he was desirously willing, as well as some others of his people, to pray to
God; but that there were sundry of that people very wicked and much addicted to
drunkenness, and thereby many disorders were committed among them: and
therefore he earnestly importuned me, that I would put forth power to help in
that case, to suppress the sin of drunkenness. Then I asked him, whether he
would take upon him the office of a constable, and I would give him power to
apprehend drunkards, and take away their strong drink from them, and bring the
delinquents before me to receive punishment. His answer was, that he would
first speak with his friends, and if they chose him, and strengthened his hand
in the work, then he would come to me for a black staff and power. I asked him,
whether he were willing to have Jethro to go and preach to them; to which he
readily complied, and seemed joyful thereat. After this discourse, we concluded
with singing a psalm and prayer; and so retired to rest. And the next morning
early, being September the 18th, we took our leave of these Indians, and passed
to Marlborough; and from thence returned to our own habitations.

There is yet another praying town in the Nipmuck country called Waeuntug.
Uxbridge.
This place lies to the westward of Nipmuck river, against an English town
called Mendon, which is on the east side of the river. It lies about ten miles
from Hassanamesitt, to the south of this place. There are two teachers; the one
named James, brother to the pastor of Hassanamesitt; the other, called Sasomet.
They both live at Hassanamesitt, and are of the church there, and both preach
to that people. I never was at the place; and therefore cannot give a
particular account thereof at present.

There are two other Indian towns, viz. Weshakim and Quabaug, The south-east
part of Brookfield.
which are coming on to receive the gospel: and reckoning these, there are nine
in the Nipmuck country. But they being not fully settled, I omit them.

Thus I have endeavored particularly to describe these Indian praying villages
within the jurisdiction of Massachusetts; which are Towns 14 Souls yielding
obedience to the gospel about 1100 That is, in Natick [supposed 145 Punkapaog
60 Hassanamesitt 60 Okommakamesit 50 Wamesit 75 Nashobah 50 Magunkaquog 55
Manchage 60 Chabanakongkomun 45 Maanexit 100 Quantisset 100 Wabquissit 150
Packachoog 100 Wacuntug [supposed 50 -- -- Total 1100 Tradition says, that a
hundred and twenty years ago the Indians in Natick were comparatively numerous.
See note* to. 3. A large proportion of the communicants were probably
inhabitants of Natick.

It may perhaps afford satisfaction to some persons to know the number of
Indians in Massachusetts, at different periods since the year 1674. The
following is the only account which we have had time and opportunity to
collect. We regret that it is not in our power to make it more complete; but we
hope that some of our readers, who possess better information, will supply our
deficiencies. -- The war with Philip greatly interrupted the progress of
christianity among the Indians. [Hubbard's M. S. Hist. chap. lxxiv.] Many
praying towns in Massachusetts were broken up. Mr. Eliot says, that in the year
1684, they were reduced to four. [Appendix to the Life of Boil, page 445.]
They seem however to have increased soon after; for in the year 1687, Dr.
Increase Mather mentions five churches. [Lett. to Leusden.] They have gradually
diminished since that period. In the year 1753, there were in Natick, the
principal town of Indians in the colony, twenty five families, beside several
individuals. Some of the males were soldiers in the war against the French,
which took place soon after. Returning from the lakes, they brought home a
mortal disease, of which twenty three died in the year 1759. In the year 1763,
according to a census then taken, there were thirty seven Indians only in
Natick; but in this return, probably the wandering Indians were not included.
The Indians in Natick are now reduced to one family of five persons, and two
single women. There are besides, belonging to this place, ten adults, some of
whom have children. They lead a wandering life, seldom residing long in one
place. -- The Indians of Grafton have not wasted so fast. In 1764 there were
eight or ten families. [Hutch. vol. 1. page 167.] And there are still about
thirty persons, who retain a portion of their lands, and receive their annual
quit rent from the white inhabitants. -- These Indians, with a few in
Stoughton, are, we believe, all the remains of the numerous tribes who formerly
inhabited the old colony of Massachusetts. -- The Muhhekaneew, or Stockbridge
Indians, who migrated from Hudson's river, about the year 1734, no longer
reside in the state, having, between the years 1785 and 1787, removed to
Oneida. Whilst they remained, they wasted away, like all other Indians. Forty
years ago, there were about a hundred and fifty families; but in the year 1763,
they were reduced to two hundred and twenty one persons, and in 1786. (...)
about one third of that number.


Churches 2 The harvest is ripe for many more, if God please to thrust forth
laborers. The pious reader, whose heart desires the honor of God, and the
salvation of these poor heathen, may here see some small beginnings that God
has wrought, and what foundations, through grace, are laid for the future
good, and increasing their numbers: for every one of these towns are able to
entertain considerable number of Indians, and it pleases God now and then to
call in some wild Indians to settle among them.

Now we shall proceed to inform you, according to the best intelligence I can
obtain, of the progress of the gospel among the Indians, in or near the other
English colonies and plantations of New England.

CHAP. VIII. Of the Progress of the Gospel among the Indians in the Colony of
New-Plymouth, and the Instruments God has raised up to promote the same.
. 1. THE example and exhortations of Reverend Mr. Eliot, and his traveling
into Plymouth jurisdiction at sometimes, and writing letters to stir up others,
and preaching among some of them, and others coming sometimes to him, has had
an influence, through the grace of God cooperating, to win sundry of them to
yield obedience and subjection unto the gospel. For the encouragement and
furtherance of that work, it pleased God to raise up one Mr. Richard Bourne,
living in that colony, about Sandwich; who being a pious, sober, and active
person, endowed with good understanding in the scriptures, having gained by his
industry and diligence a competent knowledge and ability to teach them in the
Indian language; he applied himself to preach the gospel to some Indians that
dwelt not far from his habitation: and afterward finding good success, went
further among them, preaching the glad tidings of salvation to sundry others:
that a good and plentiful harvest is gathered in that colony. Of which take the
following account from his own hands.

. 2. "To his much esteemed friend, Captain Gookin, in Cambridge. dddd.

"Worthy Sir,

"All due respects presented; according to your desire, signified in your
letter unto myself, I have endeavored to return you a particular answer,
according to the short time I had to accomplish it in. Alt^ough I have not been
willing to appear formerly in so particular account as this is, but rather did
desire, that the effect o^ the work might speak for me, the which would speak
more fully than I could: But being it must be so now, I hope it will occasion
many to render thanks to God with myself, in respect of the grace in the gospel
manifested among these poor, lost people. And for those that I have been
conversant with, and employed amongst, these many years, you may please to see
as follows.

"First there is at Meeshawn, or near the head of the Cape, Cape Cod. Part of
these Indians probably lived in Province town; but the greatest number, in
Truro.
and at Punonakanit, or Billinsgate, Now Welfleet.
that are praying Indians, that do frequently meet together upon the Lord's day
to worship God; and likewise the rest as follows; viz. Men and women 51 72
Young men and maids 21 Of these seventy two there is that can read Indian 25
And that can write there is 16

"Potanumaquut, The south east part of Eastham.
or Nawsett, The north part of Eastham.
or Eastham, there are praying Indians, Men and women 24 44 Young men and maids
20 Of these forty four there is that can read 7 That can write there is but 2

"Manamoyik, Chatham.
there are praying Indians, Men and women 42 71 Young men and maids 29 Of these
seventy one there is that can read 20 That can write 15 That can read English 1

"Sawkattuket, The west part of Harwich.
Nobsquassit, The north east part of Yarmouth.
Matakees, The land between Barnstable and Yarmouth harbors, lying principally
in the north west part of Yarmouth.
and Weequakut, Pronounced at present Cheehwacket. The south west part of the
east precinct in Barnstable.
praying Indians, Men and women 55 122 Young men and maids 67 Of these one
hundred and twenty two there is that can read 33 That can write there is 15
That can read English 4

"Saruit, Pawpoesit, Coatuit, Coatuit is in the south west part of Barnstable.
Mashpee, Wakoquet, Satuit, or Sanctuit, Pawpoesit, and Wakoquet, or Waquoit,
are all within, or near the limits of Mashpee.
there is praying Indians, Men and women 70 95 Young men and maids 25 Of these
ninety five there is that can read 24 That can write 10 That can read English 2

"Codtanmut,
Ashimuit, Or Shumuit. On the west line of Mashpee.
Weesquobs,
there is praying Indians, Men and women 12 22 Young men and maids 10 Of these
twenty two there is that can read 13 That can write 7 That can read English 2

"Pispogutt,* Wawayontat, Waywayantik, or Wewewantett. Warehan.
Sokones, Commonly pronounced Succonusset. Part of Falmouth.
there is praying Indians, Men and women 20 36 Young men and maids 16 Of these
thirty six that can read 20 That can write 7

"Cotuhtikut Or Titicut. Part of Middleborough.
, Assoowamsoo, Or Assoowamset. Part of Middleborough.
there are praying Indians, one with another, - - - - - 35

Mr. Bourne's account -- Souls, 497 -- That read Indian, 14^ -- that write, 72
-- That read English, 9.
"Concerning these last mentioned, I cannot give such a particular account, as
I did in the former; forasmuch as that when I returned from Cotuktikut to
Plymouth, then I was informed of your desires respecting this account; the
places being near forty miles distant from my habitation.

"As respecting gathered churches, there is but one; and ninety persons,
baptized; beside, yet in full communion, twenty seven. For Englishmen that are
employed in the work, that respects this account, there is only myself. Mr.
John Cotton is employed in another part of the colony; the which, I conclude,
he will give a particular account of.

"The church of Indians in this colony, whereof I am pastor, was gathered near
four years since.

"There is four Indians employed in this work, viz. Wuttananmattuk, Meeshawin,
Peter, alias Sakantuket, and Charles of Mannamit In Sandwich, near the bottom
of Buzzard's bay.
and places adjacent. Other Indians, viz. four I have employed; but as yet have
not received any wages as from the honored Commissioners, by reason of the
miscarrying of my letters.

"As for lands set out to the Indians, distinct from the English lands, there
are diverse places already bounded; viz. Where I am most conversant, there is a
tract of land preserved for them and theirs forever, under hand and seal; the
which is near ten miles in length, and five in breadth. There is the like done
at Comassakumknat,
near Sandwich, and at Cotuhtikut: Our honored governor and magistrates being
always very careful to preserve lands for them, so far as is in their power to
do it.

"The places that want help in a settled way, are these, viz. Cotuhtikut,
Potanumaquut, Manamoyik, Sokones, and Mananiet. Probably Mannamit.
We have and do want books exceedingly to carry on the work by those that are
employed therein. I do not question but there is more than one hundred young
ones, that are entered both in writing and reading, that are not put into this
account. There is good hopes of diverse of them: some of them, being lately
dead, having given a good testimony of their being in the faith; and so lifting
up their souls to Christ, as their savior and their all in all; as diverse of
the well affected English know, and have been present among some of them that
departed this life.

"I was with one of them the last summer, that had been sick for a long time;
and I stayed with him near one whole day: and there came from him very savoury
and heavenly expressions. One passage I will make bold to insert; the which is
this. That he being very sick, not expecting the continuance of his life, told
me that his wife did much solicit him to forsake God and live; forasmuch as
many that were not praying Indians, were not so afflicted as he was. But he,
using those words in Job ii. ^, 10, gave her this answer. That he would cleave
to God, although he died, rather than live, and forsake him.

"Much more I might write in these respects, but am not willing to be
troublesome; although the truth is, that many of them are very loose in their
course, to my heart breaking sorrow.

"As concerning the messengers, that were present, when the church was
gathered, there was present our honored governor, that now is, with diverse of
the magistrates. There was also seven of the teaching elders, with the
messengers of their respective churches; besides, I suppose, five hundred
people: some of the chief of them declaring their satisfaction and approbation
of the present work at that time.

"Thus I hope I have in general answered your queries according to the short
time I had to accomplish these things in, considering the remoteness of the
several places, where I am conversant diverse times. Thus I have given you a
brief answer to your desires; entreating the blessing of the Lord to be with
you and this great work for Jesus Christ which we have in hand: and rest

Yours in the service of Christ,

Sandwich, 1. of 7. month, 1674.

RICH. BOURNE."

. 3. I had another account from Mr. John Cotton, pastor of the English church
at Plymouth, concerning those Indians he teaches in that colony of Plymouth;
which take in this following letter from him, directed to me:

"These for the Worshipful Captain Daniel Gookin, Magistrate, living in
Cambridge.

"Worshipful and honored Sir,

"Mr. Bourne having been long in the Indian work, and acquainted with the
Indian language in several parts, is most able to give you a satisfying account
of the work of God, and its progress among the Indians of this colony. I have
not long lived here: but in this time I began to preach the word of God to a
company of Indians, at a place called Kitteaumut. Or Katamet. Part of Sandwich,
on Buzzard's bay.
Since which, through the blessing of God, the number of praying Indians is
forty males and females. As yet they have no Indian teacher; but on sabbath
days, they usually go to hear one of Mr. Bourne's Indians, at the nearest place
to them.

"About ten of these can read the English books; Translated into the Indian
language.
and many more are very desirous to learn to read the word: but here is very
great want of Indian primers and bibles. I much desire that the Commissioners
would take some speedy course to supply that defect. I sometimes preach to the
Indians upon the Cape, at several places, and at Namassekett; Or Namasket. Part
of Middleborough.
whither come the praying Indians of Affawomit Assoowamset.
and Ketehiquut. Titicut.
Of those Indians Mr. Bourne gives you the account. When the courts are here,
there are usually great multitudes of Indians from all parts of the colony. At
those seasons I preach to them; which I mention, because God has so far
blessed it, as to make it a means to encourage some that live very remote, to
affect praying to God: viz. Manmanewal, sachem of Sakonett, Little Compton.
and some principal Indians of Coquitt; Or Coxit. Part of Dartmouth.
who made their confessions, and declared their willingness to serve God; and
they do improve all the opportunities they can get to hear the word. They came
to hear me at Acushnett, New Bedford.
when I preached there; and do desire further means of instruction. I desire
your prayers for me and mine; and rest, Sir,

"Your Worship's in any service for Christ,

"JOHN COTTON."

Plymouth. Sep. 14. 1674."

. 4. There are some that have hopes of their greatest and chiefest sachem,
named Philip, living at Pawkunnawkutt. Bristol. The nation of which he was
sachem, derived their name from this place; see chap. ii.. 4. -- but they were
sometimes styled the Wamponoags.
Some of his chief men, as I hear, stand well inclined to hear the gosp^l: and
himself is a person of good understanding and knowledge in the best things. I
have heard him speak very good words, arguing that his conscience is convicted:
but yet, though his will is bowed to embrace Jesus Christ, his sensual and
carnal lu^s are strong bands to hold him fast under Satan's dominions. It is
our duty by faith and prayer to wait God's time, to give a blessing on the
means. Indeed the scriptures informs us, That not many wise men after the
flesh, not many mighty, not many noble men, are called. But God has chosen the
foolish things of the world, to confound the things which are mighty; and base
things of the world, and things which are despised, has God chosen, yea, and
things which are not, to bring to naught things that are. And the reason is,
that no flesh should glory in his presence. 1. Cor. 1. 26-29. Though not many,
yet some of the great men of the world, God is pleased sometimes to call; and
they are only those that he has chosen. When a sachem or sagamore is converted
to the faith, and yields himself up to embrace the gospel, it has a great
influence upon his subjects; according to that old maxim: Regis ad exemplum
totus componitur orbis. Christianity met with much better success in Plymouth,
than in Massachusetts. In the year 1685, the praying Indians in this colony
amounted to fourteen hundred and thirty nine, beside boys and girls under
twelve years of age, who were supposed to be more than three times that number
[Huth. vol. I, page 349] -- In the year 1693, there were within the limits of
Eastham, five hundred and five adult Indians, to whom Mr. Treat preached; two
hundred and fourteen adults, beside stragglers, at Mashpee and places adjacent,
under the care of Mr. Rowland Cotton, minister of Sandwich; a hundred and
eighty Indians, to whom Mr. Thomas Tupper preached; and five hundred more,
under the care of Mr. John Cotton, minister of Plymouth. [Matthew Mayhew's
Narrative. page 46-53. See also Mather's Magnalia. Book vi. page 60. and Neal's
Hist. chap. vi, page 256] -- In the year 1763, there still remained in the
colony nine hundred and five Indians of every age; two hundred and twenty three
of whom were in the county of Plymouth; five hundred and fifteen, in the county
of Barnstable; and a hundred and sixty seven, in the county of Bristol. Since
that period their numbers are much lessened. There is at present no Indian
church in the counties of Plymouth or Bristol; and Mashpee only, in the county
of Barnstable. -- Of a hundred and thirty four Indians in Dartmouth and
Freetown in 1763, there are now about thirty three left [Information of Rev.
Mr. Backus.] In the other towns of Bristol they are probably extinct. -- There
are four or five families of Indians in Middleborough; two or three, in
Pembroke; five or six persons in Bridgewater; and probably a few scattered
about in other parts of the county of Plymouth. [Inf. of Rev. Mr. B.] -- In the
county of Barnstable, a few Indians remain at Potanumaquut, a few in the town
of Barnstable, and a few at Herring Pond, between Sandwich and Plymouth. But
the great body of them resides at Mashpee; where there are about eighty
families, consisting principally of a mixed race, not more than forty or fifty
persons being pure Indians. [M. S. Let. of Rev. Mr. Mellen.]


CHAP. IX. Of the Progress of the Gospel among the Indians at Martha's Vineyard
and Nantucket, and of the Instruments that God has raised up and employed, to
preach the Gospel to the Indians of those Islands.
. 1. MARTHA's Vineyard, or Martin's Vineyard, called by the Indians Nope, which
we have in the former book described, See the Postcript.
has been, through the grace of Christ, a very fruitful vineyard unto the Lord
of hosts, and has yielded a plentiful harvest of converted Indians.

The first instruments, that God was pleased to use in this work at this place,
was Mr. Thomas Mayhew, and his eldest son, Mr. Thomas Mayhew, junior. The
father was a merchant, bred in England, as I take it, at Southampton; and he
followed the same calling in New England, at his first coming over, which was
in the beginning of the settlement of Massachusetts colony. His abode was at
Watertown, where he had good accommodations of land, and built an excellent
profitable mill there, which in those first times brought him in great profit.
But it pleased God to frown upon him in his outward estate: so that he sold
what he had in the Massachusetts, to clear himself from debts and engagements;
and about the year 1642, transplanted himself to Martha's Vineyard, with his
family. He was, as I take it, the first Englishman that settled that island:
where he has ever since continued as the governor and chief man there; being
yet living, and about eighty years of age. He died in the year 1681, in the
ninety third year of his age. See Prince's Account of English Ministers of
Martha's Vineyard, annexed to Experience Mayhew's Indian Co^^^rts.


His eldest son Thomas, being a scholar and pious man, after some time was
called to be minister unto the English upon that island. It pleased God
strongly to incline the two good men, both the father and the son, to learn the
Indian tongue of that island: and the minister especially was very ready in it;
and the old man had a very competent ability in it.

These two, especially the son, began to preach the gospel to the Indians,
about the year 1648, or 1649, as I best remember; and had set and appointed
times to meet with them. Some of the Indians lived near to the English town.
The good father, the governor, being always ready to encourage and assist his
son in that good work, not only upon the Vineyard, but upon Nantucket isle,
which is about twenty miles from it; God's blessing in the success of their
labors was and is very great: for the gospel in that place has been, as the
scripture speaks, like leven, a little whereof has levened the whole lump of
these two islands: which two islands have a considerable number of people upon
them. Unto all or most of them the gospel is now spread; and diverse of them, we
hope, are in truth brought home to God. This work prospered with good success
several years.

. 2. But An. 1657, in the month of November, Mr. Mayhew, the son, took shipping
at Boston, to pass for England, about some special concerns, intending to
return with the first opportunity; for he left his wife and children at the
Vineyard: and in truth his heart was very much in that work, to my knowledge, I
being well acquainted with him. He took his passage for England in the best of
two ships then bound for London, whereof one James Garrett was master. The
other ship, whereof John Pierse was commander, I went passenger therein, with
Mr. Hezekiah Usher senior of Boston, and several other persons. Both these
ships sailed from Boston in company. Mr. Garrett's ship, which was about four
hundred tons, had good accommodations, and greater far than the other: and she
had aboard her a very rich lading of goods, but most especially of passengers,
about fifty in number; whereof diverse of them were persons of great work and
virtue, both men and women; especially Mr. Mayhew, Mr. Davis, Mr. Ince, and Mr.
Pelham, all scholars, and masters of art, as I take it, most of them. The
second of these, viz. Mr. Davis, son to one of that name at New Haven, was one
of the best accomplished persons for learning, as ever was bred at Harvard
college in Cambridge in New England. Myself was once intended and resolved to
pass in that ship: but the master, who sometimes had been employed by me, and
from whom I expected a common courtesy, carried it something unkindly, as I
conceived, about my accommodations of a cabin; which was an occasion to divert
me to the other ship, where I also had good company, and my life also
preserved, as the sequel proved: For this ship of Garrett's perished in the
passage, and was never heard of more. And there good Mr. Mayhew ended his days,
and finished his work. Mr. Prince has written memoirs of Mr. Mayhew's life in
the book (...) to above.


This awful providence of God put a great check upon the progress of the gospel
at Martha's Vineyard. But old Mr. Mayhew, his worthy father, struck in with his
best strength and skill; and has doubtless been a very great instrument to
promote the work of converting many Indian souls upon those islands.

And here I may take occasion to mention a short, but true story, of certain
Quakers, who landing upon that island, went to some of the Indian wigwams; and
discoursing with some of the Indians that understood English, as diverse of them
do, the Quakers persuaded and urged the Indians to hearken to them; and told
the Indians, that they had a light within them, that was sufficient to guide
them to happiness; and dissuaded the Indians from hearing Mr. Mayhew, or
reading the scriptures; and said, that those ministers that preached from, or
used the scriptures, were as Baal's priests and hirelings, etc. And at last the
Quakers offered the Indians some of their pamphlet books, which they always
carry with them; exhorting the Indians to read them; and they would be of
greater benefit to them than the bible. The Indians heard all this discourse
patiently; and then one of the principal of them that could speak English,
gravely answered the Quakers after this manner. You are strangers to us, and we
like not your discourse. We know Mr. Mayhew, that he is a good and holy man;
but you we know not. You tell us of a light within us, that will guide us to
salvation: but our experience tells us, that we are darkness and corruption,
and all manner of evil within our hearts. You dehort us from using the bible;
but offer your books and commend them to us: We cannot receive your counsel,
contrary to our own experience, and the advice and exhortations of our ancient
and good teachers. Therefore we pray you, trouble us no farther with your new
doctrines; for we do not approve it. So the Quakers, not long after, departed
from the island; and never since have they been infested with them.

. 3. In the year of our Lord 1659, it pleased God to bring things to such
ma^urity among the praying Indians at the Vineyard, that one Indian church was
gathered among them; which since is become two churches: Where I take this
account in part of a letter from Mr. John Cotton, now pastor at Plymouth, which
sometimes lived and preached to the Indians upon the Vineyard.

"When I lived at the Vineyard, the praying towns were Chappaquidgick,
Chappaquiddick is an island east of Martha's Vineyard, separated from it by a
strait, about a quarter of a mile wide. It is within the limits of Edgartown.
Nashamoiess, The south part of Edgartown.
Sengekontakit, Also spelled Sanchecantachet. The north part of Edgartown.
Toikiming Taacame, or Takame. Tisbury.
, Nashuakemmiuk, Nashcuchkamuck. Chilmark.
Talhanio; Probably part of Chilmark.
one church there gathered long before, but no officers. Since I lived here, I
went over with Mr. Eliot thither: In the year 1670.
and Hiacoomes was ordained pastor; John Tokinosh, teacher; John Nonoso and
Joshua Mummeecheeg, ruling elders. See Experience Mayhew's Indian Converts.
Chap. I. Examples ^. 3. 4. 18.
Since I hear they are become two churches; the pastor and one ruling elder for
Chappaquidgick; the teacher and the other ruling elder, for the other church,
which has some members, if I mist^^^ not, in all the other towns above
mentioned. Hands were imp^^^^ in ordination, by Mr. Eliot, Mr. Mayhew, and
myself.

"The church at Marshpaug, Mashpee.
was gathered, and Mr. Bourne ordained pastor of it; hands imposed by M^. Eliot
and I, and one of the messengers of Natick church, and one of the Vineyard.
Major Winslow, now our governor, Mr. Southworth, (...), Mr. Hinkley, and Mr.
Bacon, were the magistrates present; Mr. Walley, Mr. Arnold, Mr. Shone, Mr.
Thornton, M^. I^^^^es, Mr. Newman, with brethren from all our churches. How
(...) churches have increased since, I cannot inform."

Thus far Mr. Cotton's letter, dated at Plymouth Sep. 14. 1674.

This Mr. Cotton above named, is second son to M^. John Cotton, the late worthy
teacher of the church of Christ at Boston, in New and Old England. This man is
now pastor of the church at New Plymouth: but some years past was preacher unto
the English upon Martha's Vineyard; and having some skill in the Indian tongue,
did teach the Vineyard Indians the good knowledge of God. Since his removal to
Plymouth, he does the like, as we have above heard.

. 4. Here I shall give you a further account of the Indian affairs at Martha's
Vineyard and Nantucket, expressed in a letter received from Mr. Thomas Mayhew,
directed to me.

"To the Worshipful, his worthy friend, Mr. Daniel Gookin. These deliver at his
house at Cambridge.

"Upon the Vineyard, Sep. 1, 1674.

"Much honored Captain Gookin,

"Sir,

"A copy of yours of the 14th of May I did receive, containing fifteen queries.
I have no time to answer so many now, of which some are very difficult.
Briefly, the first church was gathered here just fifteen years since. I sent
for Mr. Prince Governor of Plymouth.
and several others, but they came not; but the English of the island, and
several strangers of diverse places, present, did well approve of them. Which
church is now become three churches, by reason of their habitations: two upon
the Vineyard. There are near fifty in full, and suppose rightly in, communion,
In the two churches upon the Vineyard.
by virtue of their godly conversations. Which churches have a pastor and an
elder. Mr. Eliot was here, and joined in their ordination. Mr. Cotton was also
here with Mr. Eliot. The families here are three hundred at least: upon the
isle Chappaquidgick, sixty families; but one of them that prays not to God. The
other two hundred and forty families are generally praying. Care is taken, that
all and every one come in by voluntary confession; which is and has been the
constant practice here now. We did at the first receive them, they renouncing
heathenism and confessing their sins; and those were generally professors. Out
of them they entered into church fellowship, when by the word and spirit of God
they are moved thereunto. There are ten Indian preachers, of good knowledge and
holy conversation; seven jurisdictions; and six meetings every Lord's day. In
every jurisdiction the heads are worshippers. The whole holds forth the face of
christianity: how sincere, I know not.

"And for Nantucket, there is a church which relates to me. They as I said,
first joined into full worship here, and since became a church orderly, and is
increased. Upon that island are many praying Indians. Also the families of that
island are about three hundred. I have oftentimes accounted the families of
both islands; and have very often these thirty two years, been at Nantucket.

"For schools, sometimes there are some; sometimes, not. But many can read and
write Indian: very few, English; none, to great purpose; not above three or
four; and those do it brokenly. Myself and my two grandsons can speak the
language of this island. But my grandsons not yet employed. John, the younger,
does teach the Indians; and is like now, I suppose, to be encouraged by the
Commissioners. Matthew, my eldest grandchild, has also preached to them; and I
think, when settled, will again.

"This upon the sudden; which is that I know to be exactly true: for I am
always considering of persons and things, being well acquainted with the state
and condition of the Indians. I shall not add, but any due respects, and salute
you, and rest,

"Worthy Sir, your affectionate friend, and servant to command in our Lord
Jesus,

"THOMAS MAYHEW." In the year 16^2, the number of Indians on Martha's Vineyard
was much lessened. The church however at that time consisted of more than ^
hundred persons. [Mat. Mayhew's Nar. page 28] -- In the year 1720, there were
on the Vineyard six small villages, containing about a hundred and fifty five
families, and about eight hundred souls. Each of these villages was supplied
with an Indian preacher. There was also a small assembly at Winthrop's Island;
another, consisting of twelve or fourteen families, at Tucker's Island and
Nashaun, which lie near together. There were a few Indians left at Noman's
Land. Beside these Indian assemblies, there was a small congregation of
Baptists at Gay Head. For the state of the Indian Baptists on Martha's Vineyard
in the year 1774, see Bachus's (...).
[Exp. Mayhew's Nar. of Ind. on Martha's Vin. page 2] -- In the year 1763,
there were remaining in Duke's County three hundred and thirteen Indians;
eighty six of whom were in Edgartown; thirty nine, in Tisbury; and a hundred
and eighty eight, in Chilmark. -- About that period they began to intermarry
with negroes; in consequence of which the mixed race has increased in numbers,
and improved in temperance and industry. At present there are of pure Indians
and of the mixed race, about four hundred and forty persons: seventy five of
whom live on Chappaquiddick, (not more than one third pure:) about twenty five,
at Sanchecantacket, (not more than one fifth pure;) about forty, at Christian
town, in the north part of Tisbury, toward the Sound, (about one half, pure;)
about twenty four, at Nashonohhamuch, (about three quarters, pure) and about
two hundred and seventy six, at Gay Head (of which about one quarter are pure.)
In this account unmixed negroes are not reckoned. [Information of Capt.
Jerningham and Benjamin Basset, Esq]


. 5. Concerning the island of Nantucket, and the work of God among the Indians,
besides what is above expressed in Mr. Mayhew's letter, take the following
account. This island of Nantucket we have described in a former book, See the
Postcript.
and therefore shall omit it here. The first light of the gospel that came to
this island, was by means of Mess'rs Thomas Mayhew, father and son; and also by
Hiacoomes, now pastor of one of the churches upon that Vineyard. The Indians
upon this island sow English as well as Indian corn, spin and knit stockings,
and are more industrious than many other Indians. The truth is, the Indians,
both upon the Vineyard and Nantucket are poor; and, according as the scripture
says, do more readily receive the gospel and become religious. The rules of
religion teach them to be diligent and industrious; and the diligent hand
makes rich, and adds no sorrow with it.

Upon September the 4th, 1674, I spoke with some of the principal Indians of
Nantucket; particularly with John Gibbs, alias Assasammoogh, pastor of the
Indian church there; and with Caleb, alias Weekochisit, one of their teachers
and a sagamore's son. These two persons informed me, that there is one church
at Nantucket, whereof John Gibbs aforesaid is pastor: that there is about
thirty men and women in full communion in the church, whereof twenty are men:
that there is about forty children and youths baptized: and that there is about
three hundred Indians, young and old, who pray to God and keep the sabbath upon
that island: that they meet to worship God at three places, viz. Oggawame where
the church meets, at Wammasquid, and Squatesit: that there are four Indian
teachers upon that island, viz. John Gibbs pastor, Joseph, Samuel, and Caleb,
who also teaches school. This Caleb is one of them, that gave me this
information. He earnestly desires to learn to read and understand English; and
entreated me to procure him an English bible, which accordingly he had by order
of the Commissioners.

A further account of Nantucket Indians take in part of Mr. Cotton's letter,
dated 14th of September, 1674.

At Nantucket, according to my best intelligence, there are three praying
towns; and praying Indians, about three hundred males and females; one church,
the pastor is John Gibbs; the men in church fellowship are about twenty; the
women, ten. Their children are all baptized. The English upon that island, who
are about twenty seven families, and many of them Anabaptists, did at first
seek to hinder them from administering baptism to infants; but now they are
quiet, and meddle not with them. Caleb is preacher to one town there. In the
year 1694, the Indians on Nantucket were about five hundred adults. There were
five assemblies of praying Indians, and three churches; two Congregational, and
one of Baptists. [Gardener's Let. in Mather's Magn. Book vi. page 56.] Three
hundred and fifty eight Indians were remaining the 16th of the eighth month,
1763, when a fever began among them, and lasted till the 16th of the second
month, 1764. Of this distemper two hundred and twenty two died. [See Huth.
Hist. vol. I. page 35] -- The Indians on the island are now reduced to four
males and sixteen females. [M. S. of Friend Zaccheus Macy.]


Thus, according to the best intelligence I can yet obtain, I have endeavored
to give a faithful account of the Indians that pray to God upon these two
Islands of Martha's Vineyard and Nantucket. And in truth it has pleased God,
in his sovereign grace, to do much for them. I have seen and spoke with diverse
of the Indians of those islands, that usually every summer come up to our
parts, about Boston and the towns adjacent, to work in harvest labor and other
employ. Many of them I have judged pious; and most of them, sober, diligent,
and industrious; which are commendable qualifications. My desires and prayers
are, that not only they, but all the other praying Indians, may more and more
increase in virtue and piety.

CHAP. X. Giving an Account of what is done with respect to the Propagating of
the Gospel in the Jurisdictions of Connecticut and Rhode Island.
. 1. IN the jurisdiction of Connecticut, sundry years since, Mr. Abraham
Pierson, pastor of the church at Branford, having gained some knowledge of the
Indian tongue, made some beginnings, and continued in that work some years, to
preach the gospel to some Indians in those parts: in which work, as I have
understood, he was encouraged by the Commissioners of the united colonies. But
the providence of God removing him from those parts unto New Jersey, to the
southwest of New York about ten leagues, that work ceased with him: and I have
not heard of any considerable fruits of his labors with them, which I impute
to this reason, it being now about ten years since he left them. Religion,
especial among such a people, is very apt to decay. For precept upon precept,
and line upon line, God has said is needful in such a case. But if the vision
fail, the people will perish: and certainly religion will decay and die in
every place, if God withdraw the means of grace. Where bread and other food is
wanting, the people will famish; and the famine of the word of God is greater
than that of bread. The Lord make all mankind sensible thereof. Besides, God
has his times and seasons of grace unto these and those people. It may be,
their time is not yet come to receive the gospel. Oh that God would give all
men wisdom, to improve the day of grace, while they enjoy it.

. 2. Since Mr. Pierson's removal, it has pleased God to stir up the reverend
and worthy man, Mr. James Fitch, pastor of the English church at Norwich; who
having gained some understanding in the Indian language, does preach unto some
of the Mohegan Indians that live near him. I have endeavored, both by letters
and messages to him, to gain a particular account. But possibly either my
letters and messages, or his to me, have miscarried; or else he wants
considerable matter to inform. That which I hear in general from others, is,
that this good man does put forth his utmost endeavors, -- as his calling in
the English church, where he is alone, will permit, -- to teach and instruct
them; and that some are hopefully coming on; it being but a few years since he
began this work. I am apt to ^car, that a great obstruction unto his labors is
in the sachem of those Indians, whose name is Unkas; an old and wicked, wilful
man, a drunkard and otherwise very vicious; who has always been an opposer and
underminer of praying to God: some hints whereof I have given, in the narrative
of my journey to Wabquissit, before mentioned. My prayers and desires are, that
this servant of Christ may be encouraged and blessed in this work; and though
the Indians should not be gathered, yet he shall not fail of acceptance and
reward from his and our Lord and master, Jesus Christ.

. 3. "Honored Sir,

"Yours I received, dated in September. And I have hitherto delayed, that I
might be the better prepared for an answer to your queries. Concerning the
Indians in this colony and at Long Island, I cannot understand that they have
any inclination to learn the knowledge of God: but when Mr. Pierson did
frequently try, in the several plantations in this colony, they did generally
show an averseness, yea a perverse contempt of the word of God; and at present
they will not yield to any settled hearing or attendance upon the ministry of
the word. Since God has called me to labor in this work among the Indians
nearer to me, where indeed are the most considerable number of any in this
colony, the first of my time was spent upon the Indians at Moheek, Montville.
where Unkas, and his son, and Wanaho; are sachems. These at first carried it
teachably and tractably: until at length the sachems did discern, that religion
would not consist with a mere receiving of the word; and that practical
religion will throw down their heathenish idols, and the sachems' tyrannical
monarchy: and then the sachems, discerning this, did not only go away, but drew
off their people, some by flatteries, and others by threatenings: and they
would not suffer them to give so much as an outward attendance to the ministry
of the word of God. But at this time some few did show a willingness to attend.
These few I began meetings with them, about one year and a half since. What
progress they have made, I have informed the Commissioners. Firstly, in respect
of knowledge, they are enlightened in the common principles of the true
religion. Secondly, in respect of practice, they have yielded to cast off
heathenish devil worship, and on the Lord's day to meet together, to repeat and
to confer about that, which they have heard me teach them of the word of God.
And he that is the chief among them, whose name is Weebax, has learned so
much, that he is willing and able in some degree to be helpful in teaching and
prayer to the others, on the Lord's day: and this Weebax is of such a blameless
conversation, that his worst enemies and haters of religion cannot but speak
well of his conversation; and the same may be said concerning another, whose
name is Tuhamon.

"The number of these Indians is now increased to above thirty grown persons,
men and women, besides children and young ones. Some have showed a willingness,
that their children should learn to read; but it is not yet two years since I
began with these; and truly the charge and expense to set up and keep a school
amongst them, it is too great for me at present to compass. These Indians do
suffer much, especially the chief among them, that it is to wonderment they are
not utterly discouraged, considering they are but in their beginnings: for the
sachem and Indians round about, do to the utmost what they can, by reproaches,
revilings, and threatenings, especially in a private and clandesline manner, to
dismay them.

"And for the settlement and encouragement of these Indians, I have given them
of mine own lands, and some that I have procured of our town, above three
hundred acres of good improvable lands, and made it sure to them and theirs, so
long as they go on in the ways of God.

"And at this time Unkas and his sons seem as if they would come on again to
attend upon the ministry of the word of God. But it is no other but in envy
against these, and to promote some present self design: but it is easy with God
to turn all to salvation, etc.

"I have nothing further at present to add, but that the Lord would direct and
prosper you in your pious intendments; so entreating your prayers for me, who
am,

"Your unworthy friend and servant in the work of the Lord,

"JAMES FITCH, senior. In 1774, when a census of the inhabitants of the state
of Connecticut was taken, there were but thirteen hundred and sixty three
Indians; [another account says, thirteen hundred and ninety three] the greater
part of whom lived at Mohegan, between Norwich and New London. In the eighteen
years which have since elapsed, judging from their usual decrease, and from
some circumstances which have fallen under my own observations, I should
suppose the above number is diminished at least one half. Besides, a
considerable part of the Mohegan tribe, I have been informed, have lately
removed from their former residence, near New London to Oneida, with the late
Mr. Occom. So that I do not imagine, the present number of Indians in
Connecticut exceeds four hundred. [M. S. Letter of the Rev. Ied. Morse]


"From Norwich, Novem. 20th. 1674."

. 4. In Rhode Island and Providence plantations there are sundry English live,
that are skilful in the Indian tongue, especially Mr. Williams of Providence,
of whose endeavors I have heard something that way: but God has not yet
honored him, or any other in that colony that I can hear of, with being
instrumental to convert any of those Indians; and yet there are very
considerable numbers of Indians that live near them. If there should be any
enlightened and converted by them, when I shall be certified thereof, I would
gladly mention it in this our History. But on the contrary, I have observed,
that the Indians who live in these parts, generally are more indisposed to
embrace religion, than any Indians in the country. The reasons whereof, I
conjecture, are principally these two. First, the averleness of their sachems.
Secondly, the bad example of the English in those parts, where civil government
and religion among the English rans very low. Those two orders of magistracy
and ministry, are as Jachin and Boaz, strength and stability, upon which the
happiness and prosperity of any people does, under God, depend: and where these
are wanting in splendor and beauty, I never promise myself to see any great
honor or good to such a people. But yet let me add this in way of commendation
of the Narragansitt and Warwick Indians, who inhabit in the jurisdiction, that
they are an active, laborious, and ingenious people; which is demonstrated in
their labors they do for the English; of whom more are employed, especially in
making stone fences, and many other hard labors, than of any other Indian
people or neighbors. The Narrangaset Indians, within whose country Rhode
Island and Providence plantations fall, were strongly opposed to the
propagation of the christian religion. Their sachems would not suffer the
gospel to be preached to their subjects; and the people obstinately adhered to
the traditions and customs of their ancestors. Mr. Williams made some laudable
attempts to instruct them; but he soon left off discouraged; conceiving that he
could not, with any propriety, preach christianity to them in their own
language, without immediate inspiration. After Philip's war their numbers were
much lessened; and they were reduced to the most object state of poverty and
^^retchedness. In the year 1730, there were left in the colony no more than
nine hundred and eighty five Indians. [Callender's Century Sermon. page 40, 82,
84.] Forty four years after, their number was fourteen hundred and eighty two.
There seems here to be an increase. But it should be remembered, that in the
year 1740. Attleborough Gore, and the towns of Bristol, Tiverton, and Little
Compton, and a great part of Swanzey and Barrington, -- which probably
contained a large proportion of the Indians in the colony, -- had been taken
from Massachusetts, and annexed to Rhode Island. We cannot determine the
present number, but it is supposed to be less than five hundred. The parts of
New England, not particularly mentioned in Gookin's Historical Collections, are
the slates of New Hampshire and Vermont, and the district of Maine. There are
now no Indians in New Hampshire; some of them having removed into Canada, but
the greatest part being extinct. The Indians were never numerous in Vermont;
and at present, it is entirely des^^tute of them. Within the district of Maine,
the Indians, who are all Roman Catholics, are reduced to about sixty families
(...) river, and about thirty at Passamaquady. They have a church at each of
these places.




CHAP. XI. Of the Honorable Corporation at London, for the Propagating the
Gospel among the Indians in New England; and of the Honored Commissioners of
the United Colonies in New England, entrusted with that affair.
. 1. NOW I think it my duty to inform the candid and ingenious reader, of the
abundant favor and goodness of God, in a way of means raised up by him, for
the encouragement of this design, by inclining the hearts of many pious
benefactors in Old England to contribute to this work, and the faithful
disposing of the same in general, for the good intended by the donors.

It is most true, that neither gold or silver, or any thing under the sun, is
the price of the redemption of souls: for, as the scripture says, we were not
redeemed with silver or gold, or any other thing, the work of men's hands; but
only with the precious blood of Jesus Christ. I. Pet. i, 18, 19. Ezekiel. vii. 19.
Neither can all the gifts and benevolences of men purchase the favor of God
for ourselves or others. If we could give to God, as the prophet speaks, for a
sacrifice in a way of expiation for the least sin, ten thousand bullocks, or
ten thousand rams, or ten thousand rivers of oil, or the first born of our
bodies, etc. what would it signify to procure God's favor to man, or pardon
for the least sin? No, the redemption of the souls of men is more precious, etc.

Though this be a great truth; yet, on the other hand, the outward comforts of
this life are so far necessary, that God ordained, that he that preaches the
gospel, should live of the gospel; and that he that goes a warfare in this
kind, it is not to be at his own charge. Now, in carrying on this work of
preaching unto, and civilizing these Indians, there are many occasions, both
with respect to themselves, and to the instruments that labor among them,
which need supply, and that abundantly, more than is yet in being. But God, of
his gracious goodness and beneficence, has made some provision in the manner
following.

. 2. In the year of our Lord 1649, some years after Mr. Eliot began to preach
the gospel to the Indians, God in his divine providence so ordered it, that Mr.
Edward Winslow, one of the magistrates of Plymouth jurisdiction, a person of
great worth, piety, and wisdom, being sent for England by the united colonies
of New England before, as their agent about some public affairs, this worthy
man, at the time of his being there, made it part of his business to solicit
the parliament of lords and commons, then sitting, to cast their eye of favors
upon this good work, in passing an act of parliament, to constitute some worthy
and known persons of piety and integrity, to be a corporation to receive and
improve the free contributions of all persons for the encouragement of this
design, in propagating the christian religion among the Indian natives of New
England in America. Unto which pious motion of Mr. Winslow it pleased the Right
Honorable Parliament, according as their weighty affairs permitted, did grant
and pass an act of parliament of both houses, nominating, constituting, and
empowering, several worthy persons as a body politic and incorporate, to
manage and execute that affair to all intents and purposes, as may more
particularly appear in the said act of parliament.

N. B. Here the act of parliament is to be recited; but I having it not here,
refer it to friends in England, that peruse this tract, to cause it to be
inserted in this place. The act referred to may be found in Hazard's Historical
Collections. vol. I. page 635. For a breviat of the act, see Hutch. Hist. vol.
I. page 163.


. 3. In prosecution of this trust, they used their best endeavors in all
faithfulness, keeping their meetings and accounts openly at Cooper's hall in
London, where any person might freely have opportunity to see and observe the
integrity of their accounts and proceedings; and the expense of their time,
strength, and charge, in managing of that affair, as I have heard, was borne by
themselves, and not charged upon the collections. And God was pleased so to
bless their endeavors, and open the hearts and purses of diverse well disposed
persons, both in the city, army, and country, that considerable sums were
returned unto them: which they faithfully disposed, most of it in making
purchases of lands and rents for an annual revenue and income; and some of it
transmitted to New England, there to be distributed and disposed by the
honored the Commissioners of the united colonies, as the said act directed and
empowered them, according as they, in their wisdoms, saw most expedient, to
further and promote the main design: which, to my knowledge, -- for I have seen
the accounts, -- was and is most faithfully and prudently disposed of and
conveyed in sundry channels: as particularly, First, some small salaries to
instruments employed in the work. Secondly, keeping several Indian youths to
school, providing diet, clothing, and books for them; which expended annually,
for diverse years, considerable sums. Thirdly, the building an Indian college,
of which we have before spoken. Fourthly, the charge of printing the bible and
other books in the Indian language. This cost a great sum. Fifthly, providing
sundry tools and instruments for the Indians to work with in several callings.
Sixthly, furnishing them with some sheep's wool and cotton wool, for their
encouragement in ways of industry and diligence. Seventhly, in allowing some
encouragement and small salaries to Indian rulers, teachers, schoolmasters, and
interpreters. These, with several other particular occasions, fell in annually,
which indeed needed much more than was returned. In all these matters the
Commissioners of the colonies, from time to time, acquitted themselves, as
became wise, worthy, and faithful persons; never expending any thing of the
Indian stock, for any labor or charge thereabout, which cost them several days
yearly about that affair; all the expenses being desrayed at the cost of that
colony, where the Commissioners kept their meeting; which has exhausted very
considerable sums. So that in that respect New England people are not behind
hand in charge toward that work; and I believe, not less, but far more, in
proportion, than their countrymen in England. The churches in Boston made
annual collections for this purpose. Neal says, that in the year 1718, they
collected four hundred and eighty three pounds; and that they had at that time
besides, a fund of eight hundred or a thousand pounds, the income of which was
appropriated to the conversion of the Indians. [Hist. of N. Eng. chap. vi. page
265.]
Thus this affair was managed smoothly and comfortably for many years.

. 4. When his Majesty Charles the second, now reigning, was in a wonderful and
admirable manner restored to his crown, An. 1660, there were some, as I have
heard, endeavored to undermine and overthrow this corporation, and to swallow
up the revenues thereof into his Majesty's coffers, as was pretended, but
rather into their private purses; alleging the illegality of that act, as done
without royal assent, and other suggestions tending to its dissolution. But it
pleased God so to influence and move the heart of our royal and gracious king,
not to receive impressions by those motions, but most princely, honorably, and
christianly to grant a new charter, nominating and appointing several
honorable persons of the nobility and others, to manage that affair. And he
was pleased to continue several of those persons that were of the former
corporation; appointing that pious, and deservedly to be honored, and noble
person, Robert Boil Esquire, brother to the Right Honorable the earl of
Cork, to be governor and president of that corporation, for propagating the
gospel among the Indians in New England; continuing unto the same the revenues
formerly purchased; fully and amply empowering them in that affair to all
intents and purposes: which may be seen more particularly by the charter.

Here insert the charter, which I cannot procure in New England, but I hope
such persons, to whom this is committed to be published, will procure it, and
cause it to be printed in this place. This charter is printed in the Appendix
to Birch's Life of Boil. page 319-335.


This benign act of his Majesty will, I doubt not, redound to his everlasting
honor, and the great honor of the persons entrusted, especially the worthy
governor, Mr. Boil; who has in a special manner approved himself a promoter
and encourager of this good work, for about twelve years past, since he first
engaged therein; causing constant supplies annually to be sent over, and
writing encouraging letters in the name of the Honorable Corporation, from
time to time: which letters of his, and those of the former corporation, are
all worthy to be published, and would give great light in that affair; but they
would swell this tract to too great a bulk. I shall therefore content myself
with reciting the Honorable Mr. Boyle's first letter, and the Commissioners'
answer thereunto, and the account of that year's disbursements; which may serve
to give a taste of the rest.

. 5. "Honored Gentlemen,

"A letter of yours being brought hither, directed to Mr. Ashurst and Mr.
Hutchinson, though the former of these two gentlemen did by the last ship, as
he tells us, acknowledge the receipt of it, and intimate the reasons of our
silence; yet we now think it meet to assure you also ourselves, how acceptable
it was to us to be informed, partly by that letter of yours, and partly by the
relation of some learned ministers, that came a while since from New England,
that you continue your care and concern for the propagating of the gospel of
Christ amongst the poor Indians. And we are glad, that through the goodness of
God, we are now in a condition to inform you, that since the receipt of your
lastly mentioned letter, it has pleased the king's Majesty, in council, to
grant a charter of incorporation, wherein many of the nobility and other
persons of quality, and most of those gentlemen that were formerly employed in
the like work, are authorized and appointed to endeavor the carrying on of
that pious design, for converting the heathen natives: wherein they deservedly
estem it both an honor and advantage to be employed in this new establishment:
being, among other particulars, enjoined to appoint commissioners in New
England, to prosecute there, by our directions, his Majesty's pious intentions.

"We judge this to be a matter of the highest concernment, that belongs to the
work entrusted to us. For all our endeavors here, and all the supplies we may
procure from hence, will be but ineffectual, though not to our own souls, yet
to the work we would promote, unless there be a prudent and faithful management
of what we send over, by the commissioners we shall appoint in New England, and
those that they shall employ. And therefore since having obtained the best
information we can, and seriously considered the matter, we have pitched on the
same course, that has been formerly taken in pursuance of the same ends and
care. Accordingly determined at present to desire you to take upon you again
the care and management of this work upon the place. We hope you will discern
how great a trust we willingly repose in you: and we doubt not of your
readiness to comply, as formerly you have done, with our directions herein: the
business wherein we desire to engage you being such, as we think it truly
honorable to be engaged in ourselves; and the design being of a nature to
which the greatest and most precious promises are annexed: besides that the
civilizing and converting of your barberous and unbelieving neighbors is that,
whose success will be, in some regards, of more immediate advantage to
yourselves than to us.

"Our good wishes to so christian a work makes it much our trouble, to see the
means of carrying it on are no greater, than we now at our entrance find them:
which we mention not by way of reflection upon those, to whose hands the
management of them was committed, before the grant of our charter; but because
it is necessary for us to acquaint you with the condition we are brought to,
partly by the great charge you and we have been at on several necessary
occasions, and partly, and indeed chiefly, by the injurious dealing of some,
who take advantage of the letter of the law, against all justice and equity, to
rep (...) themselves of what they formerly sold, See Neal's Hist. of N. Eng.
chap. vi. page 261-263. and Birch'^ Life of Boil. page 136, 140, 141.
whereby the greatest p^rt of our revenue is at present detained; which will
prove, we fear, very expensive and somewhat difficult to recover. And therefore
we desire as little money may be drawn upon us for this year to come, as will
possibly consist with the not neglecting of what is necessary to be done. We
say, for this next year; because we cannot be so despondent, as not to hope,
that the providence of God will, by some means or other, provide for the supply
of a work, so much tending to his own glory, and so acceptable to those, that
are so heartily concerned for it.

"The bill for eight hundred pound, drawn for the use of the Indian work, is
for the most part paid, and should have been entirely so are now, were it not
for the want of present money. That which is from time to time (...) out, we
desire may, according to your commendable-practice, be (...) over in a
particular account, within the year. And it may assist us in the regulating our
expenses, if you be pleased to let us know, by the first convenience, what
further charge you judge you shall be put to, by perfecting the printing of the
bible. The use of that divine book, and also a constant use of catechisins, we
judge most necessary for the Indians' instruction in religion. And we also
think it may conduce to unity and order, if the same catechism be generally
taught amongst them.

"If our stock do increase, which we hope hereafter it may, especially since
his Majesty himself has graciously pleased particularly to countenance this
work, and to secure both what has been, and may be given toward it, by a
legal settlement, which before was wanting: -- If, we say, our means increase,
we shall consider of some employment, in the way of trade and manufacture, to
employ the Indians in. Or if in the interim, there occurs to you any thing
about this or any other matter, that you judge may tend to the promoting of
that good work, wherein we have the happiness to be jointly engaged, your
informations and advice will be, as well as your assistance, very welcome to us.

"Signed in the name, and by the appointment, of the Corporation for the
propagating of the gospel in America.

"Pr. ROBERT BOIL, Governor.

"London, May 15th, 1662.

"For the Worshipful the Commissioners of the united colonies of New England,
in New England. These."

An answer thereunto this following letter was returned.

. 6. "Right Honorable,

"We received yours of the 15th of May, 1662, intimating the receipt of ours
directed to Mr. Ashurst, also of a letter from him in answer thereunto, which
is not as yet come to our sight.

"That it pleased the Lord to put it into the heart of our dread sovereign, the
king's Majesty, with his most honorable council, to cast a favorable aspect
upon these so far remote parts of his dominions, not only to the owning of his
subjects, the people of his own nation, with privilege of protection and
confirmation of our wonted liberties, to the rejoicing of the hearts of many,
the Lord's poor people here, that were before sad, and to the shame of those,
who were the enemies of the peace of our Zion: but also, as by the information
given us by your Honors letters, extending his royal favor to our
neighbors, the barbarous natives, and that in such wise, as no other interest
or concernment can be any motive therein to his Majesty, save only his
unfeigned love to the honor of God and bowels of compassion to poor mankind,
the experience not only of a kingly, but also of a fatherly, godlike spirit;
especially considering the objects of this his bounty, who are such of whom it
may be truly said, that being beheld in their own savage ways and customs,
there is very little more of the relics of that glorious image put upon our
first parents, to be seen in them, than this, that they are of that race: --
The consideration whereof, together with the gentleness and candor of your
generous minds, expressed in yours to us, breathing forth your unfeigned
desires to ^^vance the interest of the Lord Jesus Christ; so that the labor
and difficulties, inevitably accompanying such an undertaking, have not
deterred your truly noble spirits from the acceptance thereof: -- cannot but
greatly oblige us, as the expressions of our thankfulness to the Lord and
yourselves, to study the faithful discharge of so great a trust, by your
Honors reposed in us, for the improvement of the means aforesaid, for the
instructing of the barbarous natives in the true knowledge of God: that so,
through his rich blessing thereon, a people, among whom Satan has had his
throne, may now become the Lord's, and his name may be known and exalted, by
those who, for so long a time, have sat in darkness and the shadow of death: --
The time of the establishing and resettling of this weighty affair, by his
Majesty's influencing thereof, and putting the royal stamp of his authority
thereupon, being such wherein the adversary was seeking to undermine all former
endeavors, to the utter disappointing of all our future hopes, by the subtilty
and powerful attempts of his instruments, even of those of whom we may truly
say, they fear not the Lord nor honor the king: -- That, at such a season, the
Lord should raise up his Majesty to be an horn of salvation to these poor
natives; -- it does greatly encourage us to hope and believe that he has even
among them some, that are of those other sheep, whom in time he will cause to
hear his voice, and that he will continue to bless the endeavors of his people
for that end.

"Touching the progression of this work, at present your Honors may please to
be informed, that, as we have formerly related, we are still waiting on the
Lord in the use of the means afforded.

"The laborers in that work, for instructing the Indians in the several
colonies, continued, together with the education of sundry youths; two whereof
have been, the year past, brought up at the college in Cambridge; where they
have good commendations of the president and their tutors, for their
proficiency in learning. Also two others are at the grammar school; and two
more, at the English school; where they learn to read and write: one whereof is
now fitted for the grammar school; besides many others that are instructed by
schoolmasters in other places to read and write. It has pleased the Lord to
frown upon our endeavors in this kind; taking away by death, at sundry times,
six youths or more, upon whom considerable cost had been expended for their
education: wherein it very well becomes us, and all herein concerned, humbly
to submit unto his sovereign pleasure.

The number of lectures, with the schoolmasters that constantly attend that
work in the respective places of the Indians' abode, your Honors may more
particularly discern by their names, inserted in the account enclosed, together
with their respective salaries and allowance for the same. We are informed by
the Reverend Mr. Eliot, that he is so far satisfied concerning the Lord's
effectual work with his word, on the hearts of sundry of the natives, that he
has proceeded to administer the sacrament of baptism at two of their
plantations: the one called Martha's Vineyard; and the other, Natick; being in
distance about one hundred miles.

"The bible is now about half done; and a constant progress there is made. The
printer hopes it will be finished within a year. The future charge is
uncertain: by estimate, not less than two hundred pounds. We have herewith sent
twenty copies of the new testament, to be disposed of as your Honors shall
think meet.

"The trust your honors has seen meet to repose in us for the managing of
this work, we shall endeavor in all faithfulness to discharge. The account
enclosed tells you, to whom, and in what manner, and for what ends, the money
sent over, has been distributed; whereby you will plainly see, that neither
our colonies nor particular concernments are any diminishers thereof, but the
whole is improved according to the will of the donors. And for the future, we
shall be ready to observe the more particular directions of your Honors;
humbly entreating this favor, that no information or complaint may be received
against us to the prejudice of our trust, until we have had advice thereof,
with a seasonable opportunity to return an answer thereto. The sum at present
resting in hand, the foot of the account does declare; which will be more than
all expended before the return of the year. Less than five hundred pounds we
could not charge bills, to be paid this year; without which the work will
inevitably be interrupted, if not broken in pieces. We shall not give your
Honors further trouble, but commend you to the guidance and protection of the
Almighty, resting your Honors to serve in the work of Christ,

"The Commissioners of the united colonies in New England.

"Boston. Sep. 10th. 1662.

"To the Honorable Robert Boil Esquire, Governor of the Corporation for the
propagation of the gospel in New England."

Boston in New England, Sept. 10, 1662. The Honorable Corporation for the
Indians, Dr. L. s. d. Imprimis, to sundry disbursements for printing the bible.
237 5 0 To books for the Indian scholars, as pr. account enclosed. 19 12 6 To
diet, clothing, and tutorage of two Indian youths at the college, one year
past, with extraordinary expenses at entrance. 41 12 3 To Mr. Daniel Weld,
schoolmaster at Roxbury, for diet, clothing, and schooling of two youths, one
year past, abating one third part of a year, for one of them, ending December
20th next. 25 0 0 To Mr. Thomas Danforth, for diet and clothing of two Indian
youths, the year past. 30 0 0 To the diet and clothing Matthew Mayhew, one year
past. 13 0 0 To the schoolmaster of Cambridge for two Indian youths and Matthew
Mayhew. 8 0 0 To the maintenance of Mr. Stanton's son, one year. 25 0 0 To Mr.
Pierson of New Haven, for his pains and travel, instructing the Indians at
several places in those parts. 30 0 0 To Mr. Eliot senior, his salary for the
year past. 50 0 0 To his interpreter Job, and three schoolmasters. 40 0 0 To
Mr. John Eliot junior, his salary for one year past. 25 0 0 To Mr. Mayhew, his
salary the year past. 30 0 0 To eight Indian schoomasters at Martin's Vineyard.
30 0 0 To Mr. Bourne in Plymouth patent, his salary. 25 0 0 To two
schoolmasters, employed by him in those parts. 5 0 0 To Captain Gookin, for
instructing and governing the Indians. 15 0 0 To sundry well deserving Indians
in the several colonies. 15 0 0 To Mr. William Thompson, his salary, for
instructing the Indians about Pequot. 20 0 0 To Mrs. Mayhew, relict of Mr.
Mayhew deceased, 6 0 0 To Mr. John Alkock, for physic to sick Indian scholars,
pr. order. 7 9 ^ To two Indian coats for the Pequot sachems. ^ 16 ^ To Mr.
James of Easthampton, his salary for instructing the Indians at Long Island. 20
0 0 To Captain George Denison, for time and expense among the Indians, sundry
times, pr. order. 6 13 4 -- 728 8 6

I have transcribed this account, to give the reader a specimen of the various
occasions for employing a stock in this work. And although the matter of charge
does differ from this in other years; yet there is always more occasion to
disburse, than there is money to be disbursed. And as the work does increase,
and the gospel spread among the Indians, as it does, and we should labor and
pray it may; so there will be greater occasion of oil to the wheels of this
motion.

CHAP. XII. Containing Proposals, as an Expedient for Civilizing the Indians,
and Propagating the Gospel among them.
. 1. THAT which I shall here offer, may be comprehended under two heads. First.
that utmost endeavors be used, with all industry and diligence, that the
Indians, especially the children and youth, may be taught to speak, read, and
write, the English tongue.

For this end I propose, first, that as many of their children as may be
procured, with the free consent of their parents and relations, be placed in
sober and christian families, as apprentices, until the youths are twenty one
years, and maids eighteen years of age: the males to be instructed in the trade
practiced by their masters; and the females, in good housewifery of all sorts:
with this provision in all contracts and indentures, that they shall be taught
to read and write the English tongue at the cost of their masters. And this may
be easily accomplished, because servants are scarce in New England. The
ordering of this affair must be committed to the management of prudent persons,
that have an interest in the Indians, and that may be able, by their authority
and wisdom, so to argue this case with the Indians, as to convince them that
this way is for their children's good; for they are generally so indulgent to
their children, that they are not easily persuaded to put them forth to the
English.

Secondly, another way for bringing this matter to pass, is by setting up one
or two free schools, to learn them to read and write English. But because this
thing has some difficulty in it; partly because, first, a suitable pious
person for a schoolmaster will not be willing to leave the English society, and
to live constantly among the Indians, as such a work will require: and,
secondly, how the Indian children that are sent to school, shall be provided
with diet and clothing, without charge to the Indian stock, -- excepting only a
blue coat for each of them once a year, which will not cost much, but may
greatly encourage the Indians: -- and therefore it must be contrived, for
effecting this thing, that those difficulties may be obviated.

For the accomplishing this matter for the Indians, within the jurisdiction of
Massachusetts, I have consulted and advised, not only with Mr. Eliot; -- and we
both joined in a proposal to the honored Commissioners of the united colonies,
at their last meeting, desiring them to move the Right Honorable the
Corporation, at London, about it; -- but also with most of the principal rulers
and teachers of the praying Indians: and they have generally agreed and
approved the expedient following: and I trust in God, that the Right Honorable
the Corporation at London, will in due season approve it; and give direction
unto the Commissioners in New England, to put it in execution. The expedient
proposed is as follows.

. 2. There is an Indian village, within twenty eight or thirty miles of Boston,
westward upon the road to Connecticut, called Okommakamesit, alias Marlborough,
which lies very near the center of most of the praying villages. This Indian
plantation joineth unto an English town called Marlborough; so that the English
and Indian plantation bear the same name. In this Indian plantation there is a
piece of fertile land, containing above one hundred and fifty acres, upon which
the Indians have, not long since, lived, and planted several apple trees
thereupon, which bear abundance of fruit; but now the Indians are removed from
it about a mile. This tract of land does so imbosom itself into the English
town, that it is encompassed about with it, except one way: and upon the edge
of this land the English have placed their meeting house; which is an argument
to demonstrate that they look upon it as near the midst of their town,
according to general computation and practice. This parcel of land, with the
addition of twenty acres of the nearest meadow, and a woodlot of about fifty
acres, is well worth two hundred pounds in money: and yet the Indians will
willingly devote it for this work; for it brings little or no profit to them,
nor is ever like to do; because the Englishmen's cattle, etc. devour all in it,
because it lies open and unfenced; and while the Indians planted there, it was
in a sort fenced by them; yet by their improvidence and bad fences, they reaped
little benefit in those times; and that was one cause of their removal.

Now I propose that the parcel of land above expressed, be set apart for an
Indian free school, and confirmed by an act of the general court of this
colony, unto the Corporation for the Indians, for this end forever: and that it
be infenced with a stone wall into two or three enclosures for corn pastures,
etc. and this may be done easily, because there are stones enough at hand upon
it: and then to build a convenient house for a schoolmaster and his family, and
under the same roof may be a room for a school: also to build some outhouses
for corn, hay, cattle, etc. The charge of all this will not amount to above two
hundred pounds in money. This being done, the place will be fit to accommodate
a schoolmaster and his family, without any other salary but the use of this
farm. Moreover it is very probable, that the English people of Marlborough,
will gladly and readily send their children to the same school, and pay the
schoolmaster for them; which will better his maintenance; for they have no
school in that place at the present: in which regard I have heard some of the
most prudent among them lament: but it being chargeable to raise a school and
maintain a schoolmaster for twenty or thirty children, the inhabitants are
backward to do it, until they are compelled by the laws of the country, which
requires every village consisting of fifty families, to provide a school to
teach the English tongue and to write; but these people of Marlborough, wanting
a few of fifty families, do take that low advantage to case their purses of
this common charge. But as soon as this school herein proposed, is set up, it
will be their interest to put their children to it, being the most thrifty and
facile way they can take; and hereby the schoolmaster will be advantaged in his
neighborhood and communion with the English church there; and this will tend
to remove the first difficulty. Besides, the English and Indian children,
learning together in the same school, will much promote the Indians learning to
speak the English tongue: of which we have had experience, when Indian children
were taught by English schoolmasters at Roxbury and Cambridge, in former years,
when several Indian children were kept at those schools, at the great charge of
the Corporation for the Indians.

But a second difficulty is this: how shall these Indian children, though they
have their schooling free, be accommodated for diet and clothing, without
public charge? I answer, that I have conferred with several of the most
prudent and judicious praying Indians of the other towns, who make it no
difficulty to provide diet for their children, with the Indians, their
countrymen, that inhabit in that place: for diet among them is at reasonable
rates, being mean for quality, and yet best suiting their bodies in point of
health. And as for clothing, a little serves them, and that mean; and that
their parents can provide; especially if the Honorable Corporation order them
a blue coat once a year, in the beginning of winter, of which I have spoken
before, and ^lso provide them books. But if this design of a free school, to
teach the Indians' children, should fail of its end, of which there is no cause
to doubt; yet the laying out of so much money upon this tract of land
aforesaid, will be, as I conceive, as good an improvement, as can be made of so
much of the stock, for the furtherance of the Indian work; for it will be a
real estate, and bring in a good rent yearly.

. 3. The like school may be set up in the colony of New Plymouth, if a
convenient place may there be found, and set apart for such a work; to which
school, for aught I know, the Indian children of Martha's Vineyard and
Nantucket may be conveniently taught, and all other neighbor Indian children
of Narragansitt, Cooawsett, and places thereabout, if it shall please the Lord
to incline their hearts.

. 4. Concerning this affair I shall further add, that I have advised with many
judicious men of quality among us, who do very well approve of this contrivance
as a very good expedient, not only to civilize, but to propagate religion among
the Indians. And also most of the known and pious Indians earnestly desired it:
and the reasons that do occur to encourage that there will be good in it, are.
First, hereby the Indians will be able to converse with the English familiarly;
and thereby learn civility and religion from them. Secondly, they will be able
to read any English book, the better to teach them the knowledge of God and
themselves. And likewise thereby they may sooner come to the understanding of
several other arts and sciences, wherein English authors do abound. Thirdly,
they will hereby be able to understand our English ministers, who are better
fitted to instruct them in substantial and orthodox divinity, than teachers of
their own ration, who cannot in reason be imagined to be so sufficient, as if
they were learned men: for who is sufficient for these things? Fourthly, it
has been the observation of some prudent historians, that the changing of the
language of a barbarous people, into the speech of a more civil and potent
nation that have conquered them, has been an approved experiment, to reduce
such a people unto the civility and religion of the prevailing nation. And I
incline to believe, that if that course had been effectually taken with the
Irish, their enmity and rebellion against the English had been long since cured
or prevented, and they better instructed in the protestant religion; and
consequently redeemed from the vassallage and affection to the Romish see; who
have by this means kept the greatest part of them in ignorance, and
consequently in brutishness and superstition to this day.

. 5. A second thing that I would humbly propose, for the civilizing and
propagating the gospel among the Indians, is, that utmost endeavors be used by
all Englishmen, in power and place, and of public spirits, to raise a greater
revenue or stock to carry on this design, as well to encourage the Indians that
are poor, as the instruments that are or may be employed, whose labor and
travail is not small. In truth the work is glorious, and the harvest is great;
but there are very few laborers. The Lord thrust forth more; and endow them
with a spirit of love, diligence, humility, patience, and self-denial; for in
this labor among the Indians, all those graces will need to be exercised.

And for this end I do, in all humility, petition and beseech his most
excellent Majesty, our gracious king, and all his people, the lords spiritual
and temporal, and the commons, to grant and promote a general collection, or
brief, throughout all his dominions; whereby his pious and well disposed
subjects may have an opportunity to cast in freely some mites of their
substance, as an offering to the Lord, and a sweet smelling savor in our Lord
Jesus Christ: and that the care of this collection be committed to the Right
Honorable Corporation for the propagating the gospel among the Indians in
America, residing at London, or unto such other pious and faithful persons, as
they shall in their wisdom appoint: so that this gift unto the Lord God may not
be diverted from its true and proper end and use, or be conveyed in any
by-channels for private interest. Doubtless such a good work will be acceptable
to God in Jesus Christ, a very great honor and renown unto his Majesty and his
people. And I am persuaded it will be no grief of heart unto any of the
servants of God, in the day of their account to God, who have had any hand to
further this good work. But every one may consider and say, as we are directed
in Ca^. viii. 8, 9, 10. We have a little sister, etc. And when this thing is
effected, his Majesty and people may well bless and praise the Lord, as that
great king and man after God's own heart, David, once did upon an occasion of
like nature, mentioned I. Chron. xxix. 10.-17. Wherefore David blessed the Lord
before all the congregation: and David said, Blessed be thou, Lord God of
Israel, our father, for ever and ever. Thine, O Lord, is the greatness, and the
power, and the glory, and the victory, and the majesty: for all that is in the
heaven and in the earth, is thine; thine is the kingdom, O Lord, and thou art
exalted as head above all. Both riches and honor come of thee, and thou
reignest over all, and in thine hand is power and might, and in thine hand it
is to make great, and to give strength unto all. Now therefore, our God, we
thank thee, and praise thy glorious name. But who am I, and what is my people
that we should be able to offer so willingly after this sort? for all things
come of thee, and of thine own have we given thee. For we are strangers before
thee, and sojourners, as were all our fathers: our days on the earth are as a
shadow, and there is none abiding. O Lord our God, all this store that we have
prepared to build thee an house for thine holy name, -- among these poor
forlorn sons of men, the Indians, -- comes of thine hand, and is all thine
own. I know also, my God, that thou triest the heart, and have pleasure in
uprightness. As for me, in the uprightness of my heart I have willingly offered
all these things: and now have I seen with joy, thy people to offer willingly
unto thee.

. 6. Now to close up this discourse, the judicious, intelligent, and candid
reader may observe in this tractate concerning the Indians, especially
referring to the converted and civilized Indians, these few particulars
following.

First, here we may see, as in a mirror, or looking glass, the woeful,
miserable, and deplorable estate, that sin has reduced mankind unto naturally,
and especially such as live without means of cultivating and civilizing, as
these poor, brutish barbarians have done for many ages: for these, excepting
their rational souls, are like unto the wild ass's colt, and not many degrees
above beasts in matters of fact.

Secondly, hence we may learn what great reason men have, that are born and
bred among civilized and christian nations, to praise God for such a mercy,
which is not a small thing in my judgment; and I conceive it should have a
voice in it, calling aloud to all such of mankind, to love, serve, and obey
God, that has in his divine providence and abundant goodness, made this
distinction between them and others.

Thirdly, is there not cause of wonderful admiration and exaltation of almighty
God in Christ Jesus, who has been pleased to condescend to cast an eye of
favor and grace, founded in his eternal decree, upon some of the desolate
souls of these forlorn sinners of the gentiles?

Fourthly, may we not observe here one reason of God's transplanting some of
his people into this wilderness, viz. that they might be instrumental to carry
his name and gospel unto some of these heathen?

Fifthly, here we may behold the real fulfilling of those precious promises
made to Jesus Christ, that God will give him the heathen for his inheritance,
and the uttermost parts of the earth for his possession. Ps. ii. 8. and
thereupon take occasion to praise God, and encourage our faith and hope in him,
for a further and more ample fulfilling of his good word in that respect.

Sixthly, we may find here just occasion to magnify God, who has fitted and
raised up instruments for converting these barbarians, -- for it is from God
that every good motion and gift comes, -- and also for stirring up the hearts
of many to promote this good work by their prayers, contributions, and labors.

Seventhly and lastly, we may take occasion from that, which has been here
truly related, First, to put up our earnest prayers to God, the lord of this
harvest, that he would thrust forth laborers into it, which are greatly
wanting. Secondly, that God would frustrate the design and stratagems of Satan
and wicked men, who endeavor to disturb and destroy the day of small things
begun among this people. Thirdly, that the English nation, which dwell among
them, may live so holify and honestly, that by their good conversation, all
stumbling blocks may be removed out of the way of the Indians in their travel
toward the heavenly Canaan, and such gracious examples set before them, that
they may more and more be induced to obedience to the yoke of our Lord Jesus
Christ.

THE END OF THE HISTORICAL COLLECTIONS OF THE INDIANS IN NEW ENGLAND.
A POSTCRIPT.
THERE are some passages in the foregoing discourse, unto which this mark has
reference: as in Chap. II.. 2. it is said, We shall have occasion to speak more
particularly in the sequel of this our history. And in Chap. IX.. 1. speaking
of Martha's Vineyard, called by the Indians Nope, which we have in the former
book described. These two passages, with some others of like nature, do refer
to something going before and something following after, and yet no mention of
it.

Concerning this matter, the reader may please to understand that when I first
drew up these Collections, it was intended for a second book of the History of
New England. But that being not yet above half finished, and this concerning
the Indians being distinct from the other, which treats principally of the
Indians in New England, although it was no great incongruity, had it
accompanied the rest* But for some reasons at this conjuncture, I have thought
it not unseasonable to emit this of the Indians first. The scope and design of
the author in that intended history, you may see in what follows, setting forth
the number and subjects of each book.

THE HISTORY OF NEW ENGLAND, ESPECIALLY OF THE COLONY OF MASSACHUSETTS, IN
EIGHT BOOKS, FAITHFULLY COLLECTED BY DANIEL GOOKIN, ONE OF THE MAGISTRATES
THEREOF.
BOOK I. Describes the country of New England in general: the extent thereof:
the division of it into four colonies: the situation of the several harbors
and islands: the nature of the land and soil: the commodities and product both
of the earth and sea, before it was inhabited by the English nation: and diverse
other things relating thereunto: with a map of the country, to be placed at the
end of this first book.

BOOK II. Treats of the Indians, natives of the country: their customs,
manners, and government, before the English settled there: also their present
state in matters of religion and government; and in especial of the praying
Indians, who have visibly received the gospel; mentioning the means and
instruments that God has used for their civilizing and conversion, and the
success thereof through the blessing of God: the present state of these praying
Indians: the number and situation of their towns, and their churches and
people, both in the colony of Massachusetts, and elsewhere in the country: with
diverse other matters referring to that affair.

BOOK III. Sets forth the first discovery, planting, and settling New
England by the English: as the time when it was undertaken; the occasion
inducing them to transplant themselves and families; the condition and quality
of the first undertakes; especially those of Massachusetts colony; and the
grounds and motives for their removal from their native country unto New
England: with diverse other matters concerning the same: and in the close of
this book, a brief account of the author's life, and the reasons inducing him
to remove himself and family unto New England.

BOOK IV. Discourses of the civil government of New England; particularly of
the colony of Massachusetts, which is founded upon the royal charter of king
Charles the first, of famous memory: with a recital of the chief heads of the
said charter or patent: with the several gradations of the courts, both
executive and legislative: together with a brief mention of the state of the
confederacy between the united colonies of New England, viz. Massachusetts,
Connecticut, and New Plymouth, with the public benefit and safety occurring to
the whole country thereby.

BOOK V. Of the present condition and state of the country: as the number and
names of the counties and towns: a conjecture of the number of people in the
country: the military forces of horse and foot: their fortifications upon their
principal harbors: their navigation and number of ships and other vessels:
their money, and commodities raised in the country, for use at home, or
commerce abroad: of foreign commodities most suitable for the country's use, to
be imported: of their manufactures; with the opportunities and advantages to
increase the same, which hitherto has been obstructed, and the reason thereof:
with some arguments to excite the people unto more intenseness and diligence in
improving the manufacture of the country.

BOOK VI. Gives an account of the worthies in New England; and especially the
magistrates and ministers in all the colonies: their names, and the characters
of some of the most eminent of them that are deceased: with the names of the
governors of Massachusetts, from the beginning until this present, and the
times of their death: and sundry other matters appertaining thereto.

BOOK VII. Mentions some of the most eminent and remarkable mercies,
providence, and doings of God for this people in New England, from the first
beginning of this plantation unto this day; wherein many wonderful salvations
of the almighty and our most gracious God has showed and extended toward
them, which they should declare unto their children and children's children,
that so the great name of Jehovah may be magnified and only exalted.

BOOK VIII. Declares their religion and the order of their church government
in New England: with a rehearsal of their faith and platform of church
discipline, drawn out of the word of God: with a vindication of this people
from the unjust imputations of separatism, anabaptism, and other heterodoxes:
also a brief mention of the college at Cambridge in New England: the present
state thereof: the care and faithful endeavors used, that it may be upheld and
encouraged for the education of learned and able men, to supply both orders of
church and state in future times: also a brief commemoration of the names of
the presidents and fellows, that have been of that society; with other learned
men, dead and living, that have been graduates there from its first foundation.

You may here see my design, which I earnestly desired might have been drawn by
a more able pen: and I have often earnestly moved able persons to undertake it:
but not knowing of any, and being unwilling that a matter of so great
concernment for the honor of God and the good of men, should be buried in
oblivion, I have adventured in my old age, and in a plain style, to draw some
rude delineaments of God's beautiful work in this land. I have, through grace,
traveled half way in this work, as is said before: but in truth I find myself
clogged with so many avocations; as my public employ among the English and
Indians, and my own personal and family exercises, which by reason of my low
estate in the world are the more obstructive and perplexing: so that I cannot
proceed in this work so vigorously as I desire. Yet I shall endeavor, by God's
assistance, if he please to spare me life and ability, to make what speedy
progress I can. If this tract concerning the Indians find acceptance, I shall
be the more encouraged to finish and send forth the other: which although it
should prove very imperfect, by reason of the weakness and unworthiness of the
author; yet I shall endeavor that it be drawn according to truth; and then, if
it be of no other use, it may serve to inform my children, or possibly
contribute some little help to a more able pen, to set forth the same thing,
more exactly and exquisitely garnished, in after times.

THE END OF THE POSTCRIPT.
CORRECTIONS.
PAGE 9, line 6, read people. L. 8, from bot. r. prepare. P. 12, I. 9. r.
blankets. P. 13, l. 35, r. night after night. P. 15, l. 17, r. relief. P. 20,
l. 7, r. Pokomtakukes. P. 23, l. 26, r. stayed. P. 50, I. 6, from bot. r. four
miles. P. 58, l. 10, r. Coluktikut.

The CONTENTS
CHAP. I. Several conjectures of the original of the Indians. Page 4 CHAP. II.
Of the principal nations of Indians that inhabit in New England. Page 7 CHAP.
III. Of the language, customs, manners, and religion of the Indians. Page 9
CHAP. IV. Of the inland Indians, particularly of the Maw-hawks, or Maquas. Page
16 CHAP. V. Of the instruments that God has used for civilizing and converting
the Indians. Page 28 CHAP. VI. Of the other means used for civilizing the
Indians. Page 37 CHAP. VII. Of the number, names, and situation of the Indian
praying towns within the colony of Massachusetts; with the churches gathered in
some of them; the quantities of land belonging to their villages; a conjecture
of the number of the families and people that inhabit in them; their manner and
solemnity in the worship of God; and diverse other matters of moment. Page 40
CHAP. VIII. Of the progress of the gospel among the Indians in the colony of
New Plymouth; and the instruments God has raised up there to promote the same.
Page 56 CHAP. IX. Of the progress of the gospel among the Indians at Martha's
Vineyard and Nantucket; and of the instruments that God has raised up, to
preach the gospel to the Indians of those islands. Page 61 CHAP. X. Gives an
account of what is done with respect to the propagating of the gospel in the
jurisdictions of Connecticut and Rhode Island. Page 67 CHAP. XI. Of the
corporation for propagating the gospel among the Indians in New England,
residing at London; and of the commissioners of the united colonies in New
England, entrusted with that affair. Page 71 CHAP. XII. Contains proposals,
as an expedient for civilizing the Indians more and more, and propagating the
gospel among them. Page 79 A POSTSCRIPT. Declares the author's purpose to send
forth a larger history of the English in New England, mentioning the heads
thereof, which is already in part prepared. Page 84


A short Account of DANIEL GOOKIN, author of the Historical Collections of the
Indians in New England.
DANIEL GOOKIN, author of the Historical Collections of the Indians in New
England, was born in the county of Kent. He came early to North America, and at
first established himself in Virginia.

In the year 1644, he removed with his family to New England, and settled in
Cambridge; "being drawn hither," according to Johnson, "by having his
affectious strongly set on the truths of Christ and his pure ordinances."

Soon after his arrival, he was appointed captain of the military company in
Cambridge, "being a very forward man to advance martial discipline, as well as
the truths of Christ." About the same time, he was chosen a member of the house
of deputies.

In 165^, he was first elected assistant, or magistrate; and four years after,
was appointed by the general court superintendent of all the Indians, who had
submitted to the government of Massachusetts. He executed this office with such
fidelity, that he appears to have been continued in it, except two or three
years whilst he was in England, until his death.

In 1656, he visited Cromwell's court, and had an interview with the protector,
who commissioned him to invite the people of Massachusetts to transport
themselves to Jamaica, which had been then lately conquered from the Spaniards.

In 1662 he was appointed one of the licensers of the printing press at
Cambridge; the Rev. Mr. Mitchell being the other.

About six months after the writing of his Historical Collections, the harmony
which had so long subsisted between the people of New England and the Indians,
was unhappily interrupted by the commencement of Philip's war. Some instances
of perfidy in Indians, who had professed themselves friendly, excited
suspicions and jealousies against all their tribes. The general court of
Massachusetts passed several severe laws against them; and the Indians of
Natick and other places, who had subjected themselves to the English
government, were hurried down to Long Island in the harbor of Boston, where
they remained all winter, and e^dured inexpressible hardships. Good Mr. Eliot
had firmness enough to stem the popular current. But the only magistrate who
opposed the people in their rage against the wretched natives, was our author;
in consequence of which he exposed himself to the reproaches of the other
magistrates, and to the insults of the populace, as he passed the streets.
Gookin was too confirmed a patriot, to feel any resentment; nor did he with to
abridge the liberties of the people, because he had suffered the unmerited
effects of their licentiousness.

Not many years elapsed, before he had an opportunity of recovering, by the
fairest means, the confidence of his fellow citizens. Soon after Philip's war,
which terminated in 1676, attempts were made to deprive Massachusetts of its
privileges, which finally issued in the destruction of its charter. Our author
was one of the firmest in resisting these machinations. This drew on him the
resentment of the infamous Randolph, who in February, 1681, exhibited to the
lords of the council articles of high misdemeanor against him and others,
styled by him a faction of the general court.

At this period there were two parties in the government, both of whom agreed
in the importance of charter privileges, but differed in opinion respecting
their extent, and the measures proper to preserve them. The governor, Mr.
Bradstreet, was at the head of one party. Gookin was of the other party, which
was headed by the deputy governor, Mr. Danforth. This party opposed sending
agents to England, or submitting to acts of trade, which they apprehended to be
an invasion of their rights, liberties, and properties, they being
unrepresented in the parliament of England. In a word, they were for adhering
to the charter, according to their construction of it, and submitting the event
to providence. Gookin, being advanced in life, desired that a paper, containing
the reasons of his opinion, which he drew up as his dying testimony, might be
lodged with the court. We are sorry that it is not in our power to present this
paper to the public; but we have searched for it in vain.

He was now so popular, that the same year he was appointed major general of
the colony, and continued in the magistracy till the dissolution of the charter
in 1686.

He did not long survive the introduction of arbitrary government; but died in
the year 1687, -- a poor man. In a letter written by Mr. Eliot to Mr. Boil,
not long after his decease, he solicits that charitable gentleman to bestow ten
pounds upon his widow.

The features of his honest mind are in some measure displayed in his book; but
we will add for the information of those who wish to be more intimately
acquainted with him, that he is characterized by the writers who mention his
name, as a man of good understanding, rigid in his religious and political
principles, but zealous and active, of inflexible integrity, and exemplary
piety, disinterested and benevolent, a firm patriot, and, above all, uniformly
friendly to the Indians, who lamented his death with unfeigned sorrow. These
worthy qualities, we hope, will throw a veil upon his bigotry and prejudices,
which are too apparent in some parts of his work. We would not presume to
apologize for them entirely; but we think that they are in some measure
extenuated by the opinions and habits, which generally prevailed among his
contemporaries in Massachusetts.

He left several children; but we can give no account of any of them, except
Daniel, the eldest, who (...) minister of Sherburne, and preacher to the
Indians in Natick.

We cannot determine whether Gookin's History of New England, mentioned in the
Postcript, was ever completed. If the whole or any part of it be preserved by
his descendants, we hope that they will not suffer it to be lost to the world.
[Johnson's Wonder Working Providence. p. 109, 192. Mather's Magnalia. Book. 1.
p. 28. ^^ok. ii. p. 21. Book. vi. p. 61. Hutch. Hut. Vol. I. p. 136. 191. 192.
257. 296. 322. 331. 332 Hutch. Collect. of Papers. p. 526. Gookin's Hist.
Collect. chap. vi. sect. 1. Appendix to Birch's Life of Boil. p. 437. 444.
448. Records of the General Court.]



