THE INJUSTICE AND IMPOLICY OF THE SLAVE TRADE, AND OF THE Slavery of the
Africans: ILLUSTRATED IN A SERMON PREACHED BEFORE THE CONNECTICUT SOCIETY FOR
THE PROMOTION OF FREEDOM, AND FOR THE RELIEF OF PERSONS UNLAWFULLY HOLD^^ IN
BONDAGE, AT THEIR ANNUAL MEETING IN NEW HAVEN, SEPTEMBER 15, 1791.

BY JONATHAN EDWARDS, D. D. PASTOR OF A CHURCH IN NEW HAVEN.

TO WHICH IS ADDED, A SHORT SKETCH OF THE EVIDENCE FOR THE ABOLITION OF THE
SLAVE TRADE* (...) HOUSE OF COMMONS.

PROVIDENCE: Printed by JOHN CARTER, M, DCC, XCII.

At a Meeting of the Connecticut Society for the Promotion of Freedom, and for
the Relief of Persons unlawfully ^olden in Bondage, at New Haven, September 15,
1791:
VOTED, That the President return the Thanks of this Society to the Rev. Doctor
EDWARDS, for his Sermon this Day delivered before the Society, and that he
request* a Copy thereof, that it may be printed.

Test. SIMEON BALDWIN, Sec'ry.

The Injustice and Impolicy of the SLAVE TRADE, and of the Slavery of the
Africans.
MATTHEW vii. 12. THEREFORE ALL THINGS WHATSOEVER YE WOULD THAT MEN SHOULD DO
TO YOU, DO YE EVEN SO TO THEM; FOR THIS IS THE LAW, AND THE PROPHETS.
THIS precept of our divine Lord has always been admired as most excellent;
and doubtless with the greatest reason. Yet it needs some explanation. It is
not surely to be understood in the most unlimited sense, implying that because
a prince expects and wishes for obedience from his subjects, he is obliged to
obey them; that because parents wish their children to submit to their
government, therefore they are to submit to the government of their children:
or that because some men wish that others would concur and assist them to the
gratification of their unlawful desires, therefore they also are to gratify the
unlawful desires (...) others, But whatever we are conscious, that we should,
in an exchange of circumstances, wish, and are persuaded that we might
reasonably wish, th^^ others would do to us; that we are bound to do to them.
This is the general rule given us in the text; and a very extensive rule it is,
reaching to the whole of our conduct: and is particularly useful to direct our
conduct toward inferiors, and those whom we have in our power. I have therefore
thought it a proper foundation for the discourse which by The Society for the
Promotion of Freedom, and for the Relief of Persons unlawfully holden in
Bondage, I have the honor to be appointed to deliver, on the present occasion.

This divine maxim is most properly applicable to the slave trade, and to the
slavery of the Africans. Let us then make the application.

Should we be willing, that the Africans or any other nation should purchase
us, our wives and children, transport us into Africa, and there sell us into
perpetual and absolute slavery? Should we be willing, that they by large bribes
and offers of a gainful traffic should entice our neighbors to kidnap and sell
us to them, and that they should hold in perpetual and cruel bondage, not only
ourselves, but our posterity through all generations? Yet why is it not as
right for them to treat us in this manner, as it is for us to treat them in the
same manner? Their color indeed is different from our's. But does this give us
a right to enslave them? The nations, from Germany to Guinea, have complexions
of every shade, from the fairest white to a jetty black: and if a black
complexion subject a nation or an individual to slavery; where shall slavery
begin? or where shall it end?

I propose to mention a few reasons against the right of the slave trade -- and
then to consider the principal arguments, which I have ever heard urged in
favor of it. -- What will be said against the slave trade will generally be
equally applicable to slavery itself; and if conclusive against the former,
will be equally conclusive against the latter.

As to the slave trade, I conceive it to be unjust in itself -- abominable, on
account of the cruel manner in which it is conducted -- and totally wrong, on
account of the impolicy of it, or its destructive tendency to the moral and
political interests of any country.

I. It is unjust in itself. -- It is unjust in the same sense, and for the same
reason, as it is to steal, to rob, or to murder. It is a principle, the truth
of which has in this country been generally if not universally acknowledged,
ever since the commencement of the late war, that all men are born equally
free. If this be true, the Africans are by nature equally entitled to freedom
as we are; and therefore we have no more right to enslave, or to afford aid to
enslave them, than they have to do the same to us. They have the same right to
their freedom, which they have to their property, or to their lives. Therefore
to enslave them is as really and in the same sense wrong, as to steal from
them, to rob, or to murder them.

There are indeed cases, in which men may justly be deprived of their liberty,
and reduced to slavery; as there are cases, in which they may be justly
deprived of their lives. But they can justly be deprived of neither, unless
they have by their own voluntary conduct forfeited it. Therefore still the
right to liberty stands on the same basis with the right to life. And that the
Africans have done something, where by they have forfeited their liberty, must
appear, before we can justly deprive them of it; as it must appear, that they
have done something, whereby they have forfeited their lives, before we may
justly deprive them of these.

II. The slave trade is wicked and abominable, on account of the cruel manner
in which it is carried on.

Beside the stealing or kidnapping of men, women and children, in the first
instance, and the instigation of others to this abominable practice; the
inhuman manner in which they are transported to America, and in which they are
treated on their passage and in their subsequent slavery, is such as ought
forever to deter every man from acting any part in this business, who has any
regard to justice or humanity. They are crowded so closely into the holds and
between the decks of vessels, that they have scarcely room to lie down, and
sometimes not room to sit up in an erect posture; the men at the same time
fastened together with irons by two and two; and all this in the most sultry
climate. The consequence of the whole is, that the most dangerous and fatal
diseases are soon bred among them, whereby vast numbers of those exported from
Africa perish in the voyage: others in dread of tha^ slavery which is before
them, and in distress and despair, from the loss of their parents, their
children, their husbands, their wives, all their dear connections, and their
dear native country itself, starve themselves to death, or plunge themselves
into the ocean. Those who attempt in the former of those ways to escape from
their persecutors, are tortured by live coals applied to their mouths. Those
who attempt an escape in the latter and fail, are equally tortured by the most
cruel beating, or otherwise as their persecutors please. If any of them make an
attempt, as they sometimes do, to recover their liberty, some, and as the
circumstances may be, many, are put to immediate death. Others beaten, bruised,
cut and mangled, in a most inhuman and shocking manner, are in this situation
exhibited to the rest, to terrify them from the like attempt in future: and
some are delivered up to every species of torment, whether by the application
of the whip, or of any other instrument, even of fire itself, as the ingenuity
of the ship-master and of his crew is able to suggest, or their situation will
admit; and these torments are purposely continued for several days, before
death is permitted to afford relief to th^se objects of vengeance.

By this means, according to the common computation, twenty-five thousand,
which is a fourth part of those who are exported from Africa, and by the
concession of all, twenty thousand, annually perish, before they arrive at the
places of their destination in America.

But this is by no means the end of the sufferings of this unhappy people. Bred
up in a country spontaneously yielding the necessaries and conveniences of
savage life, they have never been accustomed to labor: of course, they are but
ill prepared to go through the fatigue and drudgery to which they are doomed in
their state of slavery. Therefore partly by this cause, partly by the
scantiness and badness of their food, and partly from dejection of spirits,
mortification and despair, another twenty-five thousand die in the seasoning,
as it is called, i. e. within two years of their arrival in America. This I say
is the common computation. Or if we will in this particular be as favorable to
the trade (...) in the estimate of the number which perishes on the passage, we
may reckon the number which dies in the seasoning to be twenty thousand. So
that of the hundred thousand annually exported from Africa to America, fifty
thousand, as it is commonly computed, or on the most favorable estimate, forty
thousand, die before they are seasoned to the country.

Nor is this all. The cruel sufferings of these pitiable beings are not yet at
an end, Thence forward they have to drag out a miserable life in absolute
slavery, entirely at the disposal of their masters, by whom not only every
venial fault, every mere inadvertence or mistake, but even real virtues, are
liable to be construed into the most atrocious crimes, and punished as such,
according to their caprice or rage, while they are intoxicated sometimes with
liquor, sometimes with passion.

By these masters they are supplied with barely enough to keep them from
starving, as the whole expense laid out on a slave for food, clothing and
medicine, is commonly computed on an average at thirty shillings sterling
annually. At the same time they are kept at hard labor from five o'clock in
the morning, till nine at night, excepting time to eat twice during the day.
And they are constantly under the watchful eye of overseers and Negro-drivers,
more tyrannical and cruel than even their masters themselves. From these
drivers, for every imagined as well as real neglect or want of exertion, they
receive the lash, the smack of which is all day long in the ears of those who
are on the plantation or in the vicinity; and it is used with such dexterity
and severity, as not only to lacerate the skin, but to tear out small portions
of the flesh at almost every stroke.

This is the general treatment of the slaves. But many individuals suffer still
more severely. Many, many are knocked down; some have their eyes beaten out;
some have an arm or a leg broken, or chopped off; and many, for a very small or
for no crime at all, have been beaten to death merely to gratify the fury of an
enraged master or overseer.

Nor ought we on this occasion to overlook the wars among the nations of Africa
excited by the trade, or the destruction attendant on those wars. Not to
mention the destruction of property, the burning of towns and villages, etc* it
has been determined by reasonable computation, that there are annually
exported from Africa to the various parts of America, one hundred thousand
slaves, as was before observed; that of these six thousand are captives of war;
that in the wars in which these are taken, ten persons of the victors and
vanquished are killed, to one taken; that therefore the taking of the six
thousand captives is attended with the slaughter of sixty thousand of their
countrymen. Now does not justice, does not humanity shrink from the idea, that
in order to procure one slave to gratify our avarice, we should put to death
ten human beings? Or that in order to increase our property, and that only in
some small degree, we should carry on a trade, or even connive at it, to
support which sixty thousand of our own species are slain in war?

These sixty thousand, added to the forty thousand who perish on the passage
and in the seasoning, give us an hundred thousand who are annually destroyed by
the trade; and the whole advantage gained by this amazing destruction of human
lives is sixty thousand slaves. For you will recollect, that the whole number
exported from Africa in an hundred thousand; that of these forty thousand die
on the passage and in the seasoning, and sixty thousand are destroyed in the
wars. Therefore while one hundred and sixty thousand are killed in the wars and
are exported from Africa* but sixty thousand are added to the stock of slaves.

Now when we consider all this (...) when we consider the miseries which this
unhappy people suffer in their wars, in their captivity, in their voyage to
America, and during a wretched life of cruel slavery* and especially when we
consider the annual destruction of an hundred thousand lives in the manner
before mentioned; who can hesitate to declare this trade and the consequent
slavery to be contrary to every principle of justice and humanity, of the law
of nature and of the law of God?

III. This trade and this slavery are utterly wrong on the ground of impolicy.
In a variety of respects they are exceedingly hurtful to the state which
tolerates them.

1. They are hurtful, as they deprave the morals of the people. -- The
incessant and inhuman cruelties practiced in the trade, and in the subsequent
slavery, necessarily tend to harden the human heart against the tender feelings
of humanity in the masters of vessels, in the sailors, in the factors, in the
proprietors of these slaves, in their children, in the overseers, in the slaves
themselves, and in all who habitually see those cruelties. Now the eradication
or even the diminution of compassion, tenderness and humanity, is certainly a
great depravation of heart, and must be followed with correspondent depravity
of manners. And measures which lead to such depravity of heart and manners,
cannot but be extremely hurtful to the state, and consequently are extremely
impolitic.

2. The trade is impolitic, as it is so destructive of the lives of seamen. The
ingenious Mr. Clarkson has in a very satisfactory manner made it appear, that
in the slave trade alone Great Britain loses annually about nineteen hundred
seamen; and that this loss is more than double to the loss annually sustained
by Great Britain in all her other trade taken together. And doubtless we lose
as many as Great Britain in proportion to the number of seamen whom we employ
in this trade. Now can it be politic to carry on a trade which is so
destructive of that useful part of our citizens, our seamen?

3. African slavery is exceedingly impolitic, as it discourages industry.
Nothing is more essential to the political prosperity of any state, than
industry in the citizens. But in proportion as slaves are multiplied, every
kind of labor becomes ignominious: and in fact in those of the United States,
in which slaves are the most numerous, gentlemen and ladies of any fashion
disdain to employ themselves in business, which in other states is consisten^
with the dignity of the first families and first offices. In a country filled
with Negro slaves, labor belongs to them only, and a white man is despised in
proportion as he applies to it. Now how destructive to industry in all of the
lowest and middle class of citizens, such a situation and the prevalence of
such ideas will be, you can easily conceive. The consequence is, that some will
nearly starve, others will betake themselves to the most dishonest practices,
to obtain the means of living.

As slavery produces indolence in the white people, so it produces all those
vices which are naturally connected with it; such as intemperance, lewdness and
prodigality. These vices enfeeble both the body and the mind, and unfit men for
any vigorous exertions and employments either external or mental. And those who
are unfit for such exertions, are already a very degenerate race; degenerate,
not only in a moral, but a natural sense. They are contemptible too, and will
soon be despised even by their Negroes themselves.

Slavery tends to lewdness, not only as it produces indolence, but as it
affords abundant opportunity for that wickedness, without either the danger and
difficulty of an attack on the virtue of a woman of chastity, or the danger of
a connection with one of ill fame. A planter with his hundred wenches about him
is in some respects at least like the Sultan in his seraglio, and we learn the
too frequent influence and effect of such a situation, not only from common
fame, but from the multitude of mulattoes in countries where slaves are very
numerous.

Slavery has a most direct tendency to haughtiness also, and a domineering
spirit and conduct in the proprietors of the slaves, in their children, and in
all who have the control of them. A man who has been bred up in domineering
over Negroes, can scarcely avoid contracting such a habit of haughtiness and
domination, as will express itself in his general treatment to mankind, whether
in his private capacity, or in any office, civil or military, with which he may
be vested. Despotism in economics naturally leads to despotism in politics, and
domestic slavery in a free government is a perfect solicism in human affairs.

How baneful all these tendencies and effects of slavery must be to the public
good, and especially to the public good of such a free country as our's, I need
not inform you.

4. In the same proportion as industry and labor are discouraged, is
population discouraged and prevented. This is another respect in which slavery
is exceedingly impolitic. That population is prevented in proportion as
industry is discouraged, is, I conceive, so plain, that nothing needs to be
said to illustrate it. Mankind in general will enter into matrimony as soon as
they possess the means of supporting a family. But the great body of any people
have no other way of supporting themselves or a family, than by their own
labor. Of course as labor is discouraged, matrimony is discouraged, and
population is prevented. -- But the impolicy of whatever produces these effects
will be acknowledged by all. The wealth, strength and glory of a state depend
on the number of its virtuous citizens: and a state without citizens is at
least as great an absurdity, as a king without subjects.

5. The impolicy of slavery still further appears from this, that it weakens
the state, and in proportion to the degree in which it exists, exposes it to
become an easy conquest. -- The increase of free citizens is an increase of the
strength of the state. But not so with regard to the increase of slaves. They
not only add nothing to the strength of the state, but actually diminish it in
proportion to their number. Every slave is naturally an enemy to the state in
which he is holden in slavery, and wants nothing but an opportunity to assist
in its overthrow. And an enemy within a state, is much more dangerous than one
without it.

These observations, concerning the prevention of population and weakening the
state, are supported by facts, which have fallen within our own observation.
That the southern states, in which slaves are so numerous, are in no measure so
populous, according to the extent of territory, as the northern, (...) a fact
of universal notoriety* and that during the late war, the southern states found
themselves greatly weakened by their slaves, and therefore were so easily
overrun by the British army, is equally notorious.

From the view we have now taken of this subject we scruple not to infer, that
to carry on the slave trade, and to introduce slaves into our country, is not
only to be guilty of injustice, robbery and cruelty, toward our follow-men; but
it is to injure ourselves and our country; and therefore it is altogether
unjustifiable, wicked and abominable.

Having thus considered the injustice and ruinous tendency of the slave trade,
I proceed to attend to the principal arguments urged in favor of it.

1. It is said, that the Africans are the posterity of Ham, the son of Noah;
that Canaan, one of Ham's sons, was cursed by Noah* to be a servant of
servants; that by Canaan we are to understand Ham's posterity in general; that
as his posterity are devoted by God to slavery, we have a right to enslave
them. -- This is the argument: to which I answer:

It is indeed generally thought that Ham peopled Africa; but that the curse on
Canaan extended to all the posterity of Ham is a mere imagination. The only
reason given for it is, that Canaan was only one of Ham's sons; and that it
seems reasonable, that the curse of Ham's conduct should fall on all his
posterity, if on any. But this argument is insufficient. We might as clearly
argue, that the judgments denounced on the house of David, on account of his
sin in the matter of Uriah, must equally fall on all his posterity. Yet we
know, that many of them lived and died in great prosperity. So in every case in
which judgments are predicted concerning any nation or family.

It is allowed in this argument, that the curse was to fall on the posterity of
Ham, and not immediately on Ham himself: if otherwise, it is nothing to the
purpose of the slave trade, or of any slaves now in existence. It being allowed
then, that this curse was to fall on Ham's posterity, he who had a right to
curse the whole of that posterity, had the same right to curse a part of it
only, and the posterity of Canaan equally as any other part; and a curse on
Ham's posterity in the line of Canaan was as real a curse on Ham himself, as a
curse on all his posterity would have been.

Therefore we have no ground to believe, that this curse respected any others,
than the posterity of Canaan, who lived in the land of Canaan, which is well
known to be remote from Africa. We have a particular account, that all the sons
of Canaan settled in the land of Canaan; as may be seen in Genesis x. 15 -- 20.
And Canaan begat Sidon his first born, and Heth, and the Jebusite, and the
Emorite, and the Girgasite, and the Hivite, and the Arkite, and the Sinite, and
the Arvadite, and the Zemarite, and the Hamathite; and afterward were the
families of the Canaanites spread abroad. And the border of the Canaanites was
from Sidon, as thou go to Gerar, unto Gaza; as thou go unto Sodom and
Gomorrah, and Admah, and Zeboim, even unto Lashah. -- Nor have we account that
any of their posterity except the Carthaginians afterward removed to any part
of Africa: and none will pretend that these peopled Africa in general;
especially considering, that they were subdued, destroyed, and so far
extirpated by the Romans.

This curse then of the posterity of Canaan, had no reference to the
inhabitants of Guinea, or of Africa in general; but was fulfilled partly in
Joshua's time, in the reduction and servitude of the Canaanites, (...)
especially of the Gibeonites; partly by what the Phen^^^^^s suffered from the
Chaldeans, Persians and Gr^^^s; and finally by what the Carthaginians suffered
from the Romans.

Therefore this curse gives us no right to enslave the Africans, as we do by
the slave trade, because it has no respect to the Africans whom we enslave. Nor
if it had respected them, would it have given any such right; because it was
not an institution of slavery, but a mere prophecy of it. And from this
prophecy we have no more ground to infer the right of slavery, than we have
from the prophecy of the destruction of Jerusalem by Nebuchadnezzar, or by the
Romans, to infer their right respectively to destroy it in the manner they did;
or from other prophecies to infer the right of Judas to betray his master, or
the Jews to crucify him.

2. The right of slavery is inferred from the instance of Abraham, who had
servants born in his house and bought with his money. -- But it is by no means
certain, that these were slaves as our Negroes are. If they were, it is
unaccountable, that he went out at the head of an army of them to fight his
enemies. No West India planter would easily be induced to venture himself in
such a situation. It is far more probable, that similar to some of the vassals
under the feudal constitution, the servants of Abraham were only in a good
measure dependent on him, and protected by him. But if they were to all intents
and purposes slaves, Abraham's holding of them will no more prove the right of
slavery, than his going in to Hagar, will prove it right for any man to cohabit
with his wench.

3. From the divine permission given the Israelites to buy servants of the
nations round about them, it is argued, that we have a right to buy the
Africans and hold them in slavery. See Lev. xxv. 44 -- 47. Both thy bondsman and
thy bondmaids, which thou shall have, shall be of the heathen that are round
about you: of them shall ye buy bondmen and bondmaids. Moreover, of the
children of the strangers that do sojourn among you, of them shall ye buy, and
of their families, that are with you, which they begat in your land; and they
shall be your possession. And ye shall take them as an inheritance for your
children after you, to inherit them for a possession; they shall be your
bondmen for ever: but over your brethren the children of Israel ye shall not
rule one over another with rigor. But if this be at all to the purpose, it is
a permission to every nation under heaven to buy slaves of the nations round
about them; to us, to buy of our Indian neighbors; to them, to buy of us; so
the French, to buy of the English, and to the English to buy of the French; and
so through the world. If then this argument be valid, every man has an entire
right to engage in this trade, and to buy and sell any other man of another
nation, and any other man of another nation has an entire right to buy and sell
him. Thus, according to this construction, we have in Lev. xxv. 43, etc. an
institution of an universal slave trade, by which every man may not only become
a merchant, but may rightfully become the merchandise itself of this trade, and
may be bought and sold like a beast. -- Now this consequence will be given up
as absurd, and therefore also the construction of scripture, from which it
follows, must be given up. Yet it is presumed, that there is no avoiding that
construction or the absurdity flowing from it, but by admitting, that this
permission to the Israelites to buy slaves has no respect to us, but was in the
same manner peculiar to them, as the permission, and command to subdue, destroy
and extirpate the whole Canaanitish nation; and therefore no more gives
countenance to African slavery, than the command to extirpate the Canaanites,
gives countenance to the extirpation of any nation in these days, by an
universal slaughter of men and women, young men and maidens, infants and
sucklings.

4. It is further pleaded, that there were slaves in the time of the apostles;
that they did not forbid the holding of those slaves, but gave directions to
servants, doubtless referring to the servants of that day, to obey their
masters, and count them worthy of all honor.

To this the answer is, that the apostles teach the general duty of servants
who are righteously in the state of servitude, as many are or may be, by hire,
by indenture, and by judgment of a civil court. But they do not say, whether
the servants in general of that day were justly holden in slavery or not. In
like manner they lay down the general rules of obedience to civil magistrates,
without deciding concerning the characters of the magistrates of the Roman
empire in the reign of Nero. And as the apostle Paul requires masters to give
their (...) that which is just and equal (Col. iv. ^) so if any were enslaved
unjustly, of course be in this (...) requires of the masters of such, to give
them their freedom. -- Thus the apostles great the slavery of that day in the
same manner that they treat the civil government; and say nothing more in
favor of the former, than they say in favor of the latter.

Besides, this argument from the slavery* prevailing in the days of the
apostles, if it prove any thing, proves too much, and so confutes itself. It
proves, that we may enslave all captives taken in war, of any nation, and in
any the most unjust war, such as the wars of the Romans, which were generally
undertaken from the motives of ambition or avarice. On the ground of this
argument we had a right to enslave the prisoners, whom we, during the late war,
took from the British army; and they had the same right to (...) those whom
they took from (...); and so with respect to all other nations.

5. It is strongly urged, that the Negroes brought from Africa are all captives
of war, and therefore are justly bought and holden in slavery. -- This is a
principal argument always urged by the advocates for slavery; and in a (...)
debate on this subject, it has been strongly insisted on very lately, in the
British parliament. Therefore it requires our particular attention.

Captives in a war just on their part, cannot be justly enslaved; nor is this
pretended. Therefore the captives, who may be justly enslaved, must be taken in
a war unjust on their part. But even on the supposition, that captives in such
a war may be justly enslaved, it will not follow, that we can justly carry on
the slave trade, as it is commonly carried on from the African coast. In this
trade any slaves are purchased, who are offered for sale, whether justly or
unjustly enslaved. No enquiry is made whether they were captives in any war;
much less, whether they were captivated in a war unjust on their part.

By the most authentic accounts, it appears, that the wars in general in Africa
are excited by the prospect of gain from the sale of the captives of the war.
Therefore those taken by the assailants in such wars, cannot be justly
enslaved. Beside these, many are kidnapped by those of neighboring nations*
some by their own neighbors; and some by their kings or their (...) others for
debt or some ^^i^ling crime are condemned to perpetual slavery. -- But none of
these are justly enslaved. And the traders make no enquiry concerning the mode
or occasion of their first enslavement. They buy all that are offered, provided
they like them and the price. -- So that the plea, that the African slaves are
captives in war, is entirely insufficient to justify the slave trade as now
carried on.

But this is not all* if it were ever so true, that all the Negroes exported
from Africa were captives in war, and that they were taken in a war unjust on
their p^^t* still they could not be justly enslaved. -- We have no right to
enslave a private for in a state of nature, after he is conquered. Suppose in a
state of nature one man rises against another, and endeavors to kill him; in
this case the persons assaulted has no right to kill the assailant, unless it
be necessary to preserve his own life. But in wars between nations, one nation
may no doubt secure itself against another, by other means than the slavery of
its captives. If a nation be victorious in the war, it may exact some towns or
a district of country, by way of caution; or it may impose a fine to deter from
future injuries. If the nation be no^ victorious, it will do no good to enslave
the captives whom it has taken. It will provoke the victors and foolishly
excite vengeance which cannot be repelled.

Or if neither nation be decidedly victorious, to enslave the captives on
either side can answer no good purpose, but must at least occasion the
enslaving of the citizens of the other nation, who are now or in future may be
in a state of captivity. Such a practice therefore necessarily tends to evil,
and not good.

Besides; captives in war are generally common soldiers or common citizens; and
they are generally ignorant of the true cause or causes of the war, and are by
their superiors made to believe, that the war is entirely just on their part.
Or if this be not the case, they may by force be compelled to serve in a war
which they know to be unjust. In either of these cases, they do not deserve to
be condemned to perpetual slavery. To inflict perpetual slavery on these
private soldiers and citizens is manifestly not to do as we would wish that men
should do to us. If we were taken in a war unjust on our part, we should not
think it right to be condemned to perpetual slavery. No more right is it for us
to condemn and hold in perpetual slavery others, who are in the same situation.

6. It is argued, that as the Africans in their own country, previously to the
purchase of them by the African traders, are captives in war; if they were not
bought up by those traders, they would be put to death* that therefore to
purchase them, and to subject them to slavery instead of death, is an act of
mercy, not only lawful but meritorious.

If the case were indeed so as is now represented, the purchase of the Negroes
would be no more meritorious, than the act of a man, who if we were taken by
the Algerines, should purchase us out of that slavery. This would indeed be an
act of benevolence, if the purchaser should set us at liberty. But it is no act
of benevolence to buy a man out of one state into another no better. Nay, the
act of ransoming a man from death, gives no right to the ransome^ to commit a
crime or an act of injustice to the person ransomed. The person ransomed is
doubtless obligated according to his ability to satisfy the ransomer for his
expense and trouble. Yet the ransomer has no more right to enslave the other,
than the man who saves the life of another, who was about to be killed by a
robber or an assassin, has a right to enslave him* -- The liberty of a man for
life is a far greater good, than the property paid for a Negro on the African
coast. And to deprive a man of an immensely greater good, in order to recover
one immensely less, is an immense injury and crime.

7. As to the pretense, that to prohibit or lay aside this trade, would be
hurtful to our commerce; it is sufficient to ask; whether on the supposition,
that it were advantageous to the commerce of Great Britain to send her ships to
these states, and transport us into perpetual slavery in the West Indies, it
would be right that she should go into that trade.

8. That to prohibit the slave trade would infringe on the property of those,
who have expended large sums to curry on that trade, or of those who wish to
purchase the slaves for their plantations* has also been urged as an argument
in-favour of the trade* -- But the same argument would prove, (...) that if the
skins and teeth of the Negroes were as valuable articles of commerce as furs
and elephants' teeth, and a merchant were to lay out his property in this
commerce, he ought by no means to be obstructed therein.

9. But others will carry on the trade, if we do not. -- So others will rob,
steal and murder, if we do not.

10. It is said, that some men are intended by nature to be slaves. -- If this
mean, that the author of nature has given some men a license to enslave others;
this is denied, and proof is demanded. If it mean, that God has made some of
capacities inferior to others, and that the last have a right to enslave the
first* this argument will prove, that some of the citizens of every country,
have a right to enslave other citizens of the same country; nay, that some have
a right to enslave their own brothers and sisters. -- But if this argument
mean, that God in his providence suffers some men to be enslaved, and that this
proves, that from the beginning he intended they should be enslaved, and made
them with this intention; the answer is, that in like manner he suffers some
men to be murdered, and in this sense* he intended and made them to be
murdered. Yet no man in his senses will hence argue the lawfulness of murder.

11. It is further pretended, that no other men, than Negroes* can endure
labor in the hot climates of the West Indies, and the southern states* -- But
does this appear to be fact? In all other climates, the laboring people are
the most healthy. And I confess I have not yet seen evidence, but that those
who have been accustomed to labor, and are inured to those climates, can bear
labor there also. -- However, taking for granted the fact asserted in this
objection, does it follow, that the inhabitants of those countries have a right
to enslave the Africans to labor for them? No more surely than from the
circumstance, that you are feeble and cannot labor, it follows, that you have
a right to enslave your robust neighbor. As in all other cases, he feeble and
those who choose not to labor, and ye^ with to have their lands cultivated,
are necessitated to hire the robust to labor for them; so no reason can be
given, why the inhabitants of not climates should not either perform their own
labor, of hire those who can perform it, whether Negroes or others.

If our traders went to the coast of Africa to murder the inhabitants, or to
rob them of their property, all would own that such murderous or practical
practices are wicked and abominable. Now it is as really wicked to rob a man of
his liberty, as to rob him of his life; and it is much more wicked, than to rob
him of his property. All men agree to condemn highway robbery. And the
slave trade is as much a greater wickedness than highway robbery, as liberty is
more valuable than property. How strange is it then, that in the same nation
highway robbery should be punished with death, and the slave trade be
encouraged by national authority?

We all dread political slavery, or subjection to the arbitrary power of a
king, or of any man or men not deriving their authority from the people. Yet
such a state is inconceivably preferable to the slavery of the Negroes. Suppose
that in the late war we had been subdued by Great Britain; we should have been
taxed without our consent. But these taxes would have amounted to but a small
part of our property. Whereas the Negroes are deprived of all their property;
no part of their earnings is their own; the whole is their masters. -- In a
conquered state we should have been at liberty to dispose of ourselves and of
our property, in most cases, as we should choose. We should have been free to
live in this or that town or place; in any part of the country, or to remove
out of the country; to apply to this or that business; to labor or not; and
excepting a sufficiency for the taxes, to dispose of the fruit of our labor to
our own benefit, or that of our children, or of any other person. But the
unhappy. Negroes in slavery can do none of these, things. They must do what
they are commanded, and as much as they are commanded, on pain of the lash.
They must live where they are placed, and must confine themselves to that spot*
on pain of death.

So that Great Britain in her late attempt to enslave America, committed a very
small crime indeed, in comparison with the crime of those who enslave the
Africans.

The arguments which have been urged against the slave trade, are with little
variation applicable* to the holding of slaves. He who holds a slave, continues
to deprive him of that liberty, which was taken from him on the coast of
Africa. And if it were wrong to deprive him of it in the first instance, why
not in the second? If this be true, no man has a better, right to retain his
Negro in slavery, than he had to take him from his native African shores. And
every man who cannot show, that his Negro has by his voluntary conduct
forfeited his liberty, is obligated immediately to manumit him. Undoubtedly we
should think so, were we holden in the same slavery in which the Negroes are:
and our text requires us to do to others, as we would that they should do to us.

To hold a slave, who has a right to his liberty, is not only a real crime, but
a very great one. Many good Christians have wondered how Abraham, ^he father of
the faithful, could take Hagar to his bed; and how Sarah, celebrated as an holy
woman, could consent to this transaction: also, how David and Solomon could
have so many wives and concubines, and yet be real saints. Let such enquire how
it is possible that our fathers, and men now alive, universally reputed pious,
should hold Negro slaves, and yet be the subjects of real piety? And whether to
reduce a man, who has the same right to liberty as any other man, to a state
of absolute slavery, or to hold him in that state, be not as great a crime as
concubinage or fornication. I presume it will not be denied, that to commit
theft or robbery every day of a man's life, is as great a sin as to commit
fornication in one instance. But to steal a man, or to rob him of his liberty,
is a greater sin than to steal his property, or to take it by violence. And to
hold a man in a state of slavery, who has a right to his liberty, is to be
every day guilty of robbing him of his liberty, or of man-stealing. The
consequence is inevitable, that other things being the same, to hold a Negro
slave, unless he have forfeited his liberty, is a greater sin in the sight of
God than concubinage or fornication.

Does this conclusion seem strange to any of you? Let me entreat you to weigh
it heartily, before you reject it. You will not deny, that liberty is more
valuable than property: and that it is a greater sin to deprive a man of his
whole liberty during life, than to deprive him of his whole property; or that
man-stealing is a greater crime than robbery. Nor will you deny, that to hold
in slavery a man who was stolen, is substantially the same crime as to steal
him. These principles being undeniable, I leave it to yourselves to draw the
plain and necessary consequence. And if your consciences shall, in spite of all
opposition, tell you, that while you hold your Negroes in slavery, you do
wrong, exceedingly wrong; that you do not, as you would that men should do to
you; that you commit sin in the sight of God; that you daily violate the plain
rights of mankind, and that in a higher degree, than if you committed these or
robbery; let me beseech you not to stifle this conviction, but attend to it and
act accordingly; lest you add to your former guilt, that of sinning against the
light of truth, and of your own consciences.

To convince yourselves, that, your information being the same, to hold a Negro
slave is a greater sin than fornication, theft or robbery, you need only bring
the matter home to yourselves. I am willing to appeal to your own consciences,
whether you would not judge it to be a greater sin for a man to hold you or
your child during life in such slavery as* that of the Negroes, than for him to
spend one night in a brother, or in one instance to steal or rob. Let
conscience speak, and I will submit to its decision.

This question seems to be clearly decided by revelation. Exodus xxi. 16. He
that steals a man and sells him or if he be found in his hand* he shall
surely be put to death. Thus death is, by the divine express declaration, the
punishment due to the crime of man-stealing. But death is not the punishment
declared by God to be due to fornication, theft or robbery, in common cases.
Therefore we have the divine authority to assert, that man-stealing is a
greater crime than fornication, theft or robbery. Now to hold in slavery a man
who has a right to liberty, is substantially the same crime as to deprive him
of his liberty. And to deprive of liberty, and reduce to slavery, a man who has
a right to liberty, is man-stealing For it is immaterial, whether he be taken
and reduced to slavery clandestinely, or by open violence. Therefore if the
Negroes have a right to liberty; to hold them in slavery is manumitting, which
we have seen is, by God himself, declared to be a greater crime than
fornication, theft or robbery.

Perhaps, though this truth be clearly demonstrable, both from reason and
revelation, you scarcely dare receive it, because it seems to bear hardly on
the characters of our pious fathers, who held slaves But they did it
ignorantly, and in unbelief of the truth; as Abraham; Jacob, David and Solomon,
were ignorant that polygamy or concubinage was wrong. As to domestic slavery,
our fathers lived in a time of ignorance, which God winked at but now be
commands all men every where to repent of this wickedness, and to break off
this sin by righteousness, and this iniquity by showing mercy to the poor, if
it may be a lengthening out of their tranquillity. You therefore to whom the
present blaze of light as to this subject has reached, cannot sin at so cheap a
rate as our fathers.

But methinks I hear some say, I have bought my Negro. I have paid a large sum
for him; I cannot lose this sum, and therefore I cannot manumit him. -- Alas!
this is bitting the nail on the head. This brings into view the true cause
which makes it so difficult to convince men of what is right in this case. --
You recollect the story of Amaziah's hiring an hundred thousand men of Israel;
for an hundred talents, to assist him against the Edomites* and that when by
the word of the Lord, he was forbidden to take those hired men with him to the
war, he cried out, But what shall we do for the hundred talents, which I have
given to the army of Israel? In this case, the answer of God was The Lord is
able to give thee much more than this. -- To apply this to the subject before
us* God is able to give thee much more than thou shall lose by man^^ritting thy
slave.

You may plead, that you use your sla^^* well; you are not cruel to him, but
feed and clothe him comfortably, etc. Still every day you rob him of a most
valuable and important right. And a highwayman, who robs a man of his money in
the most easy and complai^ant manner, is still a robber; and murder may be
effected in a manner the least cruel and tormenting; still it is murder.

Having now taken that view of our subject which was proposed, we may in
reflection see abundant reason to acquiesce in the institution of this society.
If the slave trade be unjust, and as gross a violation of the rights of
mankind, as would be, if the Africans should transport us into perpetual
slavery in Africa; to unite our influence against it, is a duty which we owe to
mankind, to ourselves, and to God too. It is but doing as we would that men
should do to us. -- Nor is it enough that we have formed the society; we must
do the duties of it. The first of these is to put an end to the slave trade.
The second is to relieve those who, contrary to the laws of the country, are
holden in bondage. Another is to defend those in their remaining legal and
natural rights, who are by law holden in bondage. Another, and not the least
important object of this society, I conceive to be, to increase and disperse
the light of truth with respect to the subject of African slavery, and so
prepare the way for its total abolition. For until men in general are convinced
of the injustice of the trade, and of the slavery itself, comparatively little
can be done to effect the most important purposes of the institution.

It is not to be doubted, that the trade is even now carried on from this
state. Vessels are from time to time fitted out for the coast of Africa, to
transport the Negroes to the West Indies and other parts. Nor will an end be
put to this trade, without out vigilance and strenuous exertion on the part of
this society; or other friends of humanity; nor without a patient enduring of
the opposition and odium of all who are concerned in it, of their friends, and
of all who are of the opinion that it is justifiable. Among these we are
doubtless to reckon some of large property, and considerable influence. And if
the laws and customs of the country equally allowed of it, many, and perhaps as
many as now plead for the right of the African slave trade, would plead for the
right of kidnapping us, the citizens of the United States, and of selling us
into perpetual slavery. -- If then we dare not occur the displeasure of such
men, we may as well dissolve the society, and leave the slave trade to be
carried on, and the Negroes to be kidnapped; and though free in this state, to
be sold into perpetual slavery in distant parts, at the pleasure of any man,
who wishes to make gain by such abominable practices.

Though we must expect opposition, yet if we be steady and persevering, we need
not fear that we shall fail of success. The advantages, which the cause has
already gained, are many and great. Thirty years ago scarcely a man in this
country thought either the slave trade or the slavery of Negroes to be wrong.
But now how many and able advocates in private life, in our legislatures* in
Congress, have appeared, and have openly and irrefragably pleaded the rights of
humanity in this as well as other instances? Nay, the great body of the people,
from New Hampshire to Virginia inclusively, have obtained such light, that in
all those states the further importation of slaves is prohibited by law. And in
Massachusetts and New Hampshire, slavery is totally abolished.

Nor is the light concerning this subject confined to America. It has appeared
with great clearness in France, and produced remarkable effects in the National
Assembly. It has also shone in bright beams in Great Britain. It flashes with
splendor in the writings of Clarkson, and in the proceedings of several
societies formed to abolish the slave trade* Nor has it been possible to shut
it out of the British parliament. This light is still increasing* and in time
will effect a total revolution. And if we judge of the future by the past,
within fifty years from this time, it will ^e as shameful for a man to hold a
Negro slave, as to be guilty of common robbery or these. But it is our duty to
remove the obstacles which intercept the rays of this light, that it may reach
not only public bodies, but every individual. And when it shall have obtained a
general spread, shall have dispelled all darkness, and slavery shall be no
more, it will be an honor to be recorded in history as a society which was
formed, and which exerted itself with vigou^ and fidelity, to bring about an
event so necessary and conducive to the interests of humanity and virtue, to
the support of the rights, and to the advancement of the happiness of mankind.

APPENDIX.
SOME objections to the doctrine of the preceding sermon have been mentioned to
the author, since the delivery of it. Of these it may be proper to take some
notice.

1. The slaves are in a better situation than that in which they were in their
own country; especially as they have opportunity to know the Christian
religion, and to secure the saving blessings of it. Therefore it is not an
injury, but a benefit, to bring them into this country, even though their
importation be accompanied and followed with slavery. It is also said, that the
situation of many Negroes under their masters is much better than it would be
were they free in this country; that they are much better fed and clothed, and
are much more happy; that therefore to hold them in slavery is so far from a
crime, that it is a meritorious act.

With regard to these pleas, it is to be observed, that every man has a right
to judge concerning his own happiness, and to choose the means of obtaining or
promoting it; and to deprive him of this right is the very injury of which we
complain; it is to enslave him. Because we judge, that the Negroes are more
happy in this country, in a state of slavery, than in the enjoyment of liberty
in Africa, we have no more right to enslave them and bring them into this
country, than we have to enslave any of our neighbors, who we judge would be
more happy under our control, than they are at present under their own. Let us
make the case our own. Should we believe that we were justly treated, if the
Africans should carry us into perpetual slavery in Africa, on the ground that
they judged that we should be more happy in that state, than in our present
situation?

As to the opportunity which the Negroes in this country are said to have, to
become acquainted with Christianity; this with respect to many is granted: but
what follows from it? It would be ridiculous to pretend that this is the motive
on which they act who import them, or they who buy and hold them in slavery. Or
if this were the motive, it would not sanctify either the trade or the slavery.
We are not at liberty to do evil, that good may come; to commit a crime more
aggravated than theft or robbery, that we may make a proselyte to Christianity.
Neither our Lord Jesus Christ, nor any one of his apostles, has taught us this
mode of propagating the faith.

2. It is said, that the doctrine of the preceding sermon imputes that as a
crime to individuals, which is owing to the state of society. This is granted;
and what follows? It is owing to the state of society, that our neighbors the
Indians roast their captives: and does it hence follow, that such conduct is
not to be imputed to the individual agents as a crime? It is owing to the state
of society in Popish countries, that thousands worship the beast and his image:
and is that worship therefore not to be imputed as a crime to those who render
it? Read the Revelation of St. John. The state of society is such, that
drunkenness and adultery are very common in some countries; but will it follow,
that those vices are innocent in those countries?

3. If I be ever so willing to manumit my slave, I cannot do it without being
holden to maintain him, when he shall be sick, or shall be old and decrepit.
Therefore I have a right to hold him as a slave. -- The same argument will
prove, that you have a right to enslave your children or your parents; as you
are equally holden to maintain them in sickness and in decrepit old age. -- The
argument implies, that in order to secure the money, which you are afraid the
laws of your country will some time or other oblige you to pay; it is right for
you to rob a free man of his liberty, or be guilty of man-stealing. On the
ground of this argument, every town or parish obligated by law to maintain its
helpless poor, has a right to sell into perpetual slavery all the people who
may probably or even possibly occasion a public expense.

4. After all, it is not safe to manumit the Negroes: they would cut our
throats; they would endanger the peace and government of the state. Or at least
they would be so idle, that they would not provide themselves with necessaries;
of course, they must live by thievery and plundering.

This objection requires a different answer, as it respects the northern, and
as it respects the southern states. As it respects the northern, in which
slaves are so few, there is not the least foundation to imagine, that they
would combine or make insurrection against the government; or that they would
attempt to murder their masters. They are much more likely to kill their
masters, in order to obtain their liberty, or to revenge the abuse they
receive, while it is still continued, than to do it after the abuse has
ceased, and they are restored to their liberty. In this case, they would from a
sense of gratitude, or at least from a conviction of the justice of their
masters, feel a strong attachment, instead of a murderous disposition.

Nor is there the least danger, but that by a proper vigilance of the
select-men, and by a strict execution of the laws now existing, the Negroes
might in a tolerable degree be kept from idleness and pilfering.

All this has been verified by experiment. In Massachusetts, all the Negroes
in the commonwealth were by their new constitution liberated in a day: and none
of the ill consequences objected followed either to the commonwealth or to
individuals.

With regard to the southern states, the case is different. The Negroes in some
parts of those states are a great majority of the whole, and therefore the
evils objected would, in case of a general manumission at once, be more likely
to take place. But in the first place there is no prospect that the Conviction
of the truth, exhibited in the preceding discourse, will at once take place in
the minds of all the holders of slaves. The utmost that can be expected, is
that it will take place gradually in one after another, and that of course the
slaves will be gradually manumitted. Therefore the evils of a general
manumission at once, are dreaded without reason.

If in any state the slaves should be manumitted in considerable numbers at
once, or so that the number of free Negroes should become large; various
measures might be concerted to prevent the evils feared. One I beg leave to
propose: that overseers of the free Negroes be appointed from among themselves,
who shall be empowered to inspect the morals and management of the rest, and
report to proper authority those who are vicious, idle or incapable of managing
their own affairs; and that such authority dispose of them under proper masters
for a year or other term, as is done perhaps in all the states, with regard to
the poor white people in like manner vicious, idle, or incapable of management.
Such black overseers would naturally be ambitious to discharge the duties of
their office; they would in many respects have much more influence than white
men with their countrymen: and other Negroes looking forward to the same
honorable distinction, would endeavor to deserve it by their improvement and
good conduct.

But, after all, this whole objection, if it were ever so entirely founded on
truth -- if the freed Negroes would probably rise against their masters, or
combine against government, rests on the same ground as the apology of the
robber, who murders the man whom he has robbed. Says the robber to himself, I
have robbed this man, and now if I let him go he will kill me, or he will
complain to authority, and I shall be apprehended and hung. I must therefore
kill him. There is no other way of safety for me. -- The coincidence between
this reasoning and that of the objection under consideration, must be manifest
to all. And if this reasoning of the robber be inconclusive; if the robber have
no right on that ground to kill the man whom he has robbed; neither have the
slave-holders any more right to continue to hold their slaves. If the robber
ought to spare the life of the man robbed, take his own chance, and esteem
himself happy, if he can escape justice; so the slave-holders ought immediately
to let their slaves go free, treat them with the utmost kindness, by such
treatment endeavor to pacify them with respect to past injuries, and esteem
themselves happy, if they can compromise the matter in this manner.

In all countries, in which the slaves are a majority of the inhabitants, the
masters lie in a great measure at the mercy of the slaves, and may most
rationally expect sooner or later to be cut off, or driven out by the slaves,
or to be reduced to the same level, and to be mingled with them into one common
mass. This I think is, by ancient and modern events, demonstrated to be the
natural and necessary course of human affairs. The hewers of wood and drawers
of water among the Israelites, the Helots among the Lacedaemonians, the slaves
among the Romans, the villains and vassals in most of the kingdoms of Europe
under the feudal system, have long since mixed with the common mass of the
people, and shared the common privileges and honors of their respective
countries. And in the French West Indies the Mulattoes and free Negroes are
already become so numerous and powerful a body, as to be allowed by the
National Assembly to enjoy the common rights and honors of free men. These
facts plainly show, what the whites in the West Indies and the southern states
are to expect concerning their posterity, that it will infallibly be a m^ngrel
breed, or else they must quit the country to the Negroes whom they have
hitherto holden in bondage.

Thus it seems, that they will be necessitated by Providence to make in one way
or another compensation to the Negroes for the injury which they have done
them. In the first case, by taking them into affinity with themselves, giving
them their own sons and daughters in marriage, and making them and their
posterity the heirs of all their property and all their honors, and by raising
their color to a partial whiteness, whereby a part at least of that mark which
brings on them so much contempt will be wiped off. In the other case, by
leaving to them all their real estates. It is manifest, by the bare stating of
the two cases, that the compensation in the latter case is by much the least.
In the former case, the compensation will include all that is included in the
latter, and much more. If therefore our southern brethren, and the inhabitants
of the West Indies, would balance their accounts with their Negro slaves at the
cheapest possible rate, they will doubtless judge it prudent, to leave the
country, with all their houses, lands and improvements, to their quiet
possession and dominion; as otherwise Providence will compel them to much
dearer settlement, and one attended with a circumstance inconceivably more
mortifying than the loss of all their real estates, I mean the mixture of their
blood with that of the Negroes into one common posterity.

At ^^ast it is to be hoped, that these considerations will induce them to
forbear any further importation of slaves, as the more numerous the slaves are,
the more dangerous they will be, and the more deeply tinged will be the color
of their mulatto posterity.

It is not to be doubted, but that the Negroes in these northern states also
will, in time, mix with the common mass of the people. But we have this
consolation, that as they are so small a proportion of the inhabitants, when
mixed with the rest, they will not produce any very sensible diversity of
color.

A short Sketch of the Evidence for the Abolition of the SLAVE TRADE, delivered
before a Committee of the British House of Commons.
VIRTUE, say moralists, is so transcendently beautiful, that she need but be
seen, to be universally admired: and is not VICE so hateful, that the more its
features are viewed, the more it will be avoided? The traffic in the human
species, particularly as carried on by the Europeans on the coast of Africa,
has so horrible an aspect, than nothing, one should think, but the MASK, under
which it has been concealed, could have prevented all the civilized nations in
the world uniting to drive the detested monster from the face of, the earth.
This MASK is, however, at length taken away, and the traffic stands exposed in
all its real, unalterable deformity. The PEOPLE are now called upon to behold,
to feel, and judge for themselves. The representations of former writers on
this subject were roundly denied; the facts they stated were not only
contradicted, but deemed impossible, and the authors themselves were accused of
slander. Now we have a body of EVIDENCE to which to appeal; of evidence,
possessing every essential of credibility. The witnesses have declared before
the Select Committee of the House of Commons, what they themselves saw: they
had the best opportunities of observation, and they are disinterested. And now
it appears, that one half of the tale of human misery has not been told; and
that every principle, than can bind a man of honor and conscience Speech of
the Chancellor of the Exchequer in the House of Commons.
loudly calls for the prohibition of the iniquitous traffic. Hard indeed must
those hearts be, and inaccessible those understandings Fox's ditto.
, which such evidence cannot reach!

The evidence delivered before the Select Committee of the House of Commons is
very voluminous, occupying two thousand pages in folio. But a judicious
Abstract and Arrangement of the Evidence, on the Part of the Petitioners for
the Abolition of the Slave Trade Printed by J. Phillips, George-Yard,
Lombard Street.
, has been published, and in a short compass contains the evidence of well
informed persons on that subject.

In the preface to this important volume of evidence we read of rewards offered
for taking runaway Negroes alive or dead -- of laws being required to be made
to prevent the practice of cutting off ears, noses and tongues -- of breaking
limbs and putting one eyes -- to prevent distempered, maimed, and worn out
Negroes from infesting towns -- to prevent aged and infirm Negroes being driven
from the plantations to starve. We meet also with such kind of preambles to
acts as the following, viz.

'Whereas the extreme cruelty and inhumanity of the managers, overseers, and
book-keepers of estates, have frequently driven slaves into the woods, and
occasioned rebellions, internal insurrections, etc. And whereas also it
frequently happens, that slaves come to their deaths by hasty and severe blows,
and other improper treatment of overseers and book-keepers, in the heat of
passion; and when such accidents do happen, the victims are entered in the
plantation-books as having died of convulsions, fits, or other causes not to be
accounted for: and to conceal the real truth of the cause of the death of such
slave or slaves, he or they is or are immediately put under ground,' etc. Other
preambles of a similar complexion, respecting the lodging, food and clothes of
Negroes, are here to be met with. We also find that runaway negroes, when
advertised, are described by the various brands upon their shoulders, breasts,
cheeks, and foreheads. A woman is described with a wooden leg; a man as having
both his ears cropped, and another by his nose and ears being cut off. Cornwall
Chronicle, Nov 7, 1789. Other instances occur within the year 1791.

The FIRST CHAPTER contains an account of the enormities committed by the
natives of Africa on the persons of one another, to procure slaves for the
Europeans, proved by the testimony of such as have visited that continent --
and confirmed by accounts from the (...) themselves, after their arrival in the
West Indies.

Under this head, we learn that kidnapping, or, as the natives call it,
panyaring, is very common; that war is made on purpose to procure slaves. The
king's soldiers set fire to villages in the night, and seize the wretched
inhabitants as they attempt to escape from the flames, and many perish either
by the fire or sword in the execution of this horrid purpose. A boy, who was
carried away in the night from his father's house, says, he believes both his
parents were killed; he is sure that one was; and that many others were killed,
and some taken. Various instances are mentioned of consummate treachery
employed in making captives. Kidnapping is professionally followed; large
parties go up the country three hundred miles, to drive down captives -- they
go a wood-ranging, and pick up every one they meet, and strip them naked. The
purchasers generally say, they do not care how the sellers come by their
slaves. Many are sold for crimes falsely imputed* the Judges participate the
profits of the fale, and are therefore strongly induced to condemn the
innocent. Crimes are invented and multiplied for the purpose of traffic. The
great men dress up and employ women, to entice young men to be connected with
them, that they may be convicted of adultery, and sold. The slaves are
separated without the least regard to ties of consanguinity, or the pathetic
expostulations and remonstrances of nature. When slave-ships are on the coast,
the natives go armed, but are no where safe. The man, invited to drink with his
neighbor, on rising to go, is seized by two of them, and a large dog: and this
mode of seizure is common.

By the SECOND CHAPTER it appears that the Europeans, by means of the trade in
slaves, are the occasion of the before mentioned enormities; that they
sometimes use additional means to excite the natives to practice them, often
attempt themselves to steal the natives, and succeed, force trade as they
please, and are guilty of injustice in their dealings. In proof of this charge,
we learn from the evidence, that Africans receive European goods in exchange
for s^aves -- that they declare when ships cease to come (as in times of war)
slaves cease to be taken. African dealers make the Princes drunk, in order to
overcome their aversion to unprovoked war: they furnish the natives with arms
and ammunition, and excite (...) to pillage.

The term war, in Africa, is used in general to signify pillage; and when many
towns are seen blazing in the night, the natives say war is carrying on.

The traders advance goods to Chiefs, to induce them to seize their subjects or
neighbors. Capt. Patterson set two villages at variance, and brought prisoners
from both sides. It is not uncommon to make the natives drunk, and then buy
them* General ^^^ke says, that it was proposed to him, by three English
captains of ships, to kidnap a hundred, or a hundred and fifty men, women and
children, king Damel's subjects, who had come to G^ree in consequence of the
friendly intercourse between him and Damel: he refused, and was much shocked by
the proposition. They said such things had been done by a former Governor. Two
men, black traders, were invited on board, intoxicated, and captured when
asleep. The Gregson's people, in running down the coast, kidnapped thirty-two
of the natives. The Dobson's boat* of Liverpool, had stolen a man and woman;
the Captain, on the remonstrance of Caps. Briggs, who told him there would be
no more trade if he did not deliver up his (...) captives* restored them; upon
which the natives loaded a boat with yams; goats; fowls, honey, and palm wine,
and would take nothing for them; -- a striking instance of forgiveness of
injuries, and of unmerited kindness (...).

We then meet with as opposite an exhibition of character as can possibly be
conceived (...) three or four hundred Africans cruelly massacred or (...) off,
by means of the treacherous contrivance of (...) English Captains, in Old
Calabar (...) -- But (...) i^ turn our eyes for relief to some ordinary
wickedness (...) Speech in the House of Commons
some consider Frauds as a necessary part of the traffic; they put false (...)
into powder (...) cut off two or three yards from the middle of (...) of cloth,
adulterate spirits, and soul (...) articles given. Besides these, there are
others who pay in bottles, which hold but half the (...) of the samples shown;
use false steel yards and weights, and ^ell such guns as burn on firing* so
that (...) of the natives of the wind ward coast are without their (...) and
thumbs on this account, and it has become a saying, that these guns kill more
out of the (...) the (...).

The THIRD CHAPTER contains an account of the (...) of the enslaved Africans,
and of the method of (...) feeding, and exercising them (...) on the (...), and
the manner of selling them when (...) at their destined ports; the deplorable
(...) of the refuse, or sickly slaves; separation of relations and friends;
mortality on the passages, and frequently after (...)* and the causes of this
m^^^^lity.

On being brought on board, says* Dr. Trotter, they show signs of extreme
distress and despair, from a feeling of their situation, and regret at being
torn from their friends and connections. They sometimes (...) of being in their
own country, and when they (...) show their despair by howling and shrieking
(...) manner. The women (...) into fits (...) course of the voyage, the slaves
are (...) to the (...) every day, from eight in the morning to four o'clock in
the afternoon. They are (...) a day with a rice, (...) and horse (...), and how
and then a little (...) of and (...) after (...) of (...) means they are
allowed half a pins of (...) and are for^^d to jump in (...) which by the slave
(...) is called making th^^ dance, (...) frequently (...) the (...) to (...),
their (...), when it is very painful to (...), they are compelled to dance by a
cat-of-(...). The Captains order them to sing and (...) songs of (...), the
subjects of which are their (...) send the sides of never returning home the
(...) remembers the very words upon these occasion.

The slaves are so ^rouded below* that it is impossible to (...) among them
without treading upon them* Dr. Trotter has seen the slaves drawing their
breath with all those laborious and anxious efforts for life, which are
observed in expiring animals, subjected by experiment to foul air, or in the
exhausted receiver of an air pump: they cry out -- 'we are dying, and many are
irrecoverably lost by suffocation, having had no previous signs of
indisposition. They are closely wedged together, and have not so much room as a
man in his coffin* either in length or breadth. They sometimes go ^^own well at
night, and are found dead in the morning. Alexander Falconbridge was never
among them for ten minutes together below, but his shirt was as wet as if
dipped in water. Sometimes the dead and living are found shackled together.
They lie on the bare planks, and the prominent parts of their bones, about the
shoulder blade and knees, have frequently been seen bare. No situation can be
conceived so dreadful and disgusting as that of slaves when ill of the flux. In
the Alexander (A. Falconbridge says) the deck was covered with blood and mucus,
and resembled, a slaughterhouse; the stench and foul air were intolerable. The
slaves* shackled together, frequently quarrel and make a great disturbance.
Some refuse food and medicine, and declare they want to die. In such ^^^es
compulsion is used. The ships are so fitted up as to prevent, by network, the
slaves jumping overboard; notwithstanding which they often attempt it, and
sometimes succeed, showing signs of exultation in the very jaws of death. Some
employ other means to destroy themselves, and others (...). Some resolve to
^^rve, and means are ineffectually used to wrench open their teeth; they
persist in their resolution, and effect their purpose, in spite of the utmost
pains to prevent it. When severely chastised for not taking their food, they
have looked up with a smile and said, "presently we shall be no more." The
thumb-screw is an instrument of torture; the application of it sometimes
occasions mortifications, of which the Negroes die. An instance occurs of the
cruelty of a Captain to an infant only nine months old, which one would suppose
too shocking to be true, were it not corroborated by other specimens of as
great cruelty in various parts of the evidence. After a series of tortures the
infant-expired, and its savage murderer, not yet satisfied, would suffer none
of the people on deck to throw the body overboard, but called the mother, the
wretched mother, to perform this last sad office to her murdered child.
Unwilling, as it might naturally be supposed she was, to comply, "he beat her,"
regardless of the indignant murmurs of her fettered countrymen, whom in the
barbarous plenitude of secure tyranny he permitted to be spectators of this
horrible scene -- "he beat her, until he made her take up the child, and carry
it to the side of the vessel, and then she dropped it into the sea, turning her
head another way, that she might not see it Speech by W. Smith in the House of
Commons.
!" Another instance occurs in this chapter, not perhaps of more cruelty, though
of greater magnitude.

A ship from Africa, with about four hundred slaves on board, struck upon some
shoals, called the Morant Keys, distant eleven leagues S. S. E. off the east
end of a Jamaica. The officers and seamen of the ship landed in their, boats,
carrying with them arms and provisions. The slaves were left on board in their
irons and shackles. This happened in the night time. When morning came, it was
discovered that the Negroes had got out of their irons, and were busy making
rafts, upon which they placed the women and children; the men who were capable
of swimming attended upon the rafts, whilst they drifted before the wind
toward the island where the seamen had landed. From an apprehension that the
Negroes would consume the water and provisions which the seamen had landed,
they came to the resolution of destroying them, by means of their fire arms and
other weapons. As the poor wretches approached the shore, they actually
destroyed between three and four hundred of them. Out of the whole cargo only
thirty-three or thirty-four were saved and brought to Kingston, where they wore
sold at public vendue.

When the ships arrive at their destined ports, the cargo of slaves is sold,
either by scramble of vendue. The sale by scramble is described. -- A great
number of people come on board with (...) in their hands (the ship being first
darkened with sails, and covered round; the men slaves placed on the main deck,
and the women on the quarter deck) and rus^ through the barricado door with the
ferocity of brutes. Some have three or four handkerchiefs tied together, to
encircle as many as they think fit for their purpose. This is a very general
mode of sale; and so terrifies the poor Negroes, that forty or fifty at a time
have leaped into the sea* these, however the witness believes, have been taken
up again: the women have got away, and run about the town as if they were mad.
The slaves sold by public ^uctio^ or vendue are generally the refuse, or sickly
slaven. These are in such a state of health, that they fell greatly under
price. They have been knows to be sold for five dollars, a guinea, and even a
single dollar each. Some that are deemed not worth buying are left to expire in
the place of (...), for nobody gives them any thing to eat or drink, and some
of them live three days in that situation! In the sale no care is taken to
prevent the separation of relations; they are separated (says the evidence)
like sheep and lambs by the butcher. Making the slaves walk the plank, is a
term used for throwing them overboard when provisions are scarce. Sometimes the
ships los^ more than half their cargoes by the smallpox; at others they bury a
quarter or one third on the passage, owing to various other causes of
mortality: and it is confessed by the planters. See Stanley's speech in the
House of Commons.
, that half she slaves die in the seasoning, after arrival in the West Indies,
Surgeon Wilson says, that of the death of two thirds of those who died in his
ship, the primary cause was melancholy. The disorders which carry off the
slaves in such numbers are ascribed by Falconbridge to a diseased mind, sudden
transitions from heat to cold, a putrid atmosphere, wallowing in their own
excrements, and being shackled together.

The Captains, surgeons, etc* who have quitted the African slave trade,
uniformly declare the reason to have been, that they could not conscientiously
continue in it they say, that it is an unnatural, iniquitous, and villainous
trade, founded on injustice and treachery; manifestly carried on by oppression
and cruelty, and not unfrequently terminating in murder. Captain Hall says, he
quitted it (in opposition to lucrative offers) from a conviction that it was
perfectly illegal, and founded in blood.

The FOURTH CHAPTER gives an account of the general estimation and treatment of
the slaves in the West Indies. Dr. Jackson says, that the Negroes are generally
esteemed a species of inferior beings, where the right of purchase gives the
owner a power of using at his will. T^ Wool rich says, he never (...) best
master in the West Indies use his slaves so well, as the worst master his
servants in England* that their state is inconceivable -- that a sight of a
gang would convince more than all words.

Slaves are either field-slaves, or in or out door slaves.

The field-slaves begin their work at break of day. They work in rows, without
exception, under the whip of drivers, and the weak are made to keep up with the
strong. They continue their labor (with two intermissions, half an hour during
the morning, and two hours at noon) till sunset. In the Intervals they are
made to pick grass for the cattle. Cook has known pregnant women worked and
flogged a few days before their delivery. Some, however, are a little indulged
when in that state. After the month they work with the children on their backs.
In the crop-season the labor is of much longer duration On some estates it is
usual to dig a hole in the ground, in which they put the bellies of pregnant
women, while they whip them, that they may not escape punishment, nor yet
endanger the life of the woman or child.
. The slaves sometimes work so long that they cannot help sleeping, and then it
not unfrequently happens, that their arms are caught in the mill and torn off.
They are said to be allowed one day in seven for rest, but this time is
necessarily employed in raising food for the other days, and gathering grass
for their masters cattle. The best allowance of food is at Barbados, which is a
pint of grain for twenty-four hours, and half a rotten herring, when to be had.
When the herrings are unfit for the whites, they are bought up by planters for
the slaves. Some allow nine pints of corn a week, and about one pound of salt
fish, which is the greatest allowance mentioned in the whole course of the
evidence. Some have no provision but what they raise themselves, and they are
frequently so fatigued by the labor of the rest of the week, as scarcely to be
able to work for their own support on the Sunday. And the land allotted them
for this purpose is often at the distance of three miles from their houses; it
would, however, be quite ample for their support, were they allowed time
sufficient for its cultivation. Sometimes when they have been at the pains of
clearing their land, their masters take it for canes, and give them wood-land
instead of it. This hardship some have so taken to heart as to die. Putrid
carcases are burnt; if they were buried, the slaves would dig them up and eat
them, which would breed distempers among them. They are sometimes driven by
extreme hunger to steal, at the hazard of their lives. They are badly clothed;
one half of them go almost naked. The slaves in general have no bed or b^dding
at all. Their houses are built with four poles, and that^^^^. They have little
or no property. All the evidence (to whom the question has been proposed) agree
in answering, that they never knew or heard of a field-slave ever amassing such
a sum, as enabled him to purchase his own freedom. The artificers, such as
house-carpenters, coopers, masons, the drivers and head-slaves, are better off.
The owners of women let them out for prostitution, and flog them, if they do
not bring home full wages.

The Negroes, when whipped, are suspended by the arms, with weights at their
feet. They are first whipped with a whip made of cow-skin (which cuts, out the
flesh, whereas the military whips out only the skin) and afterward with ebony
bushes (which are more prickly than thorn bushes in this country) in order to
let out the congealed blood. Dr. Harrison thinks the whipping too severe to be
inflicted on any human being: he could lay two or three fingers into the wounds
of a man whipped for not coming when he was called. Many receive from one
hundred and fifty to two hundred lashes at a time; and in two or three days
this is repeated: they wash the raw parts with pickle; this appears, from the
convulsions it occasions, more cruel than whipping; but it is done to prevent
mortification. After severe whipping, they are worked all day without food,
except what their friends (...) out of (...) own (...). They are (...) the
stocks at night, and worked next day as before. This cruel ^^^atment has made
many (...). Cook has known sources slaves who, in consequence thereof, (...)
into the woods, and cut their throats together. These severe punishments are
frequent. The scars made by whipping last to old age. T. Woolrich has seen
their backs one undistinguished mass of lamps, holes, and furrows. They
sometimes die of mortification of the wounds. A planter ^^^gged his driver to
death, and boasted of having so done. (...) the head of extraordinary
punishment, (for (...) a ready named any reckoned only ordinary) the nation is
made of iron dollars with ^ooks (...) heavy cattle (...) and a half hundred
weight fast (...) them, which the Negroes are (...) to drag after them, (...)
working in the field, suspending by the hands (...) the fingers (...) ^^ogging
with ebony bushes (...) forced to go on all sounds, updates to get up, being
tied up to the branches of (...), with a heavy weight round the neck, exposed
to (...) fun -- thumb ^orews; a man was put on the pic^^^ so long as to
occasion a mortification of his foot and hand, on su^pi^^^^ of robbing his
masters, a public officer of a sum of money, which is afterward appeared the
master had taken himself. Yet the master was privy to the punishment, and the
slave had General Tottenham saw a youth, about (...), walking in the streets,
in a most deplorable situation ^ot^^ly naked, and wrong an (...) about his
neck, with (...) long projecting spites. His body, before and behind, his
breech, ^el^y and thighs, were almost cut to piec^'s and with ^onning (...)
kill over them, and you might put your finger (...) me of the (...) not s^^
down, owing to his b^^^ch being in a state of mortification; and it was
impossible for him to lie down, from the projection of the prongs. The (...)
came to the General to a^^ relief. He was shocked at his (...), and asked, him
what he had done to suffer such a punishment, and who inflicted it. He said it
was his master, who lived about two miles from town, and that as he could not
work, he would give him nothing to eat.
no compensation. He was punished by order of the master, who did not then
choose to make it known that he himself had made use of the money. A girl's ears
were nailed to a post, afterward torn aways* and clipped off close to her head,
with a pair of large sciss^rs; besides this, she was unmercifully flogged, and
all for -- BREAKING A PLATE, OR SPILLING A CUP OF TEA* A Negro, impelled by
hunger, had stolen part of a turkey, his master caused him to be held down, and
with his own hands, took a hammer and punch, and knocked out four of his teeth.
The hand is cut off, if lifted up against a white man and the leg for running
away. A planter sent for a surgeon to cut off the leg of a Negro who had ran
away. On the surgeon's refusing to do it, the planter took an iron bar, and
broke the leg in pieces, and then the surgeon took it off. This planter did
many such acts of cruelty, and all with impunity. The practice of dropping hot
lead upon the Negroes, is here mentioned, H. Ross saw a young female suspended
by her wrists to a tree swinging to and fro, while her master applied a lighted
torch to the different parts of her writhing body. It was notorious that Rushie
tortured so many of his Negroes to death; that he was obliged to ^^ll his
estate. Another planter, is, the same island Jamaica.
, destroyed forty slaves out of sixty (in three years) by severity. The rest of
the conduct of this infamous wretch was concealed by the Committee of the House
of Commons, (...) containing circumstances too horrible to be given to the
world. We, however, go on to read of knocking on the head and stabbing, of a
hot iron forced between the teeth, of a slave thrown into the boiling juice,
and killed, of a Negro shot, and his head cut off. And it appears, that the
women, deemed of respectability and rank, not only order and superintend, out
sometimes actually inflict with their own hands severe punishments on their
slaves.

The offenses for which the before mentioned punishments are inflicted are, not
coming into the field in time, not picking a sufficient quantity of grass, not
appearing willing to work, when in fact sick and not able; for staying too long
on an errand, for not coming immediately when called, for not bringing home
(the women) the full weekly sum enjoined by their owners; for running away, and
for theft, to which they are often driven by hunger.

Under the head of "extraordinary punishments," some appear to have suffered
for running away, or for lifting up a hand against a white man, or for breaking
a plate, or spilling a cup of tea, or to extort confession. Others again, in
the moments of sudden resentment, and one on a diabolical pretext, which the
master held out to the world to conceal his own villainy, and which he knew to
be false.

The slaves have little or no redress against ill usage of any sort; the laws
to restrict punishment are a mere farce, and universally disregarded, or when
pretended to be observed, they are in diverse ways effectually evaded: besides,
the evidence of a black is in no case whatever admitted against a white man;
which circumstance alone is enough to deprive the Negroes of all legal
protection whatever, were the Laws, in other respects, ever so just and
salutary. Lieutenant Davidson was so hurt at the severe and frequent whippings
of one of the women, that he complained to a magistrate, who said, "he had
nothing to do with it."

The particular instances mentioned in the evidence, of slaves dying in
consequence of severe and cruel treatment from their masters, were not
punished, though generally known; nor do the perpetrators of these barbarities
appear to have suffered any disgrace!

If you speak to a Negro of future punishments, he says, -- "Why should a poor
Negro be punished? he does no wrong; fiery cauldrons, and such things, are
reserved for white people, as punishments for the oppression of slaves."

In the FIFTH CHAPTER it is proved, by such as have seen them in their own
country, that the natives of Africa are equal to the Europeans in their natural
capacities, feelings, affections, and moral character. They manufacture gold
and iron, in some respects equal to the European artists -- also cloth and
leather with uncommon neatness; the former they did blue, yellow, brown and
orange. They are skilled in making indigo and soap, and pottery wares, and
prepare fall for their own use from the sea water. They also make ropes with
aloes. With respect to their moral character, they are very honest and
hospitable grateful and affectionate, harmless and innocent; punctual in their
dealings, and as capable of virtue as the whites. They are susceptible of all
the social virtues: generosity, fidelity, and gratitude, are allowed them by
Dr. Stuart. These virtues Dr. Jackson enumerates, and adds charity to all in
distress, and a strong attachment on the part of parents to their children. T.
Woolrich says, he never knew of an African, who could express himself, that did
not believe in the existence of a Supreme Being.

In the SIXTH and SEVENTH CHAPTERS it appears, that the natives possess
industry and a spirit of commerce, sufficient for carrying on a new trade; that
their country abounds with, and might easily be made still more productive of,
many and various articles of commerce; but that the traffic in slaves is an
insuperable impediment to opening a new trade.

In the TENTH CHAPTER it is proved not to be true, what some say, that the
natives of Africa are happier in the European colonies than in their own
country. They love their own country, but destroy themselves in the colonies,
etc. etc. But any comparison between the two situations, is (as H. Ross says,
though on another occasion) an insult to common sense.

The ELEVENTH, TWELETH and THIRTEENTH CHAPTERS, are on the subject of Negro
population in the colonies, and plainly show that the importation of fresh
Africans might immediately be superceded* by the introduction of general good
treatment and of certain salutary regulations therein suggested.

The FOURTEENTH CHAPTER is employed to demonstrate, from the evidence before
the committee, that the colonists would be able to carry on the necessary
cultivation of their lands, without a fresh importation of slaves, while the
generation immediately succeeding the regulations proposed were growing up, to
supply the vacancies occasioned by the natural deaths of the slaves of all
ages, now is their possession.

The FIFTEENTH CHAPTER enquires, whether there be not a prevailing opinion, in
the colonies, that it is cheaper to buy (...) import slaves than thus to
increase them by population. And whether the very severe of this opinion be not
true: namely, that it is more profitable to breed than to import. The result of
this enquiry is clearly in favor of the immediate abolition of the African
slave trade. The same may be said of the (...) and last chapter, in which it is
considered, whether is be more political to extend the cultivation of the
colonies by the continuance of the slave trade, or wait till the rising
generation shall be capable of performing it.

Having thus taken a general view of the most striking features of the evidence
for the abolition of the traffic in the human species, as carried on by the
English on the coast of Africa; it might not be improper to close it with the
declaration of a (...) and wise S^^^tory, whose indefatigable labors on (...)
half of the oppressed Africans cannot said to insure him the unfeigned respect
of every love of freedom and humanity.

"THE ABOLITION OF THE SLAVE TRADE ((...)) IS (...) S^^LY REQUIRED, (...) AND
MORALTEN, (...) OF ^OUND POLICY Speech of W. Wilberforce in the House of
Commons.


The noble exo^dium of another able advocate of the same righteous cause, must
not (...) be omitted in the place, the House of Commons bring no^^ (...) of the
(...) of this (...) evidenced having had the facts undeniably established,
knowing, in short, what ^he slave trade was, (...) declared, that if they did
not, by the (...) to all mankind their abhorrence of a practice so enormous, so
savage, so (...) to all laws, human and divine, it would be (...) scan^^l^ous,
(...) des^^^ing, in the eyes of the country, and of the world, than thy vote
(...) House of Commons had ever given. He desired them (...) to (...), before
they gave their votes, what, they were about to do (...). If they voted that
the slave trade should not be abolished, they would, by their vote that ^ight,
give a parliamentary (...) to (...) for and (...) for as system of rapine (...)
and murder, the slave (...) had now most thereby (...) Speech of C. J. Fox in
the House of Commons, reported by Wood ^pan^.


(...) remains now to recommend, as earnestly and as, strongly as possible, to
the inhabitant of ^^is land of, freedom individually, a particular and serious
(...) to THIS ABSOLUTE NECESSITY, ON EV^^^ CONSIDERATION OF MORALITY AND
JUSTICE, OF PUTTING AN END TO A PRACTICE SO PREGNANT WITH CIRCUMSTANCES OF
TERROR AND ALARM TO THIS COUNTRY.

Much has been lately done, by the un^ted friends of equitable freedom, in
circulating throughout the kingdom important information on this interesting
subject: but much remains yet to be done* The minds of many have been informed,
and their indignation justly kindled, by the history of a commerce* (...)
written throughout in characters of blood. Speech of W. Wilberforce, Esquire; in
the House of Commons.
But the understandings, it is to be feared, of a great majority of the people
of England, are still unenlightened. Should the foregoing short sketch of the
evidence awaken the feelings, or quicken the attention, of any, in favor of
their greatly injured fellowcreatures, the oppressed Africans, it is much to be
wished, that they will not hastily dismiss the subject (...) their
recollection* or suffer its p^inful impressions to be made in vain: but seek a
further acquaintance with the evidence* which the more they examine, the
str^^ge^ will be their inducements t^ (...) every power and faculty they
possess, for the purpose of procuring the abolition of the slave trade. Let no
one say, any situation of privacy and obscurity precludes all possibility of
serving the cause* -- for the greatest numbers consist of (...), and the most
mighty exertions of states and emp^^^ are but aggregates of individual ability*
Next to members of Parliament, all who have any just influence in the election
of them, are particularly concerned to consider, how far the attainment of the
great and we have in view may depend upon their conduct. We may certainly
conclude, that whoever is no^ a friend to the liberty of the meanest subject,
is not fit to be entrusted with that of the state: and even those who have no
vote, are nevertheless comprehended in our idea of the public mind -- nor is
any man of sense and virtue, let his situation in a free country be what it
may, to be deemed of no account. Upon his judgment, his voice (if not his vote)
his example, much may depend. The discovery of truth, the communication of
useful knowledge, and the exemplary recommendation of ^^^^^ous conduct, may
dignify a plebean, as well as add luster to a crown. Even a Negro slave, amidst
the horrors of a middle passage, and debased by every external circumstance of
degradation and misery that the imagination can conceive, shall divide his
meagr^ morsel In one of the ships, we find the slaves privately and voluntarily
fee^ing the hungry sailors, with a part of their own scanty allowance.
with the inhuman monster in distress, who stole him from his native country,
and his nearest connections, thereby returning all the GOOD in his power, for
all the EVIL his merciless enemy could inflict, and giving an example of true
benevolence of heart and real greatness of mind, unsurpassed in the history of
civilized nations, and worthy of the best and purest of all religions: -- " if
thine enemy hunger, feed him; if he thirst, give him drink Romans xii. 20.
." Let no one, therefore* think too meanly of himself, when called upon to
assist in a good cause, seeing that, from the most abject state of human
wretchedness, a lesson may sometimes be learnt, and an influence imp^rted,
which the proudest philosophy need not blush to own. The abolition of the
slave trade is an object of such high importance, and so nearly concerns every
one who has a mind to comprehend* and a heart to feel, that no communication or
assistance is too small, nor any too great, to be exerted upon this occasion.

Some people seem inclined to lend an ear to tales of human woe, and feel a
certain gratification in beholding the exhibitions of tragedy, or in the
perusal of pathetic p^^try, and the like. Even the case of the oppressed
Africans, when represented by their favorite bards, or appearing in the form
of the " Dying Slave," or the Negro's Complaint," seem to possess, if not
charms to please, at least powers forcibly to attract their w^l^ing attention,
and to win their sympathetic regard. Yet the evidence delivered before the
House of Commons, containing a true and faithful account of the miseries and
wickedness attendant upon the traffic in their fellow creatures, unembellished
by flourishes of rhetoric, undecorated with the splendid habiliments of poetry,
is almost in vai^ recommended to their notice. Should they be prevailed upon to
cast their eye over a few pages of the shocking history, they presently shut up
the book -- it makes them shudder -- they have read enough -- such horrid
barbarities, such complicated sufferings, are not to be endured, even in
imagination* But let such remember -- "that humanity consists not in a
squeamish ear -- it consists not in a starting or shrinking at such ^ales as
these, but in a disposition of heart to relieve misery, and to prevent the
repetition of cruelty: -- humanity appertains rather to the mind than to the
nerves, and prompts men to real, disinterested endeavors to give happiness to
their fellow creatures. Fox's speech in the House of Commons.
" It is therefore to be wished that no affectation of extreme sensibility, or
real effeminacy of manners, may disincline, or disqualify, for the service of
humanity. That extreme delicacy which deprives us, if not of the disposition,
yet of the ability, to encounter suffering for the sake of, and in order to
help our brethren in affliction, and under the severest oppression, is
detrimental to its possessor, and injurious to the community; it renders
compassion a painful, useless thing, and makes beneficence fruitless.

To the busy and the gay " a great book is a great evil." TWO THOUSAND PAGES IN
FOLIO, written (like Ezekiel's roll) within and without -- lamentations,
mourning, and woe, stand but little chance of obtaining their notice -- even
THE ABSTRACT O^ THE EVIDENCE would detain some of them too long from their
eager pursuits of business, or their favorite schemes of pleasure. This HASTY
SKETCH will not, however, it may be presumed, encroach too much upon their
time* and well rewarded will the compiler of it be, if it should prove a
stimulus to further investigation of the evidence. No one knows what
opportunities he may have, or how far his influence may extend, to assist the
endeavors now using for the abolition of a trade, the continued carrying on of
which, after bring so fully appri^ed of (...) dreadful enormity, may be
expected, (without the smallest ^incture of superstitious ^ea^) to expose th^^
nation to the just punishment of (...).

Three nations, Juvan, Tuba^, and (...), are mentioned in scripture* Ezekiel.
xxv^^. 1^.
as having their principal trade at Ty^^, in the ^^lling of (...). This
circumstance has been appealed to in vindication of the African slave trade: --
but mark the sequel. In the following chapter, verse 18, the prophet addresse^
the Prince of Tire thus: -- thou have defiled thy sanctuaries by the multitude
of thine iniquities, by the iniquity of thy traffic: therefore will I bring
forth a fire from the midst of thee, it shall devou^ thee; and I will bring
thee to ashes upon the earth. -- A prophecy which has been remarkably fulfilled.

The great leader in the debates of the House of Commons, on this momentous
subject, has declared, -- that, interested as he may be supposed to be in the
final event of the question, he was comparatively indifferent as to the then
decision of the House. Whatever they might do, the people of Great Britain, he
was confident, would abolish the slave trade, when, as would now soon happen,
its injustice and cruelty should be fairly laid before them. It was (said he) a
nest of serpents, which would never have endured so long, but for the darkness
in which they lay hid. -- The light of day would now be le^ in upon them, and
they would vanish from the sight.

W. B. C.


