Mr. HART's ANNIVERSARY SERMON FOR FEBRUARY 28th, 1792.

THE IMPORTANCE OF PARENTAL FIDELITY IN THE EDUCATION OF CHILDREN ILLUSTRATED,
IN A DISCOURSE, Addressed to the Congregation IN THE NORTH SOCIETY OF PRESTON,
the Lord's Day following the 28th of Feb. 1792.

By LEVI HEART, A. M. Pastor of a Church in Preston.

BEING THE THIRTIETH ANNIVERSARY OF HIS FIRST SERMON TO THAT PEOPLE.

"I have no greater joy than to hear that my children walk in the truth." John
III: 4. "Moreover I will endeavor that ye may be able, after my decease, to
have these things, always in remembrance." 2. Peter I: 15. NORWICH: PRINTED BY
BUSHNELL and HUBBARD, M,DCC,XCII.

PSALM LXXVIII. 5, 6, 7. He established a testimony in Jacob, and appointed a
law in Israel, which he commanded our fathers, that they should make them known
to their children. That the generation to come might know them, even the
children which should be born, who should arise and declare them to their
children. That they might set their hope in God, and not forget the works of
God, but keep his commandments.


THE importance of the rising generation, has engaged the attention of the wise
and good, in all ages. Experienced old men have ardently desired the best good
of posterity. Patriarchs, prophets, and apostles have labored to promote it.
The inspired writer of this Psalm, impressed deeply with the subject, calls on
us to attend to the words of his mouth, even the words which had been received
from the fathers which, said he, we will not hide from their children, "showing
to the generations to come the praises of the Lord, and his strength and his
wonderful works."

THE words of our text contain a summary of God's law and testimony which he
appointed for his people, to be transmitted to succeeding generations; that the
knowledge and practice of true religion might be preserved to the end of the
world. It will not be doubted that this subject claims our most serious
attention, on the present occasion.

WE shall attempt an illustration of it by considering the law and testimony
which God has established in his church. And

THE great importance of transmitting them to posterity.

I. WE are to consider the law and testimony which God has established in his
church.

WERE we to confine our views to the time of the Psalmist, nothing more would
be comprised than those sacred books of the old testament* which were complete
in his day. The words of our text have a manifest reference to the writings of
Moses, but they may be more extensively applied. God's law and testimony was a
progressive revelation, through the several periods, from the first age of the
world, till the completion of the sacred canon. Before the deluge, and in the
days of the patriarchs, Noah and Abraham, only a few revelations were given to
the church. -- Large additions were made in the time of Moses. In succeeding
ages, the will of God was further revealed to man, by his prophets and other
inspired messengers, till the scriptures of the old testament were completed.
And, at the appointed time, the Divine Redeemer appeared, in our world, and
having finished his labors and sufferings on earth, and ascended to glory, he
shed down the Holy Ghost on his apostles and others, to commit to writing the
whole New Testament for the benefit of his church, to the end of the world. --
Thus, "Holy men of God, spoke as they were moved by the Holy Ghost 1 Peter i.
21.
," And, "God, who at sundry times and in diverse manners, spoke to the fathers,
by the prophets, has in these last days spoken unto us by his Son Heb. i. 1, 2.
."

HENCE, we are to understand, the law and testimony of God, in the days of the
Psalmist, to comprise all parts of divine revelation then given to the church.
To us they imply the whole canon of holy scripture. These sacred writings are
"given by inspiration of God, and are profitable for doctrine, for reproof, for
correction, for instruction in righteousness. That the man of God may be
perfect, thoroughly furnished unto all good works 2 Timothy iii. 16, 17.
." But they, "principally, teach, what man is to believe, concerning God, and
what duty God requires of man." Proofs, of the being and perfections of God,
surround us in his works. "The heavens declare his glory, and the firmament
shows his handy work. Day unto day utters speech, and night unto night
shows knowledge Psalm xix. 1, 2.
." And "the invisible things of him, from the creation of the world are clearly
seen, being understood by the things which are made, even his eternal power and
Godhead Psalm xix. 7.
." But "the law of the Lord is perfect, converting the soul. The testimony of
the Lord is sure, making wise the simple Romans i. 20.
." It is from the written word that we are to learn in the fullest manner, the
divine perfections and will, and without which we are utterly in the dark as to
the door of hope for sinners, and the way in which salvation is attainable.

THE law and testimony of God instruct us in all needful truth. In these, we
are taught in the clearest manner, the natural and moral perfections of God. --
The creation of all things, by the word of his power. -- The relations of man
to his Creator, and to his fellow creatures. -- The original state of innocence
and felicity, and the nature and extent of God's moral government. -- Those
divine writings, teach us the sad and inexcusable apostasy of the first man,
and the consequent state of sin and condemnation, to him and his posterity.
Here we learn that mysterious glory of the divine existence. -- A Trinity in
Unity. -- From this we are led, in the progressive revelation, to a view of the
second person in the adorable Trinity, as the Redeemer of man. -- The holy
scriptures inform us of "the counsel of peace," or the plan of redemption fixed
in the purpose of God, and accomplished in the person of, THE WORD. The great
mystery of godliness is here displayed. "God was manifest in the flesh,
justified in the spirit, seen of angels, preached to the Gentiles, believed on
in the world, received up into glory." The work of redemption, is evidently,
the greatest of God's works revealed to man. To this all his other works tend,
and in this they center. For this reason a principal part of the sacred
scriptures are employed in treating on this subject.

"OF this salvation, the prophets enquired and searched diligently, who
prophesied of the grace which should come unto us; searching what, or what
manner of time, the spirit of Christ which was in them did signify, when it
testified before hand, the sufferings of Christ, and the glory which should
follow."

THE apostles were "witnesses of the sufferings of Christ," and they
"determined to know nothing among their hearers, save Jesus Christ and him
crucified."

IN connection with the person and work of Christ, and redemption by his blood;
the law and testimony reveal to us the work of the holy spirit, in the
application of redemption, and the way in which sinners become united to
Christ, and partakers in the saving benefits of his death. Here we are taught
the necessity of "repentance toward God, and faith toward our Lord Jesus
Christ." That without faith, it is impossible to please God," -- That "he who
believes shall be saved, but he who believes not, shall be damned." That men
are "justified by faith without the deeds of the law" -- "Justified freely by
the grace of God, through the redemption which is in Jesus Christ." From these
oracles, we also learn, that the faith of God's elect, is connected with a life
of christian holiness, or obedience to all divine commands, -- that "those,
only who do God's commandments, are blessed, have right to the tree of life,
and shall enter in through the gates into the city."

ALL gospel institutions and ordinances belong to the divine testimony, and are
enjoined in the holy scriptures. -- The religious and devout observation of
them is an important part of christian holiness, and those who fear God, count
them among their greatest blessings. -- Private and social prayer to God, and
other branches of his worship -- The observation of the Lord's day. -- Of the
christian sacraments. -- Baptism, and the Lord's Supper, are not only enjoined
as duties, but granted as privileges. -- In connection with those is the
institution of the christian church and evangelical ministry. -- The office and
work of the ministry, and the order, unity and discipline of the church, are
appointed by God, "for the perfecting the saints, for the edifying the body of
Christ, till we all come in the unity of the faith, and of the knowledge of the
Son of God, unto a perfect man, unto the measure of the stature of the fullness
of Christ."

THE holy scriptures enjoin the duties of sensible dependence on God. --
Submission in adversity, and of humility and thankfulness in prosperity. They
teach us in whatever state we are, "therewith to be content," and furnish rules
by which if duly applied, we shall "know how to be abased and how to abound --
to be full and to be hungry." -- They instruct us to be as strangers and
pilgrims on earth, to lay up treasure in heaven, and endure as seeing him who
is invisible. In all conditions, and through all changes, living or dying; the
word of God furnishes a rich supply of needful truth: that the good man may say
with thankful praise, "thy testimonies, O Lord, are wonderful, therefore does
my soul keep them." "The entrance of thy word gives life, it gives
understanding to the simple."

IT must be remembered that God's law and testimony contain all necessary rules
of duty in our various relations to each other. There we may learn our duty and
happiness, as husbands and wives, parents and children, and in all other
domestic relations.

THE word of God also, inculcates the love of our neighbor, and teaches us to
respect all men as such. It requires us to "love our enemies, and do good to
those who hate us, to pray for those who despitefully use us, and persecute
us." -- To "bear one another's burdens, relieve the distressed, visit the
fatherless and widows in their afflictions," and be "ready to every good work."

THIS sacred book not only teaches men the love of their country, but inspires
them with that true patriotism which seeks its best interest and produces all
becoming exertions to promote it. -- And that in such a manner as to advance
the good of deserving individuals, and to coincide with the true interest of
other countries, and of mankind. -- We must not omit to observe, that the love
of our country, required in the holy scriptures, is such as is subservient to
the glory of God. To this, all its exertions tend, and in it they are
ultimately absorbed.

THE divine word teaches us to spend life in preparation for death and heaven.
-- It assures us of the conscious existence of those, who are absent from the
body -- Of the resurrection, both of the just and unjust -- Of the final
judgment, and the neverending blessedness of the righteous, and punishment of
the wicked, and it presents the most awful and endearing motives to persuade us
to live under the governing influence of those great and everlasting realities;
and it offers such divine supports, in afflictions and death, as if duly
applied, will enable us to walk through the valley of the shadow of death, and
fear no evil, and in the language of thankful exultation to cry, "O death,
where is thy sting. O grave, where is thy victory!

II. THE great importance of transmitting to posterity, the divine law and
testimony will appear from the following considerations.

1st. THE worth of posterity.

THE importance of man will deeply impress the mind which attentively considers
it. The present and future existence are, both of them, highly interesting, but
especially the latter. The various endowments of the mind of man, in connection
with his immortality, render his existence important, in the highest degree. --
Such is the worth of the human soul, that in the estimate of unerring wisdom,
it is not to be exchanged for the whole world Math. xvi. 26.
. This worth is summarily comprised in the capacity for possessing and
diffusing happiness, or which issues in the same, for union to God and his
kingdom. Each individual of the present and future ages will fill a place in
the scale of beings, through never-ending duration: important in every period
of his existence; how important then in the whole of it! The present infant of
a day, is a being of immortality, and will act a part which will materially
effect the felicity, not of himself only, but of the whole moral system, and
that forever.

SUCH considerations show the importance of man, and the worth of posterity;
but it is still more strongly marked in the agency of God with respect to our
race. This world is evidently created to be an habitation for man, the various
orders of inferior creatures, were made and appointed for his service; and the
whole course of events from the first creation, is directed with reference to
him. But what swallows up all other considerations on this subject, is, the
work of redemption! to this, nothing can be added to evince the importance of
man, and the worth of posterity: the whole is expressed in saying that " in due
time, Christ died for the ungodly Romans v. 6.
." and that, " God so loved the world, that he gave his only begotten Son, that
whosoever believes in him should not perish, but have everlasting life John
iii, 16.
."

2d. THE felicity and usefulness of posterity depends on a becoming regulation
of their principles and manners. This consists in their receiving God's
testimonies, and reducing them to practice. These testimonies enjoin the
several branches of that religion which is summarily contained in the love of
God and man. Without which they can be neither happy nor useful This assertion
respects only the nature and tendency of moral dispositions, and is by no means
to be understood in opposition to the important truth, that God by his wise and
holy agency, so overrules the wickedness of his enemies, and counteracts its
nature and tendency as to render it subservient to the purpose of his infinite
wisdom and holiness, and thus, by "educing good from ill," he causes the wrath
of man to praise him, and the remainder of wrath, he graciously restrains.
.

THAT each of these depend on such dispositions will appear to be true, to
whatever particular we apply the observation.

WHAT but mutual affection constitutes that harmony of minds which is termed
friendship? -- Such union of hearts is the source and band of domestic
felicity: if this be wanting, how deplorably miserable is the nearest of human
connexions even in the midst of all other earthly good. But where this is found
it not only gives worth to all other enjoyments, but supplies their absence,
and gives truly sublime satisfaction in the midst of calamity. All family
relations, and other social connexions are found to be happy in proportion to
this, and the reverse if it be wanting.

THE interests of society at large are proportionably effected, and depend on
the union of its members, and where this in any good measure exists, the
benevolent spectator will behold it with pleasure, and exultingly cry out,
"Behold how good and how pleasant it is for brethren to dwell together in
unity." -- But as man is a being of immortality, and a member of that vast
society, comprising all intelligent beings, his felicity and usefulness are
principally to be measured in relation to that. -- When viewed in this
connection, how interesting is the present subject! -- Those whose principles
and manners are formed to the business and enjoyments of God's kingdom, are
prepared for the noblest existence. It is by the love of God and man they are
thus formed. Without this their noble endowments will be employed in a manner
strongly tending to the injury of others, and with regret to themselves. This
tendency will be effectual and everlasting.

THE only possible method of escape from this evil is in receiving God's
testimonies and reducing them to practice. -- And in this way only will they
live in the most useful manner to others on earth, and be actively useful in
heaven.

3d. THAT posterity may be thus useful and happy, they must be instructed in
God's testimonies. It belongs indeed to God only, to form the heart to the love
of divine truth. Paul may plant, and Apollos water, the best means may be
applied in vain, unless attended with the blessing of God. However, it is his
good pleasure to bless his own institutions. We are as totally dependent on him
for the health and support of the body. Our daily bread is the gift of his
bounty, no less than the food for the soul. But who will infer from thence,
that we are not to apply the appointed means, to obtain food for ourselves and
our families? The duty is not less evident, and is much more important in
regard to the soul. A proper sense of our dependence on God, that our posterity
may be formed to be useful and happy, will lead to a faithful application of
the appointed means.

AN acquaintance with the word of God is the great appointed medium of that
felicity and usefulness which is to be sought for posterity; this is to be
obtained by instruction. For many reasons it is important that this instruction
should be given in youth: the mind is then most susceptible of lasting
impressions; habits of ignorance and obstinacy are not formed, at most they
have not attained the firmness of long indulgence; bad example has not exerted
its baneful influence to strengthen them in the way of death; inveterate custom
has not fixed them in the walks of vice, and rendered them callous to the
truths of religion, and the remonstrances of conscience.

SAD experience evinces, that few who have spent their youth in vice and folly,
are brought to repentance and reformation in advanced age. Of these few were
the cases examined, it would probably be found that in most of them, the
foundation was laid by early instruction. Innumerable have been the instances
of its success. How many of God's people have blessed him for the instruction
of their youth, and that from their childhood they have "known the holy
scriptures, which are able to make them wise to salvation, through faith in
Christ Jesus." -- Admitting that a few have been made wise to salvation who
never enjoyed this inestimable privilege, (for we rejoice in the unlimited
sovereignty of God, and that he has mercy on whom he will have mercy:) yet how
disproportioned are their means to be useful and happy, and how deeply must
they lament the want of that early and pious instruction recommended in our
text! and how superior the advantages of those who have enjoyed it!

BUT alas! how vast are the numbers of those, who live and die in extreme
ignorance of God and religion; not only in the regions of unenlightened
paganism, but even in the midst of those who enjoy the gospel! Their untaught
childhood and youth have prepared them to despise religious knowledge in riper
years. Habits of vice have induced them to add contempt to ignorance, till they
have increased the number of those "fools who despise wisdom and instruction,
make a mock at sin, and die for want of wisdom."

4th. THE instruction of children and youth in God's testimonies, should be the
great concern of parents.

IF posterity are instructed at all in these things, it must be principally by
their care.

THIS instruction cannot be supposed to be obtained by themselves, or their own
unassisted exertions. If it be not the duty of parents, to whom does it belong?
and how shall it be obtained? The God of nature has established the course of
society, -- the relations of parent and child are his appointment; he has
constituted that singleness of affection, that identity of interests and
enjoyments between the two parents, which directs their joint exertions, in
nursing and educating their offspring, and which nothing but the height of
obstinacy in wickedness can prevent. -- As children in general must probably be
untaught in God's testimonies, and devoted to ruin if they are neglected by
their parents, so the greatest benefits may be hoped for in a compliance with
this duty. -- The advantages in the hand of parents for success are
distinguishingly great: they are much in the company of their children, and
have abundant opportunity to impress the objects of religion on their minds. --
The earliest impressions of their offspring are highly favorable to such views.
Beside the foundation in nature for the most tender reciprocal affections
between parents and children -- the early dependence in one, and exertions of
kindness in the other, greatly increase the nearness; the parents are strongly
prompted to instruct, and the children to learn; prepossessed as they are, in
favor of their parents, and inclined to adopt their sentiments and manners,
will they not hang on their lips, and receive the instructions of wisdom! --
Allowing that the state of sin which is common to man, and in which our
children are partakers, is opposed to the admission of saving knowledge, is
this an objection against parental instruction? does it not even show its
superior importance? -- Or, are all means to be neglected, because the fallen
race are dull of hearing? Should we not infer just the reverse, and in
imitation of the divine example, "give them line upon line, and precept upon
precept Isaiah (...)
."

MOREOVER this important duty is committed to parents, by the wisdom of God --
under the ancient dispensation such are the divine directions.

"THESE words, which I command thee this day, shall be in thine heart, and thou
shall teach them diligently unto thy children, and shall talk of them when thou
sit in thine house, and when thou walk by the way, and when thou lie
down, and when thou risest up. And thou shall bind them for a sign upon thine
hand, and they shall be as frontlets between thine eyes, and thou shall write
them upon the posts of thy house, and on thy gates Deuteronomy. vi. 6, 7, 8, 9.
. That your days may be multiplied, and the days of your children, in the land
which the LORD swear unto your fathers to give them, as the days of heaven upon
the earth Deuteronomy. xi. 21.
."

AMONG the many passages in the sacred writings inculcating this important
duty, we add only this summary direction. -- "Fathers provoke not your children
to wrath, but bring them up in the nurture and admonition of the Lord Ephesians
vi. 4.
."

5th. WE must not omit to observe, that parental education is the great
instituted mean for the good of posterity: this might be shown from the
experience of all ages, and the word of God.

IT appears from particulars already mentioned, that childhood and youth are
the seasons for implanting those practical sentiments in the human mind, which
are to influence through life, and most essentially affect the condition of man
through the whole of his existence. Experience confirms this truth, both in the
happy fruits of a well directed education, and in the sad consequences where it
has been neglected. -- Admitting that a good education has not always been
attended with desired success, and that some men have become wise and good who
never enjoyed it; in the former case it only proves the sad degeneracy of human
nature, and the great danger of youth; and in the latter, it displays the
sovereign freedom of devine grace: but in neither, counteracts the dictates of
reason and common experience, founded on the stated course of events in the
providence of God, and the history of man. -- Because the best medicines are
not always successful to restore the sick, and in some instances they recover
with none or with bad ones; shall we, herefore not apply this stated mean of
recovery, or shall we prefer the advice of Quacks and Empiries to that of the
most approved practitioners?

BUT a truth of this importance rests not merely or chiefly on the conclusions
of fallible man. -- The word of God abundantly confirms it.

TO set this matter in the strongest light would require long quotations from
many parts of the sacred writings, and would draw out the discourse to an
unreasonable length, and indeed, would be needless, as few or none have ever
appeared to deny the present truth. And writers who have differed widely as to
the standing of the children of faithful parents, with respect to the gracious
covenant of God, and their title to its blessings, have nevertheless agreed in
the divine appointment of parental education, as the great mean for the good of
posterity A particular discussion of the standing of baptized children, as
distinguished from others who are educated under the gospel, and the
obligations and encouragements which are peculiar to them, would not have been
adapted to the particular design of this discourse; and would rather have
diverted the attention of the hearers from its main object; which was to
impress the minds of all parents with a practical sense of the duty and
importance of the religious education of their children: and all children and
youth with a sense of their great obligations to improve whatever degree of
religious education they have enjoyed, in a life of practical religion.

The additional privileges and duties of those who are the children of faithful
parents, devoted to God by christian baptism in their infancy, are exceedingly
important; and worthy a particular and separate cosideration: but could not so
properly be illustrated in this discourse.


.

UNDER the general term of parental education we mean to comprise the whole of
the duty enjoined on parents in training up their children; their dedication to
God in their infancy, according to his institution, perpetuated by a course of
daily prayer, unreservedly devoting them to him for his blessing. -- A course
of (...) and well directed instructions, from the first opening of their
understandings, suitable to their age, capacity, and other circumstances,
ultimately adapted to their last improvement in the knowledge of God and true
religion, and to excite them to a life of practical holiness. -- Add to this,
the steady and well directed exertions of parental authority and love;
enforcing their instructions: and above all, the efficacious influence of wise
and pious example; without which, there can be little hope from instruction and
the exercise of authority. From the combined influence of these, we are
encouraged to hope for success in parental education; and not merely or chiefly
from its natural tendency, however well adapted, but from divine institution
and that gracious influence which God is pleased often to bestow, in connection
with the means of his own appointment. -- That means are divinely instituted
for the best good of young children, and even infants cannot be questioned,
after the express decision of our blessed Redeemer.

ON a certain occasion, when such were brought to him, (undoubtedly by their
parents,) for his blessing, some of his disciples were so remarkably blind, as
to object to it; but he sweetly reproved them. -- The history of this event
deserves our attention. It runs thus. "And they brought young children or
infants to him, that he should touch them, and lay his hands on them, and pray:
and when his disciples saw it, they rebuked those who brought them. But when
Jesus saw it, he was much displeased; and said, suffer the little children to
come unto me, and forbid them not: for of such is the kingdom of God.

VERILY I say unto you, whosoever shall not receive the kingdom of God as a
little child, he shall, in no wise, enter therein. And he called them unto him,
and took them up in his arms, and put his hands on them and blessed them Math.
xix, 13 -- 15. Mark x, 13 -- 16. Luke xviii, 15 -- 17.
."

FROM passages, adduced in this discourse, in connection with our text; we have
sufficient evidences of the divine appointment of parental education, as the
great mean of the good of posterity. Would any attend more fully to the extent
of the evidence, they may consult the history of Gods covenant with Abraham --
the history of Job's attention to the best good of his children -- the inspired
writings of David and Solomon -- and indeed, the whole bible.

THE reflections and conduct of our divine teacher, in the case just quoted,
are full of the most useful instruction. Happy parents, who brought those
children to Christ for his blessing, and happy children who received it from
him. For we know that those whom HE blesses, are indeed blessed.

How much must those parents have been edified and comforted, by such
condescending love of the blessed Jesus -- what lasting impressions must have
been made by it on the minds of the children, -- and what animating
encouragement is, hereby, presented to parents and children, in all ages, to go
and do likewise History informs us that the celebrated Ignatius, afterward
Bishop of Antioch, was one of these infants. See Dodredges in loc.
!

FROM such views, we may reasonably hope for the blessing of God in common with
the faithful and well directed performance of parental duty; that our children
may be useful and happy on earth, and blessed forever in the kingdom of God. We
proceed to observe,

6th. THE education of the present generation, may be justly expected to have a
happy influence on many succeeding ages.

THIS is a leading sentiment in the text. -- It was verified in the Psalmist,
who had received the important truths, which it contains, in this manner
through successive generations, from Moses to his own time; agreeably to the
divine injunction to which he refers, which required such instructions to their
children, " that the generation to come might know them. Even the children
which should be born, who should arise and declare them to their children, that
they might set their hope in God, and not forget the works of God, but keep his
commandments."

SCRIPTURE history abounds with facts in confirmation of the present truth. We
may reasonably conclude, it was in this way, that the knowledge and practice of
true religion were preserved in the family of Seth, to the time of the deluge;
while the pious race were distinguished by the title of " the Sons of God
Genesis, vi. 2.
." The intercourse of these, with the wicked descendants of Cain, broke the
chain of religious education, and a general apostasy brought on the destruction
of mankind.

NOAH was found righteous before God in that evil generation, and was saved
with his family from the common ruin. His son Ham very soon forsook the true
religion, and was the father of a degenerate and accursed race; most probably
in consequence of alliance with the family of Cain Genesis, iv. 22. Naamah is
the only female descendant of Adam, mentioned by name in the history of the old
world, as some Expositors suppose, because she was the wise of Ham, and the
mother of a degenerate race after the flood.
. But the true religion was preserved for many years in the family of Shem. No
doubt by means of the pious education which he received from his father Noah,
and transmitted to his children.

WHEN idolatry was fast spreading among his descendents, most probably (...)
the fruit of affinity with the wicked posterity of Ham, and the consequent
neglect of good parental education, it pleased God to call Abram, one of his
posterity, and the ninth in descent from him, and instruct him in the religion
of his pious progenitors, and also to favor him with several new and important
revelations. How he improved these, in the education of his children, we learn
from the divine declaration, in the following words: "I know him, that he will
command his children and his household after him, and they shall keep the way of
the Lord, to do justice and judgment Genesis xviii. 19.
." We may have the fruits of his pious exertions in the character of his
descendents, Isaac and Jacob, "the heirs with him of the same promise."

As the chosen family increased, and their intercourse with their idolatrous
neighbors was extended, there was a decline of religious education, and the
nation became sadly degenerated. This was uniformly the case, when they married
strange wives of the idolatrous nations round them, which effectually
obstructed a religious education. But the good effects of it in these
instances, where it did exist, are conspicuous in the history of that people
from beginning to end. It is observable also, in some who were not of the
chosen family -- the instance of the Rachabites is instructive and memorable.
The injunctions of Jonadab, their father or progenitor, were religiously
observed by them for many ages Compare, 2d Kings x. 15, with Jeremiah xxxv. 1
-- 11.
. The pious Timothy was the happy subject of that "unfeigned says which dwelt
first in his mother Lois, and his grand mother Eunice 2d Timothy i. 5.
; and from a child, no doubt by the pious education of his mother, he had known
the Holy Scriptures, which were able to make him wise to salvation through
faith in Christ Jesus Chapter iii. 15.
."

SUCH is the readiness of the human mind to be influenced by parental
education, that, when this is opposed to the dictates of the Holy Scriptures,
and the clearest reason, it often establishes youth in opposition to the truth,
and fixes prejudices, which the labors of their best and wisest friends, are
never after able to remove. What happy influence then may we expect from it,
when wisely conducted on the principles of reason and revelation?

THE influence of parental education is evident in the history of all nations.
-- Principles and manners have descended from father to son, through successive
generations -- in domestic and more extended life -- in laws, politics and
religion. We shall be established in this truth, by attending to the past and
present habits of our own country. In how many respects are those of the
present generation, in business, policy and religion, to be traced back to our
ancestors through several ages? And this notwithstanding our singular
convulsions and important revolution in government, so strongly tending to a
similar revolution in our habits and customs.

THE truth will receive confirmation, even, from ourselves and the place in
which we live; as in all other things, so in particular in regard to the
promotion of order, and the interests of religion. Who are the men, of the
present age, among us, whose labors and example, maintain the peace and good
order of society, the observation of the Lord's day, and the public
institutions of religion? Are they not the descendents of those venerable
ancestors who taught these things diligently to their children, and who added
the pious efficacy of their examples and their prayers? and who are the people
among us, that are a dead weight on society? -- opposers of order, and who
openly trample on the institutions of religion? and who are rarely to be seen
in this house of prayer? Are they not generally, the descendents of progenitors
like themselves, whose fatal examples have fixed their posterity in the path of
ruin? For though instances might be named of apostates, from the good
principles and examples of their ancestors, they are comparatively few, and in
most cases may be accounted for, from dangerous connections, in childhood,
youth, or riper years. And how few, whose unhappy lot has been the reverse of
a wise and virtuous education, have ever emerged from that degraded condition
of the mind, and become useful in society; the supporters of good order and
religion?

REFLECTIONS like these, must have often occured to observers of human nature,
either in the history of other ages and countries, or in attention to their
own. And they must have made deep impressions of the great importance of a
virtuous and well directed education.

SUCH views, we are led to suppose, have influenced the wise and good in all
ages, in the education of their children. Was it not the belief of truths like
these, which induced Abraham to "command his children and household after him,
that they might keep the way of the Lord Genesis xviii. 19.
? -- and Joshua to resolve that "as for him and his house they would serve the
Lord Joshua xxiv, 15.
? -- What brought the awful judgments of God on Eli and his house, but the
neglect of this important duty? when "his sons made themselves vile, and he
restrained them not 1st Samuel ii. iii. and iv. chapters.
."

DAVID, the man after God's heart, closed his life with an address, of this
import, to the princes of Israel, and to his son. -- "Now keep and seek ye all
the commandments of the Lord your God, that ye may possess this good land, and
leave it for an inheritance for your children after you, forever." -- "And thou
Solomon my son, know thou the God of thy father, and serve him with a perfect
heart, and with a willing mind. For the Lord searches all hearts, and
understands all the imaginations of the thoughts. If thou seek him, he will
be found of thee, but if thou forsake him, he will cast thee off forever 1st
Chron. xviii. 1, 9. See also 1st Kings, ii. 1 -- 4.
." -- Job, whose singular piety is much celebrated in holy scripture, has the
honorable testimony, that he "sanctified his sons, and continually offered
burnt offerings according to the number of them all Job i. 5.
."

THUS in the remotest ages, as well as in later times, good men have esteemed
the religious education of their children and posterity, as an object of the
first importance; and they have possessed "no greater joy, than to learn that
their children walk in the truth." In this they have ever been agreed, from
such views as have been mentioned, of which it is not the least that the
education of the present generation, may be justly expected to have a happy
influence on many which shall succeed.

WITH the utmost propriety, did the pious psalmist remind us of the divine
institution by Moses on this subject. "That the generation to come might know
his statutes; even the children which should be born, who should arise and
declare them to their children; that they might set their hope in God, and not
forget the works of God, but keep his commandments."

Improvement.
MANY are the serious and weighty reflections furnished by this subject, and
they will readily occur to the considerate mind. But "the importance of the
rising generation," and the awful and endearing motives to fidelity in parents
and children, are among the first. -- To these we shall attend in the following
addresses.

I. To the parents of the congregation. Those of you who are advanced in life,
will remember that thirty years have now passed away since our first interview
in this place of worship! Thirty years are usually accounted the life of a
minister. I am not insensible that my life and ministry have been attended with
many imperfections, for which I have cause for deep humiliation. But I am not
conscious of designedly shunning to declare all the counsel of God, or of
keeping back any thing which was profitable to you. -- "I have not sought yours
but you." -- Sensible that the best part of my days is already past, and that
the time of my departure is at hand, I would wish to be pure from the blood of
all men, and especially of the people of my charge, and to be ready to give up
the account of my stewardship. I am not only concerned for an admission to the
joys of the redeemed for myself; but, am earnestly desirous, that you, and your
children, may also be partakers. This has been a leading object, of my labors
among you, from the first of my ministry. Many of you who are now advanced in
life, were the youth of the congregation, at the time of my settlement. "The
fathers, where are they?" The venerable ancestors of t^^ people, are no more on
earth. The pastor with his flock, who founded this society are long since,
removed to the world of spirits. The church of Christ in the north society in
Preston, was formed on the thirtieth of November, 1720, at which time the Rev'd
Hezekiah Lord, was ordained to the pastoral office there, by prayer and the
imposition of the hands of The Rev'd Messieurs, SAMUEL WHITING. SALMON TREAT.
JOSEPH COIT. SAMUEL EASTABROOK.



He served in the gospel ministry with great faithfulness and esteem, and with
happy success, till June twenty-third 1761 when he was removed by death, in the
sixty-fourth year of his age and forty-first of his ministry. At the time of
his settlement the church consisted of forty-two members; two hundred and
thirty-three were added during the course of his ministry; eighty of which
remained at his death.

On the fourth of November, 1762 he was succeeded by the Rev'd Levi Heart, who
was set apart to the gospel ministry and pastoral office in like manner by The
Rev'd Messieurs, BENJAMIN LORD. JABEZ WIGHT. NATHANIEL EELLS. JOSEPH FISH.
JONATHAN BARBER. ASHER ROSSETER.



At Mr. Hart's settlement, the church consisted of eighty regular members: from
that time eighty-seven have been added, fifty-seven have been removed by death,
thirty-four have removed and joined other regular churches -- three have joined
the Anabaptists, and one has been excommunicated.

A better wish cannot be uttered for the present pastor and church, than that
they may follow their predecessors wherein they followed Christ; and see their
children walking by the same rule, minding the same thing.


Those, who were the principal actors in my settlement, are either silent in
death, or struggling with the latest calamities of declining life. Many of them
acted their part well, and their ever dear and honored names are "like
precious ointment" to posterity. Much is the debt of gratitude from their
children. You have now succeeded to their place -- to discharge that debt, you
must fill it up usefully. On this condition, they will not be ashamed to own
you, as their children, hereafter. That you may thus do, and be blessed, suffer
the word of exhortation from him who "lives if ye stand fast in the Lord."

YOU will seriously consider, that the interests of this people and of future
generations are devolved on you, and that you are to give account to God for
the important betrustment. That you may do it with joy, be pleased to remember
and practice the following particulars.

First of all, "Acquaint yourselves with God and be at peace with him." To this
you are invited, not only by all the motives which respect yourselves, but also
on account of your children and posterity: for what reasonable hope can be
indulged of fidelity, in the education of your children, if you are not
faithful to yourselves?

LET it be your first care then, to have just views of the religion of the
bible, and reduce it to practice. True religion as exhibited in the scriptures,
and existing in good men, is a beautiful and consistent whole; consisting of
various parts, harmoniously uniting, and mutually illustrating each other. It
is doctrinal, experimental, and practical, and in each of these, the connection
and dependence, of the parts, on each other, add strength, consistence and
beauty to the whole, and prove it to be every way worthy of God, and suitable
to man. Let this divine religion be exemplified in your profession and your
lives.

NEXT to your duty, as individuals, I would entreat you to do honor to
christianity, as husbands and wives. This will be effected, by living in that
conjugal harmony, for which there is every inducement, from personal and
domestic felicity -- from the interests of posterity -- from this world and the
world to come. Then you will "dwell together according to knowledge, and as
fellow heirs of the grace of life, and your prayers will not be hindered." 1
Peter iii. 7.
In this way, you may be like that excellent pair, of whom we have this
honorable testimony, "that they were both righteous before God, walking in all
the commandments and ordinances of the Lord blameless." Luke i. 6.
Many are the branches of genuine christianity, or ways of exemplifying its
excellent nature -- they are correspondent to all our relations to God, and to
our fellow creatures, to society on earth, to this world and the world to come.
A right apprehension, of its leading principles, will be abundantly useful in
directing your judgment, and influencing your practice at all times, and in all
conditions.

OUR particular attention is now called to that only, which is the subject of
this discourse; The education of posterity.

MAY I not say, in your behalf and my own, that "we have no greater joy than to
hear that our children walk in the truth." To parents, as members of society,
and as christians; their education is a leading object. We have received God's
testimonies from our parents, let us commit them to our children. We are
especially called to this, on account of their dangerous state, from the
circumstances of the age in which they live. For though we should not "inquire
wisely in asking why the former days were better than these," Ecclesiastes vii.
10.
as human nature and the world, are substantially, the same in all ages; there
are, however, occasional differences, important to be regarded in the education
of youth. You are not insensible, that the present age has the marks of
degeneracy in several particulars, which influence the manners of the people,
the order of society, and the interests of religion. The worship of God, in
families, and in public, and the religious observation of the Lord's Day, were
generally practiced by our fathers, and with great decency. But what a sad
reverse has taken place in our day! Numbers, it is to be feared, are not well
grounded in the first principles of christianity, and are in a condition to
become an early prey to seducers, who would betray them into false religions,
or even to none.

THIS may, no doubt be traced to several influencing causes. -- But may we not
conclude, that one of the greatest, is the criminal neglect of many parents in
the education of their children, and their own bad examples? The children of
such families have an unhappy influence on those who are better taught, and the
contagion of vice and irreligion is widely extended; for "man is born like the
wild asses colt Job xi. 12.
," and human nature tends to evil.

THIS calamitous event of our day, adds a new and important motive to all that
have been named, for parental fidelity in the education of children. Their
danger is uncommonly great, and we are at least, in part accountable for it. --
How highly does it concern us, to improve the remainder of our life,
faithfully, for the good of our children. We wish they may grow up to be useful
and happy in family connections, to be good members of society, to serve their
generation, to honor their Maker and Redeemer, transmit to their children the
principles of virtue and piety, and be prepared for heaven. -- That none of
these important objects may be lost through our neglect, we should "bring them
up in the nurture and admonition of the Lord;" that they may know and practice
God's testimonies, "and arise and declare them to their children; that they may
set their hope in God, and not forget his works, but keep his commandments. Let
these things be in our hearts, that we may teach them diligently to our
children; and talk of them when we set in our houses, and when we walk by the
way, and when we lie down, and when we rise up." Our instructions must be
adapted to their age, capacities, and other circumstances. They must be
supported by the exertions of parental authority and love; but above all by our
examples and prayers. We must devote them to God from their earliest infancy,
and perpetuate the dedication by prayer, as long as we live, that the God of
our pious progenitors may be their God; and we must be in all respects, as far
as possible, what we would wish them to be. We must walk before them in the
path of wisdom, which leads to usefulness and felicity on earth, and to glory
in Heaven. -- Among the many inducements to this, it will be useful to
recollect the instructions and example of our pious fathers; these must, in
some instances at least, be fresh in our minds. Such recollections must
exceedingly soften the heart, and the impressions of these truths will be
proportionably deep. What child or parent ever read the following address of
the wise man to his children, without the tenderest emotions? "Hear ye children
the instruction of a father, and attend to know understanding. (...) give you
good doctrines, forsake you not my law. For I was my father's son, tender and
only beloved in the sight of my mother. He taught me also and said unto me --
Let thine heart retain my words, keep my commandments, and live."

THE happy influence of such parental education, was early displayed in his
choice of wisdom, in preference to riches and long life 1 Kings, iii. 1 -- 14.
. And he faithfully transmitted it to posterity, in the book of proverbs,
addressed to his children. It remains, that, in our respective conditions, we
go and do likewise. -- The remainder of our time, for parental exertions, is
short; many of you like me, are in the advance of life -- we shall soon be
silent in death. -- What we do for our children and posterity, must be speedily
accomplished. -- The leading motives to fidelity and vigor, in this honorable
service have been already considered. -- You will recollect them. -- Let me
hope they will ever be present to your thoughts, and influence your practice;
that if our separation should be near, and I should never more address you on
this subject, I may die, with the joyful prospect of your fidelity and success;
-- that he who sowed, and they who reap, may rejoice together.

II. To the children and youth.

A FEW words will comprise the substance of what I would wish to be impressed
on your hearts. I have little to offer which can be called new; but it is not
less weighty and interesting for being old. The text and subject are not more
important to your parents, than to you. If their obligations and motives,
respecting your education, are such as have been named, yours are
proportionable to receive their instructions, and reduce them to practice. It
is for your sakes, and because your interest is so deeply involved, that they
are thus obliged. On this depends your felicity and usefulness in this and the
future life.

THE price in your hand to get wisdom is exceedingly precious; but its
continuance is uncertain, and at best it is short. -- If you follow the
dictates of a virtuous and truly good education, you will be useful and happy
on earth, and blessed in heaven -- God will be your friend and protector here,
and your portion forever. But if you despise the instructions of parental
piety, it is at your peril; you will be marked for wretchedness and reproach on
earth, and for aggravated misery in hell. And you will "mourn at the last, and
say, how have we hated instruction, and our hearts despised reproof? And have
not obeyed the voice of our teachers, nor inclined our ear to them that
instructed us Proverbs v. 11, 12, 13.
." -- That this may not be your awful doom, Remember that you are the creatures
of God -- born for immortality -- ruined by sin, and must partake of the gospel
salvation, or be ruined forever. -- Your continuance on earth at most will be
short, much shorter than you can, now, readily conceive. The flight of time, is
exceedingly rapid. How soon have the last thirty years passed away? and are
forever gone! -- what changes have these thirty years produced? -- those who
were then the parents of the congregation are generally gone -- we have
succeeded in their place, and you in ours. -- More than five hundred, of all
ages, have died in the society; nearly an equal number of children, at present
constitute our schools; as appears from the late visitation Thirteen schools
are annually maintained in the society, during the winter; which are visited at
the close of the season, by the pastor, in company with the civil authority and
select-men, to inspect their manners and inprovement in learning; and their
knowledge in the assemblies' catechism; and to give them instructions adapted
to their age and capacity, on the nature and importance of early virtue and
piety.
They will soon fill your place -- you ours, and we shall be gathered to our
fathers. The following thirty years will probably be marked with changes as
numerous and affecting as those which are past. Should you live during those
thirty future years, which is much to be doubted, they will be but "a vapor
which appears for a little season, and then vanishes away."

I GIVE you my best wishes for time and eternity, with the following short
directions: "Remember now your creator in the days of your youth, before the
evil days come, and the years draw nigh, when you shall say you have no
pleasure in them." "Fear God, and keep his commandments, for this is the whole
duty of man: For God shall bring every work into judgment, with every secret
thing, whether it be good, or whether it be evil Ecclesiastes xii. 1, and 13,
14.
." -- Give ear to good instruction from your parents and others -- pray for a
blessing -- study your bibles, especially the book of Proverbs, particularly
adapted for the benefit of youth -- watch and pray against temptations, and the
destructive influence of bad example -- strive to be wise and good -- a
blessing to your parents, connections and society -- to be useful to yourselves
and others, and in readiness for death and heaven.

LET me recommend to your imitation the example of young Joseph, who rejected
the allurements of guilt, with this excellent reflection, "How can I do this
great wickedness, and sin against God Genesis xxxix. 9.
?" -- and that of the pious Timothy, who attended to the religious instructions
of a faithful parent, and, "from childhood knew the holy scriptures, which were
able to make him wise to salvation through faith in Christ Jesus 2 Timothy i.
v. and iii. 15.
;" and whose future character marks the value of a virtuous education wisely
improved.

FINALLY, and above all, remember and imitate the example of the blessed Jesus,
who at the age of twelve years, engaged the attention, and excited the
astonishment of his most learned instructors, at his understanding and answers,
"and still was subject to his parents; and as he advanced in age and stature,
increased in wisdom, and in favor with God and with man Luke ii. 46 -- 52.
."

MAY you live, and be wise, useful and happy, to a good old age -- many years
after your parents and minister shall be gone to their fathers -- May you
faithfully transmit to the children of the coming age, the pure religion of the
blessed Jesus -- May it be perpetuated in this place, through all generations
till his second coming -- May we meet in heaven, with each other, with our
pious ancestors -- the children of future ages, and with all the redeemed, and
be to the praise of divine grace forever. AMEN.


