DINARBAS; A TALE: BEING A CONTINUATION OF RASSELAS, PRINCE OF ABISSINIA.

-- Rectius occupat
Nomen beati, qui Deorum
Muneribus sapienter uti,
Duramque callet pauperiem pati,
Pejus letho flagitium timet:
Non ille pro caris amicis,
Aut patria timidus perire.
HOR. Lib. iv. Od. 9. PHILADELPHIA* PRINTED BY F. BAILEY, NO. 116,
MARKET-STREET, AND T. LANG, NO. 21, CHURCH-ALLEY.

MDCCXCII.

INTRODUCTION.
BY an irrevocable law of the state, all the sons and daughters of the royal
house of Abissinia were decreed to pass their days in a delightful retreat,
named the happy valley, except such as were, from time to time, called by order
of succession to the throne. Rasselas, the emperor's fourth son, weary of being
secluded from the world, makes his escape by the assistance of Imlac, a poet
and philosopher, and visits Egypt, accompanied by his favorite sister Nekayah,
and her attendant Pekuah. They examine different stations and professions of
men, and contract a friendship with an astronomer, possessed of deep science
and an excellent heart, but who had fallen into a species of visionary madness,
by which he was led to imagine himself endued with a power to regulate and
distribute the various seasons of the year, and changes of the weather, till
his intercourse with the travelers dissipates this mental delusion. After many
fruitless enquiries in search of a life of happiness, Rasselas and Nekayah,
with their companions and the astronomer, resolve to return to the happy valley.

Such is the general plan of the inimitable tale of Rasselas prince of
Abissinia, written by the late Dr. Johnson, which it has been thought necessary
to prefix as an introduction to the following work.

Sir John Hawkins, in his life of Dr. Johnson, says, "that the writer had an
intention of marrying his hero, and placing him in a state of permanent
felicity." This passage suggested the idea of the continuation now offered,
with the greatest diffidence, to the reader, and without any thought of a vain
and presumptuous comparison; as every attempt to imitate the the energetic
style, strong imagery, and profound knowledge, of the author of Rasselas, would
be equally rash with that of the suitors to bend the bow of Ulysses.

It is indeed much to be regretted, that the same pencil which so forcibly
painted the evils attendant on humanity, had not delineated the fairer
prospect. That such a prospect exists, will scarcely be denied; and if the
narrative of Dinarbas, however defective, shall be found to afford any
consolation or relief to the wretched traveller, terrified and disheartened at
the rugged paths of life, this reflection will compensate the want of genius
and literary fame of its author, who, under the veil of concealment, anxiously
awaits the judgment of the critic, not wholly without ambition to merit the
favor and indulgence of a candid public.

CONTENTS.
CHAP. I. REFLECTIONS on the return to the happy valley PAGE. 9 CHAP. II. The
Prince is no longer left to his own choice PAGE. 13 CHAP. III. The Prince
embraces a new state of life PAGE. 19 CHAP. IV. Rasselas acquires a friend
PAGE. 23 CHAP. V. The fortress besieged PAGE. 27 CHAP. VI. The Princess meets
with a real misfortune PAGE. 33 CHAP. VII. The love of dissipation not
incorrigible PAGE. 36 CHAP. VIII. Apology for rusticity PAGE. 40 CHAP. IX.
Rasselas in confinement PAGE. 44 CHAP. X. The resources of solitude PAGE. 47
CHAP. XI. Resignation PAGE. 51 CHAP. XII. Nekayah instructed by misfortune
PAGE. 54 CHAP. XIII. The funeral of Dinarbas PAGE. 58 CHAP. XIV. Embarrassment
of Nekayah PAGE. 62 CHAP. XV. Dinarbas justifies the confidence of the Princess
PAGE. 67 CHAP. XVI. Advantages and disadvantages of the sacerdotal station
PAGE. 70 CHAP. XVII. Danger of fanaticism PAGE. 75 CHAP. XVIII. Troubles in
Abissinia PAGE. 79 CHAP. XIX. The same subject continued PAGE. 82 CHAP. XX. The
Prince gives proof of real courage PAGE. 85 CHAP. XXI. The Prince returns to
the fortress PAGE. 88 CHAP. XXII. The power of artifice PAGE. 93 CHAP. XXIII.
Rasselas endeavors to produce a reconciliation PAGE. 96 CHAP. XXIV. Victory
and gratitude to the conqueror PAGE. 101 CHAP. XXV. Retrospect of a life of
dissipation PAGE. 104 CHAP. XXVI. A new inhabitant enters the valley PAGE. 111
CHAP. XXVII. Return of a friend PAGE. 116 CHAP. XXVIII. Adventures of Dinarbas
PAGE. 119 CHAP. XXIX. Adventures of Dinarbas continued PAGE. 122 CHAP. XXX.
Dinarbas visits the Emperor PAGE. 125 CHAP. XXXI. Sketch of the travels of
Dinarbas PAGE. 129 CHAP. XXXII. Grandeur of the ancients PAGE. 131 CHAP.
XXXIII. The Prince and Princess accompany their father to Gonthar PAGE. 138
CHAP. XXXIV. Inconveniences of foreign aid PAGE. 141 CHAP. XXXV. Death of the
Emperor PAGE. 145 CHAP. XXXVI. Reflections of Rasselas on his accession to the
throne PAGE. 148 CHAP. XXXVII. Letter of Zilia PAGE. 151 CHAP. XXXVIII.
Amalphis accepts the command of the troops PAGE. 154 CHAP. XXXIX. Rasselas
takes a view of the Legislature of Abissinia PAGE. 157 CHAP. XL. Priests at
court PAGE. 161 CHAP. XLI. History of Elphenor PAGE. 164 CHAP. XLII. The
utility of learning PAGE. 168 CHAP. XLIII. The same subject continued PAGE. 171
CHAP. XLIV. Education PAGE. 176 CHAP. XLV. False pretensions to knowledge PAGE.
180 CHAP. XLVI. The conversation turns on various matters PAGE. 182 CHAP.
XLVII. Simplicity PAGE. 186 CHAP. XLVIII. Dinarbas returns from the court of
the Sultan PAGE. 191 CHAP. XLIX. Marriages of Rasselas and Nekayah PAGE. 194
CHAP. L. Visit to the happy valley PAGE. 198
DINARBAS; A TALE.
CHAP. I. Reflections on the return to the happy valley.
THE inundation having subsided, the prince and princess with their companions
left Cairo, and proceeded on their way to Abissinia: the journey was long and
tedious, and their reflections on their return were by no means satisfactory.

"Are we then," said Rasselas, "no wiser than when we set out; or have we only
learned, that all enquiries after happiness are vain, and that a state of mere
vegetation is the highest degree of felicity, which mortals are permitted to
obtain in this world?"

"We have, at least," answered the princess, "acquired sufficient knowledge to
instruct those whom we formerly left behind, and whom we are now going to
rejoin: we may convince them by our experience of the fallacy of human
enjoyments; we may guard them against the delusive powers of imagination, and
teach them to be contented with that state which, by our example, they will
find preferable to the several occupations of life."

"Not only this," said Pekuah, "but we shall add to their amusements the
relation of the various scenes we have met with on our travels: our
conversation will be sought for, because we can instruct and entertain; and
while we renew our past pleasures by relating them, sheltered from the storms
of life, the memory of the dangers we have escaped, and the hardships we have
undergone, will give a higher relish to our state of security."

"How we may be received by the inhabitants of the happy valley," replied the
prince, "or how we may be entertained by our own reflections, is to me
uncertain. I wish we may not be more discontented with the valley than we were
while unacquainted with other scenes: wandering has often given a momentary
desire of settled residence; but activity is natural to man, and he who has
once tasted the joys of liberty and action will no more be contented with
perpetual rest and seclusion, than he, who may have wished for sleep in a
moment of lassitude, would desire to remain inactive on his couch, after the
light of the sun has awakened him from oblivion and repose. I am, however,
neither displeased with our past attempts, nor hopeless for our future success:
as we advance in years the fire of imagination will cool, and the agitation of
restlessness subside: we have laid up a stock of knowledge which will teach us
to distinguish real merit from false pretension. Reason, whom we have already
perceived from afar, advances toward us as youth recedes, and I doubt not but,
by taking her for our guide, we shall enjoy that serenity, calmness, and
justice of perception, which are alone worthy of a thinking being."

"Far be it from me, Sir," said Imlac, "to anticipate your disappointment, or
to increase your alarms; yet permit me to tell you that eminent knowledge, if
not accompanied with singular indulgence to others, often serves to render its
possessors miserable, nay even ridiculous: your experience and your studies
have placed you in a class of beings very different from the inhabitants of the
happy valley, whom you can only treat with condescension or with contempt.
Society cannot subsist without equality, and while you are considered as a
prince, and as a man of superior intelligence, you may command admiration, but
you cannot ensure affection."

"Alas!" said the astronomer, "if reason is a blessing, it has the same fate as
patience; we never invoke it till we have been fatigued with the rapturous
wanderings of imagination, and exhausted by the exquisite feelings of
sensibility; we then apply to reason as a refuge from care; it convinces
without persuading, it instructs without improving us; reason should regulate,
but a warmer motive must inspire our actions: devotion and benevolence, the two
noblest incitements to virtue, are emanations of the heart, not reflections of
the head; reason may come to their support, but has not the merit of creating
them. Our condition in this world is too distant from perfection to give us
hopes of enjoying any one advantage in the supreme degree; for the experience
of age, we must resign the gaiety of youth; we must sacrifice heroism to
prudence, genius to correctness, and rapture to tranquillity: these are called
the victories of reason, but I confess I rather attribute them to the influence
of time. The wise man, in resignation to the decrees of Providence, repines not
at the loss of the advantages of youth, and rejoices in the consolations
granted to old age; but we know of none, either wise or foolish, who would
voluntarily relinquish those pleasures, which are peculiar to the spring and
summer of his days, to anticipate the hour when he must in vain look back on
what he has neglected to enjoy."

CHAP. II. The Prince is no longer left to his own choice.
RASSELAS, notwithstanding his doubts, was resolved to continue his journey: he
reached the confines of Abissinia without accident, where, as he was
discoursing with his sister on what methods they should take to excuse their
absence when they arrived at the happy valley, their caravan was stopped by
several horsemen of the King's troops, headed by a youth of animated
countenance and courteous manners. "Strangers," said he, "you are perhaps
ignorant of the orders we have received. The Egyptians have lately committed
hostilities on the Abissinian territories, and we cannot permit any of that
nation to pass our boundaries: tell me therefore what is your country, and what
the motive of your travels?"

"Sir," replied the prince, "we are travelers from curiosity, and our native
country is Abissinia: you may therefore suffer us freely to enter into the
dominions of your powerful monarch, and, if you please, we will remain under
your guard till we have obtained from the court permission to continue our
journey: we are not unknown there, and I have no doubt but our request will be
speedily granted."

The young warrior, well pleased with the answer of Rasselas, conducted him,
and his companions, to a fortress on the banks of the river that separates
Abissinia from Egypt.

The governor of this fortress, whose name was Amalphis, was a man of lofty
stature and majestic presence; his hair was white as silver, his eyes were
piercing as the midday sun, and several scars imprinted on his venerable
countenance were the honorable testimonies of his service. He received the
prince and ladies with urbanity; and with a look of penetrative enquiry
demanded the motive of their journey. His son Dinarbas, the young warrior who
had conduced them to the fort, repeated what Rasselas had told him.

"The motive of curiosity," replied Amalphis, "though laudable, is so uncommon
in this country, that we cannot, without injustice to ourselves, and detriment
to our emperor's service, permit you to proceed on your journey, till the
return of your messenger from the capital: in the mean time we expect you to
give an account of your names, families and peregrination."

The prince, not choosing to declare his name and quality, left to Imlac the
care of answering the questions of the governor. The poet, without departing
from truth, concealed as much as prudence required: he told Amalphis that he
was Imlac the merchant, who had resided some time at Cairo in the occupations
of commerce; that he had been accompanied thither by this young man and his
sister, who were Abissinians of rank, and had a desire to see the world and
make choice of the state of life most conducive to happiness; that finding
equal disappointment in all, they were now resolved to return to their former
dwelling, and pass the remainder of their lives in study and contemplation.

"As for myself," said the astronomer, "I will freely confess that I am by
birth an Egyptian, and an inhabitant of Cairo; but my life has been spent in
the pursuit of knowledge and in the labyrinths of science: whoever has assisted
me in my endeavors, has been my countryman: the world is my school, and its
inhabitants my fellow-students: my disquisitions tend not toward the welfare
or ruin of any particular state: if my studies could be of any utility, I would
not confine their influence to one spot of the habitable globe. If truth and
wisdom are emanations of the divine Spirit, surely their benefits ought to be
generally distributed amongst our fellow creatures: -- whatever regard I have
for my own country, my way of life has made me consider myself as a citizen of
the universe, or rather I have considered only my studies; and my mind, busied
with intellectual enjoyments, has been equally uninterested in the shock of
great empires and the petty pursuits of domestic life. I have lately known
blessings of which I was before ignorant -- the charms of society and the
consolations of friendship -- deprive me not of these, O governor! Permit me to
remain with persons who honor me with their confidence, and console me with
their benevolence; and be assured, that I have neither the power nor the
inclination to change any thing in the fate of empires."

Amalphis was willing to believe the ingenuous declaration of the astronomer.
Imlac and the prince seemed mysterious, but their train being neither
sufficiently numerous to announce open force, nor small enough to give the
suspicion of hidden treachery, he desired Imlac to dispatch his messenger, and
in the mean time assigned the company an apartment in his castle, where he
treated them with the respect due to their appearance, and often questioned
them on their travels, the different incidents of which they willingly related.

"I am amazed," said Amalphis, "how you should have ever imagined that
happiness depended on any particular station in life. Providence indeed has
permitted to a very few the choice of the path which they are to take in this
world: the lower class of citizens are generally debarred by poverty from
following the dictates of their inclination, and the great are still more
irresistibly restrained by the prejudice of custom: those few, who have it in
their power to choose, are too often guided by their passions: it remains
therefore equally for him who has been compelled into any state of life by the
will of others, and for him who has been so by the force of his own
imagination, to do his duty with firmness and resignation, whatever may be his
disgust or repentance. There is no profession in which a man may not be
virtuous and respected: the fault lies not in the state of life, it depends on
the manner of acting: a man who is discontented with his employment, and for
that reason neglects his duties, shows both want of sense and want of courage:
if he acts up to the part allotted him, at least he fills some character in
life: if he abandons it because it is contrary to his inclination, he either
does nothing, or goes out of his sphere: his existence is therefore useless. On
the other hand, the priest who repines at consecrating his days to meditation
or pastoral instruction, who wishes for the active life of a soldier, and is
fired with enthusiasm when he hears the trumpet sound to arms, has more merit
than his companions if he only feels these sentiments internally, and employs
the energy that Heaven has given him to conquer his repugnance, and to be more
active in his functions. The soldier who would have wished to pass his days in
literary ease and philosophical disquisition, yet, far from neglecting his duty
to his country, makes his studies serve to the perfection of the art of war, is
a greater hero than he whom the desire alone of military fame drives headlong
to the field. Similar examples may be found in any condition, and he alone is
wretched and contemptible, who will not act at least with decency, if not with
distinction, the part assigned him on this great theater. Courage, though a
virtue peculiarly essential to our profession, is necessary in all: it teaches
us equally to act with glory, and to suffer with patience: it inspires us with
firmness toward men, and resignation toward GOD."

CHAP. III. The Prince embraces a new state of life.
IT was expected that some time might elapse before the return of the messenger
dispatched to the court of Abissinia, and in the mean while the prince told
Imlac that he had an inclination to propose to the governor making an
expedition with his son.

"I have always," said he, "felt a desire for the military life; my passion for
glory was roused in the happy valley by the theory of the art of war, which the
most skilful masters are ordered to instill into us, from the possibility that
we may one day be obliged to act as commanders of a great army. I have often
wished to put these lessons in practice; and surely any employment would be
preferable to the state of inactivity in which we are doomed to remain till the
return of our messenger."

"Sir," answered Imlac, "if you persist in this intention, I will accompany you
with pleasure: a camp is no unfavourable study for a poet. But, let me first
warn you of one thing, which has probably escaped your reflection: you are
accustomed to command, and totally unacquainted with the subordination of a
military life: constraint and obedience are equally unknown to you; and yet you
will be obliged to execute every order of Dinarbas like the meanest of his
soldiers."

"I know not," replied the prince, "whether such a life would be agreeable to
me for a long duration; but one campaign cannot exhaust my patience: all evils,
of which we may calculate the term, are at least to be endured; and why should
not I contentedly submit to a life which so many rejoice in?"

"As for me, Sir," said the astronomer, "you will forgive me if I do not
accompany you; my age requires tranquillity, and my country forbids me to bear
arms against her: I will stay with the princess and Pekuah."

Nekayah entered in the midst of this conversation: she was far from approving
the prince's intentions; she dreaded being left among persons to whom she was
unknown; she represented to her brother, that a son of the emperor was not to
hazard his life like the meanest of his subjects, and that slaves were made to
defend their master.

"Sister," said the prince, "I blush to hear a reasoning so contrary to the
principles of duty and humanity -- who is to defend the father, if not the son?
And what right have princes to expect the assistance of their subjects, if they
will not join in bearing a part of the toil? What obligations can the governor
of this fortress and his son have to my father, in comparison with those I owe
him? Indeed, to speak frankly, I see not why my life is more precious than that
of Amalphis: he has served the emperor during several wars: his loss would be
felt on these frontiers: the enemy might gain ground, and the peace of
Abissinia be endangered: his death would introduce despair into his now-happy
family: his son would be left at the most dangerous period of life without the
counsels of a wife and prudent father; his daughter, in the bloom of youth and
beauty, would remain friendless and unprotected. Where would be the fatal
consequences of my fall? The importance of those who fill exalted stations is
often imaginary, and what appears great in the eyes of the possessor is perhaps
totally indifferent to others. I would have thee divest thyself, Nekayah, of
every prejudice of this nature, and seriously consider that no man is really
important, but as he is useful to his country."

The arrival of Dinarbas put an end to this discourse; he learned and applauded
the resolution of Rasselas, and offered him his friendship with all the warmth
natural to his age and profession.

Rasselas had another motive for his departure, besides those he had mentioned
to Imlac and the princess. Zelia, the daughter of Amalphis, appeared to him
entirely different from the women he had known in the happy valley, or during
his travels: the first were slaves, the others lost the power in the attempt to
please. Zelia seemed unconscious of her charms; her mind was cultivated by her
father with assiduous care; her sentiments naturally liberal, had received from
education the dignity of superior virtue: she neither avoided nor sought the
conversation of the strangers; yet all were interested by her.

Rasselas, however, though he had acquired much philosophy by his reading and
observation, still retained the idea that women, if not beings of an inferior
class, were at least not worthy of gaining too great an ascendancy over the
minds of men: he knew his own sensibility, and feared lest he should become the
slave of a passion, which he despised as trivial, or censured as romantic; he
therefore hoped a short absence would obliterate the impression which he began
to perceive Zilia had made on him, and seriously resolved to drive from his
mind all thoughts of her till his return. Time, which, while considered as
future, always promises happiness and wisdom, would, he doubted not, destroy
the power of this enchantment. He therefore hastened the departure of Dinarbas,
and they sallied forth, at the head of fifty horse, to make an incursion on the
enemy's frontiers.

CHAP. IV. Rasselas acquires a friend.
AFTER an absence of a few weeks Rasselas and Dinarbas returned triumphant with
the spoils of many conquered enemies: their friendship had been cemented by
mutual testimonies of valor and of kindness, and the prince was surprised to
see how much this expedition had raised him in the esteem of Amalphis, his son,
and Zilia.

"You are now," said the old warrior, "our friend and fellow-soldier; you have
proved your fidelity to your king and country, and we need not fear to treat
you with that confidence, with which your ingenuous and open manner at first
inspired us."

Imlac, whom the prince had not permitted to accompany him, that he might
remain with Nekayah, could not forbear remarking the new esteem which Rasselas
had acquired with the inhabitants of the fortress.

"Prince," said he, "how necessary is general knowledge to a man of your
exalted station? Of what avail had been in this citadel your literature and
philosophy, if your activity and courage had not added to these endowments the
honors of military service? He who is useful will always be respected: in the
moments of repose and tranquillity, we are pleased with the man who can
instruct or amuse us; but, in the hour of distress and danger, we neglect him
if he cannot be essentially useful."

Nekayah complained much to her brother of the time in which he had been
absent; "She was weary," she said, "of seeing every day the same faces, and
hearing the same discourses; the conversation of Amalphis was indeed
instructive and entertaining, but he was great part of the day engrossed by his
duty; and Zilia, though kind and gentle in her manners, did not treat her with
that respect which the distance between them might naturally have inspired her
with." "Can you blame," replied the prince, "the daughter of Amalphis for
denying respect to that rank which you industriously conceal, and of which she
can have no idea? You hide from others, but cannot yourself forget, that you
are a princess; lose this idea for a moment, and you will find in the society
of Zilia the same pleasure which I feel in that of her brother. I am delighted
with the familiarity of Dinarbas; he believes himself my equal, and I am
flattered with having for the first time in my life, excited disinterested
regard; which I suppose granted either to the qualities implanted in me by
nature, or to those which I may have acquired by my own industry. I am pleased
with the vivacity of his temper, and the energy of his mind: I am resolved to
make another expedition with him, and endeavor to confirm the good opinion he
has conceived of me."

Notwithstanding the wise resolutions of Rasselas, he found in the conversation
and manners of Zilia an irresistible charm; he began now to condemn his former
opinions as unjust and illiberal. "What greater happiness," said he to himself,
"could I experience than in passing my life with a being endowed with such
perfection, and who feels so little her own superiority! But, shall I have the
power of choosing for myself? Am I not doomed to be forever the victim of state
and prejudice, and shall I disturb the heavenly serenity of Zilia by seeking to
inspire her with sentiments, which can only render her as miserable as myself?"

Dinarbas found the prince absorbed in meditation. "My friend," said he, "I am
grieved to see you pensive and unhappy: were it in our power to restore you to
liberty, you should not languish in confinement; yet how often shall I regret
the moments we have passed together! with what difficulty shall I tear myself
from Nekayah! You think me not sufficiently deserving of your confidence to
disclose to me the secret of your birth, and of the rank you held in Abissinia;
I have reason to believe it elevated, both from your sentiments, from those of
Nekayah, and from the respect with which you are treated by your
fellow-travellers: you may perhaps be offended at my frankness, when I tell you
it would have been more fortunate for me if I had never known your sister: with
the gentlest manners and the most engaging urbanity, she has sometimes a
haughtiness that would lessen considerably anv other woman in my esteem, and
yet she possesses the power of making me instantaneously forget the distance
which she had seemed to prescribe me, whenever the natural sweetness of her
temper breaks through the constraint which she imposes on herself and others."

"Dinarbas!" interrupted the prince, "in the name of our friendship, let us
drop this subject; if thou could see into my heart, thou would find me
unhappy as thyself -- let us depart with the next dawn, and attack the enemies
of our country."

CHAP. V. The Fortress besieged.
WHILE the two friends were engaged in this conversation, Amalphis, having
received intelligence that a large body of Egyptians and Arabs was advancing to
assault the fortress, commanded his son to delay his intended expedition till
he could be certain of the truth of this information. In the mean time he took
every necessary precaution to prevent the enemy from finding him unprepared; he
doubled the guard on the walls, went round every night to see that all was in
order, and assigned to every soldier the post he was to defend.

The princess could not without some uneasiness behold these preparatives for
war, and Pekuah was greatly alarmed: the prince comforted them by assurances of
security, of which, however, he was perhaps no more persuaded than they; yet
his consolations, given with an air of confidence, had the desired effect, and
the ladies accustomed themselves to the expectation of a siege, with as little
concern as if they had never apprehended it. During this interval of
uncertainty, the prince was neither able, nor indeed desirous, to avoid the
company of Zilia; but he soon found her greatly altered; her anxieties
returned, and she could not consider the danger, to which Amalphis was soon to
be exposed, without the greatest uneasiness. In vain did she endeavor to
assume her usual gaiety in her father's presence: in the midst of a lively
conversation she would often burst into tears, and every night, when she bade
adieu to Amalphis and her brother, she embraced them with an impression of
sorrow in her countenance, which she vainly endeavored to conceal.

Rasselas was deeply affected with the grief of Zilia; he could not refrain
from telling her he had observed it, nor avoid expressing the pain it gave him:
she received his consolations with sensibility, and treated him with more
consideration than ever.

The princess was less pleased with the conduct of Dinarbas: since the day of
his conversation with Rasselas, he had sought to disengage himself from the
pleasure he found in listening to her; he studiously avoided Nekayah, and
discoursed only with Pekuah. The favorite thoughtlessly encouraged his
advances, and the pride of Nekayah was mortified: she found every day less
delight in the company of her dear Pekuah, she took every opportunity of
separating herself from one whose absence had formerly made her resolve to
abandon the world, and without whom she had considered existence as a torment;
yet would she often reproach herself for this change of sentiments. Pekuah had
still the same tender respect, the same attachment for the princess which had
been the greatest happiness of her life: Nekayah could only accuse her of
passing too much time with Dinarbas, and she had herself found too great a
pleasure in his company to condemn another for seeking it. She felt that
jealousy was the motive of her new and extraordinary dislike; her pride and her
principles equally combated this passion; she was surprised to find it possible
that she could be susceptible of it; and was ashamed to listen to the voice
that internally accused her.

While her mind was in this agitation she one morning observed a great dust
arising in the east: a general tumult in the fortress soon convinced her, that
she had not been the only person who had remarked it. "The army of the
Egyptians is advancing to attack us," said Dinarbas, who at that instant
entered her apartment, "yet be not alarmed, Nekayah! you are here in safety,
and did you know our hearts, you would be convinced that we would either defend
you or perish: our numbers are not contemptible, and our courage has been often
tried: the enemy's troops are numerous, but ours are better disciplined, and my
father is no young soldier."

"Dinarbas!" answered the princess, "I thank you for your care; I have not the
resolution of a warrior, but I am resigned: the first appearance of danger
naturally alarms the mind of woman; but give me time for reflection, and I am
prepared for all -- your duty is to repulse the enemy, ours to pray for your
success, and to await the event with patience."

Dinarbas hastened to his post, and the princess remained on a sofa in silent
and anxious expectation. She had not been long in this situation before she was
joined by Pekuah, who throwing herself at the feet of her mistress embraced her
knees with a flood of tears: "Dear lady," said she, "this is the most cruel
moment of my life: when I was taken by the Arabs, I consoled myself with the
reflection that you did not share my misfortunes: alas I I am now doomed to see
the princess of Abissinia in the power of lawless robbers, and the sacred
person of the prince exposed to their savage fury -- what fatal stars conducted
us to this fortress!"

"Pekuah!" answered the princess, calmly, "a few days since, you seemed to
consider this fortress as the habitation of your choice; joy animated your
eyes, and inspired your tongue; all your sentiments, even your attachment to
me, seemed absorbed in the delights of society, and I have reason to believe
that your present fears arise more from the danger of losing that society, than
from the perils to which the prince or myself may be exposed."

"Beloved mistress," replied Pekuah, "if you withdraw your favor from your
slave, she can only bow her head beneath your displeasure and sink into her
original state of insignificancy -- but wherein can Nekayah accuse me of
forgetting that respectful tenderness which alone possesses my heart? I am not
conscious of any change of manners, or how that vivacity, which formerly used
to meet your approbation in our discourses with Imlac and the astronomer, can
have displeased you in this fortress; where, from the want of variety of
objects, you allowed it was necessary to snatch every occasional amusement, and
avail ourselves of every trivial matter that could excite it."

"But why," resumed the princess, a little softened, "would you spend so much
of your time with the son of Amalphis? Though your understanding and your
virtue place you above the malignity of slander, why should you peculiarly
choose the conversation of this young warrior in preference to the sage
discourse of his father, or the lively and instructive converse of Imlac and
the astronomer?"

"I know not, lady," answered Pekuah, "that I have held more discourse with
Dinarbas than with the other inhabitants of the fortress; but if you command
it, I will henceforward avoid his company, nor shall I consider it as a
sacrifice to my obedience: indeed," added she, smiling, "if Nekayah will allow
me to proceed without being offended at her servant, I will confess to her that
I find not in the society of Dinarbas those charms which so warmly affect the
prince and Imlac: In the midst of the most interesting conversation his
thoughts often wander from the subject, and his eyes are turned on Nekayah. I
am fully conscious of the infinite attractions of my princess, and I cannot
sometimes avoid pitying the youth for having nourished aspiring sentiments, of
the vanity of which he is, perhaps, unconscious, and which yet his respect
endeavors to stifle: but surely no woman can entirely conquer the pride
inherent in our sex, nor likes to be the senseless idol that is crowned with
flowers, while the vows are offered to the Divinity."

The princess felt the truth of her favourite's discourse, and, at the same
instant, found all her affection for her revive; but great were the accusations
with which she loaded herself: she regretted her blindness, and at the same
time upbraided her own heart for the pleasure which the discovery of Pekuah had
given her: she anxiously prayed for the return of the messenger, that she might
depart, and, if possible, lose the memory of all that had interested her in the
castle.

CHAP. VI. The Princess meets with a real misfortune.
NEKAYAH had never before found herself in so uneasy a situation: her eyes were
fixed on the ground, and she knew not what answer to make to Pekuah, when they
were suddenly interrupted by the arrival of Zilia, who wild with grief entered
the apartment, and uttering a heart-piercing shriek sunk lifeless on the
ground. Pekuah ran hastily to her assistance, but Nekayah was unable to move;
she raised her eyes to heaven, and remained in motionless horror; she dreaded
to learn the cause of Zilia's affliction: a thousand confused images took
possession of her mind, and the idea of Rasselas and Dinarbas rushed at once on
her imagination.

The assistance of Pekuah soon recovered the unhappy Zilia. "Nekayah!" cried
she, "I have cruel tidings to relate, but your misfortune is less than mine;
your brother is a prisoner among the Egyptians, but Dinarbas has scarcely a
moment to live -- even now perhaps he expires, and I have lost the only poor
consolation of receiving his last breath. -- I saw him covered with wounds and
in a state of insensibility -- his valor and that of your brother have saved
the fortress, but they are victims to our safety -- the enemy has retired with
great loss -- Yet why should I repine? -- Gracious Heaven!" continued she,
falling on her knees, "thou art merciful; my father lives, though he lives to
misery -- his laurels cost him the life of his beloved son, and he has no
comfort left but the wretched Zilia -- let me haste to find him, and by my
tender cares endeavor to calm the sorrow that overwhelms him -- I forget -- he
commands me to remain here, and will not suffer me to be witness of the
mournful scene."

At this moment Imlac appeared, and confirmed the dreadful truth: he conjured
Nekayah to take comfort, but she remained the image of despair, and returned no
answer either to him or to Pekuah; at length, casting her eyes on Zilia, she
embraced her, and shed a torrent of tears.

She seemed now a little relieved, and listened with attention to the narrative
of Imlac, who told her that Amalphis had received with determined valor the
assault of the enemy, many of whom had scaled the walls and entered the
fortress; but that after a severe conflict they fled, and were pursued by
Dinarbas and Rasselas, at the head of their horsemen; that when they came to
the plain beneath the castle, the enemy turned and renewed the combat with
desperate fury, that the two young warriors fought with distinguished courage,
till Dinarbas, pierced with wounds, fell lifeless from his horse, and was
carried from the field by his soldiers, who fled with him to the fortress, and
Rasselas, engaged in the midst of the enemy's troops, was at the same instant
surrounded and taken prisoner: "You have much cause for comfort, lady,"
continued Imlac, "your brother's life is in safety; the Egyptians are not a
cruel nation, and it is not probable they will treat injuriously a prisoner of
war."

"I thank Heaven," returned the princess, "for having protected the life of my
brother; but, can I enjoy comfort while he remains a prisoner, and while I
behold the affliction of Zilia and her father? Let us seek the good Amalphis,
nor leave him longer alone a prey to his sorrows."

CHAP. VII. The love of dissipation not incorrigible.
WHILE grief had thus taken possession of the victors, the routed forces of the
Egyptians retired tumultuously toward the confines of their kingdom. Rasselas
had too much fortitude and philosophy to be dejected or surprised at what he
knew to be the common chance of war: he rejoiced at the retreat of the enemy,
and submitted with patience to his fate, though he regretted that he could not
share the honors of the conquerors: he had been too active in the engagement
to perceive the fall of Dinarbas, but he feared some ill accident might have
attended him, as he knew not otherwise how to account for losing sight of him,
and for the desertion of his troops. He was strictly secured in the midst of
four horsemen, during the time of their march, and at night placed in a tent
surrounded by a strong guard. As soon as the army arrived in Lower Egypt, he
enjoyed greater liberty, and was permitted to converse with the officers;
amongst whom he recognized several of the young men with whom he had been
intimate at his first arrival at Cairo. They received him with joy, for they
had equally forgotten the abrupt manner in which he had quitted their society,
and the good admonitions he had left with them. Rasselas was displeased at
meeting them: "What shall I do," said he to himself, "in a society of which I
have proved the inconveniences, and have felt the disgust? If I could not bear
the noisy mirth, and thoughtless vivacity of my young companions, at my first
entering into the various scenes of life, how shall I support the fatigue of
their company when every day has increased my disapprobation of their conduct,
and convinced me of the insufficiency of their amusements?"

In consequence of these reflections, he thanked them coolly for their
civilities, and avoided any further intercourse with them; but the mind
oppressed with cares, and accustomed to communicate its inquietudes, requires
the usual relief: he found, not without humiliation, that some society was
necessary, and that trifling as their conversation appeared to him, he was
compelled frequently to fly to it, as to a refuge from his own thoughts. He
began to discern, in the midst of frantic gaiety and remorseless dissipation,
sparks of honor, sincerity and goodnature, that were not to be stifled by the
influence of passion: he pitied and esteemed the possessors of these virtues;
and, having found by experience that severe rebuke and the air of superior
prudence produced an effect contrary to his wishes, he took gentler and more
successful means. By applauding their ardour, he taught them to distinguish
courage from temerity, a sense of honor and the pride of virtue from revenge
and vanity, generosity from prodigality, and friendship from blind affection:
he learned, by studying their various dispositions and characters, that of the
number whom he had considered as generally depraved, few were incapable of
being reclaimed; and that he had judged too severely of the rest from the
faults of their companions. He found that the same admonitions which they had
rejected with derision, when given with the severity of a preceptor, they
received with avidity when offered with the familiar kindness of a friend: by
commending them for whatever he discovered praiseworthy in their conduct, and
by joining in such of their pleasures as were innocent, he acquired the right
of censuring their faults, and refusing to imitate their irregularities: their
minds, unaccustomed to occupation, could with difficulty be brought to serious
studies; but the love of novelty first engaged them to listen to Rasselas, when
he proposed any improvement that had the appearance of pleasure; and the
natural empire of calm and rational amusements made them at last adopt from
conviction what they had at first taken up through caprice. Even those who had
before seemed incorrigible, gave way either to the force of reason, or to the
prevalence of example, and either insensibly joined in the reformation, or
complied with what they saw the greater number approve.

Rasselas could not, without a mixture of pleasure and regret, behold this
change, which he would never have had the patience to effectuate, if he had not
been compelled to do it by his situation. "Why did I not, while at Cairo,"
thought he, "use the same methods and obtain the same success? I fear I must
consider myself as guilty of the irregularities of my companions during the
space of time which has passed since we parted. He, who would wish to reform
his fellow creatures, must study attentively the human heart: he must treat
with tenderness the man whom weakness, not perverseness, has caused to deviate
from the path of virtue: he must fortify by degrees his returning energy, nor
dazzle at once the eyes of error with all the splendor of severe truth: he
must show her to him first under the form of compassion, of benevolence, of
indulgence: innocence alone can bear the light of her unveiled majesty;
repentance would sink into despair without the balm of mercy. -- No,
henceforward let me avoid the pride of reproof and the frown of disapprobation:
let me endeavor to instruct by example, and persuade by kindness!"

CHAP. VIII. Apology for rusticity.
WHEREVER the army passed, the prince observed that great cordiality subsisted
between the soldiers and the inhabitants of the country: the former received
presents of the fruits of the earth and of the milk of the flocks, which made
the only riches of their rural friends. Rasselas was surprised to find great
acuteness and penetration in many of these shepherds, who gave useful
instructions to the soldiers for the remainder of their march, and amused them
with pastoral sports, while they received them with frankness and hospitality.
"How different do I find you," said Rasselas to one of the old shepherds, "from
the race who tend their flocks near the cataracts of the Nile! I visited these
in hopes to find amongst them that gentleness and those harmless virtues which
all ages and all nations have agreed to attribute to the pastoral life. My
disappointment was great; they were discontented with their own situation,
envious of the rich, rude and untaught in the arts of general utility, and not
more uninstructed in the politeness of courts, than in the common duties of
hospitality. I find, on the contrary, amongst you, many who convince me that
the poets have written after nature; and I am delighted to perceive that the
tranquil happiness of a pastoral life, though not universal, is not wholly
banished from the earth."

"Sir," replied the shepherd, "I have in my youth passed some time in the
fruitful pastures which you mention, and either the warmth of fancy, not
uncommon to our nation, particularly in the spring of life, has deceived me, or
the shepherds who inhabit that happy climate are endowed with the same
penetration, and exercise the same hospitality as you find amongst us: nay, I
have thought that they possessed these qualities in a higher degree: the purity
of the air, the beautiful verdure of the fields, the infinite variety of birds
that inhabit the groves on the borders of the father of waters; all these
images of the power and goodness of the Deity must expand their hearts, and
purify them from the dross of those vile passions which you describe. But, Sir,
the peasant feels, and therefore may justly groan under, the pressure of the
tyranny of the great: your appearance persuades me that your rank is above the
class of mediocrity; they have been accustomed to look on such persons as their
tyrants, by whom they are never to be visited, but when they are to contribute
to enrich them by the fruits of their labors, or perhaps to amuse a moment of
caprice or listlessness by exciting in them sentiments of ridicule. What ideas
can these have in common with the rich? If you would know their opinions and
manners, you must divest yourself of the superiority which your rank has given
you, and live like them. I will not promise you that such intercourse will make
you amends for the sacrifice: I will only say, and your present observations
may confirm it, that the poetical descriptions of pastoral life, though perhaps
embellished, are not wholly fabulous; and that were you obliged to descend to
our humble station, you would find our candor and simplicity not unworthy of
your regard. The soldier who respects our property deserves our affection, and
we let him reap the fruits of his moderation and of our gratitude: we envy not
his riches; if he has any, they are acquired by greater hardships than we are
accustomed to, and without him we could not possess our fields in tranquillity.
Blame us not therefore for our rudeness toward the mighty; it is perhaps our
greatest virtue: every subject of despotism is equally a slave, but it is
difficult for him who spends the greatest part of his time under the ample
canopy of heaven, who sees all around him free except himself and his
fellow creature man, who feels no immediate benefit from the princes of the
earth, and only knows his dependence on them by their temporary oppressions, it
is difficult for that being not to consider the great and the rich as his
enemies: it is still more difficult for him to disguise that feeling; neither
can he conceive the necessity of feigning. It is no mark of illiberal sentiment
to neglect those above us: we see and confess the wants of this army, we supply
them with what we possess, and should be cruel if we denied them: the
connection which their necessity has made them form with us, engages us to live
familiarly together; we communicate to them our ideas, and receive information
from them: our obligations are reciprocal, and our desire to please mutual; but
where none of these motives subsist, how can you judge of the essential
character of any individual or of any class of people?

CHAP. IX. Rasselas in confinement.
THE army now arrived in a spacious plain surrounded by an amphitheatre of
hills, where, finding excellent pasturage, plentiful springs of water, and a
large forest to screen them from the heat of the sun, they formed a regular
camp, distributed rewards and punishments, and passed several days in feasts
and dissipation. The Arabs, who had accompanied the Egyptians in their
unsuccessful expedition, finding that they loitered away much time in a state
of inaction, became weary of expectation, and unanimously agreed to leave their
allies and return to their ancient desultory mode of fighting; but, before they
departed, they demanded a division of the spoils and prisoners. The Egyptians
being unable to refuse, after they had employed ineffectually all means of
soothing them to remain among them, found themselves at last obliged not only
to give up their best captives, but to enrich the Arabs with the most precious
of their acquisitions; they murmured but they complied. Such is the advantage
of the strong and active over the weak and indolent.

Rasselas, in the division of prisoners, fell to the share of the commander of
the Arabs, and was esteemed a valuable prize, on account of his youth, his
commanding figure, and his skill in various languages: but it was not
convenient for the chief to carry him immediately to Cairo, the great mart for
captives, as he would be embarrassed with him on his march: he therefore placed
him with two slaves of approved fidelity, in a strong tower on the summit of an
almost inaccessible mountain, and promised to return for him the next month.
The slaves by turns descended into the valley to seek provisions for themselves
and Rasselas, but, in compliance with what their master had exacted in proof of
their fidelity, for some time never exchanged a word with their prisoner.

Rasselas, notwithstanding his former philosophy, daily lost all temper in his
present situation: during his journey thither, and after his arrival, he had
shown so great an impatience of control, and so much desire of forcing his
guard, that he was kept with uncommon strictness. However disagreeable and
humiliating might be the fate which he expected after the return of the Arab,
he anxiously counted the days allotted for his confinement: solitude appeared
to him the worst of evils, and at the expiration of the month he looked over
the country for the arrival of the Arab with an eager expectation, equal to
that with which he would have waited for the return of a friend. From the
rising to the setting sun, he passed the day at the window of his prison, and
would scarcely leave it to take his accustomed food: for several days following
he remained in the same state of anxiety; his mind seemed absorbed in one idea,
and could find no resources in itself. He endeavored to substitute the
thoughts of the past for those of the future: it was impossible -- sleep fled
from him by night, and repose by day; he interrogated the slaves and received
no answer: at last, as they perceived his agitation to be violent, and feared
it would endanger his health, they told him their master often came much later
than he designed, since his return depended on the success of his arms; that he
might possibly be several months absent, but that in the mean time he himself
should experience no other inconveniency than that of confinement.

CHAP. X. The resources of solitude.
THE prince, far from being comforted by the answer of the slaves, was
overwhelmed with affliction; he sunk hopeless on his mat, the only furniture of
his prison, and gave himself up to all the melancholy of his reflections. "I am
now," said he, "arrived at the evil I have always dreaded, and which it has
been my constant study to avoid -- why did I take such pains to quit the happy
valley, but to emerge from a state of oblivion and inactivity? Why have I
endeavored all my life to improve in virtue and knowledge, but with the hopes
of advancing the good of others and my own glory? To whom now can I communicate
my thoughts? From whom can I gain applause or receive information? If the Arab
should fall a sacrifice to his avidity, than which nothing is more probable,
who will be acquainted with my retreat? Shall I not be condemned to wear out my
days in dreadful solitude, without any being to alleviate my woes? The guards,
who are placed to watch me, are not only unwilling but incapable of affording
me consolation: I have not the resource of conversing with the learned of
former ages, since not a volume is to be found within these walls -- the power
of writing is denied me -- I can gain no alleviation of my misery by setting
down my thoughts and arranging them with reflection -- how poor is man when
divested of external succor!"

Nor were these the only reflections of Rasselas: he was anxious for what might
be the fate of Nekayah: he recalled to mind, with the most bitter regret, the
happy moments he had passed in listening to the eloquence of Imlac, and the
science of the astronomer: he often feared that Dinarbas had fallen a victim to
his courage, and perhaps to his friendship for him. The image of Zilia was
eternally present to him; every situation in which he had found himself with
her, every smile, every tear, was fresh in his imagination: he often repeated
the conversation he had held with her, and though the remembrance gave him
inexpressible pain, he feared the images should decay, and strove to imprint
them more strongly on his memory, lest he should lose the only satisfaction
that was left him. What gave him the greatest uneasiness, was the fear of being
forgotten; and though he felt the improbability that his friends should
discover the place of his retreat, his heart would sometimes accuse them of
neglect.

In this state of weariness and affliction Rasselas passed near a fortnight;
but at length he began insensibly to accustom himself to his situation, and to
find amusement from the great objects of nature which alone presented
themselves to his view. An awful tempest, exhibiting the most noble contrast of
light and darkness, first attracted his attention, and for a few moments made
him forget his cares: he therefore pursued this new resource, and watched the
various changes of the sky with their effects on the chain of mountains that
surrounded him. A clear moonlight, which adorned the hemisphere some evenings
after, gave him the first sentiment of pleasure which he had experienced since
his captivity: he described his sensations in a small poem which he composed
and addressed to Zilia: the pains he took to repeat and retain it in his memory
employed the rest of the evening, and he slept that night better than he had
done since his imprisonment. The following day he composed a description of the
tempest, addressed to Imlac, and resolved, on the first occasion that the
absence of the moon should restore brilliancy to the stars, to dedicate an ode
on that subject to the astronomer. At night, as soon as the lunar rays entered
his chamber, he flew with rapture to the window, as to a situation that
recalled to him more forcibly the image of Zilia; he made some changes in the
poem addressed to her the former evening, added some descriptions of the
prospect in his view, and retired to rest with more than usual tranquillity.

Nekayah was not forgotten in these ideal compositions, and, from the time of
his finding this employment, he was less wearied with expectation, and
consequently more content with his present situation. He no longer spent hours
at the window looking toward the only accessible side of the mountain, nor
listened to the noise of the wind, in hopes it might be the trampling of
horses. He felt applause in his own mind for his new acquired patience, as for
a victory gained over himself, and the exultation of conscious merit gave new
strength to his resolutions.

CHAP. XI. Resignation.
RASSELAS was not only resigned to his fate, but began to be persuaded that his
confinement was rather a good than an evil. "How unthinking and how ungrateful
is man," said he -- "how could I prefer the thoughts of slavery and degradation
to the life I am now leading? It is true, I am deprived of the amusements of
variety, and debarred from the reciprocal communications of friendship, but I
am equally saved from the mortifications so frequent in society, and from the
malice of hatred and envy. If I am incapacitated from doing good, I am at least
prevented from doing ill: It is true, I am here useless to my friends, but I
have the satisfaction of reflecting that it was in their defense, and in the
service of my country that I lost my liberty. Nekayah has sense and resolution;
she can neither want friends to assist her with advice, nor prudence to follow
their counsels. Imlac and the astronomer pursued their path in life long before
they knew me: Dinarbas either perished nobly in the battle, or is engaged in
the career of glory. Zilia -- Zilia could never have been mine with honor to
herself, and obedience to my father -- I am saved from the pain of seeing her
in the arms of another, or of destroying all the happiness of her life --
Providence has certainly enclosed me here as a shelter from guilt, and I
receive the benefit with gratitude.

"The hermit whom we visited in his retreat, and accompanied back to Cairo, was
not contented with a voluntary retirement, and yet I have accustomed myself to
forced seclusion, even without many of the advantages which he enjoyed --
whence arises so strange a difference? Perhaps, while the mind has a power of
wandering, it can never sink into repose: perhaps, while choice is allowed us,
inconstancy will attend our desires: how merciful is Heaven in allotting to man
the part he is to act in this world! Did it depend wholly on himself, caprice
would direct his actions, and remorse would follow them. Resignation should be
the favorite study of the wise, and the principal virtue of the brave.

"How can a man think himself alone while surrounded with the noblest works of
his Creator? while the planets, the stars, and that great luminary, whose
general influence dispenses light and heat to the vast universe, afford a
constant field for meditation and thankfulness? How can he consider himself as
friendless and unprotected, when the hand of GOD equally supports the captive
in his wretched dungeon, and the conqueror at the head of his triumphant army?
when a moment may change the fate of either as his will directs, and when all
their efforts, without his immediate assistance, can neither alter nor continue
their present situation? Uncertain as I am which is the most preferable of the
various conditions of life, I am yet persuaded, that if there is much
disappointment, there is likewise much comfort to be found in all. I will
therefore form no other prayer to the Divinity, than to keep me from crime and
error, and teach me to be wholly governed by his will. Would it not be
presumption in a blind man to pretend to choose his path? All that he can do is
to endeavor, as far as his strength will permit, to walk upright in that which
is appointed him by his guide -- And are we not all morally blind? What have
the greatest sages discovered but that they knew nothing? And shall we not
yield ourselves without reserve to the direction of that Divine Leader, who not
only allots for us the path it is most fit we should pursue, but supports and
consoles us amid the dangers and difficulties that surround it?"

CHAP. XII. Nekayah instructed by misfortune.
DURING the confinement of Rasselas, various events happened in the fortress
where he had left Nekayah.

Attended by Imlac, Nekayah went to the apartment of Amalphis: she found him
seated on a sofa writing: she was astonished at his tranquillity, and
advancing, enquired, with trembling anxiety, after Dinarbas.

"Lady," returned the venerable warrior, "my son is no more -- he is fallen
nobly in the exercise of his duty; and while the funeral honors, that justly
belong to the young hero, are preparing, I take this moment to inform the
emperor of the success of his arms." -- "Is such then," replied Nekayah, "the
effect of philosophy, courage, or resignation? Can they divest you of the
feelings of nature, or teach you to support with patience a loss under which
the wisest have despaired, and the bravest have sunk?" "Lady," said Amalphis,
"neither philosophy nor reason could reconcile me to the death of my son: they
who would cure grief by declamation, or stifle sentiment by reason, know little
of the heart of man: the more I think, the more I am persuaded of the virtues
of Dinarbas: the more I reflect, the more must I regret his loss. My hopes are
over in this world, and happiness is for ever banished from me: all that now
remains is to do my duty for the poor remnant of my life, and then sink into
tranquillity or rise to glory. Grief does not always show itself by tears and
exclamations: if there is any power in philosophy, it consists in preventing us
from giving exterior proofs of our affliction, but it cannot cure the wound
inflicted on the heart: employment and activity may perhaps have a greater
effect, but not in sufferings like mine. The only reflection that saves me on
the very brink of the precipice of despair, is resignation to the will of
Heaven; and the only motives that can make me outwardly conquer my affliction,
are my duty to my sovereign and my love to Zilia: these," added Amalphis with a
look of unutterable sorrow, "make me bear life, nor trouble others with my
complaints; but the anguish remains in my breast, and time or reflection will
only serve to increase it."

The princess retired abashed, and penetrated with the most poignant grief; she
threw herself on her couch, and commanded all her attendants, except Pekuah, to
withdraw. -- "How can I ever forgive myself," said she, "my dear Pekuah, for
considering Amalphis as insensible? Is not his the only true philosophy? He is
miserable, yet he will support his own character, and do his duty to others --
his affliction will prey on his health, and perhaps he will fall a victim to
that sentiment of which I supposed him incapable! -- and what am I? -- how have
I treated the hero whom I shall never cease to lament! Pride, where art thou
now? -- Did I not, from the first moment of my conversing with Dinarbas, find
in him all the noble fire of heroism, without vanity or rashness? all the
liveliness of wit, and all the depth of knowledge, without ill nature and
without pedantry? Was not my first care to please and interest him, and when I
perceived with joy the impression I had made, did I not assume the air of
haughty superiority and of mortifying indifference? And why? -- because he
treated me with peculiar respect -- because he wore my chains, I made them
still more heavy, and used every art to render them lasting: if he had not
honored me with a regard of which I was unworthy, should I not anxiously have
sought delight from his eloquence, and instruction from his knowledge? Should I
not have been struck with awe and admiration at his virtue? -- O power, how
dangerous art thou to all! How little to be trusted in the hands of woman!
Forgive me, Dinarbas! my whole remaining life, a life of remorse, shall expiate
my fault. -- "

As Nekayah uttered these words, Zilia entered the apartment: she was dressed
in a long mourning robe, her face was veiled, and she was attended by her
women, habited in the same manner.

"Nekayah," said she, "I am going to pay the last sad duties to the remains of
my brother: the funeral procession advances toward the final habitation of the
brave -- will thou not join me in this melancholy moment? If the dead are
consci^us of what passes on earth, the spirit of Dinarbas will rejoice in thy
respect to his memory; for he loved thee, O Nekayah! and if thy brother was
here, he would pay with tears this homage to his friend -- he would join me in
my grief." -- Nekayah had not power to answer. She made a sign that they should
bring her a mourning habit; covered herself with a thick veil, and, without
pronouncing a word, followed the steps of Zilia.

CHAP. XIII. The funeral of Dinarbas.
THE body of Dinarbas, clothed in a rich robe, was carried on a bier decorated
with branches of palm and laurel, by six of the chosen warriors whom he had
commanded, while the rest followed leading their horses, all marching with
their arms reversed, to the sound of mournful harmony, with unfeigned
affliction in their countenance. Next to them walked Amalphis, followed by
Zilia, Nekayah, and their attendants, the procession being closed by the
remainder of the garrison. Dinarbas had gained the affection of all, and by all
he was regretted.

When they arrived at the place of burial, which was a small valley on the
banks of the river, the soldiers set down the bier; and the garrison being
formed into ranks, on one side headed by Amalphis, while on the other stood the
female mourners, a venerable priest advanced, and, according to the custom of
Abissinia, placing himself near the body, pronounced the following oration:

"Grieve not, O ye soldiers, companions of the hero whose obsequies we are met
to celebrate: your lamentations cannot recall him to life: weep not, ye lovely
mourners, Dinarbas cannot be restored by your tears: Attend to the praise of
his actions, and imitate his virtues, all ye who regret his loss: behold the
fate of youth, of genius, of valor! Employ the fleeting hours, and let your
life, like his, be glorious, and your death, like his, triumphant.

"Few have been thy years, Dinarbas! but well have thou employed them: the
burning sands of Lybia, the stony precipices of Arabia, the fertile plains of
Egypt, have been witnesses of thy glorious deeds: conquest sat on thy sword,
and humanity beamed from thy eyes. Unwearied by fatigue and hardship,
uncorrupted by the charms of victory, thy mind was active as the northern
breeze, and thy heart pure as the stream that flows before thee; fierce as the
whirlwind in the day of battle, mild as the zephyr in the hour of friendship,
thou knew all the arts of war, and all the ornaments of peace: merciful to
thy vanquished enemies, unshaken in thy resolves, courteous in thy manners,
firm and ardent in the cause of honor and of thy country, thou leavest us to
lament thy loss, and to follow thy example! -- yet who shall imitate thee, O
Dinarbas? where shall we find the warmth of youth united to the experience of
age? where shall we see, but in thy comprehensive mind, the knowledge of the
sage who has passed his days in meditation, and that of the soldier whose years
have flowed through the busy scenes of active life? -- Warriors! like him, fly
the seductions of dissipation: Dinarbas, in the bloom of youth, endowed with
all the warmth of fancy, was superior to their enticements: his greatest
conquests were over his own passions: he subdued them, or like vanquished
enemies made them subservient to his great designs, and directed them with
despotic sway in the cause of virtue and honor. Superior to every obstacle,
when he had by his last action ensured his glory and our freedom, he fell in
the arms of victory, and expired amidst the acclamations of a grateful people.
Strew his bier with flowers, O ye virgins of Abissinia! he has saved you from
slavery and dishonor -- throw palms and laurels around him, O ye warriors! he
led you to conquest, and he has left you the fruits of his triumph -- and thou,
Amalphis! by whom he was inspired with heroic ardour and godlike virtue; thou,
whose precepts and whose example he has so well obeyed and imitated, father of
our hero, and father of thy troops! may the great exploits, may the exalted
virtues of Dinarbas, compensate to thee, the shortness of the term which Heaven
has granted him! and may these, thy other children, emulate equally the valor
and the filial affection of their beloved warrior!"

Amalphis could no longer refrain from tears; they trickled in abundance down
his venerable cheeks; the chiefs of the army ran to embrace his knees, and the
soldiers, whom respect detained from approaching, filled the air with
exclamations of grief for Dinarbas, and vows of fidelity to his father.

Zilia and Nekayah remained motionless in silent sorrow: the priest made signs
for them to advance and cast flowers on the bier: they approached with
trembling knees, and uncertain steps: the tender Zilia supported herself,
half-fainting, on her women; but Nekayah, summoning all her resolution to pay
the last tribute to the memory of Dinarbas, walked majestically to the bier,
and looking steadfastly on the body, as she scattered roses over it, she thought
she perceived the breast heave with some remains of life: dubious and agitated
between hope and fear, she approached still nearer, when she saw his eyes open,
and again close from the light of day, and soon after a sigh assured her he was
yet alive. "No longer mourn, but assist your hero," cried Nekayah, wild with
joy, and yet trembling with apprehension; "bring speedy succor, and he may
still be preserved to his friends and country -- he yet breathes -- O haste to
save him!"

The rapture and confusion were universal. Amalphis thought that the
imagination of Nekayah, affrighted at the mournful solemnity, had flattered her
disturbed senses with a momentary delusion: the most skilful physicians, the
whole garrison, had pronounced him dead. Amalphis raised his eyes to heaven --
"Defend me, all-gracious Power!" cried the venerable warrior, "defend me from
this dazzling ray of fallacious hope, save me from falling still deeper into
the abyss of misery."

CHAP. XIV. Embarrassment of Nekayah.
BY the care of those around him, Dinarbas was restored to life: he turned his
eyes with astonishment on Nekayah, Zilia, and his father. Amalphis could no
longer doubt: he poured forth his grateful thanks to heaven with all the
feelings of a father, and ordered his son to be carried back to his apartment
in the fortress, where, in a few days, his wounds were proved not be mortal.

Nekayah was in the mean time greatly embarrassed with her own reflections: she
was sensible that as soon as Dinarbas was recovered he would renew his visits
to her: the supposed obligation of her restoring to life would be a strong
claim upon his gratitude, and he could therefore no longer avoid her company
even if he wished it: his distant respect must change into tender
acknowledgments, and she could not trust her heart with receiving them. She now
wanted counsel, and knew not where to seek it: Rasselas, in whom she had the
highest confidence, was absent: Pekuah was too submissively attached to her
mistress to have any other opinion than hers: Imlac she suspected of the same
complaisance, and the astronomer was too unknowing in the ways of the world to
afford her any assistance. Amalphis and Zilia were the last persons to whom she
could have applied, even if they had been acquainted with her situation, which
she did not choose to disclose to them. In this perplexity of doubt, her mind
often rested on the idea of Dinarbas. "Did not my sentiments too nearly regard
himself," thought Nekayah, "how excellent a friend might I have found in him!
one in whom my confidence would have been securely placed, and whose judgment
and sincerity would have directed me in the paths of honor and of prudence!"

Such were the anxieties of Nekayah, and she soon had reason to perceive they
were not groundless.

Dinarbas recovered his health, and his first care was to visit her. Zilia had
informed him of the grief which the princess had felt for his loss, and the
respect she had paid to his memory. His father had related to him the
circumstances of his being restored to life by Nekayah, and the joy that had
appeared in her countenance. She had indeed foreseen that all this would
happen; but she could not have solicited a concealment of her sentiments
without giving a suspicion of their nature.

When she perceived Dinarbas enter the apartment, she endeavored to hide her
agitation, and turned the discourse on the universal joy of the garrison at his
recovery, and particularly on the feelings of his father and Zilia: she
smilingly mentioned the praises which had been bestowed on him at his funeral,
and congratulated the young warrior on the rare advantage of being informed of
them: she then changed the subject, talked of her brother, and of the fruitless
enquiries made by Amalphis after the Egyptian army. But Dinarbas was not
satisfied with the apparent ease with which she spoke of circumstances that, by
the account of Zilia, had so deeply affected her.

"Nekayah," said he, "do not expect me to thank you for restoring me to life;
my death would have been happy: I had done my duty, and my father and
fellow soldiers approved my actions: my sister had shown her regard for my
memory; and I am told, that even Nekayah shed some tears over me -- Had I been
sensible of so unexpected and so blessed an event, I could have desired no more.
I am now restored to life and to your indifference; yet, Nekayah, you are
mistaken in Dinarbas, if you suppose him capable of passing the bounds of that
respect which he owes you: his conduct might have assured you of his efforts to
subdue a passion, of which he is no longer master, and for which you you ought
rather to pity than to blame him."

"Dinarbas!" answered the princess, "I will be sincere with you; I own my fault
in not having sooner been so* hear me, and learn the reasons of my conduct; but
first let me entreat your promise never, till you see my brother, to disclose
the secret with which I am going to entrust you."

Dinarbas promised all she desired, and Nekayah continued, "I am daughter to
the emperor of Abissinia, and Rasselas is his fourth son: curiosity after new
scenes, and disgust of inaction, first induced us to leave the valley; you know
the rest: -- judge, whether I ought to hear you; judge, when I further confess,
that I hear you with pleasure."

Dinarbas was less surprised at the discovery of the rank of Nekayah, than
delighted with her avowal of an attachment which he could scarcely have hoped
for; he was about to thank her with all the raptures of happy love, when the
princess stopped him.

"Dinarbas," said she, "the discovery I have made to you is not to authorize
your weakness or mine; the confidence I have placed in you, proves my opinion
of your prudence, and my conviction of your honor. Pleased with the charms of
your society, secure in your respect, and conscious of my own principles, I
should perhaps have remained a long time in the delightful illusion, without
thinking of the uneasiness I was preparing for myself and for you; but, I had
no right to leave you in error, and your conduct has deserved that I should
explain myself -- after this explanation, I fly to you for counsel and support:
assist me in clearing the mist which obscures our reason. It is true, I
consider as a prejudice the difference of our birth; but it is a prejudice
established by the universal custom of ages, and consequently ought to be
respected by all who regard their fame: virtue is wholly in our own power, but
fame depends on the breath of the multitude, and the multitude is governed by
prejudice."

CHAP. XV. Dinarbas justifies the confidence of the Princess.
DINARBAS, astonished and distressed at the discourse of Nekayah, remained for
some time silent; at length recovering himself, "Princess," said he, "I will
not ask your pardon for involuntary error: I thank you for the confidence you
have reposed in me; you will soon judge whether I deserve it: only remember
that, though we may be masters of our actions, we cannot command our
sentiments: mine will never alter; but your sincerity has found the only means
of imposing on them an eternal silence."

Having so said, he left abruptly the apartment. Nekayah arose, went to the
window, and raising her eyes to heaven, "All-seeing Power!" said she, "support
me in this hour of trial -- this hour, in which Nekayah has resigned all the
happiness of her life: I feel the whole weight of the sacrifice; I find I was
not deceived in Dinarbas."

A short time after, Amalphis entered: -- "Lady," said he, "my son is resolved
to seek his friend: the captivity of your brother will not permit him to
continue longer in a repose which he thinks degrading to his honor, and
injurious to his friendship. I approve his intention, but not the desire of its
immediate execution: his wounds are recent, his health not yet re-established;
join your entreaties to mine, and he will perhaps delay for a few days his
departure: my counsels, nay my commands, have been fruitless." Zilia, who at
this instant entered the apartment, made the same request to Nekayah with tears
in her eyes.

The princess was more embarrassed than ever, yet could find no reason to
refuse so just a prayer: she sent for Dinarbas, and, before his father and
Zilia, thanked him for his generous resolution; but requested that he would
defer to put it in execution till his health should be perfectly restored.

From this moment, she studiously avoided all occasions of meeting Dinarbas,
except in company with Pekuah, Imlac, and the astronomer, whose lively and
instructive conversation always found new subjects, and prevented the fatal
vacuity which Nekayah dreaded: yet could not all her endeavors stop the
increasing ill: the constraint which both the princess and Dinarbas imposed on
themselves, served only to augment their mutual esteem, and consequently
defeated their intentions.

Imlac, without penetrating the cause of an uneasiness which he had long
perceived in the princess, imagined the activity of her mind wanted new
objects; and that, fatigued with always seeing the same things, and pursuing
the same topics, she was weary of her situation, and of all that surrounded
her. He therefore endeavored to find out some novelty that might fix her
attention; and having been himself greatly delighted with the conversation of
the priest who had pronounced the funeral oration of Dinarbas, he entreated
leave of the princess to introduce him to her. Nekayah gladly accepted the
proposal: his discourse on that memorable day was deeply engraved on her mind,
and she had often wished for an opportunity of conversing with him.

Elphenor was surprised at the proposal of Imlac. "Immersed as I have been for
more than forty years," said he, "in the studies necessary to my profession,
what entertainment can my conversation afford to youth and beauty, gaiety and
wit? Your lady will behold in me a man, who has given up all connexions in this
world, except with those individuals whose miseries lead them to apply to me
for assistance. I have been long disused to the society of the fortunate:
however, I will neither refuse the solicitations of kindness, nor the request
of curiousity: I will accompany you whenever you command me."

CHAP. XVI. Advantages and disadvantages of the sacerdotal station.
THE princess, Pekuah, and the astronomer, were waiting with impatience for the
arrival of Imlac with the priest: at their entrance, the princess rose and
respectfully saluted Elphenor: he returned her courtesy with a modest, but not
servile humility; and the conversation soon became general: it turned on the
happy event which had restored Dinarbas to his friends; and the princess took
occasion to bestow the warmest praises on the oration pronounced by Elphenor.
"Lady," answered he, "whatever impression my words may have made on the
assembly, you are not to attribute it to the powers of eloquence. I will not,
by a false delicacy, deny that I have been sometimes flattered with exciting
the applauses of my auditors, and that I have passed days and nights in
studying to deserve them; but my late theme was of itself sufficient to
interest those who heard me, and the hearts of all the assembly felt more than
the most studied discourse could inspire. If they approved of my words, it was
because they perceived my feelings were congenial with their own: in courts and
in great cities, the flowers of eloquence may be employed, with successful
seduction, to persuade the multitude into an admiration of the imaginary
virtues and the nugatory exploits of those whom we are commanded to celebrate:
the veil of dignity which conceals them from the people, the uncertainty of
opinions which disguises them amongst their equals, favor the deception, and
hide the falsity of the orator. But, in a place like this, where every one had
been witness of the life, and could almost dive into the heart of him whom I
undertook to propose as a model for their imitation, ornament would have been
vain, and deceit useless: besides, I have long since given up the honors of
elocution; and all my present aim is, as far as mortal frailty will admit, to
pay due homage to truth, and to seize every opportunity of conveying
instruction and consolation to those committed to my care."

"This is the noblest of all aims," replied the princess, "and the only one
really worthy of the good and the enlightened: your occupations, venerable
Elphenor! are so far above the common pursuits of mankind, that we cannot but
consider you in a state infinitely superior to the rest of the inhabitants of
this globe. What other profession consecrates itself wholly to the service of
the Divinity, and to the comfort of our fellow creatures?"

"My profession," answered the sage, "is certainly deserving of reverence and
protection; but where is the state of life in which a man cannot meditate on
the power and goodness of the Deity? in which he cannot assist and instruct
other human beings? It is true, we are peculiarly set apart for these duties;
but, do we always perform them? If we do not, how far more guilty are we than
the rest of mortals, who have other employments, other avocations to divert
their attention? Sensible of the awful charge committed to our care, how
poignant must be our remorse, if we have omitted the means of guiding our
disciples, if we have led them astray by false maxims or bad example --!"

Here Elphenor made a short pause, but soon added, with unusual warmth, -- "And
where is the instructor who has nothing of this kind with which to reproach
himself? Yet, let me add, whatever may be the faults, whatever may be the
negligence of the members of our order, we are often too severely punished by
the strictures of the world: the smallest error of our conduct, the smallest
weakness in our nature is harshly condemned, or cruelly ridiculed by the
multitude, whose eyes, ever open to the failings of their fellow creatures, are
particularly intent on ours. We often deserve blame, I confess, and mankind has
the same right to censure us, as the other inhabitants of the globe; but at
least let their censure be equally distributed, and let not a larger share than
we deserve fall on our heads. Let them consider, that however our thoughts are
raised to heaven, our origin is the same as theirs; that we have the same
inclinations, the same passions as themselves; and whether the habits and
restraints of the clerical life give us greater means of resisting them or not,
is to me uncertain: either therefore the whole world is unjust, or our
profession has no advantages superior to those of other men."

"You have at least," said Imlac, "the advantage of being and having been in
every age, and in every nation, the class of men to whom every one has applied
for counsel, and whom the greater number have obeyed without hesitation. You
enjoy the most flattering of all distinctions, that of respect; and you
exercise the most powerful of all jurisdictions, for your empire is exercised
over the mind: your influence has been equally felt in the great revolutions of
kingdoms, and in the management of domestic concerns. While you enjoy these
distinguished prerogatives, can you wonder that envy should attack you, or that
mankind, naturally impatient of subjection, should take the first opportunity
of emancipating itself from that respect, to which it submits with pain,
because enjoined as a duty."

"These very prerogatives," answered Elphenor, "are the greatest enemies that
we have to fear: dazzled with the specious titles lavished on us by the world,
convinced of the real advantages to be reaped from power and influence, pride
has taken possession of so many individuals among us, that censure has often
called it the distinctive character of our order; and as simplicity and truth
have only power to govern rational minds, many of us who have aimed at
universal dominion, have thought it necessary to employ other means to to catch
the greater number. We have had recourse to the assistance of pomp and luxury
to command the respect of the vain, and have armed ourselves with all the
terrors of superstition to subdue the ignorant, the fearful, and the weak. Such
have been the errors into which ambition has led us, errors more hurtful to
mankind, than all the destruction which has followed the sword of the general,
or the projects of the statesman."

CHAP. XVII. Danger of fanaticism.
NEKAYAH, delighted with the candor of Elphenor, told him that she was assured
he had no reason to reproach himself with the ills mankind had suffered by men
of his order; and that she doubted not but that many others, though they might
not have attained to the height of beneficence and exemplary conduct which
distinguished him, yet, had, to the best of their knowledge, fulfilled the duty
of their station.

"Indeed, Lady," answered the sage, "I have known many to whom I have looked up
with reverence, many who have subdued their passions with heroism, and who have
devoted themselves entirely to their functions; I have seen amongst my brethren
some examples of uncommon fortitude, some who, in times of that most dreadful
scourge of human nature, general pestilence, have steadfastly remained with
their disciples to encourage and console them, when universal terror had broken
even the ties of blood, and when the fear of death alone reigned with despotic
sway. I have known others who, firm in the cause of religion, have sacrificed
their life to their belief: but here much distinction is to be made:
obstinately attached to his opinion, a man often mistakes hypothesis for truth:
and will often go as far in its defense. Every religion has had its martyrs,
whose deaths frequently inspire us with less admiration of their constancy,
than abhorrence of the cruelty of their intolerant persecutors."

"Sir," said the astronomer, "your discourse convinces me not only of your
sincerity, but of your judgment: I am therefore persuaded you will forgive me,
if I ask you whether your piety is not often shocked, and your understanding
disgusted, at finding yourself obliged by the laws of Abissinia, not only to
practice, but to enjoin to others, some ceremonies which you cannot approve.
Are you not grieved to find, that many of the more enlightened part of your
disciples doubt of the most essential truths of our religion, on account of the
accessory circumstances invented by man? and to see that the lower class of
those committed to your care, embrace equally the practices of exalted piety
and of senseless fanaticism, while with affecting, though mistaken, zeal, they
follow blindly every error into which custom compels you to lead them?"

"That I have felt all the sentiments you now describe," replied Elphenor, "you
will scarcely believe, when you see me pursue the practices which you so justly
disapprove; yet nothing is more true. I venerate the unsullied purity of
religion, and lament that it should be encompassed with the veil of
superstition; but some ceremonies are necessary, and they who have endeavored
to divest it totally of such, have found that reverence has been laid aside,
and respect forgotten, while fanaticism has taken the same hold of the
ignorant, though it has assumed a different form. Error is natural to man; the
wayward mind will ever substitute superstition for devotion, and sophistry for
philosophy. Where can you see this more exemplified than in the science which
you have made your particular study? During how many ages has not the strangest
of all errors, judicial astrology, prevailed over the senses of man, while the
demonstrations of astronomical truth have been neglected? With respect to
those, whom you call the more enlightened part of my hearers, who condemn the
whole of religion because some accessory circumstances are faulty, they have
likewise their incomprehensible tenets and their particular fanaticism; and it
has been justly remarked, that none is more credulous than the unbeliever."

"Alas!" rejoined Nekayah, "who would madly give up the only consolation in the
time of affliction, the only refuge for grief, the only calmer of inquietude?
Without the aiding power of religion, we should be abandoned to despair -- what
other means could we find to conquer those sentiments and subdue those
afflictions which give way only to the prevalence of devotion?"

"It is certain," answered the sage, "religion is the universal and the only
true consoler; yet I must add, that from this maxim, true as it is, often
springs a most fatal error: the mind, weakened by affliction, falls more easily
a victim to the baneful influence of fanaticism; and when once it has begun to
wander in the gloomy mansions of that destructive phantom, its energy is wholly
lost, and it is conducted by its haughty ruler amid the mazes of deception,
till it loses not only the hope, but even the desire of returning happiness.

"My situation has often afforded me examples of this truth: and I have been so
much convinced of the danger, that, whenever the afflicted apply to me, after I
have exhorted them to hope in the beneficence of that Being, who can raise the
humble from the dust, calm every discordant passion, and restore peace and
tranquillity to the bosom lacerated by disappointed ambition or hopeless love,
I always counsel them to avoid meditation, to fly from solitude, as the most
pernicious of evils, and seek in employment a refuge from morbid care.

"The greatest of all mental afflictions, the consciousness of guilt, may be
lessened by deprecating the wrath of offended Heaven, and by the exercise of
active virtue; but to substitute indolent fanaticism for criminal pursuits, is
only exchanging one passion for another, and losing those precious moments
which a merciful Deity has granted for expiatory repentance."

CHAP. XVIII. Troubles in Abissinia.
NEKAYAH was struck with the advice of Elphenor, and felt the necessity of
exercising the virtues he recommended.

The time now approached which had been fixed for the departure of Dinarbas,
and every motive engaged him to hasten it: he selected only a few horsemen to
accompany him, that he might not leave the fortress unprovided in case of a
second attack, and, to the regret of the whole garrison, set forward on an
expedition of which the success was uncertain.

The first days of his absence were spent by the princess in reflections on her
conduct; and these reflections being naturally consolatory, she applauded her
firmness, and hoped that returning tranquillity would soon be the reward of the
sacrifice which she had made: but after some time passed in these thoughts,
which were only interrupted by the usual occurrences of society, she felt every
hour increasing weariness. Unwilling to suppose her victory incomplete, she
attributed her anxiety and restlessness to the uncertainty of her fate, to the
situation of her brother, to a thousand causes, none of which had occurred to
her before. One morning as she was immersed in these contemplations, Pekuah
entered, and informed her that the messenger, dispatched to the court of
Abissinia, was returned, and desired admittance. The princess was alarmed at
this intelligence; for, how could she quit the fortress and return to the happy
valley, without her brother?

The messenger, after he had prostrated himself before Nekayah, delivered to
her letters directed to the prince, which she received and placed beside her on
the sofa: he then, by her command, related, that being arrived at Gonthar, the
capital of Abissinia, he had found an universal confusion spread over the city.
"The second and third sons," said he, "of your glorious father, Sarza and
Menas, have rebelled against him, and the venerable monarch is almost prisoner
in his court: these princes, with whose ambitious characters you are
acquainted, found means to escape from the happy valley by the same passage
which prince Rasselas had made: they have raised a considerable army, and are
already masters of the fertile province of Amhara. The emperor, on hearing of
their revolt, took arms with celerity and marched against them, having first
obliged his eldest son Zengis to accompany him and head the cavalry; but this
unfortunate prince being lately killed in a skirmish with some of the
insurgents, grief and despair have taken possession of the heart of the
emperor, who has returned to his capital surrounded by his best troops, leaving
the rest under the command of his generals in the field."

When he received the letter of prince Rasselas, he burst into tears, and said
-- "I pardon him for leaving the happy valley, though, had he not divested
himself of his obedience to his sovereign and father, Sarza and Menas would
never have dared to attempt an escape superior to their courage and to their
penetration. Go to Rasselas, command him to come to me immediately and expiate
his fault by the defense of his father: let Nekayah remain where she now is;
but recommend to them both a total silence on their rank, as necessary in the
present circumstances, lest Rasselas should be intercepted by his rebellious
brothers. My further instructions to him, and the order for the governor of the
fortress to set him at liberty, shall be delivered to thee before thy
departure." "These are the papers, Lady! and the commands of our sovereign: I
am not surprised at the astonishment which I perceive in your looks: the
rebellion of the princes has been sudden, and is conducted with such art as to
prevent all communication between the capital and the frontiers: I had the
utmost difficulty to escape their guards; but I will not trouble you with a
recital of the various disguises I have employed to elude their vigilance."

CHAP. XIX. The same subject continued.
THE princess felt deeply the affliction of her father, and the misfortunes of
the state: she reflected seriously on the share she had in causing them, and
lamented her total inability in being useful to the emperor: she found herself
destitute of all assistance: Rasselas was absent, and in a situation that made
it impossible to estimate the time of his return: Dinarbas was, in compliance
with her wishes, departed in search of him; and she was deprived of the present
aid of that young warrior without knowing whether he might succeed in finding
the prince: she was equally perplexed to know what directions ought to be given
to Amalphis in the present emergency. Pekuah conjured her to open the packet
addressed to Rasselas; but she firmly refused. "My dear Pekuah," said the
princess, "an action which in itself is blameable can never be justified by the
lawfulness of the motive: to open a letter addressed to another, is a breach or
confidence, which political reasons may authorize, but which honor and
delicacy must ever reject. I know not what orders the emperor may have given to
Rasselas: I know his commands to me, and will obey them."

The princess then ordered the messenger to repair to Amalphis, and inform him
of the rebellion, and of every thing that he was permitted to tell; of her
intention of remaining with Zilia, to be in safety from the horrors of war, and
of the commands imposed on Rasselas by his sovereign, to fly to his assistance.

Amalphis soon received from various persons the same intelligence of the flame
which had made such rapid progress in Abissinia. Precautions may be observed,
and respected for a short time by a numerous army; but that will not remain a
secret which many are enjoined to keep, and many interested to divulge. Not
having received any instructions from the emperor, he was uncertain how to act;
for despotic power will not even be served against its commands: he was
likewise informed that a strong body of the enemy's troops had cut often all
communication with the capital: the fortress which he commanded, could not make
a sufficient defense against the army of the princes, if they advanced to
attack it; and the Egyptians might invest it during his absence, if he
attempted to march to the assistance of the emperor. Duty and prudence both
determined him not to abandon his post, but to wait the event with patience.

Every day, however, increased the anxiety of Amalphis, and redoubled the
agitation of Nekayah. New reports of the success of the princes, and of the
want of conduct of the royal army, succeeded each other; but, in the midst of
their inquietudes, they had the satisfaction of receiving an embassy sent by
the new Bassa of Cairo, to make excuses to the governor for the hostilities
committed by the Egyptians under the influence of his predecessor. The Sultan
had no sooner been informed of this unauthorised war, than he punished the
ambitious Bassa, and appointed another, who was directed to make reparation for
the injuries, to restore the prisoners, and chastise the delinquents. The envoy
informed Amalphis, that a large body of Turkish horse had been sent to enforce
the orders of the Sultan against the Egyptians and Arabs, who had so rashly
enlisted themselves under the standard of the late Bassa. Amalphis informed him
what prisoners had been made in his district, and particularly mentioned
Rasselas as having been taken in the sally.

The envoy promised that the most diligent enquiries should be made; and
Amalphis, Nekayah and Zilia conceived the warmest hopes of the approaching
liberty of Rasselas.

CHAP. XX. The Prince gives proof of real courage.
RASSELAS had been now several months in confinement, and from comparing in his
mind the various conditions of life, and calculating the resources of
resignation and philosophy, he had reasoned himself into a state of
tranquillity nearly resembling content. The slaves who served him had again
relapsed into the obstinate silence which they had been enjoined by their
master; but Rasselas at length perceived an uneasiness, and even a terror in
their looks, of which he in vain enquired the cause.

One day he was surprised to find that at the usual hour of repast no
nourishment was brought him, and felt great uneasiness when night drew near and
no one appeared: he listened, but could not hear the accustomed sound of the
voices of the slaves: no light was reflected on the ground from the narrow
window of their chamber, which was under his own: he called to them, but
received no answer: at length he thought he heard the noise of footsteps: he
repeated his call, when the slave, whose companion had not returned that day
with the usual provisions from the valley, and who was gone out to seek him,
again entered the tower, but being alone would not enter the chamber of
Rasselas, left his prisoner should attempt the recovery of his liberty. The
prince passed the night without sleep, and at break of day perceived the slave
departing from the tower: in vain did he call to him, the slave only hastened
his pace toward the valley. Rasselas composed himself with the idea that he
was probably, gone to seek provisions, and that the negligence of the other
slave, in not returning the day before, had been the cause of his remaining
that day without food; but this day, like the former, being spent in vain
expectation, the solicitude of the prince was now changed into apprehension of
the most horrid of deaths. All was silent and desolate around him; darkness
came on without the consoling prospect of rest, and the last dreadful hour of
fate seemed to draw near, without the hopes of relief or the balm of pity.

Rasselas had faced death with intrepidity in the rage of battle, but its
present silent and cold approaches were far different: a greater share of
courage was here necessary to subdue, unaided by the voice of glory, the
horrors of dissolution, and a more exalted resignation must inspire him, to
abandon every tie that can endear existence, without giving the last counsels,
and without taking the last farewell.

Yet had the prince fortitude sufficient to resign himself to the will of
Heaven, and to await, without impatience, the close of this scene of solitary
woe.

Sleep, which flies from agitation, may yet naturally follow resignation,
Rasselas had passed some time in the calm of oblivion, when an unusual noise
awakened him, and he had scarcely time to rise before he saw his chamber door
burst open, and several armed Turks enter his apartment: their chief informed
him that they were sent for his deliverance, and had orders to conduct him to
the fortress commanded by Amalphis.

He told him of the resentment of the Sultan, and the injunctions he had laid
on his troops to make diligent search after the prisoners, and informed him
they had discovered his retreat by intercepting the slaves: the first, he said,
would not betray his trust, but the second, more fearful or more compassionate,
had guided them to the path by which alone the tower was accessible.

CHAP. XXI. The Prince returns to the fortress.
IDEAS long banished from the mind of Rasselas, or considered by him merely as
illusions, now returned with new-acquired force: he seemed to endeavor to
retrieve in a moment all the time he had lost in solitude; he crowded question
on question, but soon had his attention wholly engrossed by the intelligence
which the Turks gave him of the rebellion of his brothers.

Grief and remorse took possession of all his faculties, and, without knowing
the manner of the escape of the princes, or thinking on the reproaches of his
father, he already condemned himself for having, though from innocent motives,
set them the example of disobedience: he was now more than ever convinced of
the evils arising from a capricious love of change, and of the necessity that
every man should be content with the station in which he is placed. "To my own
restless disposition," said Rasselas to himself, "I owe the humiliation of
fruitless enquiry, the disgrace and weariness of imprisonment, the pangs of
hopeless love, and the remorse of not only having destroyed the peace of my
father and of my country, but of having driven my brothers into the most odious
crimes."

The prince, in consequence of these reflections, entreated the Turks to hasten
their march, till with astonishing rapidity they arrived at the fortress
commanded by Amalphis: here Rasselas heard a distinct account of the rebellion
of his brothers, and received the letter of the emperor from the princess, who
anxiously enquired of Rasselas whether he owed his liberty to Dinarbas,
relating to him the exertions of friendship in that young warrior. The prince
felt all the warmth of gratitude and affection, and bitterly regretted the
absence of his generous friend: he then hastily read over the letters that
explained to him the present state or his sovereign, who, after having tenderly
reproached him for abandoning the happy valley, conjured him to come to his
assistance, take the command of the army, and assume the regal power. "I am too
old," says the emperor, "to direct the thunderbolts of war, or to hold the
balance of justice: come and receive the imperial diadem from the hand of thy
father: conquer and punish thy rebellious brothers, whom blind affection might
lead me to spare: let Nekayah remain with the brave Amalphis, whose virtues and
services have been long known to me, and whom long since I should have promoted
to higher employments, had I not considered his usefulness on the frontiers:
his fidelity is approved, ^et make him not acquainted with thy rank, or that of
thy sister: I do not think he would betray you to Sarza; but it would not be
prudent to give him so great a claim to reward, as the known protection of a
son and daughter of the emperor of Abissinia."

This letter made a singular impression on Rasselas: he venerated his father,
and was averse to commit a second time the fault of disobedience; yet his
humanity was shocked at the idea of depriving his brothers of their right of
succession, and he recoiled with horror from the thoughts of their punishment.
His generosity was equally disgusted at the diffidence and unthankfulness shown
by the emperor toward a man, whose fidelity he confessed, and whose bravery he
admired. The prince then perused the imperial mandate which he was to deliver
to Amalphis, wherein the governor was informed that Rasselas and Nekayah were
the children of one of the emperor's favorite emirs; that Rasselas was to have
permission to repair immediately to court, and that Nekayah was to remain under
the protection of the governor.

The prince, having debated an instant in his own mind, now thought himself at
liberty to consult his inclinations: all his filial deference for a father
could not induce him to imitate his ingratitude: he sought the good old
warrior, delivered to him the emperor's mandate, and spoke thus --

"I must depart, Amalphis, and have not words to express my sense of the
important services which you have done me: to you I owe, not only protection
and support, but instruction and kindness: without you, I should have nothing
at present to offer to the emperor but rash and unskilful valor, or at best
but idle theory without practice. You have taught me the only true philosophy,
resignation and patience: I leave you overwhelmed with obligations, yet I must
entreat you to add one more, and that the greatest you have in your power to
confer: promise to make me happy in the possession of Zilia; let me be assured
of your unerring faith, that you will consent she shall be my wife, when the
troubles of Abissinia are appeased, and I shall depart contented."

Amalphis read the emperor's mandate, respectfully kissed the signature, and
said, "My sovereign's orders shall be obeyed -- as for your request, Sir, I
thank you for the honor you are disposed to confer on my family; but, contrary
to the custom of our country, I disclaim all right over the choice of Zilia: if
she consents, I shall be happy to bestow her on a man, whose conduct and
principles I have ever esteemed, and whose kindness I am ambitious to preserve:
permit me to consult her inclinations; Zilia is sincere, and will soon
determine my answer."

CHAP. XXII. The power of artifice.
ZILIA was neither unacquainted with the sentiments of Rasselas, nor insensible
to them: she had indeed endeavored to suppress her sensibility, because she
could see no reason for the concealment of his rank from her, and none to
prevent his demanding her of Amalphis, whom she informed of all that had past
in her mind on this occasion, freely submitting to him what answer should be
given to Rasselas.

Amalphis smiled, and, introducing Rasselas, acceded to every hope of their
mutual affection, with tears of paternal benediction.

Nekayah took her brother aside, and imparted to him all her conversations with
Dinarbas: he forbore to make remarks on her story; for happiness cannot easily
console, and has no right to upbraid disappointment.

After a few moments given to kindness and gratitude, Rasselas quitted the
fortress, and, conducted by the messenger, whose precautions for avoiding a
discovery were again successful, arrived at Gonthar, the capital of the kingdom
of Abissinia. He found the city in a general consternation, though the forces
of the princes were still at a considerable distance. The emperor, surrounded
by a few aged counselors, who had never distinguished themselves in their
youth, and whose timidity and indolence had increased with their years, was
divided between fear and anger: the punishment of the rebel princes was alone
the theme of debate, while every measure was taken to guard against their
approach.

In the mean time, desertions were frequent in the royal army, the chiefs of
which were tyrannical without firmness, and profuse without liberality: their
pomp and magnificence demanded continual supplies, and exhausted the province
in which they were encamped: they did not choose to hazard either their
reputation or their safety in a general engagement, and they were usually
defeated in the skirmishes with which they were perpetually harrassed by the
princes. Had these continued to conduct themselves with discernment, and
profited by the advantages daily given them, they would have made the most
rapid progress; but division had taken possession of their camp. Sarza was of a
haughty and violent temper; sudden in his resolves, and uncertain in their
execution: prodigal even to madness, and openly avowing the most reprehensible
inclinations, which he spared no means to gratify; impatiently desirous of
attaining his end, yet neglecting, in the arms of pleasure, the steps necessary
for obtaining success.

Menas, with no less ambition, had a more regular plan and more apparent
modesty: his vices were more cautiously concealed from the eye of public
stricture, and his love of pleasure was flattered by the hopes of a crown,
which would put him in possession of all he could desire: he acted apparently
for his brother, and industriously gave out that he had no other wish than to
place the diadem on the head of Sarza; yet he labored to form a party, that
might support him in his pretensions, when his brother by his imprudence should
have lost the affections of the people: which he thought must inevitably
happen, on his ascending the throne of Abissinia. Though at present the minds
of the multitude were much more favorable to the splendid Sarza than to the
cautious Menas, as the exterior accomplishments of the former were more
striking, his temerity being denominated heroism, and his love of pleasure
popularity, yet the steps of Menas toward power were more sure; and as he had
been the instigator of the attempt, so he was the supporter of it; though all
the nation considered Sarza as the only author of the enterprise.

Such were the enemies whom Rasselas was commanded by his father to oppose, and
these enemies his own brothers!

As soon as he arrived at the camp, he was ^vested by the generals with the
supreme command: his first care was to introduce discipline and frugality among
the troops: he succceded in his attempt without losing their affection; and set
them that example which virtue (...) shame obliged them to follow. When he
thought his army sufficiently disciplined to face that of the enemy, he
advanced toward the kingdom of Amhara, and met the rebels on a large plain
near the city of Bagemder; where he ordered his troops to halt, and, having
formed them into order of battle, sent a messenger to demand a conference with
his brothers.

CHAP. XXIII. Rasselas endeavors to produce a reconciliation.
THE two princes advanced to meet Rasselas into the middle of the plain, and,
after a royal pavilion had been erected, entreated him to enter; but Rasselas
declined the offer, and insisted on their conference being held in the open
air, and in sight of the two armies.

He began by an enquiry into the cause of their impious rebellion, and received
for answer, the usual pretenses for insurrection, complaints of the emperor,
artfully veiled in respectful terms, open accusations of his favorites and
ministers, zeal for the public good, and dread of increasing evils.

Rasselas replied, that they were sons and subjects of the emperor, and that,
whatever might be the faults of government, they were not authorized, either by
the nation, or its chief, to attempt a reformation: he entered deeply into
considerations of the respect due to the monarch and the father; of the baneful
influence of the spirit of mutiny; and of the danger of foreign invasion, while
the arms of Abissinia were turned against herself. He finished by conjuring the
princes to return to their duty, and by accusing himself of having, by his
departure from the happy valley, given them the first example of disobedience:
he promised them unconditional pardon, and a general amnesty to their troops.

Sarza was affected at the discourse of Rasselas, which was sometimes pathetic
and sometimes forcible, and seemed willing to enter into a treaty of
accommodation, of which he deferred the execution till the next day, by the
advice of Menas.

The different sentiments of the brothers had not escaped the observation of
Rasselas: he knew the character of each, and felt all that was to be
apprehended from the dangerous influence of Menas. He retired into his tent,
hopeless of reconciliation, the expectation of which was general in the two
armies; but Rasselas knew that Sarza was only to be prevailed on by sudden
starts of conviction, and that, if he delayed to follow the momentary ray of
virtue, he became the victim of the first seducer whose interest it was to
present a different counsel in a plausible light: he wanted that firmness,
without which virtue is useless, and understanding merely an illusion.

These reflections distressed the prince: whenever he turned his thoughts on
the continuation of the war, he saw nothing but horror, whether in conquest or
defeat: sometimes however he would think that he had conceived too harsh an
opinion of the character of Menas, and sometimes he flattered himself that
Sarza would have sufficient energy to withstand his insinuations.

As he was seated in his tent, waiting with impatience for the morning, a
stranger was announced, whom he perceived, through the disguise that covered
him, to be his brother Menas: he commanded his attendants to withdraw, and then
enquired the occasion of his visit.

"Thou may see, Rasselas," said Menas, "the confidence I place in thy
generosity: I come to treat with thee, and to free myself from every suspicion
that may have arisen in thy breast against me: thou know the headstrong
disposition of Sarza: ambition and ill counselors enflamed him with a desire
of seizing the reins of government, and enclosing his father in the palace of
the valley, there to finish his days in peaceful pleasures. After vainly
endeavoring to dissuade him from an enterprise, which, whatever might be its
motives, must always have the appearance of disobedience, I offered to
accompany him, flattering myself that I should be able to set some bounds to
the impetuosity of his temper, and save both my father and the nation from the
tempest which menaced them. Hitherto I have so far succeeded, as to prevent
unnecessary effusion of blood, and my brother has now reduced his ambitious
schemes to a redress of grievances, and change of bad ministers, particularly
since you have joined your efforts to mine; for I have observed, since
yesterday's conference, that he is more than ever disposed to follow my advice,
and submit himself to our offended father on the conditions I have mentioned.
Your own conduct proves that you were wearied and indignant at the confinement
in the valley; we intend to exact from our father a promise that no son of
Abissinia shall be again reduced to that state of restraint and inaction, and
to entreat that he will bestow on us employments, of which we may without
vanity declare ourselves to be more worthy than the indolent and pernicious
ministers by whom he is surrounded. My desire is, that you will join us in this
request; you are less odious to our father, and may more easily prevail: if you
persist in refusing an union so necessary to our general welfare, even should
conquest smile on your arms, you will have not only the remorse of having
destroyed your brothers, but will expose yourself to the artful snares and
malicious envy of a court: your triumph will be short, and your ruin certain."

"Brother!" replied the prince, "I wish we could with justice say that blood
has been spared -- have you forgotten the death of Zengis? I am grieved to be
compelled to reproach you with it; but should be far more grieved were my
future life to be poisoned with a like reproach, yet mine would be the crime of
necessity; yours has been that of choice.

"I hope, Menas, thou do not even thyself suspect me of being capable of
accepting thy proposals: my father can have no worse ministers than rebels; and
were I to persuade him to receive you into his councils, I should render myself
an accomplice of your crime. If you will return to your duty, your submission
must be unconditional, and so will be your pardon: I trust these considerations
may have their due weight: tomorrow's conference, or tomorrow's battle,
decides your destiny."

Rasselas said no more, but commanded his guards to conduct the prince in
safety to his tents.

CHAP. XXIV. Victory, and gratitude to the conqueror.
THE next morning, by break of day, the two armies appeared as before, drawn up
in order of battle, and the conference was resumed.

Menas, who had reason, from the firmness he observed in Rasselas, to apprehend
that a general engagement would not be favorable to the rebels, had by this
time changed his opinion, or at least wished to amuse his brother with the
prospect of a reconciliation; but Sarza's impetuosity now took place of his
returning affection: he broke the conference, gave the signal of battle, and
scarcely left Rasselas time to set himself at the head of his army, before he
attacked him with impetuosity.

The prince defended himself with intrepidity and skill, and his troops better
disciplined, though inferior in number to the enemy, seconded his wishes: he
had particularly commanded his soldiers to spare the lives of the princes.
Sarza was taken prisoner, but Menas escaped by flight: a part of the army
surrendered, and the rest were dispersed.

Rasselas returned to Gonthar, and laid the trophies of victory at his father's
feet: he with difficulty obtained the pardon of Sarza, whom the emperor had
resolved to sacrifice to h^ resentment, or rather to the counsels of his
ministers. At length, in consideration of the services and supplications of
Rasselas, he decreed that Sarza should return to the happy valley, accompanied
with a strong guard, by which he was to be continually surrounded.

The emperor then took the diadem from his head, and would have placed it on
that of Rasselas; but the prince resolutely refused to accept it, and declared
his intention of retiring to the happy valley, whence he would never more
depart, except by the express commands of the emperor, and in the greatest
exigencies of the state.

The emperor at first combated his resolution with gratitude and tenderness,
but finding Rasselas steady in his determination, and attending himself to the
representation of his favorites, who were not sorry for the prince's
departure, he at length consented to his retreat, loading him with riches and
honors.

Rasselas, before he departed, gave his father an account of Imlac and the
Astronomer, and desired that they might be permitted to accompany his sister
and her attendant to the happy valley.

He recommended Amalphis to the emperor, who promised to reward his services:
he likewise informed him of his own engagement with Zilia, requesting
permission to conclude a marriage, which, though contrary to the custom of
Abissinia, might be authorized by the approbation of the emperor, and would add
happiness to his retirement. To this he obtained no other answer than vague
promises of compliance, when the troubles of the state should be perfectly
appeased, which promises his father never meant to fulfill.

By the unaccountable desire of secrecy in matters of no avail, which forms all
the policy of weak governments, assisted by the invisibility of despotic
princes and their families, the person and history of Rasselas were unknown,
though his actions could not be concealed. It was generally understood in
Abissinia, that one of the king's sons had headed the army and gained a
decisive victory; that he was to return to the happy valley, whence they
supposed he had been taken for the conduct of the war; but no more was known,
and no further enquiries were made.

Rasselas, however, received from his troops the most sincere testimonies of
affection and regret. The man who has shared the dangers of his general in the
field, is neither ignorant of his true character, nor will be silent on a
subject so interesting to his own honor. The soldiers idolized the valor, and
respected the prudence of Rasselas, and even declared they could not serve
under another commander, after having followed the orders of their beloved
prince.

CHAP. XXV. Retrospect of a life of dissipation.
THE prince wished to make a visit to the fortress before he devoted himself to
lasting seclusion; but the emperor having expressed a desire that he would lose
no time to accompany his brother Sarza, who was considered as a prisoner of
state, he departed from Gonthar, and soon arrived at the happy valley.

It is difficult to express the sentiments of Rasselas when the massy gates,
which separate the valley from the rest of the universe, closed behind him.
Amalphis and his son, Imlac, the astronomer, and Nekayah, but above the rest
Zilia, presented themselves forcibly to his mind: he found as much resolution
was necessary in this moment, as when he thought himself condemned to perish
unknown in the Arabian tower. He sought the palace, and had the additional
mortification of finding that neither his victory nor his obedience received
the praise which they deserved; that his return was considered as an act of
compulsion, and that curiosity and suspicion alone brought society around him.

But, supported by the sentiment of conscious virtue, he looked on all his
sufferings as so many additions to his triumph: that effort which impels to
great actions, or painful sacrifices, continues awhile to support the mind with
a sort of elastic force; but time diminishes the communicated vigor, and it
falls again into dejection and languor. Such was the state of Rasselas, who no
longer found himself weary alone of the happy valley, but of existence.
Indifferent to instruction, and insensible to hope, he wandered in solitude
without enjoying the beauties of nature, and returned to the palace without
admiring the works of art.

His melancholy was increased by the despair of Sarza. A gloomy horror had
taken the place of ambition in the heart of this mistaken prince: he found he
had been misled by those whom he had most trusted, and regarded Rasselas in no
other light than as a conqueror. Shame and anger made him reject the
consolation of a brother, who now feeling no other sentiments for him but those
of tenderness and compassion, endeavored, with unremitting solicitude, to
soften the impressions of his grief, and the violence of his resentments.

The efforts of Rasselas were long fruitless. He had the pain of seeing that
Sarza's impatience of his fate, brought on him a gradual decay. As his health
wasted, Rasselas became still more assiduous to console him: he soon gave up
his whole time to this employment, and found in it a mournful satisfaction that
compensated the mortifications he endured. Whenever he perceived in Sarza the
least sensibility of his attentions, a heartfelt pleasure repaid him for his
anxiety, and he began to thank Heaven for having placed him in a situation to
assist his brother.

His mind now enjoyed more tranquillity, when he was one day surprised with the
joyful intelligence of the arrival of Nekayah, who, as all danger of war seemed
to be part, was, by the emperor's command, taken from the fortress. and
conducted to her former habitation. Imlac accompanied her, and the astronomer
obtained permission to follow them.

After the first transports of their meeting had subsided, Rasselas enquired
anxiously after Zilia and after her father. "I fear," said he, "that the
letters which I have sent to the fortress must have been intercepted at
Gonthar, as none of my messengers have ever returned. What must have been the
ideas of Zilia? and what must the good Amalphis now think of me?"

"I was myself," answered the princess, "in the greatest uneasiness. Our
information of the events of the war was confused and uncertain: we were kept
in the most painful agitation by a variety of reports; and the messenger, who
brought the emperor's orders for my return to the valley, was the first who
acquainted us with the true state of affairs; at the same time he delivered to
me new injunctions of secrecy in regard to our condition, and I had not the
consolation of informing Amalphis and Zilia of the place destined for my
habitation, nor of the situation of my brother: all I could tell them in answer
to their frequent enquiries was, that I knew you followed the fortunes of the
prince, who had commanded the royal army, and that I would give them the
speediest intelligence in my power."

The first days of the reunion of Rasselas and Nekayah passed in these mutual
narrations, and in various fruitless endeavors to dispatch some messenger with
letters to the fortress. Imlac returned to his studies, and the astronomer was
delighted with the splendor and novelty of the scene. Pekuah was liberal in
her communication to the inhabitants of the valley, and was soon surrounded by
a numerous auditory. The prince and princess found their concern lessened by
reciprocal confidence; they joined their efforts for the assistance and
consolation of Sarza, whose health grew every day more precarious: as his
strength decreased, his passions softened; he seemed no longer to regret the
ill success of his enterprise, but to repent that he had attempted it. He
confessed to Rasselas how artfully he had been led astray by the insinuations
of Menas, and perceiving the resources which Rasselas and Nekayah found in
literary pursuits and innocent pleasures, he regretted not having followed the
same path, and tenderly acknowledged their kindness to him.

"Alas!" said he, one day, when they had drawn the sofa to the window of the
apartment where he was confined, "why have I been hitherto insensible to the
beauties of nature? Yon vast orb of light, which tinges with the brightest
purple, the exhalations that accompany its retreat, is new to Sarza! If I have
ever watched its disappearing, it has been only as a signal to the commencing
banquet, in the hopes of tumultuous pleasures; nor has its rising majesty
impressed on me other images than those of disgust, as it warned me to retire
from the scene of riot, and intoxication. How often have I repined at the
appearance of yon silvery moon, which attracts the enraptured eyes of Nekayah
as it advances to take possession of the sky, and yield us a more gentle light
to compensate the splendour we have lost: I feared its rays, lest they should
betray my disguise, and force me to return guiltless.

"O Rasselas! O Nekayah! you have not always been happy, but you know not the
pangs of remorse: you are unacquainted with the horrors of guilt: I have not
one consolatory reflection to soften my last moments: nothing remains on my
mind but confused scenes of dissipation, of intemperance, of error, at best of
folly! Among those whom similar pursuits and base adulation made my companions,
not one can I call by the sacred name of friend, not one whose bread will feel
for me the tender pang of pity, or whose bleeding heart sympathizes with mine.
-- Chimerical dreams of criminal ambition had taken possession of my serious
moments, and lawless revelling was all my gaiety. -- It is over, and my tardy
repentance only consecrates to virtue, to reason, and to affection, the hours
of pain, of disappointment, and of satiety.

"The bleeding form of the unhappy Zengis is ever present to my imagination! --
yet, why should I say unhappy? He whose talents I depreciated, and whose
mildness I despised, is now superior to me; for he died innocent; and I am his
murderer? My father's stern indifference stings me to the soul -- even thou,
Rasselas, whose tender care sooths my affliction, thou excitest in me a
sentiment of grief and remorse; why did I not listen to thee sooner! -- Of
Menas, I cannot think without horror, and, condemn me not while I speak it,
scarcely without detestation. -- I endeavor to forgive him; but how far am I
yet from attaining that resignation and serenity with which thou seek to
inspire me!"

Nekayah remained in tears, during the discourse of Sarza, and Rasselas strove
to calm his agitated mind with hopes for the future, and consolations for the
past.

"Thou art not the first, my brother," said he, "whom violent passion and
smooth seduction have led into error; the same qualities, which raise to the
height of heroism, may, when wrong directed, lead us to the precipice of guilt;
but repentance is always in our power, nor are the means wanting for thee to
retrieve the virtue thou have lost: rash ambition, and immoderate love of
pleasure, may make us commit faults, nay even crimes; but dissimulation,
perfidy, and cowardice are the only vices that render honor irretrievable: I
know thou have not descended to any of these; they are contrary to thy nature:
thy virtues are thy own, thy errors proceed from others, and more than all,
from the deadful fatality that attends greatness."

CHAP. XXVI. A new inhabitant enters the valley.
WHILE the princess and Nekayah were thus employed, a messenger entered, and
informed them that Menas was returned to court, and reinstated in the emperor's
favor: by secret correspondence with his father's ministers, from the place of
his retreat, he had found means to clear himself from the imputation of any
share in the rebellion, by throwing the whole blame on Sarza, and now governed
Abissinia in the name of the emperor. Insinuations had been given that the
interviews between Rasselas and Sarza were frequent, and consequently
seditious; the emperor's age and natural temper inclined him to suspicion, and
some officers of the army, who were friends to Rasselas, had dispatched this
messenger to conjure him to be on his guard.

This intelligence, however kind, was useless; it was immediately followed by a
mandate from court, which ordered Rasselas to one of the towers of the palace,
whence it was not permitted him to have any communication with his brother.

Nekayah divided her time between her two brothers, but she had not long
occasion to show her tenderness to Sarza; this last stroke hastened his end,
and he expired soon after in the arms of his sister, resigned and repentant.

In the mean time the successful Menas, not contented with having in his hands
the sole authority of Abissinia, wished to have it confirmed by the name and
honors of royalty: he endeavored to persuade his father to retire to the
happy valley, and pass the remainder of his life in ease and tranquillity; but
the emperor was unwilling to inhabit a place, that offered him nothing but the
image of death or of rebellion, and had even avoided making his annual visit:
besides, he had been long accustomed to royalty, and feared dependence. Danger
had engaged him to offer the resignation of his throne to Rasselas; that motive
was no more, and his refusal to Menas was accompanied with severe reproach.

But the emperor only retained the exterior of royalty; the power had passed
from his feeble hand into the grasp of Menas: his anger was therefore derided,
and his remonstrances were neglected, and finding, with grief, that the only
means to retain the poor appearance of sovereignty, was to consent
unconditionally to the desire of his son, he took the road of the valley,
surrounded by every new professor of the arts of luxury whom he could collect,
seeking to forget the power he had lost in scenes of magnificence and pleasure.

Menas being thus arrived at the summit of his wishes, was yet disturbed with
doubts and alarms: he feared his father would forget the prejudices with which
he had inspired him against Rasselas, and that duty as well as allegiance might
induce the latter to make a desperate effort to replace him on the throne: to
prevent therefore all communication which could awaken in the emperor his
former affection for Rasselas, he insinuated to him, that the visits which the
prince received from his sister and friends, were dangerous to the peace of
Abissinia, and that the only effectual means of preventing the ill consequences
that were likely to ensue from their meetings, was to secure every individual
of the party.

The emperor approved, or at least consented, to this proposal. Imlac and the
astronomer were condemned to separate confinements, and the princess with
difficulty obtained permission to be attended by her favorite Pekuah in the
apartments which were assigned her as a prison.

The artful Menas had no sooner effected his designs, than he sought every
means for rendering the retirement of his father a magnificent and seducing
prison: he sent frequent messengers with superb presents, accompanied by the
most skilful artists, and by all those who make it their study to delight; his
letters were filled with expressions of filial duty, complaints of the fatigue
of government, and suspicions cautiously introduced of seditions excited by
emissaries of Rasselas.

Sumptuous banquets, the charms of poetry and music, ease and flattery, took
such strong possession of the aged emperor, that at length he considered his
retreat as a shelter from the storms of life, and gave the strictest orders for
guarding Rasselas and the princess, lest they should endeavor to disturb his
repose.

Much time passed in this manner: the prince made many daring but fruitless
attempts to recover his liberty, and to convince his father of the fatal error
into which he had fallen: the princess was not more successful in her
endeavors.

Imlac made use of the lessons of philosophy, which he had learned in the
experience of a long life, and comforted himself with reflecting, that
revolutions are frequent in eastern monarchies. He was, however, uneasy with
respect to the astronomer: he feared that solitude might again pervert his
imagination, and bring back those ideas, with which it had formerly been led
astray: he therefore sought, and at last obtained, permission of his guards to
be removed to the same prison, and soon perceived that his fears had not been
groundless. The astronomer confessed to Imlac, that he had been seized with a
hopeless melancholy, in which he considered his imprisonment as a punishment
for having neglected, in the charms of conversation, the great charge of the
government of the seasons: the reason and eloquence of Imlac soon convinced him
of his error, but could scarcely console him for the privation of general
society. "I feel," said he, "that pleasure and amusement are natural to the
mind of man: curiosity incites us to engage in the busy scenes of life; they
who have not enjoyed them in youth will seek them in age, with that avidity
which naturally attends on every wish, whose gratification has been long
delayed. Age has fewer resources, and consequently stands more in need of the
assistance of others: study becomes difficult, and therefore irksome: hope is
less extensive, and gives less consolation: the moments appear to us more
precious as we suppose them to be fewer, and we fear to retreat for an instant,
lest we should be totally laid aside."

CHAP. XXVII. Return of a friend.
NEKAYAH, who had at present more time for reflection than she had ever before
experienced, passed her days in a less uneasy manner than any of the other
captives. She was persuaded that happiness was unattainable, and this
persuasion, which is perhaps destructive to the fortunate, is often useful to
the unhappy: the attachment of Pekuah was a consolation, but she depended more
on herself than on others. Compelled to renounce what she most loved, no other
companion could be an adequate compensation; she was devoid of hope and of
fear, and, having experienced their vicissitudes, she felt the advantages of
tranquillity.

One day Pekuah informed her that she had perceived, during many successive
evenings, a young man of lofty stature and generous aspect, though poorly
clothed, who soon after sunset took his post opposite to her windows, and
seemed to desire to be noticed, but that fear of the guards had always
prevented her from gratifying her curiosity of knowing his intentions; that for
a while he had been absent, but that she had seen him again the preceding
evening.

Nekayah ordered her to observe, and, if he returned that night, make signs to
him to come round to the eastern side of their mansion, which was usually less
guarded, as it overlooked the lake, and endeavor to make him to comprehend,
that he might approach near enough in a boat to converse unobserved. "It is
probably," added Nekayah, "some messenger from my brother, and if my conference
with him can afford Rasselas any comfort, I would neglect nothing to facilitate
his access."

The young man did not appear that evening; but, on the following night, as the
princess and Pekuah were looking over from a terrace near the lake, they
perceived a small boat advancing toward them, and soon after saw two persons
leap on shore and silently climb the ascent that led to the castle, one of them
placed a ladder against the terrace wall, and mounted with rapidity, not
without alarming the princess and Pekuah. The stranger soon put an end to their
fears, by discovering himself to be the messenger whom they had formerly
dispatched from the fortress to the court of Abissinia, and who had since been
retained for his musical talents in the service of the old emperor. The
princess, delighted with seeing him, was about to ask him various questions,
when he informed her that no time was to be lost, that the son of Amalphis was
beneath the terrace, and desired permission to visit her, as he had something
of importance to communicate.

Nekayah's joy and agitation were greater than any language can express, and
she had scarcely recovered the power of utterance when Dinarbas appeared,
disguised in the habit of a fisherman.

After the first emotion natural to their situation was subsided, he informed
her, that he had long attempted in vain to approach her apartment, and had been
equally unsuccessful in his endeavors to speak with Rasselas; that at last he
had the good fortune of meeting the messenger, who told him on which side the
palace was most accessible, and accompanied him in a boat which he had
procured: "I am now," added Dinarbas, "come to offer you my assistance, and I
am rejoiced that fortune has so singularly distinguished me, as to put it in my
power, perhaps, to free you and the prince from your confinement: O Nekayah! we
may yet be happy -- "

He was going to proceed in his narrative, when the hour approaching to relieve
the guard, Nekayah warned him to retire, lest the boat should be observed.
Dinarbas obeyed, with a promise of returning the next evening.

CHAP. XXVIII. Adventures of Dinarbas.
DINARBAS, charmed with having seen Nekayah, persuaded the messenger to
accompany him to the tower where Rasselas was confined, and, if possible,
procure his admittance: the attempt was successful, and what neither the prince
nor his friend could have effected, however penetrative and active were their
minds, the slave, accustomed to combine and to employ stratagems, easily
accomplished.

The prince and Dinarbas embraced each other with equal joy, and mutual
demonstrations of friendship as the latter had entered unperceived, they found
sufficient opportunity for conversation; and the son of Amalphis related to
Rasselas all that had passed since his quitting the fortress in search of him.

"I sought for you long in Egypt," said he, "and afterward in Arabia, where,
on the frontiers, I met a party of Arabs, who told me they had seen you under
the guard of Turkish horsemen, and supposed that you were gone to
Constantinople. I could not hear of your embarkation at Cairo, but continued my
voyage in hopes of finding you at the court of the sultan. As that prince had
shown openly his disapprobation of the conduct of the late Bassa of Cairo, he
was singularly desirous of paying every attention possible to the Abissinian
nation: he had heard my name, and had approved my actions; he received me with
peculiar courtesy: he commanded that diligent search should be made after the
prisoner for whom I was come to supplicate his justice, and named a day on
which I was to return to know the result of his enquiries. His enquiries were
fruitless; but he told me, that he was not placed on the throne of Mahomet to
abandon the innocent, or to savor injustice; that many Greek pirates had
lately infested the seas in his dominions, and that as it was probable they
might have intercepted the Turks, with my friend, in their passage from Cairo
to Constantinople, he had given orders for strictly searching all the Greek
islands and the coasts of that country: in the mean while he desired me to
remain at his court, and held various discourses with me on the art of war: he
listened to my answers with attention and complacency, and discovered much of
the genius and knowledge for which he has been so justly celebrated in his
transactions with the Venetians. During my interviews with him, I found how
unjustly we often attribute to greatness fastidious and oppressive insolence:
he who finds himself by birth superior in rank to the rest of mankind, can have
neither the motives of jealousy not of emulation; his condescension will
scarcely be abused, or his courtesy humiliated: it is not to with him who has
risen above his equals by the caprice of fortune, and whose ambition makes him
still aim at loftier distinctions: he fears lest affability and ease should
again sink him into his former station; and as his greatness is only
comparative, he thinks himself obliged to support it by artificial means.
Whatever qualities may be wanting in sovereigns, courtesy is, I believe, rarely
among the number; but this is not a time to lengthen my story with reflections.

"Before the vessels returned, which the sultan had ineffectually sent in quest
of you, I had sufficiently gained his confidence to obtain permission to
undertake the same expedition with my Abissinians. He granted me a light armed
galley, skilful mariners, and an experienced pilot: with these I visited not
only the islands, but great part of the continent belonging to the dominions of
the sultan."

CHAP. XXIX. Adventures of Dinarbas continued.
HERE Rasselas exclaimed, "How often have I wished to view those places
celebrated in history, and sung by the poets of antiquity."

"Prince," replied his friend, "your leisure moments may hereafter be employed
in listening to the incidents of my travels; at present both your curiosity and
your interest require me to hasten to a conclusion of the narrative. Not
finding my attempts successful, I directed my galley toward Candia, where the
fleet and army of the sultan, under the command of the grand vizier, had been
long employed against the united forces of the western world, who assisted the
Venetians, in maintaining a siege of more than two years. As I had now lost all
hopes of finding my prince, I wished at least to testify my sense of the
sultan's goodness to me: I happened fortunately to arrive on the eve of the day
allotted for the general attack of the place: I obtained permission of the
vizier to head a considerable body of troops, and had the good fortune to carry
the bastion of Sant' Andrea, one of the most important of the city: much of the
success of the assault was attributed to this action: I was loaded with praises
by the vizier, and advanced to the highest commands. The place capitulated soon
after, and our army returned triumphant to Adrianople, where the sultan then
was, and where the peace, for which the Venetians were obliged to sue, the
mortification of the haughty princes of Europe, and the despair of the chief of
their religion, added new glories to the victory of the sultan. His munificence
was proportioned to his successes; he considered my services as the most
signal, perhaps because they were voluntary; he recompensed me with
sovereignty; and to retain me in his dominions, made me despot of Servia: my
kingdom is only dependent on the sultan, so far as I am obliged to assist his
allies, and attack his enemies; and I have the next place to the grand vizier
in the divan. At Adrianople I heard of your victory over your brothers, and of
your retreat into this valley. The promise which I had given Nekayah would not
allow me to disclose your history to the sultan; but after I had made a visit
to my new dominions, I found him, at my return to his court, interested in your
favor, and received from him the account of your imprisonment, and of the
intrigues of Menas against you, of the forced retirement of the emperor from
public business, and of the death of Sarza. I was surprised to see the facility
with which sovereigns can penetrate into the most secret councils of
neighboring states, and the care they take to inform themselves of affairs
with which they have no apparent connection; while those who are deeply
concerned, in them are often blindly ignorant of the most essential
circumstances. The opportunity was favorable to me, and I entreated permission
of the monarch to go as his ambassador to Menas, and to employ his mediation as
an ally, to demand the restoration of the emperor. He readily granted my
request; but Menas returned me such specious answers, and gave so many apparent
proofs of the voluntary retirement of your father, that I wrote to the sultan
for leave to enter the valley, and there, by discoursing with our sovereign in
the sultan's name, discover his real sentiments. I left my train at the
fortress commanded by my father, where I am still supposed to remain with them;
and disguising myself, found means to enter the valley with one of the
messengers dispatched from court with presents to the emperor; but I have not
yet been able to obtain access to him."

CHAP. XXX. Dinarbas visit the Emperor.
RASSELAS congratulated Dinarbas on his success at the court of the Sultan, and
thanked him for the offers of his assistance: "I fear," said he, "the emperor
will not be prevailed on to replace himself on the throne: he seems immersed in
pleasure and insensibility: he fears to think, and all means are taken to
prevent his being undeceived. I am alarmed it the rashness of your attempt. The
valley is filled with emissaries of Menas; and, should you be discovered, you
are lost."

"I have no fears of that sort," replied Dinarbas; "the Sultan is not of a
character to suffer tamely an injury to his ambassador: nor is Menas hardly
enough to awaken his anger. Instruct me how I can obtain an audience of your
father, and I have great hopes for the rest."

"First tell me," said Rasselas, "whether Amalphis and Zilia still remember me:
I have experienced too many of the caprices of fortune to be anxious after the
projects of ambition, and have found that the only ornament of prosperity, and
the only consolation in adversity, is the sympathy of friendship and affection."

"They were totally ignorant of your fate," said Dinarbas, "and their anxiety
was greater than I can describe. As I was not at liberty to discover to them
the whole of your situation, I told them I had heard of your distinguishing
yourself during the war; and that I believed you to be at present confined, by
the order of Menas, in the happy valley. I promised them, at my departure, that
they should soon receive fuller information. Let us now consider what methods
will prevail with the emperor."

"I know not," said Rasselas, "whether we shall render him a service in tearing
the veil which Menas has so artfully drawn around him; and I doubt not that, if
he were replaced on the throne, he would regret the delights of the happy
valley; all I can wish from your friendship is, that you will endeavor to
convince him of my innocence, and of that of Nekayah; and I know no easier nor
safer means of admittance than to proclaim yourself the son of Amalphis; the
fidelity of your father is well known to the emperor, and he will sooner admit
a subject, than the ambassador of a powerful neighbor."

"Pardon me, prince," answered Dinarbas, "if I say that you judge the emperor
by your own heart: power could not dictate to you, but fidelity might soothe
you: I will however try the expedient which you propose, but if it succeeds, I
know not the character of the emperor."

Dinarbas staid till the shades of night permitted him to depart unperceived:
he then left the prison of Rasselas, and went to the terrace, where be was
again received by Nekayah and Pekuah: he related to them his adventures and his
intentions. The princess charged him not discover himself as ambassador from
the Sultan, till he had founded the disposition of her father: "I know," said
she, "that the spirit of an emperor of Abissinia can never brook the
interference of a foreign power."

Dinarbas, against his own inclinations, obeyed the counsel of the prince and
princess: he announced himself to the emperor as the son of Amalphis, who had
important affairs to communicate. The sovereign gave for answer, that he must
apply to Menas; but recollecting himself that Nekayah and Rasselas had been
long under the guard of Amalphis, he concluded the son might be an accomplice
of their supposed crimes, and commanded him to enter, surrounded with guards.

Dinarbas then related, with frankness and energy, all the circumstances of the
wrong done to Rasselas and the princess: he spared not Menas as an usurper; and
invited the emperor to return to his throne, and do justice to his family. But
his discourse made no other impression on the monarch than to convince him that
Rasselas must have been guilty, as he had betrayed the secret of his birth, and
that the son of Amalphis was his accomplice. As Dinarbas could not exculpate
the prince without accusing Nekayah, he blushed, and was embarrassed. The
emperor considered this as a signal of guilt, and commanded him instantly to be
imprisoned.

Dinarbas now thought himself at liberty to act upon his own plan: he declared
himself ambassador from the sultan, sent by him in the most open manner to
remonstrate with Menas, and, should he not succeed with him, to apply to the
emperor, assure him of the sultan's friendship, and reinstate him on the throne.

Awe of superior power took place of anger in the heart of the sovereign: he
knew not what he was to believe; but he resolved to send a messenger to his son
for instructions, and in the mean time to treat Dinarbas with the respect due
to the representative of the sultan.

A report was spread next day in the valley, by messengers arrived from
Gonthar, that a considerable body of Turkish troops had marched toward the
frontiers of Abissinia. This news engaged the emperor to pay still more
attention to Dinarbas, and even to grant the request he made of visiting
Rasselas as often as he should think proper.

CHAP. XXXI. Sketch of the Travels of Dinarbas.
DINARBAS forbore to make any remarks to the prince on the conduct of the
emperor: he simply related to him what had passed; from which Rasselas formed
small hopes: he found that his friend was in some sort become, on his account,
a prisoner of state, and he was alarmed at his danger.

"Fear not for me, said Dinarbas, I know my steps are watched, and that I must
remain here till the emperor hears from Menas; but I hope by that time to
convince him of your innocence, and of the necessity of his returning to the
management of public affairs: no sovereign, I believe, ever retired but by some
species of constraint; and none, I am convinced, ever failed of repenting the
step he had taken. Authority and active life are too natural to the mind, not
to retain their hold, however circumstances may have at any period weakened
their impression: the scenes of action will retrace themselves to the
voluptuary in the bosom of pleasure, and to the anchorite in the cell of
austerity. When the emperor reflects on the conversation I held with him last
night, he will find the charms of royalty again rush on his imagination, and
with a few more interviews, I hope to rouse all his sleeping ambition."

Rasselas found his imprisonment greatly relieved by the visits of Dinarbas,
who every day informed him of the progress he made with the emperor, in
awakening his tenderness for the prince and princess. Rasselas however did not
willingly give way to hope, and would often change the subject of conversation,
by asking Dinarbas for the detail of his travels in the dominions of the sultan.

"I have often wished to know, said Rasselas, whether the scenes so beautifully
described by the ancient European poets are really as interesting as we should
believe from their works, did we not judge by our own writers, of the
embellishments of poetry. I have always considered our total ignorance of other
countries as one of the greatest misfortunes that attends our government, and
have tried to obviate this inconvenience for myself, as far as books could
assist me."

"In my voyages in the Archipelago and Mediterranean, replied Dinarbas, I have
seen enough to solve your question: nations have disappeared from the face of
the earth, laws have been forgotten, and morals corrupted; but nature, though
subject to great revolutions, ever remains beautiful in temperate climates.
That poets have been thought to embellish nature, is an opinion that must have
had its rise and its continuance in countries where the northern blasts deface
the charms of fertility, or where the too ardent rays of the sun dry up its
sources; but in those happy climes where vegetation is never wholly stopped,
poets will be found, with all their eloquence, to trace very faintly the charms
of nature. The Abissinian, scorched on the burning sands that surround him; the
Scythian, sliding over frozen rivers, and climbing mountains, whose dazzling
whiteness makes no distinction to the sight, can have but a very imperfect idea
of the variegated landscape that attracts the eyes of Greece.

"In these celebrated scenes every thing tends to diversify and heighten the
beauties of the prospect: The majestic rocks, glowing with all the warmth of
coloring; the cascades, reflecting the azure of an unsullied sky; the trees,
not more various in their forms than in their hues; the earth, enriched with
vegetable production: but chiefly that light and transparent vapor, which
gives the faint blue to the distant mountains, and the splendid purple to the
western clouds, and, like tenderness in social life, softens every object, and
diffuses serenity and rapture! Rasselas, thou may think me an enthusiast;
yet, had thou accompanied me in the enchanted spots where I sought thee, thou
would have felt the same warmth of fancy, the same sensibility of heart that
transported me: these are the favorite theaters of august and pleasing
meditation. How often have I been led to adore the goodness of the Creator of
the universe, when, wandering through some delightful valley, adorned as I have
in vain attempted to describe to thee, I contemplated the beauties which he has
so bountifully offered to man! There some majestic and awful ruin would rear
its venerable head, and silently instruct me: every part in these countries
unites the charms of situation, and of celebrity; no mountain is without a name
-- the ground we tread is consecrated to fame in the historic page; even fable
becomes respected -- and, while our heart is raised to heroism at the pass of
Thermopylae, our imagination is filled with poetic ardour on the side of
Olympus and Parnassus! In these places, the images of those who were most dear
to me, returned with double force; I longed for my father amidst the ruins of
Sparta, and for my prince near the temple of Theseus! In the shade of those
trees, which are the progeny of the Academic Grove, I wished for the assistance
of Imlac to converse with Plato and his disciples! My warlike companions were
present to my thoughts at Platea, and at Marathon. In the valley of Tempe I
forgot, for a moment, my hopeless situation, and imagined that I saw Nekayah
beside me, the humble and pleased companion of my enthusiastic raptures."

CHAP. XXXII. Grandeur of the Ancients.
"THOU have now said enough, replied the prince, to be considered as an
enthusiast by the greater part of mankind, by those whose hearts are steeled,
or whose heads are stupefied by interest or gaiety: happily we are not heard by
them in this prison, where, if our bodies are enclosed, our minds are at
liberty; a privilege not always attainable in the world. But, to return to thy
travels, have thou observed many of those monuments of ancient grandeur and
elegance, of which the few scattered remains afforded me such delight in Egypt?"

"The effect which those buildings produced on me, said Dinarbas, is far
superior to my powers of description: the noble simplicity of the Grecian
temples, the elegance of their proportion, the harmony of the parts, and the
majesty of the whole, give an impression of awe and of satisfaction, which no
modern building affords. I have never yet been able to comprehend how the taste
of any architect should be so strangely depraved, as to permit him to view
unmoved those stately fabrics, and vainly imagine he could, by mean plans,
disproportionate combinations, and glittering deformity, give delight to
rational spectators: yet such artists have been found, and they have not wanted
protectors. He, who built the mosque of St. Sophia, undoubtedly supposed he had
raised an edifice that would show how far the elegance of the golden age, in
which he lived, was superior to the barbarism of that which saw the elevation
of the temple of Theseus. It has ever been the irremediable error of weak minds
and degenerate nations, to substitute ornament for proportion, curious
minuteness for majestic beauty, and heterogeneous variety for harmony and grace.

"Our spires, our turrets, and our many colored roofs, are become odious to my
eyes, since I have beheld simplicity and elegance on the desolate shores of
Greece: nor did the architecture alone take possession of my imagination; I
found the same characteristic feature in all their remaining productions. Their
inscriptions are lofty, pure and energetic, they seem only written to convey
the meaning, and the flowers of eloquence spring naturally from the subject.
Their statues, not writhed into distortion to catch the eye by forced
contrasts, are simple and beauteous like Nature itself, which they represent in
the general effect, more than by descending into little peculiarities; every
figure speaks to the heart; we confess the influence of the passion it
breathes, or the respect it inspires. But, in the works of modern art, even
among its best performances, our mind must have the labor of combining
particulars, before we perceive the general effect: we approve or criticize ere
we can feel, and therefore scarcely feel at all. When we contemplate the
masterpieces of the ancients, our sentiments are immediately engaged, our
imagination is interested, and the first impression must begin to weaken before
we can descend to minute examination; yet even then we admire; we see that, as
in a well-ordered kingdom, though some parts are inferior, they are in their
place, and contribute to the beauty of the whole.

"Such, in the view of moral or political greatness, if we examine history, was
the conduct of the illustrious men of ancient Greece and Rome: their
enterprises were vast, and their minds capacious; they formed a comprehensive
plan, and acted up to it. It is not by adding one little idea to another, that
perfection is insensibly attained. Alexander had conceived his scheme for the
conquest of the east, before he left his native Macedon; nor did Caesar take
the command in Gaul, without a previous design of becoming the first man in the
republic. I am not surprised at the policy of our courts, which usually
excludes their subjects from all communication with the knowledge of Europe --
in order to confine us to narrow views, to indolent magnificence, and, if I may
so express it, to living by the day: this is the surest foundation for
despotism; the mind being easily reduced to inactivity, when its flights are
not allowed to go beyond a certain extent."

"All this is true," said Rasselas, "yet I cannot see what the sovereign gains
by debasing the faculties of his subjects: a good prince will be respected and
beloved by a wise nation, and, what he can never rely on from a herd of willing
slaves, will be sure of their fidelity: he will not be deserted at the first
appearance of a foreign enemy, or domestic usurper, who, in our despotic
governments, obtains the same tribute of obedience as the rightful monarch,
because he has the same authority, that of terror. What else could have so
calmly placed Menas on the throne, at the expense of his brother's life, and
his father's sovereign dignity?"

CHAP. XXXIII. The Prince and Princess accompany their Father to Gonthar.
DINARBAS at length prevailed on the emperor to visit Nekayah, whose innocence
it was easy to prove, and whose tenderness and eloquence soon convinced him of
the truth of Rasselas: after a short struggle between pride and paternal
affection, the prince was justified and restored to liberty.

The difficulty now remained to force Menas to resign a throne in which he was
supported by his own guilt and that of traitors, who must defend him because
they were his accomplices. It was probable that, with the assistance of
Amalphis, and from the fame of Rasselas, the troops might have been engaged to
declare for their former sovereign; but their officers had been changed, men
devoted to Menas now commanded them, and it was not easy, in case they were
disposed to second the efforts of Rasselas, to communicate any plan by which
they might act, without exposing themselves to the fury of the reigning party,
before they could have a chief to support them.

The authority of the sultan might be easily exerted: he had warmly offered his
mediation; and what sovereign will not warmly offer his mediation in the
difference of his less powerful neighbors? This disposition of the Turks gave
pain to Rasselas: he would have preferred any other method of reinstating his
father on the throne of his ancestors: but his disgust to foreign aid he soon
sound to be fruitless. The report of a Turkish army marching toward the
frontiers had not been without foundation; and more certain accounts arrived of
their having penetrated into the heart of Abissinia. It was said that Amalphis
and his garrison, who were entreated to join them, remained neuter, but had not
prevented the train of Dinarbas from following them; that Menas at the head of
his troops was gone out to meet them, and that a decisive battle might soon be
expected.

It was now time to act: Dinarbas obtained permission of the emperor to join
the Turkish army, where his presence was necessary, to prevent irregularities.
The confusion was become general, and the valley was no longer strictly
guarded: the emissaries of Menas began to pay their court to the emperor and
his party, and suffered them to enjoy all the liberty they desired.

Dinarbas hastily advanced toward Gonthar, near which place he had been told
the two armies lay encamped. He hoped by intimidating Menas, to make him resign
the crown, and, after replacing the emperor on the throne, to conduct the
sultan's troops back to his dominions; but, on his approach, he was met by the
principal officers of his train, and the chiefs of the army, with the head of
Menas: they informed him of their victory, and of the flight of the usurper
under a mean disguise, in which he was stopped and put to death. They invited
the son of Amalphis to share their triumph, and decide the fate of the
prisoners, among whom were the principal ministers and favorites of Menas.

Dinarbas, in consequence of the sultan's mandate, delivered to him by the
chiefs, assumed the command of the army, entered Gonthar, and dispatched
messengers to the happy valley, entreating the presence of the emperor and
Rasselas.

The death of Menas made little impression on his father, but deeply affected
Rasselas and Nekayah: they had, however, the consolation to reflect that they
were innocent of his fate, and accompanied the emperor to Gonthar, attended by
the lady Pekuah, Imlac, and the astronomer, whom they had restored to liberty,
as soon as they were reinstated in the favor of their father.

CHAP. XXXIV. Inconveniences of foreign aid.
THE emperor resumed with joy the imperial dignity, but made few reflections on
the revolution which replaced him on the throne; and, being asked what was to
be done with his former favorites, he coolly ordered them to execution.
Rasselas, however, obtained from him their pardon, on condition of their
perpetual imprisonment, and the sovereign mentioned them no more.

He likewise complied with the request of Rasselas to send a messenger to the
fortress of Amalphis, to demand Zilia in marriage As she was the sister of his
deliverer, whom he loaded with praises and thanks, he no longer considered the
alliance as derogatory from his dignity. A train of women and slaves
accompanied the messenger, to honor the royal bride; and letters from
Rasselas, Nekayah, and Dinarbas, informed Amalphis and Zilia, that the prince
and princess, formerly celebrated by fame for their sufferings, and now for a
happy reverse, were the guests whose society they had enjoyed in the fortress.
These letters contained a minute detail of all the public events, and the
sentiments of Rasselas on his change of fortune. Amalphis was invited to court
with a considerable command in the army.

Rasselas impatiently expected the arrival of Amalphis and Zilia, and in the
mean time saw with grief the disorder which reigned in the capital and its
environs, from the license given by the officers of the Turkish army to their
numerous troops. Dinarbas, though invested with the chief command, found it
difficult to exercise severe authority over foreign soldiers elated with
victory, conscious of belonging to superior power, and of having conferred
assistance. The officers were haughty and extravagant in their demands, the men
riotous and avaricious; the highways were infested by their outrages, nor were
the houses of the inhabitants of the city protected from their lawless
insolence. In vain did Dinarbas attempt, by alternate menaces and soothing, to
reduce them to discipline; the timidity of the Abissinians had given them an
advantage which they had no inclination to relinquish: a reinforcement was
advancing from Egypt; the sultan either not being yet informed of the success
of the enterprise, or choosing to facilitate and give validity to a treaty of
alliance with Abissinia, by the presence of a formidable army.

"Prince," said Dinarbas to his friend, "I am sensible that I have involved you
in all the present difficulties, by rashly engaging the sultan in your
interest: your doubts were justly founded, and I know not how to extricate you
from the danger of which I have been inadvertently the cause. If I depart for
the sultan's court to remonstrate with him on the conduct of his troops, I
leave them without a chief to repress, in any degree, their excesses. I have
written to entreat him to recall them, but I have no reason to hope, from the
present appearance of things, that my request will be granted without a demand,
on his side, of concessions injurious to your honor."

"Dinarbas," answered the Prince, "if we were to be accountable for the ill
success of every good intention, we must suppose ourselves endued with
prescience, a quality inherent in the Divinity alone. Your proceedings were
open and just, and you had no reason to imagine that the Turkish army would be
lawless and ungenerous: we are not yet assured whether the sultan is in fault:
if he is not, he will recall his troops; but if he persists in treating us like
a conquered kingdom, we have a right to consider him as our enemy, not our
benefactor; and his enmity is perhaps not so formidable as the world has been
taught to suppose.

"By the accounts thou have often given me of the siege of Candia, he owes that
conquest more to the division of the enemy, and to the singular bravery of some
of his officers, among whom thou has been particularly distinguished, than to
the general tenor of his conduct: it is even probable that all his efforts
would have proved fruitless, had not the Venetians been abandoned by their
allies. They who trust to the mutability of courts, and the complicated
interests of governments, will find themselves deserted like the Venetians, or
menaced like ourselves. The only way to make allies useful, is to be
respectable without them.

"Consider how a small island in the same seas, merely from the courage and
conduct of its defenders, victoriously resisted the attacks of the most
formidable and most numerous armies of the Tur^, headed by their ablest
generals.

"I have not the hopes of forming instantaneously a well-disciplined army, but
I have at least learned not to fear ungovernable multitudes; and if I am
compelled to take up arms, I shall dread more the imputation of ingratitude
than the power of the sultan."

CHAP. XXXV. Death of the Emperor.
THE emperor did not long survive his usurping son: he was, like many other
men, solicitous for the events that might happen after his death, though he had
been careless of what had been done in his lifetime; all wish to extend their
influence beyond the grave, and few approach their end without making some
reflections on their past existence. The mind of the emperor was less weakened
by age, than enervated by indolence and pleasures: when infirmity obliged him
to retire from dissipation, thought returned upon him more forcibly; his
tenderness for Rasselas and Nekayah redoubled as he was about to quit them. "My
children, said he, "I shall neither leave you precepts nor example: I can only
beseech you to beware of my errors, and, if possible, to cast a veil over my
faults -- I have, by indolence, brought my kingdom into greater distresses,
than the most cruel and avaricious tyrants have ever occasioned.

"I am now convinced that inactivity is generally the source of crime: it is
scarcely possible for the man who does nothing to be free from guilt; we, in
particular, are placed in a sphere, in which it is our duty to direct, like the
pilot, who, if he neglects the rudder for an instant, is in danger of seeing
the vessel dashed on the neighboring rock. Yet are not my faults without
extenuation; a mistaken notion of humanity has made me detest war, and
consequently neglect my army; the desire of being loved has induced me to court
the friendship of my slaves, and you see the gratitude of my favorites: a mind
not uninformed nor incurious led me naturally to the love of arts and sciences;
but this inclination has been falsely turned to those of luxury and amusement,
rather than to those of political or moral utility. Had I possessed sufficient
energy of mind to rouse myself from the illusions that surrounded me, I might
have seen the fallacy of my ideas as soon as I had attempted to investigate
them; but the dream was prolonged by all who came near me; the vicious offered
to me new schemes of dissipation, and even the virtuous praised me for that
gentleness and good nature, which they celebrated as superior to the shining
qualities of the conqueror. War is, undoubtedly, shocking to humanity; but
while we live amongst mortals, actuated by mortal passions, we must be ever
ready to defend those committed to our care.

"Thou, my son, to whom I am rather confessing my own errors than conveying
instruction, have the activity and rectitude which I have wanted. I believe
that royalty will not shake thy virtues; yet consider how different is the
state of the subject and the sovereign, the prince and the king. Thou will soon
be absolute master of vast dominions; and, what is still more dangerous, master
of thyself, with nothing to control, and every thing to mislead thee. Why is
prosperity more dangerous than adversity? Because it leaves no obstacle to our
will; because we have no restraint upon our passions, and, having no
difficulties to struggle with, fall indolently asleep in the lap of pleasure.
We often owe our preservation from final ruin, to temporary evils. May thou
be preserved in dignity and honor, by gentler means, by reason and virtue!"

Thus did the emperor lament the errors of his former conduct, and warn his son
against the like misfortune. Rasselas received his exhortations with respect,
and soon after, with tears of filial piety, saw his remains deposited in the
tomb of his ancestors.

CHAP. XXXVI. Reflections of Rasselas on his accession to the throne.
RASSELAS was now, by right of succession, and with the general acclamations of
the people, proclaimed emperor of Abissinia. He was not elated with the
dignity; he looked round the sepulchral monuments of the royal house, and he
could not, without a melancholy reflection, contemplate the tombs of a father
and three brothers, who, in so short a space of time, had finished their course
amidst the troubles in which the nation had been plunged.

"There," said he to Nekayah, from whom he was never separated, "there are the
steps by which I have ascended the throne. O my sister! we are guiltless of
these deaths, but let us be warned by the awful scene. Our Creator alone knows
how many years, months, or days will revolve before we become inhabitants of
this silent mansion; but as his goodness permits us a free agency in this life,
let us endeavor to act so as to obtain more than a bare memorial that we have
existed.

"Let us not entertain an impious vanity, because we have seen and avoided the
errors of our race; let us offer up our thanks to Heaven for the greatest of
all blessings, that of innocence. Born with the same frailties as those whose
mortal remains fill these marble structures, we might, like them, have been the
sport of contending passions, and at last the victims of their fury! We should
now deserve execration, where they merited compassion, if, with more
instruction, with better friends, and especially with the knowledge of
adversity, we had erred like them. Thou, Nekayah, have a calm and serene part
to act through life, and therefore less difficult than mine. Ye, whose
ambitious wishes have long grasped at sovereign power, could you see the heart
of Rasselas, you would fear to sink under the burden of cares and duties which
it imposes on you.

"Nekayah! let us leave this scene of contemplation; not the dead but the
living are to be benefited or injured by the scepter of Rasselas: if to be
injured, all powerful Arbitrator of mankind! let me soon hide my remorse,
though not my shame, in some lone angle of this receptacle of death."

Having so said, he departed thoughtful. At the entrance of his palace, he met
the chief of the slaves whom he had dispatched to the fortress. He anxiously
enquired whether Zilia and Amalphis were arrived, and listened with the
greatest agitation to the following answer.

"Dread sovereign! when we were only at the distance of a day's journey from
the fortress, the messenger who was charged with your letters suddenly
disappeared: we searched for him long in vain; and, during this delay, received
the news of our late emperor's death, and of your majesty's accession to the
imperial power: we proceeded to the castle, where we related the purport of our
mission, and the loss of our credentials: we informed the governor of the
various events which had contributed to place you on the throne: and we found
he had long supposed you to be the same hero whose presence formerly honored
his mansion; but, how great was our surprise, when we perceived that, instead
of complying with our request, he delivered to us this letter, and commanding
us to assure the emperor of his inviolable fidelity, said he waited your
further orders for prostrating himself at the foot of your throne!"

CHAP. XXXVII. Letter of Zilia.
RASSELAS found the letter was from Zilia, and opened it with infinite
impatience: it was conceived in these terms.

"As sincerity and candor are the ruling principles of Zilia, let my sovereign
pardon me if I disclose my heart to Rasselas: think, O prince! what must be my
sensations, when I learn that fortune and thy own merit have placed thee in a
rank above my fondest hopes; and forgive me if I say beyond my wishes. Had I at
first inspired thee with that confidence which my heart tells me I deserve, I
should not now be compelled to act a painful, and apparently an ungrateful
part; but as thy prudence was then superior to thy passion, and as, since that
time, every thing has prevented thee from conveying to me thy sentiments, an
explanation is now necessary, both for thy satisfaction, and my own.

"I thank thee for the assurance that thou wishest me to share thy honors; but
does this wish arise from a scrupulous observance of thy promise, or from that
affection which first dictated thy vows? The step thou have taken is a proof of
thy principles, but not of thy sentiments. Zilia could never doubt the honor
of Rasselas; but is she assured of his love?

"Attend to me, O prince! The throne of Abissinia, even dignified as it is by
thy virtues, has no charms for me, if the place which I once flattered myself
with possessing in thy breast is no longer mine. Consult thyself; reflect
whether the circumstances which constrained thee, during a time, to inhabit the
fortress commanded by my father, did not favor an illusion: think whether, in
the midst of the serious and important scenes in which thou have been since
engaged, the image of Zilia has invariably presented itself to thy memory. Have
thou the same sentiments from which we sometimes derived the highest felicity,
and often the most anxious solicitude, when wandering beneath these lofty palm
trees that overlook the plains of Abissinia, and the distant mountains whence
the Nile derives its source, thou would often say that joy, pleasure, and
content were in this fortress, and all beyond its walls was a vast desert, or a
troubled ocean? Was not this illusion, Rasselas? Have thou not found in that
desert, flowers not cultivated by the hand of Zilia; in that troubled ocean,
harbors not formed by her care? In the midst of thy sufferings, have thou
wished to pour thy griefs into her faithful bosom? Have thou at least thought
her worthy of thy confidence?

"If the emotions of thy heart impelled thee to summon Zilia to the court of
Gonthar, she will obey their summons; she will accept happiness and Rasselas;
but if she owes this message to thy former promise, she will irrevocably resign
herself to retirement, to distant admiration of thy virtues, and to prayers for
thy prosperity: Rasselas, thou art free: whatever is thy answer, I know it will
be dictated by truth, and received with gratitude."

It is impossible to describe the sensations with which Rasselas read this
letter. Had his regard for Zilia suffered any change, it would have revived
every tender thought; but the impression which her virtues had made on him, was
not capable of diminution. He loved her with unabating fondness and unshaken
constancy: he felt and applauded the delicacy of her sentiments, and
immediately dispatched the same slaves to the fortress, with letters to
Amalphis and Zilia that sufficiently assured them how necessary to his
happiness was their speedy arrival. He took care that a stronger guard should
accompany these attendants, as he supposed the defection of his messenger,
during their former journey, must have been owing to some treacherous
communication with the Turks: he had long seriously reflected on the ills which
they occasioned, and resolved to make it his first care to free himself from
these haughty allies.

CHAP. XXXVIII. Amalphis accepts the command of the troops.
RASSELAS sent an ambassador to the sultan with letters, in which he returned
him thanks for the assistance of his troops; requested the continuance of his
friendship, but at the same time informed him, that, notwithstanding the care
and diligence of Dinarbas, the insolence and irregularity of the officers and
men were insufferable; and that his kingdom could not be at peace, till they
were removed. He offered to defray all the expenses of the war.

While Rasselas waited the answer of the sultan, he applied himself with
unremitting vigilance to the forming of an army. He found many obstacles
arising from the anarchy and confusion which had lately reigned in Abissinia:
his former instructions were neglected; but he had not lost the affection of
the troops: and what will not industry attain when assisted by power? He soon
felt the salutary effects of his resolution. The Turkish army, intimidated by
the improving forces of Rasselas, became more courteous and less rapacious; yet
still he impatienly wished their removal from his dominions; fearing lest their
want of discipline should infect his army, and their magnificence and luxury
renew a desire for the splendor, which had been carried to the most
reprehensible height during the reign of his father.

He was soon made happy by the arrival of Amalphis and Zilia. Convinced of the
sentiments of Rasselas, she no longer hesitated to accompany her father to
Gonthar. They were received amidst the acclamations of a people who considered
the felicity of their sovereign as their own. A day was fixed for the
celebration of the marriage, which was to take place immediately on the
expiration of the first month's mourning for the late emperor. Dinarbas and
Nekayah had a more particular share in the general joy. Rasselas willingly
bestowed his sister on his friend and benefactor, and appointed the same time
for their union.

He now told Amalphis that his intentions were to follow his counsels in all
that regarded his military department, and conferred on him the supreme command
in his army. "I cheerfully accept, said the venerable chief, the employment
with which my sovereign honors me, and I hope, by the performance of my duty,
not to prove unworthy of such distinction; yet let not Rasselas follow blindly
my counsels; let him consult his own reason, and that of other men who may have
equal experience with myself, but who have not had the good fortune to be known
to their sovereign. Who can flatter himself that he is devoid of partiality? I
have, it is true, during my youth, lived much in extensive society; but in my
age, confined to one spot, I must have naturally lessened my general experience
in the discrimination of character, and may have fancied those around me most
worthy of command, because my observation was confined to them alone. I feel,
that when I seek for officers of merit, my thoughts will scarcely stray beyond
my garrison; therefore I might not only commit injustice with respect to many
of whose worth I am ignorant, but likewise do irreparable injury to your
service, if I was to undertake the distribution of employments.

"This province more properly belongs to the sovereign, guided by the opinion
of the nation, which he must study with unremitting diligence."

CHAP. XXXIX. Rasselas takes a view of the Legislature of Abissinia.
THE sultan sent an ambassador to Rasselas in return; and, while he
congratulated him on his accession to the throne, and promised to recall his
forces, he proposed a treaty of alliance, the terms of which were highly
injurious to the honor and interest of Abissinia. The sultan demanded, in
virtue of this alliance, the cession of a considerable port in the Red Sea,
which had long been the object of Turkish ambition, and was not only the
greatest mart of Abissinian commerce, but the best safeguard of the coasts.
This proposal had been made to the late emperor, who, by the intrigues of his
ministers, was nearly led to accept it, in consideration of a large sum offered
by the Turks, if he had not been timely prevented by the rebellion of his sons.
The negotiation had been broken off, but a plea was still left for the sultan
to renew it.

Rasselas received the ambassador with dignity, and answered him with firmness:
he told him, he was not conscious of any obligations to the sultan which could
authorize such demands; that he renounced all alliance that was not to be
formed on a footing of equality; that he knew not what might have been his
father's motive for entering into such a negotiation; but that, in his
situation, it would be no less abject than impolitic to become tributary to a
man, whose assistance he had neither directly nor indirectly courted, and whose
intentions, as they appeared from his demands, cancelled all obligation.

The ambassador had orders to denounce war, in case of a refusal; but Dinarbas,
who felt himself in some measure the cause of this dispute, and who, whatever
might be the conduct of the sultan on this occasion, was attached to him by all
the ties of honor, requested, and, though with difficulty, obtained permission
of Rasselas to accompany the ambassador, and make a last attempt on the mind of
his benefactor.

Rasselas, in the mean time, with the assistance of Amalphis, prepared for war
with an activity that alarmed the Turkish army, who remained within their camp,
and seemed rather to fear being attacked, than to have any inclination to
commence hostilities.

He did not neglect the civil part of the government: he found the tribunals
subject to injustice, the natural consequence of that dilatoriness which gives
room for prejudice to bias the minds of those magistrates who have less
penetration than study, while the greater number have not even the merit of
endeavoring to distinguish right from wrong, but blindly fall in with the
opinion of others to avoid the trouble of thinking for themselves. Rasselas
took all possible means to obviate, in a temporary manner, these evils, by
pardoning the condemned when there was the least probability of innocence;
while he applied himself seriously, with the assistance of the most eminent for
learning and rectitude, to form a code of laws, which might for the future
rather prevent crimes than chastise then, and have equal power over the
magistrate and the accused. This most arduous and most essential part of
legislation at first alarmed him, on account of the labyrinths in which he
found himself involved; yet, on examining the subject more closely, he believed
it far less complex than he had at first imagined. Virtue and vice, right and
wrong, are, when truly considered, impossible to be mistaken: sophistry and
prejudice may cast a veil over their features, but cannot totally concea^ them
from him who seeks for justice and truth; and such was Rasselas. He therefore
found few obstacles in framing laws for criminal judicature, and when he had
once established them, he was firm to enforce their execution; their tenor was
lenient, but it was impossible to escape from their power: he soon with
pleasure perceived their efficacy, by an amazing diminution in the number of
crimes committed in his dominions. At the same time, he found greater
difficulties in forming a plan that might secure the possessions of his
subjects from destructive chicanery, this part of justice being naturally
involved in more perplexities, and less subject to evidence. Happily the
Abissinians were not greatly addicted to these pursuits, which are rather the
consequence of the degeneracy of a nation once civilized, than the remains of
pristine barbarism; and Rasselas not only took care that testaments and laws
should be as clear as possible, but discouraged every thing that tended to
introduce litigious enquiries; and, being convinced that interest was generally
the promoter of these mischiefs, he industriously placed magistrates in such a
situation as to be, if possible, inaccessible to bribery; while, as the
simplicity of the laws put it in the power of every man to plead for himself,
there could be no exterior influence, such as he had observed in other
countries, among the lower officers of justice, to breathe the flame of discord
into weak minds from motives of interest and avarice.

CHAP. XL. Priests at Court.
NEKAYAH had not forgotten the wise and good Elphenor, with whom she had
conversed during her residence at the fortress: she entreated her brother to
send for him to court: "His piety," said she, "will assist our devotion, and
his charity direct our benevolence. I have observed, with concern, that your
palace is filled with men, who, under the venerable garb of priesthood, are not
only subject to every passion of the courtier, but are even the great springs
that set in motion all the petty intrigues and invidious cabals that infest the
dwelling of princes: some who, without a blush, live in open contempt of those
maxims which they are obliged to inculcate, whose ostentation vies with the
dignity of the prince, and whose gaiety, not to say libertinism, equals that of
your emirs, and of the officers of your guards. These are indeed greatly
hurtful to religion; for, though their precepts are good, there is a want of
example to enforce them; yet these have often charity and often talents, and
appear less dangerous than their brethren of another class, who edify the
people with the exterior of regid virtue and warm devotion, who, alike with
their airy rivals, wish for despotic influence, and who pursue it by closer,
and therefore more destructive, methods: these are the men most to be feared;
and all are surely unworthy of the station they enjoy. We have need of some
pious man who may regulate the duties of devotion, and reform the many abuses
introduced: such a one, as I have often told you, is to be found in Elphenor:
his humanity is not to be tainted by this air of infection, and his wisdom and
piety are only equalled by his experience."

"Nekayah!" answered Rasselas, "I know the rectitude of thy heart, and the
purity of thy intentions: I confess that great abuses have been introduced into
the practice of worship, and greater still among the ministers; but Heaven
protect me from ever erecting myself into a judge of religious causes! To rouse
the sleeping damon of fanaticism in my dominions, would be the greatest error I
could commit in administration: this must inevitably be the case, were I to
attempt a reform by authoritative measures: every command would be considered
as an innovation, every regulation would become a source of controversy. In all
civil, all moral considerations, controversy is useful; it maintains
independency of spirit, and diffuses light over a nation; but in matters of
religion, it is the most dangerous of fiends. All I mean to do, and all I can
do with prudence, is to give, as far as human frailty will admit, the example
of unaffected constancy in the duties of piety; to discountenance equally
dissipation and superstition in the ministers of the altar; to choose for the
higher offices, those of the most unblemished principles, and to exclude all
from any influence in civil or political affairs. As for Elphenor, of whom I
believe what you have told me, I will, in consequence of that belief, promote
him to one of the first dignities of his profession, where his example and his
precepts may enlighten and improve the district committed to his care; but I am
persuaded, when my sister reflects, she will agree with me, that more cannot,
and ought not to be expected from a man of his function."

In consequence of this determination, a message was dispatched to the
fortress, inviting Elphenor to court, and assuring him of the intentions of the
emperor in his favor, from a conviction of the good which he would diffuse in
a situation of more extensive influence. This mandate was accompanied by a
letter from Nekayah, in which she returned him thanks for the consolation he
had afforded her by his visits at the fortress, and expressed her desire of
seeing him a witness of her happiness, as he had been of her affliction.

CHAP. XLI. History of Elphenor.
THE messenger soon returned to Nekayah with the following letter.

"THINK not, most esteemed lady! that I am insensible of the honor which your
royal brother would confer on me, or of the kindness with which you repay what
was merely a duty, consoling virtue in affliction.

"Neither suppose me neglectful of my sacred ministry, if I decline to act in a
more extensive sphere, where Heaven might bless my endeavors with diffusing
good over an ampler space than the narrow limits of this fortress.

"Believe me, princess! neither indolence nor ingratitude prevents me from
accepting this splendid offer. Vouchsafe to peruse my history: it is neither
long nor eventful: I did not choose to relate it during your residence here;
your mind then required rather to be calmed than agitated by adventitious
impressions.

"I am descended from no ignoble family; and followed the example of my
forefathers, by serving the emperor in the field: I was crowned with conquest
in a successful engagement, and should probably have continued the pursuit of
military honors, had it not been for a calamity, the remembrance of which time
has never been able to efface. I loved and was beloved; -- but, at the moment
in which I was to have been united to the object of my affection, an awful
event separated us -- a flash of lightening reduced my bride to ashes as she
received my vows at the altar. -- I will not expatiate on so dreadful a
circumstance, but leave the heart of Nekayah to judge of my feelings. After a
long conflict between despair and resignation, I sought consolation in visiting
and comforting the afflicted: I embraced the sacred ministry, and have
consecrated my life to Heaven, which forbade me to seek a refuge in the grave.

"I have been repaid for my sufferings by the blessing conferred on my
endeavors: the flock, of which I am become the shepherd, love me, and find in
my advice a resource against mortifications and adversity. Let those, who have,
from choice alone, dedicated themselves to the immediate service of the
Divinity, be promoted to the supreme dignity of our order; in me it would be
the height of ingratitude to abandon that duty, which has so long been the only
alleviation of my sorrows.

"I have not always, it is true, remained in the state of tranquillity in which
you found me: my mind naturally active, and my ambition once boundless, led me
at first to seek fame, and to deafen by tumult the voice of affliction. I
endeavored by my eloquence to distinguish myself at Gonthar, and might then
have obtained the honors which you now offer me; but, after viewing the
splendid scene, I found it more dazzling than real; I discovered that it would
not make me amends for the serenity I must relinquish. I felt that my natural
sensibility might, in a narrower sphere, be turned to the consolation of those
individuals, who should stand in need of my assistance, but that a heart
blasted by misfortune, was not capable of great pursuits, and that tenderness
could never happily be exchanged for ambition. I retired to this fortress,
where I have passed near half a century. Can I abandon my children, when my age
and my declining health require that I should lose no time in giving them
proofs of my affection? If my prayers can avail, I offer them up sincerely for
the prosperity of my sovereign, for that of Nekayah, and of Dinarbas. -- This
young hero has ever been the object of my regard: I watched his growing
virtues: I once thought they were recompensed by a glorious death, before he
had known misfortune. I now see they are rewarded in a different manner: it has
pleased Heaven, that he should contribute to the preservation of his country,
and that he should be crowned with glory and with love: few, very few, can hope
for so singular a blessing! May you both long enjoy it! and ever recall to your
memory, that Heaven seems to have peculiarly distinguished you, because your
passions were made subservient to the voice of reason and virtue! May you, as
the greatest felicity I can wish you, be taken both at the same instant, to the
blissful habitation of permanent security! For, in the midst of transport,
Nekayah must remember that all happiness in this world is transitory, except
virtue, and that while she retains her steady attachment to that heavenly
guide, she can want no earthly director to point out to her the celestial
enjoyments of piety and beneficence."

CHAP. XLII. The utility of Learning.
THE cares of government had too much engrossed Rasselas to permit him to
enjoy, as formerly, the conversation of Imlac and the astronomer: one evening,
as these were assembled with Nekayah, Zilia, and Pekuah, in a small palace of
the emperor, the windows of which overlooked the river, Rasselas joined them,
with Amalphis.

"You are not to think, my friends," said the monarch, "that your society is
less dear to me than formerly, or that my heart is less sensible of the charms
of literary and social converse. I have found an empire in such confusion, that
every branch of its government demands immediate attention; but I hope it will
not be long before I may again enjoy the delights I have ever found in your
company. I shall likewise require your assistance for the benefit of my
subjects; you have talents to be useful; and a long intercourse with you has
convinced me that your hearts are warm in every virtuous pursuit. You are not
unacquainted with my notions on the necessity of in a state: the Abissinians in
general want neither acuteness nor application, but their studies have been
hitherto wrong directed: as a proof of this, we have only to consider the
famous libraries, which are the source of vanity to our nation, and of envy to
our neighbors. Of what are they chiefly composed? Of manuscripts, which have
no other merit than the claim of dubious antiquity; treatises on mystical
devotion, or judicial astrology, and annals of nations, from whom we can gain
little instruction, because they were not further advanced than ourselves. I
know, Imlac, you already hear me with impatience, and would except, in my
general censure, the beautiful and affecting pastorals composed by the
wandering Arab, from the view of simple nature, and the ideas analogous to his
state of life; but these, you will yourself confess, do not much improve the
learning of a people."

"If they do not immediately improve the learning," answered Imlac, "they form
the taste, which I hold to be a considerable step toward it."

"I too," said the astronomer, "must speak in favor of a part of your
libraries, consisting of numberless volumes which prove that the revolutions of
the planets, and the division of the stars into constellations, were known to
the ancients, and that modern astronomy is rather a revival than a discovery,
perhaps even an imperfect revival. Probably these remaining treasures of
antiquity may not be sufficient to explain to us wholly the system of the
heavens; had they been so, the sages who examined them, would have been capable
of putting an end to the doubts which still arise amidst our most penetrating
enquiries. But they convince us of the application and researches of former
ages; they lead us to wish for a knowledge of the productions of times still
more remote, and to accompany that wish with endeavors to investigate the
origin of a science, founded, it is true, on nature and observation, but not
susceptible of perfection without great labor and astonishing perspicacity. I
do not mean from this to infer that astronomy, though one of the noblest of
studies, deserves the immediate attention of a monarch, who has to form an
infant nation: there are other parts of the mathematics far more essential, for
which public masters should be established: such are the mechanics, hydraulics,
and in short every thing that contributes to introduce simplicity in the
construction of machines, to spare labor, and to improve agriculture: all
which advantages can no otherwise be attained, than by a knowledge of the
mathematics."

"I shall be always ready," answered Rasselas, "to promote in my dominions the
study of the sciences; and though thy modesty has been sparing of praise to thy
favorite contemplations, I shall not be neglectful of them. For thee, Imlac,
thou have long known my veneration for learning: no instruction equals that
obtained by the perusal of history; but how far do thou think this study
should be carried by the generality of mankind? Are not most men devoted to
pass their lives in one spot; and is not the history of their own country, if
they mean to be useful to it, the only one necessary for them?"

CHAP. XLIII. The same subject continued.
"I AM far from being of that opinion," said Imlac; "he who would confine his
knowledge to one particular kingdom, would fancy it, as experience often shows
us, superior to every other, and consequently think nothing could be added to
its advantages: his ideas thus restrained would be incapable of forming
extensive designs or plans of general utility. We cannot learn how to act in
the various circumstances of life, without considering various examples, and
how can we find all these in the limited boundaries of one country? We must
have very little judgment if we cannot discriminate those parts of history
which are applicable to our situation; and, though we would not be Romans at
Constantinople, or Abissinians at Venice, we may, even from conditions directly
opposite to our own, gain instruction and improvement, as we receive by
reflection the light of the sun, when its rays are directed to the moon.
General history is therefore, in my opinion, useful to all, and for this
purpose it is necessary to have a competent knowledge of different languages,
without which we are obliged to see through the false medium of translation;
or, what is still worse, to rely implicitly on the faith of our own historians.
The Abissinians have few works of this nature, and even if they had many, it is
most probable they would be infected with the same partiality and prejudices,
which we find in the volumes of other nations. The only method of discovering
truth is to compare these different narrations; to study the character of the
people described, and of the author who describes them; to enter into their
views, and adopt their feelings, but not suffer ourselves to be led astray
either by the charms of eloquence, or by any apparent connection with our own
systems and interests.

"Poetry, as it teaches the knowledge of the heart, and developes the powers of
the imagination, is not only pleasing, but instructive in the great study of
morality, the most essential of all, that to which all learning tends, and
without which learning is of no avail."

"I am perfectly persuaded," replied Rasselas, "that such is the use, and such
the necessity of learning to polish the manners, and rectify the principles of
a nation, that I shall ever consider it as my duty to encourage all men of
letters, and to distinguish more particularly with my protection those, who by
their talents and assiduity have acquired the glorious pre-eminence of
enlightening and improving their fellow-citizens."

Amalphis smiled at the expression of Rasselas, which Imlac observing, said, "I
see Amalphis is not of opinion that men of letters are always the promoters of
learning, if I am not mistaken in the interpretation of that smile."

"You are right, Imlac," said Amalphis, "I honor and esteem men of letters,
while they retain that character; but when they make their talents subservient
either to base adulation, or to the rage of party, they lose all their merit in
my eyes; besides, their petty jealousies are more disgraceful than those of
women, because we always expect that some philosophy and elevation of thought
should be found in those minds that have been cultivated by study and
instruction: I may safely say this to you, Imlac, whose pen has neither
flattered nor insulted, and who have only known envy by being the object of it."

"I hope in some measure," said Rasselas, "to guard my literary subjects
against the practice of adulation, by showing them that it would be lost on me;
and I may perhaps diminish the fuel of envy, by giving equal encouragement to
those who equally deserve. If envy could be destroyed, satire and malevolence
would be unknown: for no man takes pains to dispraise him, from whom he fears
no competition: but, if an angel reigned in Abissinia, he could not remedy this
evil, and all my endeavors will only serve to palliate what can never be
eradicated.

"There is another circumstance which Amalphis might have remarked, and which
only his partiality to me has omitted. Most sovereigns, who have been
particularly attached to letters, have given themselves wholly up to the
delightful seduction, and have neglected their council chamger and their camp,
for their closet and their library. He who sacrifices his time, even to
innocent pursuits, when they call him off from his duty, is criminal; but he is
praiseworthy when he makes these pursuits tend to the great object which he
must ever keep in view, I must therefore sedulously arm myself against the
charms of music, painting, sculpture, and architecture, the embellishments of
life, the delight of rational minds, and active imaginations. A monarch should
in this imitate the sun, whose rays bestow color and radiancy on the flowers
which spring up beneath his influence, but who stops not his fiery chariot to
contemplate their beauty, lest he should endanger the safety of the universe,
to which it is his essential office to communicate light and heat. Such should
be the conduct of the prince; in this, as in many things, less happy than his
subjects, who may innocently employ their hours to attain perfection in
whatever study they have made their peculiar choice, while he should have a
general knowledge of all, without sacrificing his life to any in particular,
however useful or pleasing."

CHAP. XLIV. Education.
"I HAVE been listening attentively to all your conversation," said Pekuah,
"and nothing but my respect for the emperor would have kept me from
interrupting Amalphis, when he spoke in so contemptuous a manner of the
jealousies of women. Our sovereign thinks the conduct of the patron may
increase or diminish the envy that subsists between men of letters, and I am
persuaded that the jealousy of women is somented by the influence of men."

"I believe," answered Amalphis, "that none are more sensible of the merit of
women than the military man, who can best defend them, and who, if he has any
good principles, will be tender of their honor, because he feels the nicety of
his own. It is true, I spoke with some contempt of the jealousy of women:
whatever is the cause, we know it equally reigns over the recluse, whom we
should suppose devoted to meditation, and the thoughtless, whom we might
imagine busied only in gaiety. Cast your eyes on a company of children; they
have not to accuse men of raising the passion of envy by flattery, yet never
does it operate more forcibly than in their infant breasts: all causes are
capable of bringing to light this fatal evil with those in whom it is
unfortunately inherent, and none but great minds are totally exempt from it.

"The good or the bad dispositions of women have a very extensive influence in
society, and could we be so fortunate as to discover the motives of what we
call by the general name of caprice, we might probably succeed in preventing
the effects. Empires have been ruined by the jealousies of women; to them are
owing many of the great revolutions that have decided the fate of nations; and
if we join to theirs the sacerdotal influence, I fancy we shall prove that
statesmen and conquerers have often been simply the machines put in motion by
weak hands and versatile heads."

"If women," said Imlac, "frequently do great hurt by interposing in affairs
which seem foreign to their sex, how useful are they when they turn their
thoughts to the education of their children, and by these domestic and natural
cares provide happiness in future, not only for themselves but for their
country! The first impressions are difficult to efface, and the first
impressions are given by women; their mistaken tenderness has formed cowards,
and their capricious anger has reared up tyrants. If therefore they deserve our
censure for the ill qualities which their children have imbibed from them, let
us not deny them our praises for many of the virtues which make men an honor
to their age and to their nation."

"When I think on education," said Rasselas, "I wander in a labyrinth, from
which I know not how to extricate myself, and yet every delay to pursue this
important subject seems to accuse me of criminal omission. From faulty or
neglected education spring the evils which I am laboring to correct at
present, and which I would endeavor to obviate for the future.

"Private education, I believe, in general, to be pernicious to men, because it
is the way to perpetuate the failings of the race from one generation to
another: for, how can he teach wisely, who has not been wisely taught? It seems
more expedient that the public should form those by whose services it is to be
benefited -- But what is the public? It is a name without a determinate idea,
in which, though all individuals are interested, few think themselves
immediately concerned. If so small a number of parents are found capable of
educating their own children, are we to expect that more attention will be paid
to this duty by persons who have no tie for the performance of it, but that of
general utility, or self-interest?"

"The great advantages of public education," said Imlac, "are these: proper
rules are formed, and blind tenderness is not likely to interfere with their
execution: the children have the benefit of reciprocal emulation, and of some
initiation into a knowledge of the world: this, I own, is too frequently
attended by an early acqaintance with vice; but could not this be remedied by a
prudent choice of masters? The greatest model of this sort is the Lacedemonian
school, which was imperfect only in what was ill-planned from the first: the
institution was rigorously followed, and, therefore, if wise rules are made,
they can be strictly observed."

"I depend greatly on thee, Imlac," returned the prince, "for the formation of
such rules; thou have not only read, but seen much, and the great fault I have
remarked in those who preside over the education of youth, is their total
ignorance of those scenes for which they are to prepare their disciples."

CHAP. XLV. False pretensions to Knowledge.
"AS for myself," said Pekuah, "I would willingly undertake to teach children
what little I have myself attained: I know no happiness in knowledge without
communication, but I must be permitted to choose my scholars: to instruct those
who have genius is delightful, but to drive ideas into minds incapable of
making them spread or fructify, is a torment which none but wretched preceptors
know."

"Lady," said the astronomer, "all are not so happy in pupils as the Arab and
myself; yet I know too well the sweetness of your temper not to believe you
would think your pains well rewarded, if they succeeded in fixing the giddy to
application, or in enlivening the apathy of dullness."

"Such a task," interrupted Nekayah, "is worthy of your beneficence and
talents, but I own myself of the opinion of Pekuah -- Who can make feathers
solid, or lead elastic?"

"Madam," replied the astronomer, "though their qualities cannot be changed,
they may be directed to useful purposes."

"True," said Amalphis, "the feather may, by being applied to the arrow, guide
its intended flight; and the lead formed into a shot, will reach the destined
mark from the musket; this may be called their education, without which the
feather would have fluttered useless in the air, and the lead lain unheeded on
the ground. The misfortune is, that weak and sordid minds are sometimes
employed in great attempts; to this fatal error we owe thoughless or indolent
statesmen, and tedious or delusive writers. It were much to be wished that
servile offices could be left to mean capacities, and that none should act the
first parts on the great theater of the world, but those who have talents to
fill the character. All men may be made useful, if they are placed in their
proper station, and their faculties directed to those pursuits of which they
are most capable."

"As for utility," resumed Imlac, "few parents reflect whether the education
which they give their sons, will make them serviceable to their country, or to
their fellow creatures; they wish that it may enable them to shine in society,
and they early inspire them with a desire of showing all the learning of which
they are possessed. As vanity has been the motive of his education, the same
disposition attends the unfortunate youth through life: perhaps he finds
himself unequal to support, without further study, the reputation of that
instruction which he pretends to have received: he therefore seeks the resource
of nomenclature, syllabus, and compilation, which keep him forever immersed in
ignorance and impertinence.

"Such are the steps of those who affect knowledge, members of society far more
insupportable than the rustic or the trifler; men who have no original ideas,
no solid erudition, and yet mix boldly with the learned, while they impose on
the untaught. Even serious application, diligent study, and sound judgment,
must wait long in the vestibule of learning, before they can be admitted to her
sanctuary."

CHAP. XLVI. The conversation turns on various matters.
IMLAC here interrupted his discourse on perceiving that Rasselas was not
listening to him, but that his thoughts were employed on some idea which he
seemed unwilling to communicate.

"I was thinking," said the prince, "how miserable we should be, if Heaven was
to grant us what we have fondly desired at a former period of our lives. Do you
remember, while we were detained in Egypt by the inundations of the Nile, that
Pekuah, delighted with the convent of St. Anthony, wished to be prioress of an
order of pious maidens, and there fix her invariable residence? yet Pekuah is
contented with the diversity of life that has since been her lot, and would
not, I fancy, be willing to relinquish the court of the princess, where her
mind enjoys rational amusement in the society of Amalphis, Imlac, and her
astronomical instructor, and where the liveliness of her wit finds constant
exercise in the different groups which compose the motley scene in the mansion
of a sovereign."

"Certainly," answered Pekuah, "I have at present no wish for retirement: while
I was lately imprisoned with the princess in the valley, I often wondered how I
should have ever desired to become the inhabitant of a monastery, and reflected
where I could have found nuns whose society would have been comparable to that
of Nekayah; and yet, even with that society so dear to me, I longed to be again
at liberty."

"And you, sister," said Rasselas, "would you be greatly delighted, if heaven
should make you directress of a college of learned ladies; and would you
renounce the society of Dinarbas, and your friends, for the pleasure of
discoursing with the aged, and instructing the young? As for myself, I wished
for a little kingdom, and was ever extending the limits of my fancied
dominions: I now find the government of Abissinia an arduous task, and though
nothing should induce me to renounce what it is my duty to retain, I see, in
the friendship of Zilia, and the esteem of those around me, the summit of my
happiness, a happiness totally independent on the charms of royalty. Such were
our wishes, Nekayah! thou and Pekuah should return thanks to heaven that yours
were not accomplished, and I, that blessings were bestowed on me, which alone
could make the accomplishment of mine supportable."

"I feel the force of your observation, my brother," answered the princess,
"but circumstances are perpetually changing, and we are not responsible for the
influence which they may have on our minds. Imlac and the astronomer, it is
true, were wiser; they made no choice, because they had experienced how little
we know in this world what is best for us. I believe, however, we may venture
to affirm, that they who condemn themselves to irrevocable retirement are
greatly deceived in their expectations, and if their repentance is not
manifest, it is because pride will not allow them to own it.

"I think I should have been sufficiently mistress of myself to bear with
resignation the misfortunes of which I had once the gloomy prospect; but I am
certain I could never have hoped for so great felicity as Providence has been
pleased unexpectedly to grant me."

"It is singular," said the astronomer, "that those whose imagination is most
lively, are generally the most subject to occasional disgust and dejection, and
consequently most led to seek a refuge in solitude; whether their spirits are
more worn by greater exertion, or whether a mind naturally active, takes a
stronger impulse whatever way it tends."

"I believe," said Pekuah, "such minds want constant employment, and feel more
pain from inaction than from misfortune: indeed, listless indifference is the
most unsupportable of all situations. I know, that when I am deprived of the
society of those who can entertain and instruct me, I prefer the intercourse of
beings whose follies or singularities are of the ridiculous kind, to those in
whom I can find nothing to blame or commend, who weary me with insipidity, and
yet afford no theme for amusing my friends at their expense."

"The arms of ridicule are very dangerous, Pekuah," said the princess, "I
confess thou have often used them with dexterity, and I cannot deny that I have
taken pleasure in thy sallies; but consider what pain they may give to the
innocent, what enemies they may create among the vindictive!"

"And yet, if we were deprived of ridicule," said Imlac, "we should lose much
of the power of wit, and much of the influence of general opinion -- two
invisible monarchs, who govern with sufficient justice, and who, if they do not
prevent crimes, at least may reform errors."

CHAP. XLVII. Simplicity.
"IMLAC," said Rasselas, "J have often observed with what skill those who
possess the advantages of a superior education and knowledge of the world, can,
without apparent incivility, lessen, in his own opinion, that man who has
intruded himself on their company, or who has abused the privileges they have
allowed him: he has no reason to complain, yet he feels himself uneasy in their
presence, and is awed into respect without the shame of reproof.

"This is one of the many advantages of good breeding -- a quality which has
perhaps more power than any other, since it will for a time conceal even want
of talents, and want of virtue. How necessary is it therefore to acquire this
pleasing pre-eminence, without which the most essential endowments are abashed
before inferior merit. Politeness may be called the portrait of virtue, and its
resemblance is so perfect, that nothing but the solidity of the original is
wanting: ceremony and affectation are poor imitators of true good-breeding,
which is easy and simple, like nature itself. If I was to form a system, it
would be that of simplicity; it should pervade all works of imagination, all
enquiries of science, all performances of the chisel and pencil, all behavior,
and all dress. Carry this idea even to the most awful height, what is
simplicity but truth, the great basis of virtue and religion? When I call this
a system, it is only to comply with the common mode of speech, which would make
of the most natural ideas a philosophical discovery. Simplicity is the child of
nature: the love of it seems implanted in us by Providence; yet all the labor
of erring mortals is to depart from this great and open road, and to return to
it when they have seen the fallacy of winding paths and doubtful mazes."

"My brother," said Nekayah, "when you extol with reason the universal merit of
simplicity, you certainly do not mean to imply a neglect of combination of
ideas in the works of art or science, or a neglect of common forms in dress or
manners."

"So far from it," replied the prince, "that as nature is varied, so must be
the imitation or investigation of it; and to affect singularity, either in
habit or behavior, would be wandering from the very rule that I have been
proposing."

To explain this," said Imlac, "we need only have recourse to our own feelings
and perceptions: the variety of nature is infinite; but it is harmonized by
general effect. The verdant leaves of the trees participate of the azure of the
sky, and their trunks of the coloring of the earth: the most discordant sounds
in music, the most distant ideas in metaphysics, are combined by gradation, or
opposed by contrast; yet even in contrast there is an imperceptible connection
that unites the whole. Without one great plan, to which all is subservient, our
general conduct in life, and our finest productions of art or genius, are like
a republic without laws, or a monarchy without a king.

"Simplicity, by those whose wayward minds are not susceptible of its charms,
is supposed to exclude pomp and elegance; yet what is pomp without dignity, or
elegance without grace? Both are the offspring of nature, and sisters to
simplicity."

"I know," said Zilia, "that no other power obtains access to our hearts: the
various inflections of voice, the painful efforts of the musician, who shows
his art in deviating from nature, excite our wonder; but the nightingale, and
he whose notes are equally pathetic and simple, inspire us with more than
admiration."

"If our sovereign introduces simplicity at court," said Pekuah, "what will
become of the numberless artists, merchants, and other abettors of luxury, that
owe their chief support to the inhabitants of this mansion, and to the
influence of their example over the rest of the nation?"

"The circulation of riches, for the gratification of pride, indolence, or the
love of pleasure," replied the prince, "is, in my opinion, detrimental to a
kingdom. I have often thought, that every ingot, stored b^ ^ommerce in the
treasury of a monarch, has ^ost him the virtue and principles of a subject. The
romantic warmth of youth, may perhaps make me judge too severely; and it is
possible that commerce may, in some nations, be carried on without insidious
treaties between the respective governments, and without unjust attempts of
individuals to make their fortunes at the expense of their neighbors. Though I
love virtue too well not to wish that I could be persuaded of its general
influence in every station of life, yet I shall never consider luxury at best
but as a necessary evil, and its dependent, commerce, as a very dangerous trial
for the principles of its followers. -- Notwithstanding this conviction, I
cannot abolish either: money is wanted in all states, that they may not become
the prey of their richer neighbors; commerce must therefore be encouraged; but
it is our duty to endeavor, as far as we are able, to prevent fraud and
monopoly. Were it possible for any monarch to render a people perfectly happy
in themselves, it would not be sufficient; he must make the whole world
participate in the great reformation, or he could never preserve his own
subjects in security. We may indulge ideal speculation, but experience shows us
this humiliating truth, that all we can do is to diminish evil and to promote
good, by the means that are given us: perfect justice can alone be exercised by
the Divinity."

CHAP. XLVIII. Dinarbas returns from the court of the Sultan.
THE conversation was here interrupted by the arrival of Dinarbas from
Constantinople. He was received with great joy by the sovereign, by his father,
Nekayah, and Zilia: but Amalphis was impatient to know the success of his
embassy; he considered that the honor of his son was engaged, and anxiously
entreated him to begin his narration.

"When I arrived at Constantinople," said Dinarbas, "I found the sultan highly
incensed at the independent answer of the Abissinian monarch, and displeased
with me for not having warmly seconded his proposal of a treaty: he declared
that nothing should persuade him to relinquish pretensions which he thought
justly founded on the assistance he had furnished: he said, that Rasselas owed
to him alone the throne of Abissinia, and could not, without ingratitude,
refuse to comply with his demands.

"In answer to this, I observed, that when I had first recourse to him for
assistance, the prince was totally ignorant of my intentions; that afterward,
the army marched without my knowledge, and expressly contrary to the wishes of
Rasselas; that a happy change had indeed been effected by their intervention,
but that the whole nation joined in restoring their former sovereign; and that,
had Rasselas, instead of Menas, headed the troops of Abissinia, the victory
might not have been so easily obtained.

"The sultan would not listen to my remonstrances: he denounced war against my
country, but accompanied his denunciation with a desire that I would remain in
his council, and retain the government of Servia, both which I refused, and
prepared to depart from Constantinople, offended with myself for having
indulged the romantic idea, that a man at the head of a powerful and submissive
nation, would listen to the voice of justice, against what he supposed his own
interest: I said to myself, that I had mistaken in him magnificence for
generosity, and splendid professions for honorable sentiments.

"Being on the point of leaving his dominions, I again requested an audience,
that I might testify my gratitude for the favors which he had conferred on me,
and my regret for not being able to retain them without infidelity to my
natural sovereign: he seemed affected, and, commanding his attendants to
withdraw, spoke to me in the following manner.

"Dinarbas! I love thee, and will say to thee, what I would not say to any
other man -- I believe thee -- read these letters, and tell me whether they are
genuine.

"So saying, he gave into my hands the letters which your majesty, the
princess, and myself had sent by the messenger to my father and Zilia, the loss
of which we always suspected to have been owing to the Turks. These letters,
continued the sultan, have just been delivered to me -- I wait thy answer.

"I easily convinced him that they were really sent from the court of
Abissinia; on which he made me this reply --

"Dinarbas! I perceive that truth, honor, and integrity, ought not only in
individuals, but in governments, to be the great ruling principles of action: I
learn by these letters the real sentiments of thy sovereign, his innocence in
his steps to the throne, and the firmness of his character: were I to make war
against him, the event would at least be doubtful on my side, and the disgrace
inevitable. His army is better disciplined than mine, and I know not whether
any superiority of number would weigh against the attachment of his troops to a
warlike sovereign, and a tender father: I cannot boast of either of these
titles, nor have I energy sufficient to deserve them; but the fatal delusion of
flattery, which seems to have enchanted this imperial seat, has not so totally
blinded me, as to prevent me from revering in others the virtues of which I am
incapable: besides, my own interest engages me to retain one honest man in my
dominions, and to cultivate a friendship with one disinterested prince. Return
to Abissinia, offer my alliance to thy monarch on equal terms, lead back my
army, and teach me how to govern.

"I was astonished and affected at the sultan's discourse. Does not this man
deserve to be virtuous?"

CHAP. XLIX. Marriages of Rasselas and Nekayah.
"THE interception of our letters," said Rasselas, "has then informed the
Sultan of the purity of my intentions, and of the loyalty of my subjects; how
frequently have I wished that my inmost thoughts could be known! Guilt and
innocence so often wear the same aspect, that, far from fearing the secret
emissaries who may be placed to observe my conduct, I only desire that they
should report the truth.

"To thee, Dinarbas, we owe the tranquillity of the empire; and in thy
friendship I have found more than a recompense for all my searches after
happiness; but how can I estimate the felicity that is promised me in the
society of my Zilia! A felicity which was once beyond my hopes, but without
which, I now could not exist. I remember that I had formerly with Nekayah a
long debate on marriage, in which we could not decide whether early or late
unions, whether sympathy or reason were most conducive to conjugal happiness:
we have, by a singular course of events, been permitted to enjoy at once these
opposite advantages: the warmest affection has been confirmed by the severest
trials: surely we have before us the fairest prospect, a prospect to which
neither interested views, nor transitory passions can lay claim."

"In this," said the astronomer, "your virtues are rewarded; he who wants
firmness deserves not success; reason can be no enemy to that love, which is
founded on virtue, and supported by constancy."

The nuptials of Rasselas and Zilia, Dinarbas and Nekayah, were celebrated
without ostentatious magnificence, but with a dignity becoming their rank. The
poor had the greatest share in the rejoicings, because the superfluous
treasures, consumed on similar occasions, were distributed among them. It was
decided that Dinarbas should in a few weeks conduct back the army of the Sultan
into his dominions; that he should, with Nekayah, fix his residence in Servia,
but that their visits to Abissinia should be frequent. Pekuah was to accompany
the princess, and the astronomer, delighted in varying the scene, since he had
tasted the charms of society, begged leave to visit the states of Dinarbas,
who, with Nekayah, gladly acceded to his proposal: his knowledge and his
virtues made them revere him as a father.

Rasselas concluded an alliance, offensive and defensive, with the Sultan;
repaid the expenses of the troops, and graced the officers with distinguished
marks of his favor.

Amalphis, honored and beloved by his son and sovereign, applied all his care
to form the Abissinian army. Imlac was no less attentive to the institutions of
Rasselas, for promoting learning in his dominions: both enjoyed the confidence
of the monarch: but neither did Amalphis receive the memorials of the officers
of the army, nor Imlac the dedications of the poets: every matter was first
referred to the emperor, who consulted those, whom he had appointed to be the
heads of the several departments of the state, before he gave his answer, but
did not always decide according to their judgment.

Zilia never interfered in public business; her voice often directed
establishments of charity, and her taste frequently decided on the protection
to be given to genius.

Innocent gaiety and rational amusements were introduced by her into the court
of Abissinia; her dress was simple and elegant, and consisted of the
manufactures of the country; she distinguished no woman as her favorite, but
showed peculiar regard to all those whose conduct was exemplary, without
affectation, and whose minds were well informed, without vain pretensions to a
display of learning. Her beneficence was extended to all, and if she showed any
partiality, it was to the orphans and widows of those who had served their
country in battle; for she did not forget that she was the daughter of
Amalphis: she knew the heartfelt misery of that disappointed hope and poverty,
which honest pride forbids to own; the lot of many families, whose chiefs have
bravely supported the honor of their prince and country.

CHAP. L. Visit to the happy valley.
BEFORE the departure of Dinarbas and Nekayah, Rasselas and his friends made a
visit to the happy valley. The prince and his sister wished to review those
scenes, which had been to them objects of satiety at one time, and of
uneasiness at another: they returned to every spot which remembrance had
dignified, and rejoiced to contemplate those situations which were once irksome
to their imagination.

Rasselas had only one brother left, a youth whose education he recommended to
the care of Imlac: he freed the princesses, his sisters, from the confinement
of the valley, and gave them permission either to remain there, or return with
him to Gonthar. He commanded the massy gates that closed the entrance of the
valley to be destroyed; the dancers, musicians, and other professors of arts,
merely of amusement, to be dismissed with pensions, and liberty to be granted
to all.

The prince, followed by his companions, led Zilia to the entrance of the
cavern, through which he had first made his escape. "Consider this cavity," said
he, "and think what must be the grateful transports that glow in my breast --
Nekayah! Imlac! Pekuah! is not our search rewarded? Let us return thanks to
heaven for having inspired us with that active desire of knowledge, and
contempt of indolence, that have blessed us with instruction, with friendship,
and with love! It is true that we have been singularly favored by Providence;
and few can expect, like us, to have their fondest wishes crowned with success;
but even when our prospects were far different, our search after happiness had
taught us resignation: let us therefore warn others against viewing the world
as a scene of inevitable misery. Much is to be suffered in our journey through
life; but conscious virtue, active fortitude, the balm of sympathy, and
submission to the divine will, can support us through the painful trial. With
them every station is the best; without them prosperity is a feverish dream,
and pleasure a poisoned cup.

"Youth will vanish, health will decay, beauty fade, and strength sink into
imbecility; but if we have enjoyed their advantages, let us not say there is no
good, because the good in this world is not permanent: none but the guilty are
excluded from at least temporary happiness; and if he whose imaginat^on is
lively, and whose heart glows with sensibility, is more subject than others to
poignant grief and maddening disappointment, surely he will confess that he has
moments of ecstacy and consolatory reflection that repay him for all his
sufferings.

"Let us now return to the busy scene of action where we are called, and
endeavor, by the exercise of our several duties, to deserve a continuation of
the blessings which Providence has granted, and on the use of which depends all
our present, all our future, felicity."

FINIS.

