THE LADY's POCKET LIBRARY CONTAINING: 1. MISS MORE'S ESSAYS. 2. DR. GREGORY'S
LEGACY TO HIS DAUGHTERS. 3. LADY PENNINGTON'S UNFORTUNATE MOTHER'S ADVICE TO
HER DAUGHTERS. 4. MARCHIONESS OF LAMBERT'S ADVICE OF A MOTHER TO HER DAUGHTER.
5. MRS. CHAPONE'S LETTER ON THE GOVERNMENT OF THE TEMPER. 6. SWIFT'S LETTER TO
A YOUNG LADY NEWLY MARRIED. 7. MOORE'S FABLES FOR THE FEMALE SEX.


PHILADELPHIA: FROM THE PRESS OF MATTHEW CAREY, NO. 118, MARKET-STREET. MARCH
20, M.DCC.XCII.

To the LADIES of the UNITED STATES.
THE Editor of this publication hopes, from the established reputation of the
several tracts of which it is composed, that it will be found a more complete
system for the instruction of the female world, than perhaps any other extant.

A volume under the present title was lately published in England and Ireland,
and had a most rapid sale, having been purchased by almost every lady of taste
in those kingdoms. To this volume, the Editor has added Miss More's essays --
Mrs. Chapone's letter on the government of the temper -- and Swift's letter to
a young lady newly married. These have considerably enhanced its value -- and
he doubts not, the ladies on this side the Atlantic will be as generous in
their encouragement of a work intended for their advantage, as those in England
and Ireland have been.

Philadelphia, March 20, 1792.
THE LADIES' LIBRARY. MISS MORE'S ESSAYS.
INTRODUCTION.
IT is with the utmost diffidence that the following pages are submitted to the
inspection of the public: yet, however the limited abilities of the author may
have prevented her from succeeding to her wish, in the execution of her present
attempt, she humbly trusts that the uprightness of her intention will procure
it a candid and favorable reception. These little essays are chiefly
calculated for the younger part of her own sex, who, she flatters herself, will
not esteem them the less, because they were written immediately for their
service. She by no means pretends to have composed a regular system of morals,
or a finished plan of conduct: she has only endeavored to make a few remarks
on such circumstances as seemed to her susceptible of some improvement, and on
such subjects as she imagined were particularly interesting to young ladies, on
their first introduction into the world. She hopes they will not be offended,
if she has occasionally pointed out certain qualities, and suggested certain
tempers and dispositions, as peculiarly feminine, and hazarded some
observations, which naturally arose from the subject, on the different
characters which mark the sexes. And here again she takes the liberty to repeat
that these distinctions cannot be too nicely maintained; for besides those
important qualities common to both, each sex has its respective, appropriated
qualifications, which would cease to be meritorious, the instant they ceased to
be appropriated. Nature, propriety, and custom have prescribed certain bounds
to each; bounds which the prudent and the candid will never attempt to break
down; and indeed it would be highly impolitic to annihilate distinctions from
which each acquires excellence, and to attempt innovations by which both would
be losers.

Women, therefore, never understand their own interests so little, as when they
affect those qualities and accomplishments, from the want of which they derive
their highest merit. "The porcelain clay of human kind," says an admired
writer, speaking of the sex. Greater delicacy evidently implies greater
fragility; and this weakness, natural and moral, clearly points out the
necessity of a superior degree of caution, retirement, and reserve.

If the author may be allowed to keep up the allusion of the poet just quoted,
she would ask, if we do not put the finest vases, and the costliest images in
places of the greatest security, and most remote from any probability of
accident or destruction? By being so situated, they find their protection in
their weakness, and their safety in their delicacy. This metaphor is far from
being used with a design of placing young ladies in a trivial, unimportant
light: it is only introduced to insinuate, that where there is more beauty, and
more weakness, there should be greater circumspection and superior prudence.

Men, on the contrary, are formed for the more public exhibitions on the great
theater of human life. Like the stronger and more substantial wares, they
derive no injury, and lose no polish, by being always exposed, and engaged in
the constant commerce of the world. It is their proper element, where they
respire their natural air, and exert their noblest powers, in situations which
call them into action. They were intended by Providence for the bustling scenes
of life -- to appear terrible in arms, useful in commerce, shining in counsels.

The author fears it will be hazarding a very bold remark, in the opinion of
many ladies, when she adds, that the female mind, in general, does not appear
capable of attaining so high a degree of perfection in science, as the male.
Yet she hopes to be forgiven, when she observes also, that as it does not seem
to derive the chief portion of its excellence from extraordinary abilities of
this kind, it is not at all lessened by the imputation of not possessing them.
It is readily allowed, that the sex have lively imaginations, and those
exquisite perceptions of the beautiful and defective, which come under the
denomination of taste. But pretensions to that strength of intellect, which is
requisite to penetrate into the abstruser walks of literature, it is presumed
they will readily relinquish. There are green pastures, and pleasant valleys,
where they may wander with safety to themselves, and delight to others. They
may cultivate the roses of imagination, and the valuable fruits of morals and
criticism: but the steeps of Parnassus, few, comparatively, have attempted to
scale with success. And when it is considered, that many languages, and many
sciences, must contribute to the perfection of poetical composition, it will
appear less strange. The lofty epic, the pointed satire, and the more daring
and successful flights of the tragic Muse, seem reserved for the bold
adventurers of the other sex.

Nor does this assertion, it is apprehended, at all injure the interests of the
women; they have other pretensions, on which to value themselves, and other
qualities much better calculated to answer their particular purposes. We are
enamoured of the soft strains of the Sicilian and the Mantuan Muse, while, to
the sweet notes of the pastoral reed, they sing the contentions of the
shepherds, the blessings of love, or the innocent delights of rural life. Has
it ever been ascribed to them as a defect, that their eclog^es do not treat of
active scenes, of busy cities, and of wasting war? No: their simplicity is
their perfection; and they are only blamed when they have too little of it.

On the other hand, the lofty bards, who strung their bolder harps to higher
measures, and sung the Wrath of Peleus' son, and Man's first disobedience, have
never been censured for want of sweetness and refinement. The sublime, the
nervous, and the masculine, characterise their compositions; as the beautiful,
the soft, and the delicate, mark those of the others. Grandeur, dignity, and
force, distinguish the one species; ease, simplicity, and purity the other.
Both shine from their native, distinct, unborrowed merits, not from those which
are foreign, adventitious, and unnatural. Yet those excellencies, which make up
the essential and constituent parts of poetry, they have in common.

Women have generally quicker perceptions: men have juster sentiments. -- Women
consider how things may be prettily said; men how they may be properly said. --
In women, (young ones at least) speaking accompanies, and sometimes precedes
reflection; in men, reflection is the antecedent. -- Women speak to shine or to
please; men, to convince or confute. -- Women admire what is brilliant; men
what is solid. Women prefer an extemporaneous sally of wit, or a sparkling
effusion of fancy, before the most accurate reasoning, or the most laborious
investigations of facts. In literary composition, women are pleased with point,
turn, and antithesis; men with observation, and a just deduction of effects
from their causes. Women are fond of incident, men of argument. -- Women admire
passionately; men approve cautiously. -- One sex will think it betrays a want
of feeling to be moderate in their applause; the other will be afraid of
exposing a want of judgment by being in raptures with any thing. -- Men refuse
to give way to the emotions they actually feel, while women sometimes affect to
be transported beyond what the occasion will justify.

As a farther confirmation of what has been advanced on the different bent of
the understanding in the sexes, it may be observed, that we have heard of many
female wits, but never of one female logician -- of many admirable writers of
memoirs, but never of one chronologer. -- In the boundless and aerial regions
of romance, and in that fashionable species of composition which succeeded it,
and which carries a nearer approximation to the manners of the world, the women
cannot be excelled: this imaginary soil they have a peculiar talent for
cultivating; because here, Invention labors more, and judgment less.

The merit of this kind of writing consists in the vrai-semblance to real life,
as to the events themselves, with a certain elevation in the narrative, which
places them, if not above what is natural, yet above what is common. It farther
consists in the art of interesting the tender feelings, by a pathetic
representation of those minute, endearing, domestic circumstances, which take
captive the soul before it has time to shield itself with the armor of
reflection. To amuse, rather than to instruct, or to instruct indirectly by
short inferences, drawn from a long concatenation of circumstances, is at once
the business of this sort of composition, and one of the characteristics of
female genius The author does not apprehend it makes against her GENERAL
position, that this nation can boast a female critic, poet, historian,
linguist, philosopher, and moralist, equal to most of the other sex. To these
particular instances others might be adduced; but it is presumed, that they
only stand as exceptions against the rule, without tending to invalidate the
rule itself.
.

In short, it appears that the mind in each sex has some natural kind of bias,
which constitutes a distinction of character, and that the happiness of both
depends, in a great measure, on the preservation and observance of this
distinction. For where would be the superior pleasure and satisfaction
resulting from mixed conversation, if this difference were abolished? If the
qualities of both were invariably and exactly the same, no benefit or
entertainment would arise from the tedious and insipid uniformity of such an
intercourse; whereas considerable advantages are reaped from a select society
of both sexes. The rough angles and asperities of male manners are
imperceptibly filed, and gradually worn smooth, by the polishing of female
conversation, and the refining of female taste; while the ideas of women
acquire strength and solidity, by their associating with sensible, intelligent,
and judicious men.

On the whole, (even if fame be the object of pursuit) is it not better to
succeed as women, than to fail as men? To shine, by walking honorably in the
road which nature, custom, and education seem to have marked out, rather than
to counteract them all, by moving awkwardly in a path diametrically opposite?
To be good originals, rather than bad imitators? In a word, to be excellent
women, rather than indifferent men?

On Dissipation.
Dolgie certe, allegrezze incerte!

-- PETRARCA.
AS an argument in favor of modern manners, it has been pleaded, that the
softer vices of luxury and dissipation, belong rather to gentle and yielding
tempers, than to such as are rugged and ferocious: that they are vices which
increase civilization, and tend to promote refinement, and the cultivation of
humanity.

But this is an assertion, the truth of which the experience of all ages
contradicts. Nero was not less a tyrant for being a siddler; he The emperor
Caligula.
who wished the whole Roman people had but one neck, that he might dispatch
them at a blow, was himself the most debauched man in Rome; and Sydney and
Russel were condemned to bleed under the most barbarous, though most dissipated
and voluptuous reign, that ever disgraced the annals of Britain.

The love of dissipation is, I believe, allowed to be the reigning evil of the
present day. It is an evil which many content themselves with regretting,
without seeking to redress. A dissipated life is censured in the very act of
dissipation; and prodigality of time is as gravely declaimed against at the
card table, as in the pulpit.

The lover of dancing censures the amusements of the theater for their dullness,
and the gamester blames them both for their levity. She, whose whole soul is
swallowed up in " opera extaci^s," is astonished, that her acquaintance can
spend whole nights in preying, like harpies, on the fortunes of their fellow
creatures; while the grave, sober sinner, who passes her pale and anxious
vigils, in this fashionable sort of pillaging, is no less surprised how the
other can waste her precious time in hearing sounds for which she has no taste,
in a language she does not understand

In short, every one seems convinced, that the evil so much complained of does
really exist somewhere, though all are inwardly persuaded that it is not with
themselves. All desire a general reformation; but few will listen to proposals
of particular amendment; the body must be restored, but each limb begs to
remain as it is; and accusations, which concern all, will be likely to affect
none. They think that sin, like matter, is divisible, and that what is
scattered among so many, cannot materially affect any one; and thus individuals
contribute separately to that evil which they in general lament.

The prevailing manners of an age depend more than we are aware, or are willing
to allow, on the conduct of the women; this is one of the principal hinges on
which the great machine of human society turns. Those, who allow the influence
which female graces have, in contributing to polish the manners of men, would
do well to reflect how great an influence female morals must also have on their
conduct. How much then is it to be regretted, that the ladies should ever sit
down contented to polish, when they are able to reform -- to entertain, when
they might instruct, and to dazzle for an hour, when they are candidates for
eternity!

Under the dispensation of Mahomet's law, indeed, these mental excellencies
cannot be expected; because the women are shut out from all opportunities of
instruction, and excluded from the endearing pleasures of a delightful and
equal society; and, as a charming poet sings, are taught to believe, that For
their inferior natures
Formed to delight, and happy by delighting,
Heaven has reserved no future paradise,
But bids them rove the paths of bliss, secure
Of total death, and careless of hereafter.
-- IRENE.

These act consistently, in studying none but exterior graces, in cultivating
only personal attractions, and in trying to lighten the intolerable burden of
time, by the most frivolous and vain amusements. They act in consequence of
their own blind belief, and the tyranny of their despotic masters; for they
have neither the freedom of a present choice, nor the prospect of a future
being.

But in this land of civil and religious liberty, where there is as little
despotism exercised over the minds, as over the persons of women, they have
every liberty of choice, and every opportunity of improvement; and how greatly
does this increase their obligation to be exemplary in there general conduct,
attentive to the government of their families, and instrumental to the good
order of society!

She who is at a loss to find amusements at home, can no longer apologize for
her dissipation abroad, by saying she is deprived of the benefit and the
pleasure of books; and she who regrets being doomed to a state of dark and
gloomy ignorance, by the injustice, or tyranny of men, complains of an evil
which does not exist.

It is a question ^requently in the mouths of illiterate and dissipated females
-- "What good is there in reading? To what end does it conduce?" It is,
however, too obvious to need insisting on, that unless perverted, as the best
things may be, reading answers many excellent purposes, besides the great
leading one, and is perhaps the safest remedy for dissipation. She who
dedicates a portion of her leisure to useful reading, feels her mind in a
constant progressive state of improvement, while the mind of a dissiputed woman
is continually losing ground. An active spirit rejoiceth, like the sun, to run
his daily course, while indolence, like the dial of Ahaz, goes backwards. The
advantages which the understanding receives from polite literature, it is not
here necessary to enumerate; its effects on the moral temper is the present
object of consideration. The remark may perhaps be thought too strong, but I
believe it is true, that, next to religious influences, an habit of study is
the most probable preservative of the virtue of young persons. Those who
cultivate letters have rarely a strong passion for promiscuous visiting, or
dissipated society: study, therefore, induces a relish for domestic life, the
most desirable temper in the world for women. Study, as it rescues the mind
from an inordinate fondness for gaming, dress, and public amusements, is an
economical propensity* for a lady may read at much less expense than she can
play at cards* as it requires some application, it gives the mind an habit of
industry; as it is a relief against that mental disease, which the French
emphatically call ennui, it cannot fail of being beneficial to the temper and
spirits, I mean in the moderate degree in which ladies are supposed to use it;
as an enemy to indolence, it becomes a social virtue; as it demands the full
exertion of our talents, it grows a rational duty; and, when directed to the
knowledge of the Supreme Being, and his laws, it rises into an (...) of
religion.

The rage for reformation commonly shows itself in a violent zeal for
suppressing what is wrong, rather than a prudent attention to establish what is
right: but we shall never obtain a fair garden merely by rooting up weeds; we
must also plant flowers; for the natural richness of the soil we have been
clearing will not suffer it to lie barren; but whether it shall be vainly or
beneficially prolific, depends on the culture. What the present age has gained
on one side, by a more enlarged and liberal way of thinking, seems to be lost
on the other, by excessive freedom and unbounded indulgence. Knowledge is not,
as heretofore, confined to the dull cloister, or the gloomy college, but
disseminated, to a certain degree, among both sexes and almost all ranks. The
only misfortune is, that these opportunities do not seem to be so wisely
improved, or turned to so good an account as might be wished. Books of a
pernicious, idle, and frivolous sort, are too much multiplied, and it is from
the very redundancy of them, that true knowledge is so scarce, and the habit of
dissipation so much increased.

It has been remarked, that the prevailing character of the present age is not
that of gross immorality: but if this is meant of those in the higher walks of
life, it is easy to discern, that there can be but little merit in abstaining
from crimes which there is but little temptation to commit. It is, however, to
be feared, that a gradual defection from piety, will in time draw after it all
the bad consequences of more active vice; for whether mounds and fences are
suddenly destroyed by a sweeping torrent, or worn away through gradual neglect,
the effect is equally destructive. As a rapid fever and a consuming ^ectic are
alike fatal to our natural health, so are flagrant immorality and torpid
indolence to our moral well being.

The philosophical doctrine of the slow recession of bodies from the sun, is a
lively image of the reluctance with which we first abandon the light of virtue.
The beginning of folly, and the first entrance on a dissipated life, cost some
pangs to a well disposed heart; but it is surprising to see how soon the
progress ceases to be impeded by reflection, or slackened by remorse. For it is
in moral as in natural things; the motion in minds as well as bodies is
accelerated by a nearer approach to the center, to which they are tending. If
we recede slowly at first setting out, we advance rapidly in our future course:
and to have begun to be wrong, is already to have made a great progress.

A constant habit of amusement relaxes the tone of the mind, and renders it
totally incapable of application, study, or virtue. Dissipation not only
indisposes its votaries to every thing useful and excellent, but disqualifies
them for the enjoyment of pleasure itself. It softens the soul so much, that
the most superficial employment becomes a labor, and the slightest
inconvenience an agony. The luxurious Sybarite must have lost all sense of real
enjoyment, and all relish for true gratification, before he complained that he
could not sleep, because the rose-leaves lay double under him.

Luxury and dissipation, soft and gentle as their approaches are, and silently
as they throw their silken chains about the heart, enslave it more than the
most active and turbulent vices. The mightiest conquerors have been conquered
by those unarmed foes: the flowery fetters are fastened before they are felt.
The blandishments of Circe were more fatal to the mariners of a^lysses, than
the strength of Polypheme or the brutality of the ^aestrigons. Hercules, after
he had cleansed the Augean stable, and performed all the other labors enjoined
him by Euristheus, found himself a slave to the softness of the heart; and he,
who wore a club and a lion's skin in the cause of virtue, condescended to the
most effeminate employments to gratify a criminal weakness. Hannibal, who
vanquished mighty nations, was himself overcome by the love of pleasure; and he
who despised cold, and want, and danger, and death on the Alps, was conquered
and undone by the dissolute indulgences of Capua.

Before the hero of the most beautiful and virtuous romance that ever was
written, I mean Telemachus, landed on the island of Cyprus, he unfortunately
lost his prudent companion, Mentor, in whom wisdom is so finely personified. At
first he beheld with horror the wanton and dissolute manners of the voluptuous
inhabitants; the ill effects of their example were not immediate: he did not
fall into the commission of glaring enormities; but his virtue was secretly and
imperceptibly undermined; his heart was softened by their pernicious society,
and the nerve of resolution was slackened: he every day beheld with diminished
indignation the worship which was offered to Venus; the disorders of luxury and
profaneness became less and less terrible, and the infectious air of the
country enfeebled his courage, and relaxed his principles. In short, he had
ceased to love virtue long before he thought of committing actual vice; and the
duties of a manly piety were burdensome to him, before he was so debased as to
offer perfumes, and burn incense on the altar of the licentious goddess Nothing
can be more admirable than the manner in which this allegory is conducted; and
the whole work, not to mention its images, machinery, and other poetical
beauties, is written in the very finest strain of morality. In this latter
respect, it is evidently superior to the works of the ancients, the moral of
which is frequently tainted by the grossness of their mythology. Something of
the purity of the Christian religion may be discovered even in Fenelon's
heathens; and they catch a tincture of piety in passing through the hands of
that amiable prelate.
.

Let us crown ourselves with rose buds before they be withered, said Solomon's
libertine. Alas! he did not reflect, that they withered in the very gathering.
The roses of pleasure seldom last long enough to adorn the brow of him who
plucks them; for they are the only roses which do not retain their sweetness
after they have lost their beauty.

The heathen poets often pressed on their readers the necessity of considering
the shortness of life, as an incentive to pleasure and voluptuousness; lest the
season for indulging in them should pass unimproved. The dark and uncertain
notions, not to say the absolute disbelief, which they entertained of a future
state, is the only apology that can be offered for this reasoning. But while we
censure their tenets, let us not adopt their errors; errors which would be
infinitely more inexcusable in us, who, from the clearer views which revelation
has given us, shall not have their ignorance or their doubts to plead. It were
well if we availed ourselves of that portion of their precept, which inculcates
the improvement of every moment of our time, but not like them to dedicate the
moments so redeemed to the pursuit of sensual and perishable pleasures, but to
the securing of those which are spiritual in their nature, and eternal in their
duration.

If, indeed, like the miserable The Struldburgs. See Voyage to Laputa.
beings imagined by Swift, with a view to cure us of the irrational desire
after immoderate length of days, we were condemned to a wretched earthly
immortality, we should have an excuse for spending some portion of our time in
dissipation, as we might then pretend, with some color of reason, that we
proposed, at a distant period, to enter on a better course of action. Or if we
never formed any such resolution, it would make no material difference to
beings, whose state was already unalterably fixed. But of the scanty portion of
days assigned to our lot, not one should be lost in weak and irresolute
procrastination.

Those who have not yet determined on the side of vanity, who, like Herculus,
(before he knew the queen of Lydia, and had learnt to spin) have not resolved
on their choice between VIRTUE and PLEASURE, may reflect, that it is still in
their power to imitate that hero in his noble choice, and in his virtuous
rejection. They may also reflect with grateful triumph, that christianity
furnishes them with a better guide than the tutor of Alcides, and with a surer
light than the doctrines of pagan philosophy.

It is far from my design severely to condemn the innocent pleasures of life; I
would only beg leave to observe, that those which are criminal should never be
allowed; and that even the most innocent will, by immoderate use, soon cease to
be so.

The women of this country were not sent into the world to shun society, but to
embellish it; they were not designed for wilds and solitudes, but for the
amiable and endearing offices of social life. They have useful stations to
fill, and important characters to sustain. They are of a religion which does
not impose penances, but enjoins duties; a religion of perfect purity, but of
perfect benevolence also. A religion which does not condemn its followers to
indolent seclusion from the world, but assigns them the more dangerous though
more honorable province, of living uncorrupted in it. In fine, a religion,
which does not direct them to fly from the multitude, that they may do nothing,
but which positively forbids them to follow a multitude to do evil.

On Conversation.
IT has been advised, and by very respectable authorities too, that in
conversation women should carefully conceal any knowledge or learning they may
happen to possess. I own with submission, that I do not see either the
necessity or propriety of this advice. For if a young lady has that discretion
and modesty, without which all knowledge is little worth, she will never make
an ostentatious parade of it, because she will rather be intent on acquiring
more, than on displaying what she has.

I am at a loss to know why a young female is instructed to exhibit, in the
most advantageous point of view, her skill in music, her singing, dancing,
taste in dress, and her acquaintance with the most ^ashionable games and
amusements, while her piety is to be anxiously concealed, and her knowledge
affectedly disavowed, lest the former should draw on her the appellation of an
enthusiast, or the latter that of a pedant.

In regard to knowledge, why should she forever affect to be on her guard, lest
she should be found guilty of a small portion of it? She need be the less
solicitous about it, as it seldom proves to be so very considerable as to
excite astonishment or admiration: for, after all the acquisitions which her
talents and her studies have enabled her to make, she will, generally speaking,
be found to have less of what is called learning, than a common school boy.

It would be to the last degree presumptuous and absurd, for a young woman to
pretend to give the ton to the company -- to interrupt the pleasure of others,
and her own opportunity of improvement, by talking when she ought to listen --
or to introduce subjects out of the common road, in order to show her own wit,
or to expose the want of it in others: but were the sex to be totally silent
when any topic of literature happens to be discussed in their presence,
conversation would lose much of its vivacity and society would be robbed of one
of its most inte^esting charms.

How easily and effectually may a well-bred woman promote the most useful and
elegant conversation, almost without speaking a word! for the modes of speech
are scarcely more variable than the modes of silence. The silence of listless
ignorance, and the silence of sparkling intelligence, are perhaps as separately
marked, and as distinctly expressed, as the same feelings could have been by
the most unequivocal language. A woman, in a company where she has the least
influence, may promote any subject by a profound and invariable attention,
which shows that she is pleased with it, and by an illuminated countenance,
which proves she understands it. This obliging attention is the most flattering
encouragement in the world to men of sense and letters, to continue any topic
of instruction or entertainment they happen to be engaged in: it owed its
introduction perhaps to accident, the best introduction in the world for a
subject of ingenuity, which, though it could not have been formally proposed
without ped^ntry, may be continued with ease and good humor; but which will be
frequently and effectually stopped by the liftlessness, inattention, or
whispering of silly girls, whose weariness betrays their ignorance, and whose
impatience exposes their ill-breeding. A polite man, however deeply interested
in the subject on which he is conversing, catches at the slightest hint to have
done: a look is a sufficient intimation, and if a pretty simpleton, who sits
near him, seems distraite, he puts an end to his remarks, to the great regret
of the reasonable part of the company, who perhaps might have gained more
improvement by the continuance of such a conversation, than a week's reading
would have yielded them; for it is such company as this, that give an edge to
each other's wit, "as iron sharpeneth iron."

That silence is one of the great arts of conversation is allowed by Cicero
himself, who says, there is not only an art, but even an eloquence in it. And
this opinion is confirmed by a great modern Lord Bacon.
, in the following little anecdote from one of the ancients:

When many Grecian philosophers had a solemn meeting before the ambassador of a
foreign prince, each endeavored to show his parts by the brilliancy of his
conversation, that the ambassador might have something to relate of the Grecian
wisdom. One of them, offended, no doubt, at the loquacity of his companions,
observed a profound silence; when the ambassador, turning to him, asked, But
what have you to say, that I may report it? He made this laconic, but very
pointed reply: Tell your king that you have found one among the Greeks who knew
how to be silent.

There is a quality infinitely more intoxicating to the female mind than
knowledge; this is wit, the most captivating, but the most dreaded of all
talents: the most dangerous to those who have it, and the most feared by those
who have it not. Though it is against all the rules, yet I cannot find in my
heart to abuse this charming quality. He who is grown rich without it, in safe
and sober dullness, shuns it as a disease, and looks upon poverty as its
invariable concomitant. The moralist declaims against it, as the source of
irregularity; and the frugal citizen dreads it more than bankruptcy itself; for
he considers it as the parent of extravagance and beggary. The cynic will ask
of what use it is? Of very little perhaps: no more is a flower garden, and yet
it is allowed as an object of innocent amusement and delightful recreation. A
woman who possesses this quality, has received a most dangerous present,
perhaps not less so than beauty itself: especially if it be not sheathed in a
temper peculiarly inoffensive, chastised by a most correct judgment, and
restrained by more prudence than falls to the common lot.

This talent is more likely to make a woman vain than knowledge; for as wit is
the immediate property of its possessor, and learning is only an acquaintance
with the knowledge of other people, there is much more danger, that we should
be vain of what is our own, than of what we borrow.

But wit, like learning, is not near so common a thing as is imagined. Let not,
therefore, a young lady be alarmed at the acuteness of her own wit, any more
than at the abundance of her own knowledge. The great danger is, lest she
should mistake pertness, flippancy, or imprudence, for this brilliant quality,
or imagine she is witty, only because she is indiscreet. This is very
frequently the case; and this makes the name of wit so cheap, while its real
existence is so rare.

Lest the flattery of her acquaintance, or an overweening opinion of her own
qualifications, should lead some vain and petulant girl into a false notion
that she has a great deal of wit, when she has only a redundancy of animal
spirits, she may not find it useless to attend to the definition of this
quality, by o^^ who had as large a portion of it, as most individuals could
ever boast: It Is not a tale, it is not a jest,
Admired with laughter at a feast,
Nor florid talk, which can that title gain,
The proofs of wit forever must remain.
Neither can that have any place,
At which a virgin hides her face;
Such dross the fire must purge away; it is just
The author blush there, where the reader must.


But those who actually possess this rare talent, cannot be too abstinent in
the use of it. It often makes admirers, but it never makes friends; I mean,
where it is the predominant feature; and the unprotected and defenseless state
of womanhood calls for friendship more than for admiration. She who does not
desire friends, has a sordid and insensible soul; but she who is ambitious of
making every man her admirer, has an invincible vanity, and a cold heart.

But to dwell only on the side of policy, a prudent woman, who has established
the reputation of some genius, will sufficiently maintain it, without keeping
her faculties always on the stretch, to say good things. Nay, if reputation
alone be her object, she will gain a more solid one by her forbearance; as the
wiser part of her acquaintance will ascribe it to the right motive, which is,
not that she has less wit, but that she has more judgment.

The fatal fondness for indulging a spirit of ridicule, and the injur^ous and
irreparable consequences which sometimes attend the too prompt reply, can never
be too seriously or too severely condemned. Not to offend is the first step
toward pleasing. To give pain is as much an offense against humanity, as
against good breedi^ and surely it is as well to abstain from an action because
it is sinful, as because it is unpolite. In company, young ladies would do
well, before they speak, to reflect, if what they are going to say may not
distress some worthy persons present, b^ wounding them in their persons,
families, connexions, or religious opinions. If they find it will touch them in
either of these, I would advise them to suspect, that what they are going to
say, is not so very good a thing as they at first imagined. Nay, if even it was
one of those bright ideas, which Venus has imbued with a fifth part of her
nectar, so much greater will be their merit in suppressing it, if there was a
probability it might offend* ^ndeed if they have the temper and prudence to
make such a previous reflection, they will be more richly rewarded by their own
inward triumph, at having suppressed a lively but severe remark, than they
could have been with the dissembled applauses of the whole company, who, with
that complaisant deceit, which good breeding too much authorizes, affect openly
to admire what they secretly resolve never to forgive.

I have always been delighted with the story of the little girl's eloquence, in
one of the children's tales, who received from a friendly fairy the gift, that
at every word she uttered, pinks, roses, diamonds, and pearls, should drop from
her mouth. The hidden moral appears to be this, that it was the sweetness of
her temper which produced this pretty fanciful effect: for when her malicious
sister desired the same gift from the good natured tiny intelligence, the venom
of her own heart converted it into poisonous and loathsome reptiles.

A man of sense and breeding will sometimes join in the laugh, which has been
raised at his expense, by an ill-natured repartee: but if it was very cutting,
and one of that shocking sort of truths, which, as they can scarcely be
pardoned even in private, ought never to be uttered in public, he does not
laugh because he is pleased, but because he wishes to conceal how much he is
hurt. As the sarcasm was uttered by a lady, so far from seeming to resent it,
he will be the first to commend it; but nothwithstanding that, he will remember
it as a trait of malice, when the whole company shall have forgotten it as a
stroke of wit. Women are so far from being privileged by their sex to say
unhandsome or cruel things, that this is the very circumstance which renders
them more intolerable. When the arrow is lodged in the heart, it is no relief
to him who is wounded, to reflect, that the hand which shot him was a fair one.

Many women, when they have a favorite point to gain, or an earnest wish to
bring any one over to their opinion, often use a very disingenuous method: they
will state a case ambiguously, and then avail themselves of it, in whatever
manner shall best answer their purpose; leaving your mind in a state of
indecision as to their real meaning, while they triumph in the perplexity they
have given you, by the unfair conclusions they draw, from premises equivocally
stated. They will also frequently argue from exceptions instead of rules, and
are astonished when you are not willing to be contented with a prejudice,
instead of a reason.

In a sensible company of both sexes, where women are not restrained by any
other reserve than what their natural modesty imposes -- and where the intimacy
of all parties authorizes the utmost freedom of communication -- should any one
enquire what were the general sentiments on some particular subject, it will, I
believe, commonly happen that the ladies, whose imaginations have kept pace
with the narration, have anticipated its end, and are ready to deliver their
sentiments on it, as soon as it is finished. While some of the male hearers,
whose minds were busied in settling the propriety, comparing the circumstances,
and examining the consistencies of what was said are obliged to pause and
discriminate, before they think of answering. Nothing is so embarrassing as a
variety of matter; and the conversation of women is often more perspicuous,
because it is less labored.

A man of deep reflection, if he does not keep up an intimate commerce with the
world, will be sometimes so entangled in the intricacies of intense thought,
that he will have the appearance of a confused and perplexed expression; while
a sprightly woman will extricate herself with that lively and "rash dexterity,"
which will almost always please, though it is very far from being always right.
It is easier to confound than to convince an opponent; the former may be
effected by a turn that has more happiness than truth in it. Many an excellent
reasoner, well skilled in the theory of the schools, has felt himself
discomfited by a reply, which, though as wide of the mark, and as foreign to
the question, as can be conceived, has disconcerted him more than the most
startling propositon, or the most accurate chain of reasoning could have done;
and he has borne the laugh of his fair antagonist, as well as of the whole
company, though he could not but feel, that his own argument was attended with
the fullest demonstration: so true it is, that it is not always necessary to be
right, in order to be applauded.

But let not a young lady's vanity be too much elated with this false applause,
which is given, not to merit, but to her sex: she has not, perhaps, gained a
victory, though she may be allowed a triumph; and it should humble her to
reflect, that the tribute is paid, not to her strength, but to her weakness. It
is worth while to discriminate between that applause, which is given from the
complaisance of others, and that which is paid to our own merit.

Where great sprightliness is the natural bent of the temper, girls should
endeavor to habituate themselves to a custom of observing, thinking, and
reasoning. I do not mean that they should devote themselves to abstruse
speculation, or the study of logic; but she, who is accustomed to give a due
arrangement to her thoughts, to reason justly and pertinently, on common
affairs, and judiciously to deduce effects from their causes, will be a better
logician tha^ some of those who claim the name, because they have studied the
art: this is being "learned without the rules;" the best definition, perhaps,
of that sort of literature which is properest for the sex. That species of
knowledge, which appears to be the result of reflection rather than of science,
sits peculiarly well on women. It is not uncommon to find a lady, who, though
she does not know a rule of syntax, scarcely ever violates one; and who
constucts every sentence she utters, with more propriety than many a learned
dunce, who has every rule of Aristotle by heart, and who can lace his own
threadbare discourse with the golden shreds of Cicero and Virgil.

It has been objected, and I fear with some reason, that female conversation is
too frequently tinctured with a censorious spirit, and that ladies are seldom
apt to discover much tenderness for the errors of a fallen sister. If it be so,
it is a grievous fault. No arguments can justify, no pleas can extenuate it To
exult over the miseries of an unhappy creature is inhuman: not to compassionate
them is unchristian. The worthy part of the sex always express themselves
humanely on the failings of others, in proportion to their own undeviating
goodness.

And here I cannot help remarking, that young women do not always carefully
distinguish between running into the error of detraction, and its opposite
extreme of indiscriminate applause. This proceeds from the false idea they
entertain, that the direct contrary to what is wrong, must be right. Thus the
dread of being only suspected of one fault, makes them actually guilty of
another. The desire of avoiding the imputation of envy, impels them to be
insincere; and to establish a reputation for sweetness of temper and
generosity, they affect sometimes to speak of very indifferent characters with
the most extravagant applause. With such the hyperbole is a favorite figure;
and every degree of comparison, but the superlative, is rejected, as cold and
inexpressive. But this habit of exaggeration greatly weakens their credit, and
destroys the weight of their opinion on other occasions; for people very soon
discover what degree of faith is to be given both to their judgment and
veracity. And those of real merit will no more be flattered by that
approbation, which cannot distinguish the value of what it praises, than the
celebrated painter must have been at the judgment passed on his works by an
ignorant spectator, who, being asked what he thought of such and such very
capital but very different pieces, cried out in an affected rapture, "All
alike! all alike!"

It has been proposed to the young, as a maxim of supreme wisdom, to manage so
dexterously in conversation, as to appear to be well acquainted with subjects,
of which they are totally ignorant; and this, by affecting silence in regard to
those, on which they are known to excel. -- But why counsel this disingenuous
fraud? Why add to the numberless arts of deceit, this practice of deceiving, as
it were, on a settled principle? If to disavow the knowledge they really have,
be a culpable affectation, then certainly to insinuate an idea of their skill
where they are actually ignorant, is a most unworthy artifice.

But of all the qualifications for conversation, humility, if not the most
brilliant, is the safest, the most amiable, and the most feminine. The
affectation of introducing subjects, with which others are unacquainted, and of
displaying talents superior to the rest of the company, is as dangerous as it
is foolish.

There are many, who never can forgive another for being more agreeable and
more accomplished than themselves, and who can pardon any offense rather than
an eclipsing merit. Had the nightingale in the fable conquered his vanity, and
resisted the temptation of showing a fine voice, he might have escaped the
talons of the hawk. The melody of his singing was the cause of his destruction;
his merit brought him into danger, and his vanity cost him his life.

On Envy.
Envy came next -- Envy with squinting eyes,
Sick of a strange disease, his neighbor's health;
Best then he lives, when any better dies,
Is never poor but in another's wealth:
On best men's harms and griefs he feeds his fill,
Else his own maw does eat with spiteful will;
Ill must the temper be, where diet is so ill.
FLETCHER'S PURPLE ISLAND.
"ENVY," says Lord Bacon, "has no holidays." There cannot, perhaps, be a more
lively and striking description of the miserable state of mind those endure,
who are tormented with this vice. A spirit of emulation has been supposed to be
the source of the greatest improvements; and there is no doubt but the warmest
rivalship will produce the most excellent effects; but it is to be feared, that
a perpetual state of contest will injure the temper so essentially, that the
mischief will hardly be counter-balanced by any other advantages. Those, whose
progress is the most rapid, will be apt to despise their less successful
competitors, who, in return, will feel the bitterest resentment against their
more fortunate rivals. Among persons of real goodness, this jealousy and
contempt can never be equally felt; because every advancement in piety will be
attended with a proportionable increase of humility, which will lead them to
contemplate their own improvements with modesty, and to view with charity the
miscarriages of others.

When an envious man is melancholy, one may ask him, in the words of Bion, what
evil has befallen himself, or what good has happened to another? This last is
the scale by which he principally measures his felicity, and the very smiles of
his friends are so many deductions from his own happiness. The wants of others
are the standard by which he rates his own wealth; and he estimates his riches
not so much by his own possessions, as by the necessities of his neighbors.

When the malevolent intend to strike a very deep and dangerous stroke of
malice, they generally begin the most remotely in the world, from the subject
nearest their hearts. They set out with commending the object of their envy for
some trifling quality or advantage, which it is scarcely worth while to
possess: they next proceed to make a general profession of their own good will
and regard for him; thus artfully removing any suspicion of their design, and
clearing all obstructions for the insidious stab they are about to give: for
who will ^uspect them of an intention to injure the object of their peculiar
and professed esteem? the hearer's belief of the fact grows in proportion to
the seeming reluctance with which it is told, and to the conviction he has,
that the relater is not influenced by any private pique, or personal
resentment; but that the confession is extorted from him sorely against his
inclination, and purely on account of his zeal for truth.

Anger is less reasonable and more sincere than envy. -- Anger breaks out
abruptly; envy is a great prefacer: anger wishes to be understood at once; envy
is fond of remote hints and ambiguities; but, obscure as its oracles are, it
never ceases to deliver them till they are perfectly comprehended: anger
repeats the same circumstances over again; envy invents new ones at every fresh
recital: anger gives a broken, vehement, and interrupted narrative; envy tells
a more consistent and more probable, though a falser tale: anger is excessively
imprudent; for it is impatient to disclose every thing it knows; envy is
discreet; for it has a great deal to hide: anger never consults times or
seasons; envy waits for the lucky moment, when the wound it meditates may be
made the most exquisitely painful, and the most incurably deep: anger uses more
invective; envy does more mischief: simple anger soon runs itself out of
breath, and is exhausted at the end of its tale; but it is for that chosen
period that envy has treasured up the most barbed arrow in its whole quiver:
anger puts a man out of himself; but the truly malicious generally preserve the
appearance of self-possession, or they could not so effectually injure. -- The
angry man sets out by destroying his whole credit with you at once; for he very
frankly confesses his abhorrence and detestation of the object of his abuse;
while the envious man carefully suppresses all his own share in the affair. --
The angry man d^feats the end of his resentment, by keeping himself continually
before your eyes, instead of his enemy; while the envious man artfully brings
forward the object of his malice, and keeps himself out of sight. -- The angry
man talks loudly of his own wrongs; the envious of his adversary's injustice.
-- A passionate person, if his resentments are not complicated with malice,
divides his time between sinning and sorrowing; and as the irascible passions
cannot constantly be at work, his heart may sometimes get a holiday. -- Anger
is a violent act, envy a constant habit: -- no one can be always angry, but he
may be always envious: -- an angry man's enmity (if he be generous) will
subside when the object of his resentment becomes unfortunate; but the envious
man can extract food from his malice out of calamity itself, if he finds his
adversary bea^s it with dignity, or is pitied or assisted in it. The rage of
the passionate man is totally extinguished by the death of his enemy: but the
hatred of the malicious is not buried even in the grave of his rival: he will
envy the good name he has left behind him; he will envy him the tears of his
widow, and the prosperity of his children, the esteem of his friends, the
praises of his epitaph -- nay, the very magnificence of his funeral.

"The ear of jealousy hears all things," (says the wise man) frequently I
believe more than is uttered, which makes the company of persons infected with
it still more dangerous.

When you tell those of a malicious turn, any circumstance that has happened to
another, though they perfectly know of whom you are speaking, they often affect
to be at a loss, to forget his name, or to misapprehend you in some respect or
other; and this, merely to have an apportunity of slily gratifying their
malice, by mentioning some unhappy defect or personal infirmity he labors
under; and not contented "to tack his every error to his name," they will by
way of farther explanation, have recourse to the faults of his father, or the
misfortunes of his family; and this, with all the seeming simplicity and
candor in the world, merely for the sake of preventing mistakes, and to clear
up every doubt of his identy. -- If you are speaking of a lady, for instance,
they will perhaps embellish their enquiries, by asking, if you mean her, whose
great grandfather was a bankrupt, though she has the vanity to keep a chariot,
while others who are much better born walk on foot; for they will afterward
recollect, that you may possibly mean her cousin, of the same name, whose
mother was suspected of such or such an indiscretion, though the daughter had
the luck to make her fortune by marrying, while her betters are overlooked.

To hint at a fault, does more mischief than speaking out; for whatever is left
for the imagination to finish, will not fail to be overdone: every hiatus will
be more than filled up, and every pause more than supplied. There is less
malice, and less mischief too, in telling a man's name, than the initials of
it; as a worthier person may be involved in the most disgraceful suspicions by
such a dangerous ambiguity.

It is not uncommon for the envious, after having attempted to deface the
fairest character so industriously, that they are afraid you will begin to
detect their malice, to endeavor to remove your suspicions effectually, by
assuring you, that what they have just related is only the popular opinion;
they themselves can never believe things are so bad as they are said to be; for
their part, it is a rule with them always to hope the best. It is their way
never to believe or report ill of any one. They will, however, mention the
story in all companies, that they may do their friend the service of protesting
their disbelief of it. More reputations are thus hinted away by false friends,
than are openly destroyed by public enemies. An if, or a but, or a mortified
look, or a languid defense, or an ambiguous shake of the head, or a hasty word
affectedly recalled, will demolish a character more effectually, than the whole
artillery of malice, when openly levelled against it.

It is not that envy never praises: No, that would be making a public
profession of itself, and advertising its own malignity; whereas the greatest
success of its efforts depends on the concealment of their end. When envy
intends to strike a stroke of Machiavelian policy, it sometimes affects the
language of the most exaggerated applause; though it generally takes care, that
the subject of its panegyric shall be a very indifferent and common character,
so that it is well aware none of its praises will stick.

It is the unhappy nature of envy not to be contented with positive misery, but
to be continually aggravating its own torments, by comparing them with the
felicities of others. The eyes of envy are perpetually fixed on the object
which disturbs it, nor can it avert them from it, though to procure itself the
relief of a temporary forgetfulness. On seeing the innocence of the first pair,
Aside the Devil turned,
For envy, yet with jealous leer malign,
Eyed them askance.


As this enormous sin chiefly instigated the revolt, and brought on the ruin,
of the angelic spirits, so it is not improbable, that it will be a principal
instrument of misery in a future world, for the envious to compare their
desperate condition with the happiness of the children of God, and to heighten
their actual wretchedness by reflecting on what they have lost.

Perhaps envy, like lying and ingratitude, is practiced with more frequency,
because it is practiced with impunity; but there being no human laws against
these crimes, is so far from an inducement to commit them, that this very
consideration would be sufficient to deter the wise and good, if all others
were ineffectual; for of how heinous a nature must those sins be, which are
judged above the reach of human punishment, and are reserved for the final
justice of God himself!

On the Danger of Sentimental or Romantic Connexions.
AMONG the many evils which prevail under the sun, the abuse of words is not
the least considerable. By the influence of time, and the perversion of
fashion, the plainest and most unequivocal may be so altered, as to have a
meaning assigned them almost diametrically opposite to their original
signification.

The present age may be termed, by way of distinction, the age of sentiment, a
word, which, in the implication it now bears, was unknown to our plain
ancestors. Sentiment is the varnish of virtue, to conceal the deformity of
vice; and it is not uncommon for the same persons to make a jest of religion,
to break through the most solemn ties and engagements, to practice every art of
latent fraud and open seduction, and yet to value themselves on speaking and
writing sentimentally.

But this resined jargon, which has infected letters, and tainted morals, is
chiefly admired and adopted by young ladies of a certain turn, who read
sentimental books, write sentimental letters, and contract sentimental
friendships.

Error is never likely to do so much mischief, as when it disguises its real
tendency, and puts on an engaging and attractive appearance. Many a young
woman, who would be shocked at the imputation of an intrigue, is extremely
flattered at the idea of a sentimental connection, though perhaps with a
dangerous and designing man, who, by putting on this mask of plausibility and
virtue, disarms her of her prudence, lays her apprehensions asleep, and
involves her in misery -- misery the more inevitable, because unsuspected. For
she who apprehends no danger, will not think it necessary to be always upon her
guard; but will rather invite than avoid the ruin, which comes under so
specious and so fair a form.

Such an engagement will be infinitely dearer to her vanity, than an avowed and
authorized attachment; for one of these sentimental lovers will not scruple
very seriously to assure a credulous girl, that her unparalleled merit entitles
her to the adoration of the whole world, and that the universal homage of
mankind is nothing more than the unavoidable tribute extorted by her charms. No
wonder then she should be so easily prevailed on to believe, that an individual
is captivated by perfections which might enslave a million. But she should
remember, that he, who endeavors to intoxicate her with adulation, intends one
day most effectually to humble her. For an artful man has always a secret
design to pay himself in future for every present sacrifice. And this
prodigality of praise, which he now appears to lavish with such thoughtless
profusion, is, in fact, a sum economically laid out to supply his future
necessities: of this sum he keeps an exact estimate, and at some distant day
promises himself the most exorbitant interest for it. If he has address and
conduct, and the object of his pursuit much vanity, and some sensibility, he
seldom fails of success; for so powerful will be his ascendency over her mind,
that she will soon adopt his notions and opinions. Indeed it is more than
probable she possessed most of them before, having gradually acquired them in
her initiation into the sentimental character. To maintain that character with
dignity and propriety, it is necessary she should entertain the most elevated
ideas of disproportionate alliances, and disinterested love; and consider
fortune, rank, and reputation, as mere chimerical distinctions and vulgar
prejudices.

The lover, deeply versed in all the obliquities of fraud, and skilled to wind
himself into every avenue of the heart, which indiscretion has left unguarded,
soon discovers on which side it is most accessible. He avails himself of this
weakness by addressing her in a language exactly consonant to her own ideas. He
attacks her with her own weapons, and opposes rhapsody to sentiment. He
professes so sovereign a contempt for the paltry concerns of money, that she
thinks it her duty to reward him for so generous a renunciation. Every plea he
artfully advances of his own unworthiness, is considered by her as a fresh
demand, which her gratitude must answer. And she makes it a point of honor to
sacrifice to him that fortune which he is too noble to regard. These
professions of humility are the common artifice of the vain; and these
protestations of generosity the refuge of the rapacious. And among its many
smooth mischiefs, it is one of the sure and successful frauds of sentiment, to
affect the most frigid indifference to those external and pecuniary advantages,
which it is its great and real object to obtain.

A sentimental girl very rarely entertains any doubt of her personal beauty;
for she has been daily accustomed to contemplate it herself, and to hear of it
from others. She will not therefore be very solicitous for the confirmation of
a truth so self-evident; but she suspects, that her pretensions to
understanding are more likely to be disputed, and, for that reason, greedily
devours every compliment offered to those perfections, which are less obvious
and more refined. She is persuaded that men need only open their eyes to decide
on her beauty, while it will be the most convincing proof of the taste, sense,
and elegance of her admirer, that he can discern and flatter those qualities in
her. A man of the character here supposed, will easily insinuate himself into
her affections, by means of this latent but leading foible, which may be called
the guiding clue to a sentimental heart. He will affect to overlook that beauty
which attracts common eyes, and ensnares common hearts, while he will bestow
the most delicate praises on the beauties of her mind, and finish the climax of
adulation, by hinting that she is superior to it.

And when he tells her she hates flattery,
She says she does, being then most flattered.
But nothing, in general, can end less delightfully than these sublime
attachments, even where no acts of seduction are ever practiced, but they are
suffered, like mere sublunary connexions, to terminate in the vulgar
catastrophe of marriage. That wealth, which lately seemed to be looked on with
ineffable contempt by the lover, now appears to be the principal attraction in
the eyes of the husband: and he, who but a few short weeks before, in a
transport of sentimental generosity, wished her to have been a village maid,
with no portion but her crook and her beauty, and that they might spend their
days in pastoral love and innocence, has now lost all relish for the Arcadian
life, or any other life in which she must be his companion.

On the other hand, she who was lately An angel called, and angel-like adored,
is shocked to find herself at once stripped of all her celestial attributes.
This late divinity, who scarcely yielded to her sisters of the sky, now finds
herself of less importance in the esteem of the man she has chosen, than any
other mere mortal woman. No longer is she gratified with the tear of
counterfeited passion, the sigh of dissembled rapture, or the language of
premeditated adoration. No longer is the altar of her vanity loaded with the
oblations of fictitious fondness, the incense of falsehood, or the sacrifice of
flattery. -- Her apotheosis is ended! She feels herself degraded from the
dignities and privileges of a goddess, to all the imperfections, vanities, and
weaknesses of a slighted woman, and a neglected wife. Her faults, which were so
lately overlooked, or mistaken for virtues, are now, as Cassius says, set in a
note-book. The passion, which was vowed eternal, lasted only a few short weeks,
and the indifference, which was so far from being included in the bargain, that
it was not so much as suspected, follows them through the whole tiresome
journey of their insipid, vacant, joyless existence.

Thus much for the completion of the sentimental history. If we ^^ace it back
to its beginning, we shall find, that a damsel of this cast had her head
originally turned by pernicious reading, and her insanity confirmed by
imprudent friendships. She never fails to select a beloved confidante of her
own turn and humor, though, if she can help it, not quite so handsome as
herself. A violent intimacy ensues, or, to speak the language of sentiment, an
intimate union of souls immediately takes place, which is wrought to the
highest pitch, by a secret and voluminous correspondence, though they live in
the same street, or perhaps in the same house. This is the fuel which
principally feeds and supplies the dangerous flame of sentiment. In this
correspondence the two friends encourage each other in the falsest notions
imaginable. They represent romantic love as the great important business of
human life, and describe all the other concerns of it as too low and paltry to
merit the attention of such elevated beings, and fit only to employ the
daughters of the plodding vulgar. In these letters, family affairs are
misrepresented, family secrets divulged, and family misfortunes aggravated.
They are filled with vows of eternal amity, and protestations of never-ending
love. But interjections and quotations are the principal embellishments of
these very sublime epistles. Every panegyric contained in them is extravagant
and hyperbolical, every censure exaggerated and excessive. In a favorite,
every frailty is heightened into a perfection, and in a foe, degraded into a
crime. The dramatic poets, especially the most tender and romantic, are quoted
in almost every line, and every pompous or pathetic thought is forced to give
up its natural and obvious meaning, and, with all the violence of
misapplication, is compelled to suit some circumstance of imaginary woe of the
fair transcriber. Alicia is not too mad for her heroics, nor Monimia too mild
for her soft emotions.

Fathers have flinty hearts, is an expression worth an empire, and is always
used with peculiar emphasis and enthusiasm. For a favorite topic of these
epistles is the grovelling spirit and sordid temper of the parents, who will be
sure to find no quarter at the hands of their daughters, should they presume to
be so unreasonable as to direct their course of reading, interfere in their
choice of friends, or interrupt their very important correspondence. But as
these young ladies are fertile in expedients, and as their genius is never more
agreeably exercised than in finding resources, they are not without their
secret exultation, in case either of the above interesting events should
happen, as they carry with them a certain air of tyranny and persecution which
is very delightful. For a prohibited correspondence is one of the great
incidents of a sentimental life -- and a letter clandestinely received, the
supreme felicity of a sentimental lady.

Nothing can equal the astonishment of these soaring spirits, when their plain
friends or prudent relations presume to remonstrate with them on any
impropriety in their conduct. But if these worthy people happen to be somewhat
advanced in life, their contempt is then a little softened by pity, at the
reflection that such very antiquated, poor creatures should pretend to judge
what is fit or unfit for ladies of their great refinement, sense, and reading.
They consider them as wretches utterly ignorant of the sublime pleasures of a
delicate and exalted passion; as tyrants whose authority is to be contemned,
and as spies whose vigilance is to be eluded. The prudence of these worthy
friends they term suspicion, and their experience dotage. For they are
persuaded, that the face of things has so totally changed, since their parents
were young, that though they might then judge tolerably for themselves, yet
they are now (with all their advantages of knowledge and observation) by no
means qualified to direct their more enlightened daughters; who, if they have
made a great progress in the sentimental walk, will be no more influenced by
the advice of their mother, than they would go abroad in her laced pinner, or
her brocade suit.

But young people never show their folly and ignorance more conspicuously, than
by this over confidence in their own judgment, and this haughty disdain of the
opinion of those who have known more days. Youth has a quickness of
apprehension, which it is very apt to mistake for an acuteness of penetration.
But youth, like cunning, though very conceited, is very short-sighted, and
never more so than when it disregards the instructions of the wise, and the
admonitions of the aged. The same vices and follies influenced the human heart
in their day, which influence it now, and nearly in the same manner. One, who
well knew the world and its various vanities, has said: The thing which has
been, it is that which shall be, and that which is done is that which shall be
done, and there is no new thing under the sun.

It is also a part of the sentimental character, to imagine that none but the
young and the beautiful have any right to the pleasures of society, or even to
the common benefits and blessings of life. Ladies of this turn also affect the
most lofty disregard for useful qualities and domestic virtues; and this is a
natural consequence; for as this sort of sentiment is only a word for idleness,
she who is constantly and usefully employed, has neither leisure nor propensity
to cultivate it.

A sentimental lady principally values herself on the enlargement of her
notions, and her liberal way of thinking. This superiority of soul chiefly
manifests itself in the contempt of these minute delicacies and little
decorums, which, trifling as they may be thought, tend at once to dignify the
character, and to restrain the levity of the younger part of the sex.

Perhaps the error here complained of, originates in mistaking sentiment and
principle for each other. Now I conc^ive them to be extremely different.
Sentiment is the virtue of ideas, and principle the virtue of action. Sentiment
has its seat in the head, principle in the heart. Sentiment suggests fine
harangues and subtle distinctions; principle conceives just notions, and
performs good actions in consequence of them. Sentiment refines away the
simplicity of truth and the plainness of piety; and, as a celebrated wit See
Voltaire's Prophecy concerning Rousseau.
has remarked of his no less celebrated cotemporary, gives us virtue in words
and vice in deeds. Sentiment may be called the Athenian who knew what was
right, and principle the Lacedemonian who practiced it.

But these qualities will be better exemplified by an attentive consideration
of two admirably drawn characters of ^ilton, which are beautifully, delicately,
and distinctly marked. These are, Belial, who may not improperly be called the
Demon of Sentiment; and Abdiel, who may be termed the Angel of Principle.

Survey the picture of Belial, drawn by the sublimest hand that ever held the
poetic pencil.

A fairer person lost not heaven; he seemed
For dignity composed, and high exploit;
But all was false and hollow -- though his tongue
Dropped manna, and could make the worse appear
The better reason, to perplex and dash
Maturest counsels; for his thoughts were low;
To vice industrious, but to noble deeds
Timorous and slothful; yet he pleased the ear.
PARADISE LOST, B. II. Here is a lively and exquisite representation of art,
subtilty, wit, fine breeding, and polished manners: on the whole, of a very
accomplished and sentimental spirit.

Now turn to the artless, upright, and unsophisticated Abdiel, Faithful found
--
Among the faithless, faithful only he --
Among innumerable false, unmoved,
Unshaken, unseduc'd, unter^ed;
His loyalty he kept, his love, his zeal.
Nor number, nor example with him wrought
To swerve from truth, or change his constant mind
Though single,
BOOK V.

But it is not from these descriptions just and striking as they are, that
their characters are so perfectly known, as from an examination of their
conduct through the remainder of this divine work; in which it is well worth
while to remark the consonancy of their actions, with what the above pictures
seem to promise. It will also be observed, that the contrast between them is
kept up throughout, with the utmost exactness of delineation, and the most
animated strength of coloring. On a review it will be found, that Belial
talked all, and Abdiel did all. The former, With words still clothed in
reason's guise,
Counseled ignoble ease and peaceful sloth,
Not peace.
BOOK II.

In Abdiel you will constantly find the eloquence of action. When tempted by
the rebellious angels, with what retorted scorn, with what honest indignation
he deserts their multitudes, and retreats from their contagious society!

All night the dreadless angel unpursued
Through heavens wide champain held his way.
BOOK VI. No wonder he was received with such acclamations of joy by the
celestial powers, when there was But one
Yes, of so many myriads fallen, but one
Returned not lost.
IBID.

And afterward, in a close contest with the archfiend, A noble stroke he
lifted high,
On the proud crest of Satan.
IBID.

What was the effect of this courage of the vigilant and active seraph?

Amazement seized
The rebel throne, but greatest rage to see
Thus foiled their mightiest.
Abdiel had the superiority of Belial as much in the warlike combat, as in the
peaceful counsels.

Nor was it aught but just,
That he, who in debate of truth had won,
Should win in arms -- in both disputes alike Victor.
But notwithstanding I have spoken with some asperity against sentiment, as
opposed to principle, yet I am convinced, that true genuine sentiment (not the
sort I have been describing) may be so connected with principle, as to bestow
on it its brightest luster, and its most captivating graces. And enthusiasm is
so far from being disagreeable, that a portion of it is perhaps indispensably
necessary in an engaging woman. But it must be the enthuasiasm of the heart,
not of the senses* it must be the enthusiasm which grows up with a feeling
mind, and is cherished by a virtuous education -- not that which is compounded
of irregular passions, and artificially refined by books of unnatural fiction
and improbable adventure. I will even go so far as to assert, that a young
woman cannot have any real greatness of soul, or true clevation of principle,
if she has not a tincture of what the vulgar would call Romance, but which
persons of a certain way of thinking will discern to p^oceed from those fine
feelings, and that charming sensibility, without which, though a woman may be
worthy, yet she can never be amiable.

But this dangerous merit cannot be too rigidly watched, as it is very apt to
lead those who possess it into inconveniences from which less interesting
characters are happily exempt. Young women of strong sensibility may be carried
by the very ^miableness of this temper, into the most al^rming extremes. Their
tastes are passions. They love and hate with all their hearts, and scarcely
suffer themselves to feel a reasonable preference, before it strengthens into a
violent attachment.

When an innocent girl, of this open, trusting, tender heart, happens to meet
with one of her own sex and age, whose address and manners are engaging, she is
instantly seized with an ardent desire to commence a friendship with her. She
feels the most lively impatience at the restraints of company, and the decorums
of ceremony. She longs to be alone with her, longs to assure her of the warmth
of her tenderness, and generously ascribes to the fair stranger all the good
qualities she feels in her own heart, or rather all those which she has met
with, in her reading, dispersed in a variety of heroines. She is persuaded,
that her new friend unites them all in herself, because she carries in her
prepossessing countenance the promise of them all. How cruel and how censorious
would this inexperienced girl think her mother was, who should venture to hint,
that the agreeable unknown had defects in her temper, or exceptions in her
character! She would mistake these hints of discretion for the insinuations of
an uncharitable disposition. At first she would perhaps listen to them with a
generous impatience, and afterward with a cold and silent disdain. She would
despise them as the effect of prejudice, misrepresentation, or ignorance. The
more aggravated the censure, the more vehemently would she protest in secret,
that her friendship for this dear injured creature (who is raised much higher
in her esteem by such injurious suspicions) shall know no bounds, as she is
assured it can know no end.

Yet this trusting confidence, this honest indiscretion, is, at this early
period of life, as amiable as it is natural; and will, if wisely cultivated,
produce, at its proper season, fruits infinitely more valuable than all the
guarded circumspection of premature, and therefore artificial prudence. Men, I
believe, are seldom struck with these sudden prepossessions in favor of each
other. They are not so unsuspecting, nor so easily led away by the predominance
of fancy. They engage more warily, and pass through the several stages of
acquaintance, intimacy, and confidence, by flower gradations; but women, if
they are sometimes deceived in the choice of a friend, enjoy even then an
higher degree of satisfaction, than if they never trusted. For to be always
clad in the burdensome armor of suspicion, is more painful and inconvenient,
than to run the hazard of suffering now and then a transient injury.

But the above observations only extend to the young and the inexperienced; for
I am very certain, that women are capable of as faithful and as durable
friendship as any of the other sex. They can enter not only into all the
enthusiastic tenderness, but into all the solid fidelity of attachment. And if
we cannot oppose instances of equal weight with those of Nysus and Euryalus,
Theseus and Pirithous, Pylades and Orestes, let it be remembered, that it is
because the recorders of those characters were men, and that the very existence
of them is merely poetical.

On True and False Meekness.
A LOW voice and soft address are the common indications of a well-bred woman,
and should seem to be the natural effects of a meek and quiet spirit; but they
are only the outward and visible signs of it: for they are no more meekness
itself, than a red coat is courage, or a black one devotion.

Yet nothing is more common than to mistake the sign for the thing itself; nor
is any practice more frequent, than that of endeavoring to acquire the
exterior mark, without once thinking to labor after the interior grace. Surely
this is beginning at the wrong end, like attacking the symptom, and neglecting
the disease. To regulate the features, while the soul is in tumults, or to
command the voice, while the passions are without restraint, is as idle as
throwing odours into a stream when the source is polluted.

The sapient king, who knew better than any man the nature and the power of
beauty, has assured us, that the temper of the mind has a strong influence upon
the features: "Wisdom makes the face to shine," says that exquisite judge; and
surely no part of wisdom is more likely to produce this amiable effect, than a
placid serenity of soul.

It will not be difficult to distinguish the true from the artificial meekness.
The former is universal and habitual; the latter, local and temporary. Every
young female may keep this rule by her, to enable her to form a just judgment
of her own temper: if she is not as gentle to her chambermaid, as she is to her
visitor, she may rest satisfied, that the spirit of gentleness is not in her.

Who would not be shocked and disappointed to behold a well-bred young lady,
soft and engaging as the doves of Venus, displaying a thousand graces and
attractions to win the hearts of a large company -- and the instant they are
gone, to see her look mad as the Pythian maid, and all the frightened graces
driven from her furious countenance, only because her gown was brought home a
quarter of an hour later than she expected, or her riband sent half a shade
lighter or darker than she ordered?

All men's characters are said to proceed from their servants; and this is more
particularly true of ladies: for as their situations are more domestic, they
lie more open to the inspection of their families, to whom their real
characters are easily and perfectly known; for they seldom think it worth while
to practice any disguise before those, whose good opinion they do not value,
and who are obliged to submit to their most insupportable humors, because they
are paid for it.

Among women of breeding, the exterior of gentleness is so uniformly assumed,
and the whole manner is so perfectly level and uni, that it is next to
impossible for a stranger to know any thing of their true dispositions by
conversing with them: and even the very features are so exactly regulated, that
physiognomy, which may sometimes be trusted among the vulgar, is, with the
polite, a most lying science.

A very termagant woman, if she happens also to be a very artful one, will be
conscious she has so much to conceal, that the dread of betraying her real
temper, will make her put on an over-acted softness, which, from its very
excess, may be distinguished from the natural by a penetrating eye. That
gentleness is ever liable to be suspected for the counterfeited, which is so
excessive as to deprive people of the proper use of speech, and motion, or
which, as (...) says, makes them lisp and amble, and nickname ^'s creatures.

The countenance and manners of some very fashionable persons may be compared
to the inscriptions on their monuments, which speak nothing but good of what is
within; but he who knows any thing of the world, or of the human heart, will no
more trust to the countenance than he will depend on the epitaph.

Among the various artifices of factitious meekness, one of the most frequent
and most plausible, is that of affecting to be always equally delighted with
all persons and all characters. The society of these languid beings is without
confidence; their friendship without attachment; and their love without
affection, or even preference. This insipid mode of conduct may be safe; but I
cannot think it has either taste, sense, or principle in it.

These uniformly smiling and approving ladies, who have neither the noble
courage to reprehend vice, nor the generous warmth to bear their honest
testimony in the cause of virtue, conclude every one to be ill-natured who has
any penetration, and look upon a distinguishing judgment as want of tenderness.
But they should learn, that this discernment does not always proceed from an
uncharitable temper, but from that long experience and thorough knowledge of
the world, which lead these who have it, to scrutinize into the conduct and
disposition of men, before they trust entirely to those fair appearances, which
sometimes veil the most insidious purposes.

We are perpetually mistaking the qualities and dispositions of our own hearts.
We elevate our failings into virtues, and qualify our vices into weaknesses:
and hence arise so many false judgments respecting meekness. Self-ignorance is
at the root of all this mischief. Many ladies complain, that, for their part,
their spirit is so meek they can bear nothing; whereas, if they spoke truth,
they would say, their spirit is so high and unbroken, that they can bear
nothing. Strange* to plead their meekness as a reason why they cannot endure to
be crossed, and to produce their impatience of contradiction* as a proof of
their gentleness!

Meekness, like most other virtues, has certain limits, which it no sooner
exceeds than it becomes criminal. Servility of spirit is not gentleness, but
weakness; and if allowed, under the specious appearances it sometimes puts on,
will lead to the most dangerous compliances. She who hears innocence maligned
without vindicating it, falsehood asserted without contradicting it, or
religion profaned without resenting it, is not gentle, but wicked.

To give up the cause of an innocent, injured friend, if the popular cry
happens to be against him, is the most disgraceful weakness. This was the case
of Madame de Maintenon. She loved the character and admired the talents of
Racine; she caressed him while he had no enemies, but wanted the greatness of
mind, or rather the common justice, to protect him against their resentment,
when he had; and her favorite was abandoned to the suspicious jealousy of the
king, when a prudent remonstrance might have preserved him. -- But her
tameness, if not absolute connivance in the great massacre of the protestants,
in whose church she had been bred, is a far more guilty instance of her
weakness; an instance which, in spite of all her devotional zeal and
incomparable prudence, will disqualify her from shining in the annals of good
women, however she may be entitled to figure among the great and the fortunate.
Compare her conduct with that of her undaunted and pious countryman and
cotemporary, Bougi, who, when Louis would have prevailed on him to renounce his
religion for a commission or a government, nobly replied, "If I could be
persuaded to betray my God for a marshal's staff, I might betray my king for a
bribe of much less consequence."

Meekness is imperfect, if it be not both active and passive -- if it will not
enable us to subdue our own passions and resentments, as well as qualify us to
bear patiently the passions and resentments of others.

Before we give way to any violent emotion of anger, it would, perhaps, be
worth while to consider the value of the object which excites it, and to
reflect for a moment, whether the thing we so ardently desire, or so vehemently
resent, be really of as much importance to us, as that delightful tranquillity
of soul, which we renounce in pursuit of it. If, on a fair calculation, we find
we are not likely to get as much as we are sure to lose, then, putting all
religious considerations out of the question, common sense and human policy
will tell us, we have made a foolish and unprofitable exchange. Inward quiet is
a part of one's self; the object of our resentment may be only a matter of
opinion; and certainly, what makes a portion of our actual happiness ought to
be too dear to us, to be sacrificed for a trifling, foreign, perhaps imaginary
good.

The most pointed satire I remember to have read, on a mind enslaved by anger,
is an observation of Seneca's. "Alexander," said he, had two friends, Clitus
and Lysimachus; the one he exposed to a lion, the other to himself: he who was
turned loose to the beast, escaped; but Clitus was murdered: for he was turned
loose to an angry man.

A passionate woman's happiness is never in her own keeping: it is the sport of
accident, and the slave of events. It is in the power of her acquaintance, her
servants, but chiefly of her enemies; and all her comforts lie at the mercy of
others. So far from being willing to learn of him who was meek and lowly, she
considers meekness as the want of a becoming spirit, and lowliness as a
despicable and vulgar meanness. And an imperious woman will so little covet the
ornament of a meek and quiet spirit, that it is almost the only ornament she
will not be solicitous to wear. But resentment is a very expensive vice. How
dearly has it cost its votaries, even from the sin of Cain, the first offender
in this kind! "It is cheaper (says a pious writer) to forgive, and save the
charges."

If it were only for mere human reasons, it would turn to a better account to
be patient: nothing defeats the malice of an enemy like a spirit of
forbearance: the return of rage for rage cannot be so effectually provoking.
True gentleness, like an impenetrable armor, repels the most pointed shafts of
malice: they cannot pierce through this invulnerable shield, but either fall
hurtless to the ground, or return, to wound the hand that shot them.

A meek spirit will not look out of itself for happiness, because it finds a
constant banquet at home; yet, by a sort of divine alchymy, it will convert all
external events to its own profit, and be able to deduce some good, even from
the most unpromising; it will extract comfort and satisfaction from the most
barren circumstances: It will suck honey out of the rock, and oil out of the
flinty rock.

But the supreme excellence of this complacent quality is, that it naturally
disposes the mind where it resides, to the practice of every other that is
amiable. Meekness may be called the pioneer of all the other virtues, which
levels every obstruction, and smooths every difficulty that might impede their
entrance, or retard their progress.

The peculiar importance and value of this amiable virtue may be farther seen
in its permanency. Honors and dignities are transient -- beauty and riches
frail and fugacious, to a proverb. Would not the truly wise, therefore, wish to
have some one possession, which they might call their own in the severest
exigencies? But this wish can only be accomplished by acquiring and maintaining
that calm and absolute self-possession, which, as the world had no hand in
giving, so it cannot, by the most malicious exertion of its power, take away.

Thoughts on the Cultivation of the Heart and Temper in the Education of
Daughters.
I HAVE not the foolish presumption to imagine, that I can offer any thing new
on a subject, which has been so successfully treated by many learned and able
writers. I would only, with all possible deference, beg leave to hazard a few
short remarks on that part of the subject of education, which I would call the
education of the heart. I am well aware, that this part also has not been less
skilfully and forcibly discussed than the rest, though I cannot at the same
time, help remarking, that it does not appear to have been so much adopted into
common practice.

It appears then, that notwithstanding the great and real improvements, which
have been made in the affair of female education, and notwithstanding the more
enlarged and generous views of it, which prevail in the present day, there is
still a very material defect, which it is not, in general, enough the object of
attention to remove. This defect seems to consist in this, that too little
regard is paid to the disposition of the mind; that the indications of the
temper are not properly cherished; nor the affections of the heart sufficiently
regulated.

In the first education of girls, as far as the customs, which fashion
establishes, are right, they should undoubtedly be followed. Let the exterior
be made a considerable object of attention; but let it not be the principal,
let it not be the only one. Let the graces be industriously cultivated; but let
them not be cultivated at the expense of the virtues. -- Let the arms, the
head, the whole person be carefully polished; but let not the heart be the only
portion of the human anatomy, which shall be totally overlooked.

The neglect of this cultivation seems to proceed as much from a bad taste, as
from a false principle. The generality of people form their judgment of
education by slight and sudden appearances, which is certainly a wrong way of
determining ^ Music, dancing, and languages, gratify those who teach them, by
perceptible and almost immediate ^ffects* and when there happens to be no
imbecility in the pupil, nor deficiency in the master, every superficial
observer can, in some measure, judge of the progress. The effects of most of
these accomplishments address themselves to the senses; and there are more who
can see and hear, than there are, who can judge and reflect.

Personal perfection is not only more obvious, it is also more rapid; and even
in very accomplished characters, elegance usually precedes principle.

But the heart, that natural seat of evil propensities, that little troublesome
empire of the passions, is led to what is right by slow motions and
imperceptible degrees. It must be admonished by reproof, and allured by
kindness. Its liveliest advances are frequently impeded by the obstinacy of
prejudice, and its brightest promises often obscured by the tempests of
passion. It is slow in its acquisition of virtue, and reluctant in its
approaches to piety.

There is another reason, which proves this mental cultivation to be more
important, as well as more difficult, than any other part of education. In the
usual fashionable accomplishments, the business of acquiring them is almost
always getting forwards, and one difficulty is conquered, before another is
suffered to show itself; for a prudent teacher will level the road his pupil is
to pass and smooth the inequalities which might retard her progress.

But in morals, (which should be the greatest object constantly kept in view)
the task is far more difficult. The unruly and turbulent desires of the heart
are not so obedient; one passion will start up, before another is suppressed.
The subduing Hercules cannot cut off the heads so often as the prolific hydra
can produce them, nor fell the stubborn Antaeus, so fast as he can recruit his
strength, and rise in vigourous and repeated opposition.

If all the accomplishments could be bought at the price of a single virtue,
the purchase would be infinitely dear! And, however startling it may sound, I
think it is, notwithstanding, true, that the labors of a good and wise mother,
who is anxious for her daughter's most important interests, will seem to be at
variance with those of her instructors. She will, doubtless, rejoice at her
progress in any polite art, but she will rejoice with trembling: -- humility
and piety form the solid and durable basis, on which she wishes to raise the
superstructure of the accomplishments; while the accomplishments themselves are
frequently of such an unsteady nature, that if the foundation is not secured,
in proportion as the building is enlarged, it will be overloaded and destroyed
by those very ornaments which were intended to embellish what they have
contributed to ^^in.

The more ostensible qualifications should be carefully regulated, or they will
be in danger of putting to flight the modest train of retreating virtues, which
cannot safely subsist before the bold eye of public observation, or bear the
bolder tongue of impudent and audacious flattery. A tender mother cannot but
feel an honest triumph, in contemplating those excellencies in her daughter
which deserve applause; but she will also shudder at the vanity which that
applause may excite, and at those hitherto unknown ideas which it may awaken.

The master, (it is his interest, and perhaps his duty,) will naturally teach a
girl to set her improvements in the most conspicuous point of light. S^ fair
valoir is the great principle industriously inculcated into her young heart,
and seems to be considered as a kind of fundamental maxim in education. It is,
however, the certain and effectual seed, from which a thousand yet unborn
vanities will sprin^* This dangerous doctrine (which yet is not without its
uses) will be counteracted by the prudent moth^^, not in so many words, but by
a watchful and scarcely perceptible dexterity. Such a one will be more careful
to have the talents of her daughter cultivated, than exhibited.

One would be led to imagine, by the common mode of female education, that life
consisted of one universal holiday, and that the only contest was, who should
be best enabled to excel in the sports and games that were to be celebrated on
it. Merely ornamental accomplishments will but indifferently qualify a woman to
perform the duties of life, though it is highly proper she should possess them,
in order to furnish the amusements of it. But is it right to spend so large a
portion of life without some preparation for the business of living? A lady may
speak a little French and Italian, repeat a few passages in a thea^ical tone,
play and sing, have her dressing room ^ung with her own drawings, and her
person covered with her own tambour work, and may, notwithstanding, have been
very badly educated. Yet I am far from attempting to depreciate the value of
these qualifications: they are most of them not only highly becoming, but often
indispensibly necessary; and a polite education cannot be perfected without
them. But as the world seems to be very well apprised of their importance,
there is the less occasion to insist on their utility. Yet, though well-bred
young women should learn to dance, sing, recite, and draw, the end of a good
education is not, that they may become dancers, singers, players, or painters;
its real object is to make them good daughters, good wives, good mistresses,
good members of society, and good christians. The above qualifications,
therefore, are intended to adorn their leisure, not to employ their lives; for
an amiable and wise woman will always have something better to value herself
on, than these advantages, which, however captivating, are still but
subordinate parts of a truly excellent character.

But I am afraid parents themselves sometimes contribute to the error of which
I am complaining. Do they not often set a higher value on those acquisitions
which are calculated to attract observation, and catch the eye of the
multitude, than on those which are valuable, permanent, and internal? Are they
not sometimes more solicitous about the opinion of others, respecting their
children, than about the real advantage and happiness of the children
themselves? To an injudicious and superficial eye, the best educated girl may
make the least brilliant figure, as she will probably have less flippancy in
her manner, and less repartee in her expression; and her acquirements, to
borrow bishop Sprat's idea, will be rather enamelled than embossed. But her
merit will be known, and acknowledged by all wh^ come near enough to discern,
and have taste enough to distinguish. It will be understood and admired by the
man, whose happiness she is one day to make, whose family she is to govern, and
whose children she is to educate. He will not seek for her in the haunts of
dissipation; for he knows he shall not find her there: but he will seek for her
in the bosom of retirement, in the practice of every domestic virtue, in the
exercise of every amiable accomplishment, exerted in the shade, to enliven
retirement, to heighten the endearing pleasures of social intercourse, and to
embellish the narrow circle of family delights. To this amiable purpose, a
truly good and well educated young lady will dedicate more elegant
accomplishments, instead of exhibiting them to attract admiration, or depress
inferiority.

Young girls, who have more vivacity than understanding, will often make a
sprightly figure in conversation. But this agreeable talent for entertaining
others, is frequently dangerous to themselves, nor is it by any means to be
desired or encouraged very early in life. This immaturity of wit it helped on
by frivolous reading, which will produce its effect in much less time than
books of solid instruction: for the imagination is touched sooner than the
understanding; and effects are more rapid as they are more pernicious.
Conversation should be the result of education, not the precursor of it. It is
a golden fruit, when suffered to grow gradually on the tree of knowledge; but
if precipitated by forced and unnatural means, it will in the end become vapid,
in proportion as it is artificial.

The best effects of a careful and religious education are often very remote:
they are to be discovered in future scenes, and exhibited in untried
connexions. Every event of life will be putting the heart into fresh
situations, and making demands on its prudence, its firmness, its integrity, or
its piety. Those, whose business it is to form it, can foresee none of these
situations: yet, as far as human wisdom will allow, they must enable it to
provide for them all, with an humble dependence on the divine assistance. A
well-disciplined soldier must learn and practice all his evolutions, though he
does not know on what service his leader may command him, by what foe he shall
be attacked, nor what mode of combat the enemy may use.

One great art of education consists in not suffering the feelings to become
too acute by unnecessary awakening, nor too obtuse by the want of exertion. The
former renders them the source of calamity, and totally ruins the temper: while
the latter blunts and debases them, and produces a dull, cold, and selfish
spirit. For the mind is an instrument, which, if wound too high, will lose its
sweetness, and if not enough strained, will abate of its vigor.

How cruel is it to extinguish by neglect or unkindness, the precious
sensibility of an open temper, to chill the amiable glow of an ingenuous soul,
and to quench the bright flame of a noble and generous spirit! These are of
higher worth than all the documents of learning, of dearer price than all the
advantages, which can be derived from the most refined and artificial mode of
education.

But sensibility and delicacy, and an ingenuous temper make no part of
education, exclaims the pedagogue -- they are reducible to no class -- they
come under no article of instruction -- they belong neither to languages nor to
music. What an error! They are a part of education, and of infinitely more
value Than all their pedant discip^^ne ever knew. It is true, they are ranged
under no class, but they are superior to all; they are of more esteem than
languages or music; for they are the language of the heart, and the music of
the according passions. Yet this sensibility is, in many instances, so far from
being cultivated, that it is not uncommon to see those who affect more than
usual sagacity, cast a smile of supercilious pity, at any indication of a warm,
generous, or enthusiastic temper in the lively and the young: as much as to
say, they will know better, and will have more discretion when they are older.
But every appearance of amiable simplicity, or of honest shame, Nature's has^y
conscience, will be dear to sensible hearts; they will carefully cherish every
such indication in a young female: for they will perceive, that it is this
temper, wisely cultivated, which will one day make her enamoured of the
loveliness of virtue, and the beauty of holiness: from which she will acquire a
taste for the doctrines of religion, and a spirit to perform the duties of it.
And those, who wish to make her ashamed of this charming temper, and seek to
dispossess her of it, will, it is to be feared, give her nothing better in
exchange. But whoever reflects at all, will easily discern how carefully this
enthusiasm is to be directed, and how judiciously its redundancies are to be
lopped away.

Prudence is not natural to children: they can, however, substitute art in its
stead. But is it not much better, that a girl should discover the faults
incident to her age, than conceal them under this dark and impenetrable veil? I
could almost venture to assert, that there is something more becoming in the
very errors of nature, where they are undisguised, than in the affectation of
virtue itself, where the reality is wanting. And I am so far from being an
admirer of prodigies, that I am extremely apt to suspect them; and am always
infinitely better pleased with nature, in her more common modes of operation.
The precise and premature wisdom, which some girls have cunning enough to
assume, is of a more dangerous tendency than any of their natural failings can
be; as it effectually covers those secret bad dispositions, which, if they
displayed thmeselves, might be rectified. The hypocrisy of assuming virtues,
which are not inherent in the heart, prevents the growth and disclosure of
those real ones, which it is the great end of education to cultivate.

But if the natural indications of the temper are to be suppressed and stifled,
where are the diagnosties, by which the state of the mind is to be known? The
wise Author of all things, who did nothing in vain, doubtless intended them as
symptoms, by which to judge of the diseases of the heart; and it is impossible
diseases should be cured before they are known. If the stream be so cut off, as
to prevent communication, or so choked up as to defeat discovery, how shall we
ever reach the source, out of which are the issues of life?

This cunning, which of all the different dispositions girls discover, is most
to be dreaded, is increased by nothing so much as by fear. If those about them
express violent and unreasonable anger at every trivial offense, it will always
promote this temper, and will very frequently create it, where there was a
natural tendency to frankness. The indiscreet transports of rage, which many
betray on every slight occasion, and the little distinction they make between
venial errors and premeditated crimes, naturally dispose a child to conceal,
what she does not however care to suppress. Anger in one will not remedy the
faults of another; for how can an instrument of sin cure sin? If a girl is kept
in a state of perpetual and slavish terror, she will, perhaps, have artifice
enough to conceal those propensities which she knows are wrong, or those
actions which she thinks are most obnoxious to punishment. But, nevertheless,
she will not cease to indulge those propensities, and to commit those actions,
when she can do it with impunity.

Good dispositions, of themselves, will go but a very little way, unless they
are confirmed into good principles. And this cannot be effected but by a
careful course of religious instruction, and a patient and laborious
cultivation of the moral temper.

But, though girls should not be treated with unkindness, nor the first
openings of the passions blighted by cold severity; yet I am of opinion, that
young females should be accustomed, very early in life, to a certain degree of
restraint. The natural cast of character, and the moral distinctions between
the sexes, should not be disregarded, even in childhood. That bold,
independent, enterprising spirit, which is so much admired in boys, should not,
when it happens to discover itself in the other sex, be encouraged, but
suppressed. Girls should be taught to give up their opinions betimes, and not
pertinaciously to carry on a dispute, even if they should know themselves to be
in the right. I do not mean, that they should be robbed of the liberty of
private judgment, but that they should by no means be encouraged to contract a
contentious or contradictory turn. It is of the greatest importance to their
future happiness, that they should acquire a submissive temper, and a
forbearing spirit; for it is a lesson which the world will not fail to make
them frequently practice, when they come abroad into it; and they will not
practice it the worse, for having learnt it the sooner. These early restraints,
in the limitation here meant, are so far from being an effect of cruelty, that
they are the most indubitable marks of affection, and are the more meritorious,
as they are severe trials of tenderness. But all the beneficial effects, which
a mother can expect from this watchfulness, will be entirely defeated, if it is
practiced occasionally, and not habitually, and if it ever appears to be used
to gratify caprice, ill-humour or resentment.

Those, who have children to educate, ought to be extremely patient: it is
indeed a labor of love. They should reflect, that extraordinary talents are
neither essential to the well-being of society, nor to the happiness of
individuals. If that had been the case, the beneficent Father of the universe
would not have made them so rare. For it is as easy for an Almighty Creator to
produce a Newton, as an ordinary man; and he could have made those powers
common which we now consider as wonderful, without any miraculous exertion of
his omnipotence, if the existence of many Newtons had been necessary to the
perfection of his wise and gracious plan.

Surely, therefore, there is more piety, as well as more sense, in laboring to
improve the talents which children actually have, than in lamenting that they
do not possess supernatural endowments, or angelic perfections. A passage of
lord Bacon's furnishes an admirable incitement for endeavoring to carry the
amiable and christian grace of charity to its farthest extent, instead of
indulging an over-anxious care for more brilliant but less important
acquisitions. The desire of power in excess caused the angels to fall; the
desire of knowledge in excess caused man to fall; but in charity is no excess;
neither can men nor angels come into danger by it.

A girl who has docility will seldom be found to want understanding enough for
all the purposes of a social, a happy, and an useful life. And when we behold
the tender hope of fond and anxious love, blasted by disappointment, the defect
will as often be discovered to proceed from the neglect or the error of
cultivation, as from the natural temper; and those who lament the evil, will
sometimes be found to have occasioned it.

It is as injudicious for parents to set out with too sanguine a dependence on
the merit of their children, as it is for them to be discouraged at every
repulse. When their wishes are defeated in this or that particular instance,
where they had treasured up some darling expectation, this is so far from being
a reason for relaxing their attention, that it ought to be an additional motive
for redoubling it. Those, who hope to do a great deal, must not expect to do
every thing. If they know any thing of the malignity of sin, the blindness of
prejudice, or the corruption of the human heart, they will also know, that that
heart will always remain, after the very best possible education, full of
infirmity and imperfection. Extraordinary allowances, therefore, must be made
for the weakness of nature in this its weakest stake. After much is done, much
will remain to do, and much, very much, will still be left undone. For this
regulation of the passions and affections cannot be the work of education
alone, without the concurrence of divine grace operating on the heart. Why then
should parents repine, if their efforts are not always crowned with immediate
success? They should consider, that they are not educating cherubs and seraphs,
but men and women -- creatures, who at their best estate are altogether vanity:
how little then can be expected from them in the weakness and imbecility of
infancy! I have dwelt on this part of the subject the longer, because I am
certain that many, who have set out with a warm and active zeal, have cooled on
the very first discouragement, and have afterward almost totally remitted
their vigilance, through a criminal kind of despair.

Great allowances must be made for a profusion of gaiety, loquacity, and even
indiscretion in children, that there may be animation enough left to supply an
active and useful character, when the first fermentation of the youthful
passions is over, and the redundant spirits shall come to subside.

If it be true, as a consummate judge of human nature has observed, That not a
vanity is given in vain, it is also true, that there is scarcely a single
passion, which may not be turned to some good account, if prudently rectified,
and skilfully turned into the road of some neighboring virtue. It cannot be
violently bent, or unnaturally forced toward an object of a totally opposite
nature, but may be gradually inclined toward a correspondent but superior
affection. Anger, hatred, resentment, and ambition, the most restless and
turbulent passions which shake and distract the human soul, may be led to
become the most active opposers of sin, after having been its most successful
instruments. Our anger, for instance, which can never be totally subdued, may
be made to turn against ourselves, for our weak and imperfect obedience -- our
hatred, against every species of vice -- our ambition, which will not be
discarded, may be ennobled: it will not change its name, but its object; it
will despise what it lately valued, nor be contented to grasp at less than
immortality.

Thus the joys, fears, hopes, desires, all the passions and affections, which
separate in various currents from the soul, will, if directed into their proper
channels, after having fertilised wherever they have flowed, return again to
swell and enrich the parent source.

That the very passions which appear the most uncontrollable and unpromising,
may be intended in the great scheme of Providence, to answer some important
purpose, is remarkably evidenced in the character and history of saint Paul. A
remark on this subject by an ingenious old Spanish writer, which I will here
take the liberty to translate, will better illustrate my meaning.

To convert the bitterest enemy into the most zealous advocate, is the work of
God for the instruction of man. Plutarch has observed, that the medical science
would be brought to the utmost perfection, when poison should be converted into
physic. Thus, in the mortal disease of Judaism and idolatry, our blessed Lord
converted the adder's venom of ^ul the persecutor, into that cement which made
Paul the chosen vessel. That manly activity, that restless ardor, that burning
zeal for the law of his fathers, that ardent thirst for the blood of
christians, did the Son of God find necessary in the man who was one day to
become the defender of his suffering people Obras de Quevedo, vida de San Pablo
Apostol.
.

To win the passions, therefore, over to the cause of virtue, answers a much
nobler end than their extinction would possibly do, even if that could be
effected. But it is their nature never to observe a neutrality; they are either
rebels or auxilaries; and an enemy subdued is an ally obtained. If I may be
allowed to change the allusion so soon, I would say, that the passions also
resemble fires, which are friendly and beneficial when under proper direction;
but if suffered to blaze without restraint, they carry devastation along with
them, and, if totally extinguished, leave the benighted mind in a state of cold
and comfortless inanity.

But in speaking of the usefulness of the passions, as instruments of virtue,
envy and lying must always be excepted: these, I am persuaded, must either go
on in still progressive mischief, or else be radically cured before any good
can be expected from the heart which has been infected with them. For I never
will believe that envy, though passed through all the moral strainers, can be
refined into a virtuous emulation, or lying improved into an agreeable turn for
innocent invention. Almost all the other passions may be made to take an
amiable hue: but these two must either be totally extirpated, or be always
contented to preserve their original deformity, and to wear their native black.

On the Importance of Religion to the Female Character.
VARIOUS are the reasons why the greater part of mankind cannot apply
themselves to arts or letters. Particular studies are only suited to the
capacities of particular persons. Some are incapable of applying to them from
the delicacy of their sex, some from the unsteadiness of youth, and others from
the imbecility of age. Many are precluded by the narrowness of their education,
and many by the straitness of their fortune. The wisdow of God is wonderfully
manifested in this happy and well-ordered diversity, in the powers and
properties of his creatures; since by thus admirably suiting the agent to the
action, the whole scheme of human affairs is carried on with the most agreeing
and consistent economy, and no chasm is left for want of an object to fill it,
exactly suited to its nature.

But in the great and universal concerns of religion, both sexes, and all
ranks, are equally interested. The truly catholic spirit of christianity
accommodates itself, with an astonishing condescension, to the circumstances of
the whole human race. It rejects none on account of their pecuniary wants,
their personal infirmities, or their intellectual deficiencies. No superiority
of parts is the least recommendation, nor is any depression of fortune the
smallest objection. None are too wise to be excused from performing the duties
of religion, nor are any too poor to be excluded from the consolations of ^ts
promises.

If we admire the wisdom of God, in having furnished different degrees of
intelligence, so exactly adapted to their different destinations, and in having
fitted every part of his stupendous work, not only to serve its own immediate
purpose, but also to contribute to the beauty and perfection of the whole: how
much more ought we to adore that goodness which has perfected the divine plan,
by appointing one wide, comprehensive, and universal means of salvation -- a
salvation, which all are invited to partake -- by a means which all are cap^ble
of using -- which nothing but voluntary blindness can prevent our
comprehending, and nothing but wilful error can hinder us from embracing.

The muses are coy, and will only be wooed and won by some highly-favoured
suitors. The sciences are lofty, and will not stoop to the reach of ordinary
capacities. But wisdom (by which the royal preacher means piety) is a saving
spirit: she is easily seen of them that love her, and found of all such as seek
her. Nay, she is so accessible and condescending, that she preventeth them that
desire her, making herself first known unto them.

We are told by the same animated writer, that "wisdom is the breath of the
power of God." How infinitely superior, in grandeur and sublimity, is this
description to the origin of the wisdom of the heathens, as described by their
poets and mythologists! In the exalted strains of the Hebrew poetry we read,
that wisdom is the brightness of the everlasting light, the unspotted mirror of
the power of God, and the image of his goodness.

The philosophical author of The defense of learning observes, that knowledge
has something of venom and malignity in it, when taken without its proper
corrective, and what that is, the inspired saint Paul teaches us, by placing it
as the immediate antidote: Knowledge puffs up, but charity edifieth. Perhaps,
it is the vanity of human wisdom, unchastised by this correcting principle,
which has made so many infidels. It may proceed from the arrogance of a
selfsufficient pride, that some philosophers disdain to acknowledge their
belief in a Being, who has judged proper to conceal from them the infinite
wisdom of his counsels; who, (to borrow the lofty language of the man of Uz)
refused to consult them when he laid the foundations of the earth, when he shut
up the sea with doors, and made the clouds the garment thereof.

A man must be an infidel either from pride, prejudice, or bad education: he
cannot be one unawares, or by surprise; for infidelity is not occasioned by
sudden impulse or violent temptation. He may be hurried by some vehement desire
into an immoral action, at which he will blush in his cooler moments, and which
he will lament, as the s^d effect of a spirit unsubdued by religion: but
infidelity is a calm, considerate act, which cannot plead the weakness of the
heart, or the seduction of the senses. Even good men frequently fail in their
duty through the infirmities of nature, and the allurements of the world; but
the infidel errs on a plan, on a settled and deliberate principle.

But though the minds of men are sometimes fatally infected with this disease,
either through unhappy prepossession, or some of the other causes above
mentioned: yet I am unwilling to believe, that there is in nature so
monstrously incongruous a being, as a female infidel. The least reflection on
the temper, the character, and the education of women, makes the mind revolt
with horror from an idea so improbable, and so unnatural.

May I be allowed to observe, that, in general, the minds of girls seem more
aptly prepared, in their early youth, for the reception of serious impressions,
than those of the other sex, and that their less exposed situations, in more
advanced life, qualify them better for the preservation of them? The daughters
(of good parents I mean) are often more carefully instructed in their religious
duties, than the sons, and this from a variety of causes. They are not so soon
sent from under the parental eye into the bustle of the world, nor so early
exposed to the contagion of bad example: their hearts are naturally more
flexible, soft, and liable to any kind of impression the forming hand may stamp
on them; and lastly, as they do not receive the same classical education with
boys, their feeble minds are not obliged at once to receive and separate the
precepts of christianity, and the documents of pagan philosophy. The necessity
of doing this perhaps somewhat weakens the serious impressions of young men, at
least till the understanding is formed, and confuses their ideas of piety, by
mixing them with so much heterogeneous matter. They only casually read, or hear
read, the scriptures of truth, while they are obliged to learn by heart,
construe and repeat the poetical fables of the less than human gods of the
ancients. And as the excellent author of The internal evidence of the christian
religion observes, Nothing has so much contributed to corrupt the true spirit
of the christian institution, as that partiality which we contract, in our
earliest education, for the manners of pagan antiquity.

Girls, therefore, who do not contract this early partiality, ought to have a
clearer notion of their religious duties: they are not obliged, at an age when
the judgment is so weak, to distinguish between the doctrines of Zeno, of
Epicurus, and of Christ; and to embarrass their minds with the various morals
which were taught in the porch, in the academy, and on the mount.

It is presumed, that these remarks cannot possibly be so misunderstood, as to
be construed into the least disrespect to literature, or a want of the highest
reverence for a learned education, the basis of all elegant knowledge: they are
only intended, with all proper deference, to point out to young women, that
however inferior their advantages of acquiring a knowledge of the
belles-lettres are to those of the other sex; yet it depends on themselves not
to be surpassed in this most important of all studies, for which their
abilities are equal, and their opportunities, perhaps, greater.

But the mere exemption from infidelity is so small a part of the religious
character, that I hope no one will attempt to claim any merit from this
negative sort of goodness, or value herself merely for not being the very worst
thing she possibly can be. Let no mistaken girl fancy she gives a proof of her
wit by her want of piety, or that a contempt of things serious and sacred will
exalt her understanding, or raise her character even in the opinion of the most
avowed male infidels. For one may venture to affirm, that with all their
profligate ideas, both of women and of religion, neither Bolingbroke, Wharton,
Buckingham, nor even lord Chesterfield himself, would have esteemed a woman the
more for her being irreligious.

With whatever ridicule a polite free-thinker may affect to treat religion
himself, he will think it necessary his wife should entertain different notions
of it. He may pretend to despise it as a matter of opinion, depending on creeds
and systems; but, if he is a man of sense, he will know the value of it, as a
governing principle, which is to influence her conduct and direct her actions.
If he sees her unaffectedly sincere in the practice of her religious duties, it
will be a secret pledge to him, that she will be equally exact in fulfilling
the conjugal; for he can have no reasonable dependence on her attachment to
him, if he has no opinion of her fidelity to GOD; for she who neglects first
duties, gives but an indifferent proof of her disposition to fill up inferior
ones; and how can a man of any understanding, (whatever his own religious
professions may be) trust that women with the care of his family, and the
education of his children, who wants herself the best incentive to a virtuous
life, the belief that she is an accountable creature, and the reflection that
she has an immortal soul?

Cicero spoke it as the highest commendation of Cato's character, that he
embraced philosophy, not for the sake of disputing like a philosopher, but of
living like one. The chief purpose of christian knowledge is to promote the
great end of a christian life. Every rational woman should, no doubt, be able
to give a reason of the hope that is in her; but this knowledge is best
acquired, and the duties consequent on it best performed, by reading books of
plain piety and practical devotion, and not by entering into the endless feuds,
and engaging in the unprofitable contentions of partial controversialists.
Nothing is more unamiable than the narrow spirit of party zeal, nor more
disgusting than to hear a woman deal out judgments, and denounce vengeance
against any one, who happens to differ from her in some opinion, perhaps of no
real importance, and which, it is probable, she may be just as wrong in
rejecting, as the object of her censure is in embracing. A furious and
unmerciful female bigot wanders as far beyond the limits prescribed to her sex,
as a Thalestris or a Joan d'Arc. Violent debate has made as few converts as the
sword, and both these instruments are particularly unbecoming, when wielded by
a female hand.

But though no one will be frightened out of their opinions, yet they may be
persuaded out of them: they may be touched by the affecting earnestness of
serious conversation, and allured by the attractive beauty of a consistently
serious life. And while a young woman ought to dread the name of a wrangling
polemic, it is her duty to aspire after the honorable character of a sincere
christian. But this dignified character she can by no means deserve, if she is
ever afraid to avow her principles, or ashamed to defend them. A profligate,
who makes it a point to ridicule every thing which comes under the appearance
of formal instruction, will be disconcerted at the spirited yet modest rebuke
of a pious young woman. But there is as much efficacy in the manner of
reproving profaneness, as in the words. If she corrects it with moroseness,
she defeats the effect of her remedy, by her unskilful manner of administering
it. If, on the other hand, she affects to defend the insulted cause of God, in
a faint tone of voice, and studied ambiguity of phrase, or with an air of
levity, and a certain expression of pleasure in her eyes, which proves she is
secretly delighted with what she pretends to censure, she injures religion much
more than he did, who publicly profaned it; for she plainly indicates, that
she either does not believe, or does not respect what she professes. The other
attacked it as an open foe; she betrays it as a false friend. No one pays any
regard to the opinion of an avowed enemy: but the desertion or treachery of a
professed friend, is dangerous indeed!

It is a strange notion, which prevails in the world, that religion only
belongs to the old and the melancholy, and that it is not worth while to pay
the least attention to it, while we are capable of attending to any thing else.
They allow it to be proper enough for the clergy, whose business it is, and for
the aged, who have not spirits for any business at all. But till they can
prove, that none except the clergy and aged die, it must be confessed that this
is most wretched reasoning.

Great injury is done to the interests of religion, by placing it in a gloomy
and unamiable light. It is sometimes spoken of, as if it would actually make a
handsome woman ugly, or a young one wrinkled. But can any thing be more absurd,
than to represent the beauty of holiness as the source of deformity?

There are few, perhaps, so entirely plunged in business, or absorbed in
pleasure, as not to intend, at some future time, to set about a religious life
in good earnest. But then they consider it as a kind of dernier ressort, and
think it prudent to defer flying to this disagreeable refuge, till they have no
relish left for any thing else. Do they forget, that to perform this great
business well, requires all the strength of their youth, and all the vigor of
their unimpaired capacities? To confirm this assertion, they may observe how
much the slightest indisposition, even in the most active season of life,
disorders every faculty, and disqualifies them for attending to the most
ordinary affairs; and then let them reflect how little able they will be to
transact the most important of all business, in the moment of excruciating
pain, or in the day of universal debility.

When the senses are palled with excessive gratification -- when the eye is
tired with seeing, and the ear with hearing -- when the spirits are so ^unk,
that the grasshopper is become a burden -- how shall the blunted apprehension
be capable of understanding a new science, or the worn-out heart be able to
relish a new pleasure?

To put off religion till we have lost all taste for amusement -- to refuse
listening to the voice of the charmer, till our enfeebled organs can no longer
listen to the voice of singing men and singing women, -- and not to devote our
days to heaven, till we have "no pleasure in them" ourselves, is but a^
ungracious offering. And it is a wretched sacrifice to the God of heaven, to
present him with the remnants of decayed appetites, and the leavings of
extinguished passions.

Miscellaneous Observations on Genius, Taste, good Sense, etc. The author begs
leave to offer an apology for introducing this e^say, which, she fears, may be
thought foreign to her purpose. But she hopes that her earnest desire of
exciting a taste for literature in young ladies, (which encouraged her to
hazard the following remarks) will not OBSTRUCT her general design, even if it
does not actually PROMOTE it.

GOOD sense is as different from genius, as perception is from invention; yet,
though distinct qualities, they frequently subsist together. It is altogether
opposite to wit, but by no means inconsistent with it. It is not science; for
there is such a thing as unlettered good sense; yet, though it is neither wit,
learning, nor genius, it is a substitute for each, where they do not exist, and
the perfection of all where they do.

Good sense is so far from deserving the apellation of common sense, by which
it is frequently called, that it is perhaps one of the rarest qualities of the
human mind. If, indeed, this name is given it in respect to its peculiar
suitableness to the purposes of common life, there is great propriety in it.
Good sense appears to differ from taste, in this, that taste is an
instantaneous decision of the mind, a sudden relish of what is beautiful, or
disgust at what is defective, in an object, without waiting for the slower
confirmation of the judgment. Good sense is, perhaps, that confirmation, which
establishes a suddenly conceived idea, or feeling, by the powers of comparing
and reflecting. They differ also in this, that taste seems to have a more
immediate reference to arts, to literature, and to almost every object of the
senses; while good sense rises to moral excellence, and exerts its influence on
life and manners. Taste is fitted to the perception and enjoyment of whatever
is beautiful in art or nature: good sense, to the improvement of the conduct,
and the regulation of the heart.

Yet the term, good sense, is used indiscriminately to express either a
finished taste for letters, or an invariable prudence in the affairs of life.
It is sometimes applied to the most moderate abilities, in which case, the
expression is certainly too strong: and at others to the most shining, when it
is as much too weak and inadequate. A sensible man is the usual, but
unappropriated phrase, for every degree in the scale of understanding, from the
sober mortal, who obtains it by his decent demeanor and solid dullness, to him
whose talents qualify him to rank with a Bacon, a Harris, or a Johnson.

Genius is the power of invention and imitation. It is an incommunicable
faculty: no art or skill of the possessor can bestow the smallest portion of it
on another; no pains or labor can reach the summit of perfection, where the
seeds of it are wanting in the mind: yet it is capable of infinite improvement
where it actually exists, and is attended with the highest capacity of
communicating instruction, as well as delight to others.

It is the peculiar property of genius to strike out great or beautiful things:
it is the felicity of good sense not to do absurd ones. Genius breaks out in
splendid sentiments and elevated ideas: good sense confines its more
circumscribed, but perhaps more useful walk, within the limits of prudence and
propriety.

The poet's eye in a fine frenzy rolling,
Does glance from heaven to earth, from earth to heaven;
And, as imagination bodies forth
The forms of things unknown, the poet's pen
Turns them to shape, and gives to airy nothing
A local habitation and a name.
This is, perhaps, the finest picture of human genius that ever was drawn by a
human pencil. It presents a living image of a creative imagination, or a power
of inventing things which have no actual existence.

With superficial judges, who, it must be confessed, make up the greater part
of the mass of mankind, talents are only liked or understood to a certain
degree. Lofty ideas are above the reach of ordinary apprehensions: the vulgar
allow those who possess them, to be in a somewhat higher state of mind than
themselves; but of the vast gulf which separates them, they have not the least
conception. They acknowledge a superiority; but of its extent they neither know
the value, nor can conceive the reality. It is true, the mind, as well as the
eye, can take in objects larger than itself; but this is only true of great
minds: for a man of low capacity, who considers a consummate genius, resembles
one, who seeing a column for the first time, and standing at too great a
distance to take in the whole of it, concludes it to be flat; or, like one
unacquainted with the first principles of philosophy, who, finding the sensible
horizon appear a plain surface, can form no idea of the spherical form of the
whole, which he does not see, and laughs at the account of antipodes, which he
cannot comprehend.

Whatever is excellent is also rare; what is useful is more common. How many
thousands are born qualified for the coarse employments of life, for one who is
capable of excelling in the fine arts! yet so it ought to be; because our
natural wants are more numerous, and more importunate, than the intellectual.

Whenever it happens, that a man of distinguished talents has been drawn by
mistake, or precipitated by passion, into any dangerous indiscretion; it is
common for those, whose coldness of temper has supplied the place, and usurped
the name, of prudence, to boast of their own steadier virtue, and triumph in
their own superior caution; only because they have never been assailed by a
temptation strong enough to surprise them into error. And with what a visible
appropriation of the character to themselves, do they constantly conclude, with
a cordial compliment to common sense! They point out the beauty and usefulness
of ^his quality so forcibly and explicitly, that you cannot possibly mistake
whose picture they are drawing with so flattering a pencil. The unhappy man,
whose conduct has been so feelingly arraigned, perhaps acted from good, though
mistaken motives -- at least, from motives of which his censurer has not
capacity to judge: but the event was unfavourable, nay the action might be
really wrong, and the vulgar maliciously take the opportunity of this single
indiscretion, to lift themselves nearer on a level with a character, which,
except in this instance, has always thrown them at the most disgraceful and
mortifying distance.

The elegant biographer of Collins, in his affecting apology for that
unfortunate genius, remarks, That the gifts of imagination bring the heaviest
ta^^ on the vigilance of reason; and to bear those fac^lties with unerring
rectitude, or invariable propriety, requires a degree of firmness, and of cool
attention, which does not always attend the higher gifts of the mind: yet
difficult as nature herself seems to have rendered the task of regularity to
genius, it is the supreme consolation of dullness, and of folly, to point with
gothic triumph to those excesses which are the overflowing of faculties they
never enjoyed.

What the greater part of the world mean by common sense, will be generally
found, on a closer enquiry, to be art, fraud, or selfishness! That sort of
saving prudence which makes men extremely attentive to their own safety, or
profit -- diligent in the pursuit of their own pleasures or interests -- and
perfectly at their ease as to what becomes of the rest of mankind. Furious,
where their own property is concerned, philosophers when nothing but the good
of others is at stake, and perfectly resigned under all calamities but their
own.

When we see so many accomplished wits of the present age, as remarkable for
the decorum of their lives, as for the brilliancy of their writings, we may
believe, that next to principle, it is owing to their good sense, which
regulates and chastises their imginations. The vast conceptions which enable a
true genius to ascend the sublimest heights, may be so connected with the
stronger passions, as to give it a natu^^l tendency to fly off from the strait
line of regular^^^; till good sense, acting on the fancy, makes it gravitate
powerfully toward that virtue which is its proper center.

Add to this, when it is considered with what imperfection the divine wisdom
has thought fit to stamp every thing human, it will be found, that excellence
and infirmity are so inseparably wound up in each other, that a man derives the
soreness of temper, and irritability of nerve, which makes him uneasy to
others, and unhappy in himself, from those exquisite feelings, and that
elevated pitch of thought, by which, as the apostle expresses it, on a more
serious occasion, he is, as it were, out of the body.

It is not astonishing, therefore, when the spirit is carried away by the
magnificence of its own ideas, Not touched, but rapt -- not weakened, but
inspired, that the frail body, which is the natural victim of pain, disease,
and death, should not always be able to follow the mind in its aspiring
flights, but should be as imperfect as if it belonged only to an ordinary soul.

Besides, might not providence intend to humble human pride, by presenting to
our eyes so mortifying a view of the weakness and infirmity of even his best
work? Perhaps man, who is already but a little lower than the angels, might,
like the revolted spirits, totally have shaken off obedience and submission to
his Creator, had not God wisely tempered human excellence with a certain
consciousness of its own imperfection. But though this inevitable alloy of
weakness may frequently be found in the best characters, yet how can that be
the source of triumph and exaltation to any, which, if properly weighed, must
be the deepest motive of humiliation to all? A good-natured man will be so far
from rejoicing, that he will be secretly troubled, whenever he reads that the
greatest Roman moralist was tainted with avarice, and the greatest British
philosopher with venality.

It is remarked by Pope, in his essay on criticism, that, Ten censure wrong,
for one that writes amiss. But I apprehend it does not therefore follow, that
to judge is more difficult than to write. If this were the case, the critic
would be superior to the poet, whereas it appears to be directly the contrary.
The critic, (says the great champion of Shakespeare) but fashions the body of a
work; the poet must add the soul, which gives force and direction to its
actions and gestures. It should seem, that the reason why so many more judge
wrong, than write ill, is because the number of readers is beyond all
proportion greater than the number of writers. Every man who reads, is, in some
measure, a critic, and, with very common abilities, may point out real faults
and material errors in a very well written book: but it by no means follows,
that he is able to write any thing comparable to the work which he is capable
of censuring. And unless the numbers of those who write, and of those who
judge, were more equal, the calculation seems not to be quite fair.

A capacity for relishing works of genius is the indubitable sign of good
taste. But if a proper disposition and ability to enjoy the compositions of
others, entitle a man to the claim of reputation, it is still a far inferior
degree of merit to his who can invent and produce those compositions, the bare
disquisition of which gives the critic no small share of fame.

The president of the royal academy, in his admirable discourse on imitation,
has set the folly of depending on unassisted genius, in the clearest light; and
has shown the necessity of adding the knowledge of others, to our own native
powers, in his usual striking and masterly manner. "The mind," says he, is a
barren soil -- is a soil soon exhausted, and will produce no crop, or only one,
unless it be continually fertilized, and enriched with foreign matter.

Yet it has been objected, that study is a great enemy to originality; but even
if this were true, it would perhaps be as well that an author should give us
the ideas of still better writers, mixed and assimilated with the matter in his
own mind, as those crude and undigested thoughts, which he values under the
notion that they are original. The sweetest honey neither tastes of the rose,
the honey-suckle, nor the carnation, yet it is compounded of the very essence
of them all.

If in the other fine arts, this accumulation of knowledge is necessary, it is
indispensably so in poetry. It is a fatal rashness for any one to trust too
much to his own stock of ideas. He must invigorate them by exercise, polish
them by conversation, and increase them by every species of elegant and
virtuous knowledge, and the mind will not fail to reproduce with interest those
seeds, which are sown in it by study and observation. Above all, let every one
guard against the dangerous opinion, that he knows enough: an opinion that will
weaken the energy and reduce the powers of the mind, which, though once perhaps
vigorous and effectual, will be sunk to a state of literary imbecility, by
cherishing vain and presumptuous ideas of its own independence.

For instance, it may not be necessary that a poet should be deeply skilled in
the Linnaean system; but it must be allowed, that a general acquaintance with
plants and flowers will furnish him with a delightful and profitable species of
instruction. He is not obliged to trace nature in all her nice and varied
operations, with the minute accuracy of a Boil, or the laborious investigation
of a Newton; but his good sense will point out to him, that no inconsiderable
portion of philosophical knowledge is requisite to the completion of his
literary character. The sciences are more independent, and require little or no
assistance from the graces of poetry: but poetry, if she would charm and
instruct, must not be so haughty; she must be contented to borrow of the
sciences, many of her choicest allusions; and many of her most graceful
embellishments; and does it not magnify the character of true poesy, that she
includes within herself all the scattered graces of every separate art?

The rules of the great masters in criticism may not be so necessary to the
forming a good taste, as the examination of those original mines from whence
they drew their treasures of knowledge.

The three celebrated essays on the art of poetry do not teach so much by their
laws as by their examples; the dead letter of their rules is less instructive
than the living spirit of their verse. Yet these rules are to a young poet,
what the study of logarithms is to a young mathematician; they do not so much
contribute to form his judgment, as afford him the satisfaction of convincing
him that he i^ right. They do not preclude the difficulty of the operation; but
at the conclusion of it, furnish him with a f^ller demonstration that he has
proceeded on proper principles. When he has well studied the masters in whose
schools the first critics formed themselves, and fancies he has caught a spark
of their divine flame, it may be a good method to try his own compositions by
the test of the critic rules, so far, indeed, as the mechanism of poetry goes.
If the examination be fair and candid, this trial, like the touch of Ithuriel's
spear, will detect every latent error, and bring to light every favorite
failing.

Good taste always suits the measure of its admiration to the merit of the
composition it examines. It accommodates its praises, or its censure, to the
excellence of a work, and appropriates it to the nature of it. General
applause, or indiscriminate abuse, is the sign of a vulgar understanding. There
are certain blemishes which the judicious and good-natured reader will heartily
overlook. But the false sublime, the tumor which is intended for greatness,
the distorted figure, the puerile conceit, and the incongruous metaphor, these
are defects for which scarcely any other kind of merit can atone. And yet there
may be more hope of a writer (especially if he be a young one) who is now and
then guilty of some of these faults, than of one who avoids them all, not
through judgment, but feebleness, and who, instead of deviating into error, is
continually falling short of excellence. The mere absence of error implies that
moderate and inferior degree of merit with which a cold heart and a phlegmatic
taste will be better satisfied than with the magnificent irregularities of
exalted spirits. It stretches some minds to an uneasy extension, to be obliged
to attend to compositions superlatively excellent; and it contracts liberal
souls to a painful narrowness to descend to books of inferior merit. A work of
capital genius, to a man of an ordinary mind, is the bed of Procrustes to one
of a short stature; the man is too little to fill up the space assigned him,
and undergoes the torture in attempting it: and a moderate, or low production
to a man of bright talents, is the punishment inflicted by Mezentius; the
living spirit has too much animation to endure patiently to be in contact with
a dead body.

Taste seems to be a sentiment of the soul, which gives the bias to opinion;
for we feel before we reflect. Without this sentiment, all knowledge, learning,
and opinion, would be cold, inert materials; whereas they become active
principles when stirred, kindled, and inflamed by this animating quality.

There is another feeling, which is called enthusiasm. The enthusiasm of
sensible hearts is so strong, that it only yields to the impulse with which
striking objects act on it; but such hearts help on the effect by their own
sensibility. In a scene where Shakespeare and Garrick give perfection to each
other, the feeling heart does not merely accede to the delirium they occasion:
it does more; it is enamoured of it; it solicits the delusion; it sues to be
deceived, and grudgingly cherishes the sacred treasure of its feelings. The
poet and performer concur in carrying us Beyond this visible diurnal sphere.
They bear us aloft in their airy course, with unresisted rapidity, if they meet
not with any obstruction from the coldness of our own feelings. Perhaps only a
few fine spirits can enter into the detail of their writing and acting: but the
multitude do not enjoy less acutely, because they are not able philosophically
to analyze the sources of their joy or sorrow. If the others have the advantage
of judging, these have at least the privilege of feeling: and it is not from
complaisance to a few leading judges, that they burst into peals of laughter,
or melt into delightful agony; their hearts decide, and that is a decision from
which there lies no appeal. It must, however, be confessed, that the nicer
separations of character, and the lighter and almost imperceptible shades which
sometimes distinguish them, will not be intimately relished, unless there be a
consonancy of taste as well as feeling in the spectators; though, where the
passions are principally concerned, the profane vulgar come in for a larger
portion of the universal delight, than critics and connoisseurs are willing to
allow them.

Yet enthusiasm, though the natural concomitant of genius, is no more genius
itself, than drunkenness is cheerfulness: and that enthusiasm, which discovers
itself on occasions not worthy to excite it, is the mark of a wretched judgment
and a false taste.

Nature produces innumerable objects: to imitate them, is the province of
genius; to direct those imitations, is the property of judgment; to decide on
their effects, is the business of taste. For taste, who sits as supreme judge
on the productions of genius, is not satisfied when she merely imitates nature;
she must also, says an ingenious French writer, imitate beautiful nature. It
requires no less judgment to reject than to choose, and genius might imitate
what is vulgar, under pretense that it was natural, if taste did not carefully
point out those objects which are most proper for imitation. It also requires a
very nice discernment to distinguish verisimilitude from truth; for there is a
truth in taste nearly as conclusive as demonstration in mathematics.

Genius, when in full impetuosity of its career, often touches on the very
brink of error; and is, perhaps, never so near the verge of the precipice, as
when indulging its sublimest flights. It is in those great, but dangerous
moments, that the curb of vigilant judgment is most wanting: while safe and
sober dullness observes one tedious and insipid round of tiresome uniformity,
and steers equally clear of eccentricity and of beauty. Dullness has few
redundancies to retrench, few luxuriancies to pru^e, and few irregularities to
smooth. These, though errors, are the errors of genius, for there is rarely
redundancy without plenitude, or irregularity without greatness. The excesses
of genius may easily be retrenched, but the deficiencies of dullness can never
be supplied.

Those, who copy from others, will doubtless be less excellent than those who
copy from nature. To imitate imitators, is the way to depart too far from the
great original herself. The later copies of an engraving retain fainter and
fainter traces of the subject, to which the earlier impressions bore so strong
a resemblance.

It seems very extraordinary, that it should be the most difficult thing in the
world to be natural; and that it should be harder to hit off the manners of
real life, and to delineate such characters as we converse with every day, than
to imagine such as do not exist. But caricature is much eas^^r than an exact
outline -- and the coloring of fancy less difficult than that of truth.

People do not always know what taste they have, till it is awakened by some
corresponding object; nay, genius itself is a fire, which in many minds would
never blaze, if not kindled by some external cause.

Nature, that munificent mother, when she bestows the power of judging,
accompanies it with the capacity of enjoying. The judgment, which is clear
sighted, points out such objects as are calculated to inspire love; and the
heart instantaneously attaches itself to whatsoever is lovely.

In regard to literary reputation, a great deal depends on the state of
learning in the particular age or nation, in which an author lives. In a dark
and ignorant period, moderate knowledge will entitle its possessor to a
considerable share of fame; whereas, to be distinguished in a polite and
lettered age, requires striking parts and deep erudition.

When a nation begins to emerge from a state of mental darkness, and to strike
out the first rudiments of improvement, it chalks out a few strong but
incorrect sketches, gives the rude out-lines of general art, and leaves the
filling up to the leisure of happier days, and the refinement of more
enlightened times. Their drawing is a rude Sbozzo, and their poetry wild
minstrelsy.

Perfection of taste is a point which a nation no sooner reaches, than it
overshoots; and it is more difficult to return to it, after having passed it,
than it was to attain, when they fell short of it. Where the arts begin to
languish after having flourished, they seldom, indeed, fall back to their
original barbarism: but a certain feebleness of exertion takes place, and it is
more difficult to recover them from this dying languor to their proper
strength, than it was to polish them from their former r^deness; for it is a
less formidable undertaking, to refine barbarity, than to stop decay: the first
may be labored into elegance; but the latter will rarely be strengthened into
vigor.

Taste exerts itself at first but feebly and imp^rfectly; it is repressed and
kept back by a crowd of the most discouraging prejudices: like an infant
prince, who, though born to reign, yet holds an idle scepter, which he has not
power to use, but is obliged to see with the eyes, and hear through the ears of
other men.

A writer of correct taste will hardly ever go out of his way, even in search
of embellishment; he will study to attain the best end by the most natural
means; for he knows that what is not natural cannot be beautiful, and that
nothing can be beautiful out of its own place; for an improper situation will
convert the most striking beauty into a glaring defect. When, by a
well-connected chain of ideas, or a judicious succession of events, the reader
is snatched to Thebes or Athens, what can be more impertinent than for the poet
to obstruct the operation of the passion he has just been kindling, by
introducing a conceit which contradicts his purpose, and interrupts his
business! Indeed, we cannot be transported, even in idea, to those places, if
the poet does not manage so adroitly as not to make us sensible of the journey:
the instant we feel we are traveling, the writer's art fails, and the delirium
is at an end.

Proserpine, says Ovid, would have been restored to her mother Ceres, had not
Ascalaphus seen her stop to gather a golden apple, when the terms of her
restoration were, that she should taste nothing. A story pregnant with
instruction for lively writers, who, by neglecting the main business, and going
out of the way for false gratifications, lose sight of the end they should
principally keep in view. It was this false taste that introduced the
numberless concetti, which disgrace the brightest of the Italian poets; and
this is the reason, why the reader only feels short and interrupted snatches of
delight, in perusing the brilliant but unequal compositions of Ariosto, instead
of that unbroken and undiminished pleasure, which he constantly receives from
Virgil, from Milton, and generally from Tasso. The first mentioned Italian is
the Atalanta, who will interrupt the most eager career, to pick up the
glittering mischief; while the Mantuan and the British bards, like Hippomenes,
press on warm in the pursuit, and unseduced by temptation.

A writer of real taste will take great pains in the perfection of his style,
to make the reader believe that he took none at all. The writing, which appears
to be most easy, will be generally found to be least imutable. The most elegant
verses are the most easily retained; they fasten themselves on the memory,
without its making any effort to preserve them, and we are apt to imagine, that
what is remembered with ease, was written without difficulty.

To conclude: genius is a rare and precious gem, of which few know the worth;
it is fitter for the cabinet of the connoisseur, than for the commerce of
mankind. Good sense is a bank-bill, convenient for change, negociable at all
times, and current in all places. It knows the value of small things, and
considers that an aggregate of them makes up the sum of human affairs. It
elevates common concerns into matters of importance, by performing them in the
best manner, and at the most suitable season. Good sense carries with it the
idea of equality, while genius is always suspected of a design to impose the
burden of superiority; and respect is paid to it with that reluctance which
always attends other imposts, the lower orders of mankind generally repining
most at demands, by which they are least liable to be affected.

As it is the character of genius to penetrate with a lynx's beam into
unfathomable abysses and uncreated worlds, and to see what is not, so it is the
property of good sense to distinguish perfectly, and judge accurately what
realy is. Good sense has not so piercing an eye, but it has as clear a sight.
It does not penetrate so deeply, but as far as it does see, it discerns
distinctly. Good sense is a judicious mechanic, who can produce beauty and
convenience out of suitable means; but genius (I speak with reverence of the
immeasurable distance) bears some remote resemblance to the divine architect,
who produced perfection of beauty without any visible materials, who spoke, and
it was created; who said, let it be, and it was.

THE LADIES' LIBRARY. GREGORY'S LEGACY TO HIS DAUGHTERS.
PREFACE.
THAT the subsequent letters were written by a tender father, in a declining
state of health, for the instruction of his daughters, and not intended for the
public, is a circumstance which will recommend them to every one who considers
them in the light of admonition and advice. In such domestic intercourse, no
sacrifices are made to prejudices, to customs, to fashionable opinions.
Paternal love, paternal care, speak their genuine sentiments, undisguised and
unrestained. A father's zeal for his daughter's improvement, in whatever can
make a woman amiable, with a father's quick apprehension of the dangers that
too often arise, even from the attainment of that very point, suggest his
admonitions, and render him attentive to a thousand little graces and decorums,
which would escape the nicest moralist who should undertake the subject on
uninterested speculation. Every faculty is on the alarm, when the objects of
such tender affection are concerned.

In the writer of these letters, paternal tenderness and vigilance were
doubled, as he was at that time sole parent; death having before deprived the
young ladies of their excellent mother. His own precarious state of health
inspired him with the most tender solicitude for their future welfare; and
though he might have concluded, that the impressions made by his instructions
and uniform example could never be effaced from the memory of his children, yet
his anxiety for their orphan condition suggested to him this method of
continuing to them those advantages.

The editor is encouraged to offer this treatise to the public, by the very
favorable reception which the rest of his father's works have met with. The
comparative view of the state of man and other animals, and the essay on the
office and duties of a physician, have been very generally read; and, if he is
not deceived by the partiality of his friends, he has reason to believe they
have met with general approbation.

In some of those tracts, the author's object was to improve the taste and
understanding of his reader; in others, to mend his heart; in others, to point
out to him the proper use of philosophy, by showing its application to the
duties of common life. In all his writings, his chief view was the good of his
fellow creatures; and as those among his friends, in whose taste and judgment
he most confided, think the publication of this small work will contribute to
that general design, and at the same time do honor to his memory, the editor
can no longer hesitate to comply with their advice, in communicating it to the
public.

Introduction.
My dear girls,
YOU had the misfortune to be deprived of your mother at a time of life when
you were insensible of your loss, and could receive little benefit either from
her instruction or her example. Before this comes to your hands, you will
likewise have lost your father.

I have had many melancholy reflections on the forlorn and helpless situation
you must be in, if it should please God to remove me from you, before you
arrive at that period of life, when you will be able to think and act for
yourselves. I know mankind too well; I know their falsehood, their dissipation,
their coldness to all the duties of friendship and humanity. I know the little
attention paid to helpless infancy. You will meet with few friends
disinterested enough to do you good offices, when you are incapable of making
them any return, by contributing to their interest or their pleasure, or even
to the gratification of their vanity.

I have been supported under the gloom naturally arising from these reflections,
by a reliance on the goodness of that providence which has hitherto preserved
you, and given me the most pleasing prospect of the goodness of your
dispositions; and by the secret hope, that your mother's virtues will entail a
blessing on her children.

The anxiety I have for your happiness, has made me resolve to throw together
my sentiments relating to your future conduct in life. If I live for some
years, you will receive them with much greater advantage, suited to your
different geniuses and dispositions. If I die sooner, you must receive them in
this very imperfec^ manner, -- the last proof of my affection.

You will all remember your father's fondness, when perhaps every other
circumstance relating to him is forgotten. This remembrance, I hope, will
induce you to give a serious attention to the advices I am now going to leave
with you. I can request this attention with the greater confidence, as my
sentiments, on the most interesting points that regard life and manners, were
entirely correspondent to your mother's, whose judgment and taste I trusted
much more than my own.

You must expect that the advices which I shall give you, will be very
imperfect, as there are many nameless delicacies in female manners, of which
none but a woman can judge. You will have one advantage by attending to what I
am going to leave with you; you will hear, at least for once in your lives, the
genuine sentiments of a man who has no interest in flattering or deceiving you.
I shall throw my reflections together without any studied order, and shall only,
to avoid confusion, range them under a few general heads.

You will see, in a little treatise of mine just published, in what an
honorable point of view I have considered your sex, -- not as domestic
drudges, or the slaves of our pleasures, but as our companions and equals -- as
designed to soften our hearts and polish our manners -- and, as Thomson finely
says, To raise the virtues, animate the bliss,
And sweeten all the toils of human life.


I shall not repeat what I have there said on this subject, and shall only
observe, that from the view I have given of your natural character and place in
society, there arises a certain propriety of conduct, peculiar to your sex. It
is this peculiar propriety of female manners, of which I intend to give you my
sentiments, without touching on those general rules of conduct by which men and
women are equally bound.

While I explain to you that system of conduct which I think will tend most to
your honor and happiness, I shall, at the same time, endeavor to point out
those virtues and accomplishments which render you most respectable and most
amiable in the eyes of my own sex.

Religion.
THOUGH the duties of religion, strictly speaking, are equally binding on both
sexes, yet certain differences in their natural character and education, render
some vices in your sex particularly odious. The natural hardness of our hearts,
and strength of our passions, inflamed by the uncontrouled license we are too
often indulged with in our youth, are apt to render our manners more dissolute,
and make us less susceptible of the finer feelings of the heart. Your superior
delicacy, your modesty, and the usual severity of your education, preserve you,
in a great measure, from any temptation to those vices to which we are most
subjected. The natural softness and sensibility of your dispositions
particularly fit you for the practice of those duties where the heart is
chiefly concerned. And this, along with the natural warmth of your imagination,
renders you peculiarly susceptible of the feelings of devotion.

There are many circumstances in your situation that peculiarly require the
supports of religion, to enable you to act in them with spirit and propriety.
Your whole life is often a life of suffering. You cannot plunge into business,
or dissipate yourselves in pleasure and riot, as men too often do, when under
the pressure of misfortunes. You must bear your sorrows in silence, unknown and
unpitied. You must often put on a face of serenity and cheerfulness, when your
hearts are torn with anguish, or sinking in despair. Then your only resource is
in the consolations of religion. It is chiefly owing to these, that you bear
domestic misfortunes better than we do.

But you are sometimes in very different circumstances, that equally require
the restraints of religion. The natural vivacity, and perhaps the natural
vanity of your sex, is very apt to lead you into a dissipated state of life,
that deceives you under the appearance of innocent pleasure; but which in
reality wastes your spirits, impairs your health, weakens all the superior
faculties of your minds, and often sullies your reputations. Religion, by
checking this dissipation, and rage for pleasure, enables you to draw more
happiness, even from those very sources of amusement, which, when too
frequently applied to, are often productive of satiety and disgust.

Religion is rather a matter of sentiment than reasoning. The important and
interesting articles of faith are sufficiently plain. Fix your attention on
these, and do not meddle with controversy. If you get into that, you plunge
into a chaos, from which you will never be able to extricate yourselves. It
spoils the temper, and, I suspect, has no good effect on the heart.

Avoid all books and all conversations that tend to shake your faith on those
great points of religion which should serve to regulate your conduct, and on
which your hopes of future and eternal happiness depend.

Never indulge yourselves in ridicule on religious subjects, nor give
countenance to it in others by seeming diverted with what they say. This, to
people of good-breeding, will be a sufficient check.

I wish you to go no further than the scriptures for your religious opinions.
Embrace those you find clearly revealed. Never perplex yourselves about such as
you do not understand, but treat them with silent and becoming reverence. I
would advise you to read only such religious books as are addressed to the
heart, such as inspire pious and devout affections, such as are proper to
direct you in your conduct, and not such as tend to entangle you in the endless
maze of opinions and systems.

Be punctual in the stated performance of your private devotions, morning and
evening. If you have any sensibility or imagination, this will establish such
an intercourse between you and the Supreme Being, as will be of infinite
consequence to you in life. It will communicate an habitual cheerfulness to
your tempers, give a firmness and steadiness to your virtue, and enable you to
go through all the vicissitudes of human life with propriety and dignity.

I wish you to be regular in your attendance on public worship, and in
receiving the communion. Allow nothing to interrupt your public or private
devotions, except the performance of some active duty in life, to which they
should always give place. In your behavior at public worship, observe an
exemplary attention and gravity.

That extreme strictness which I recommend to you in these duties, will be
considered by many of your acquaintance as a superstitious attachment to forms;
but in the advices I give you on this and other subjecte, I have an eye to the
spirit and manners of the (...). There is a levity and dissipation in the
present ^nners, a coldness and listlessness in whatever re^ates to religion,
which cannot fail to infect you, unless you purposely cultivate in your minds a
contrary bias, and make the devotional taste habitual.

Avoid all grimace and ostentation in your religious duties. They are the usual
cloaks of hypocrisy; at least they show a weak and vain mind.

Do not make religion a subject of common conversation in mixed companies. When
it is introduced, rather seem to decline it. At the same time, never suffer any
person to insult you by any foolish ribaldry on your religious opinions, but
show the same resentment you would nat^^ally do on being offered any other
personal insult. But the surest way to avoid this, is by a modest reserve or
the subject, and by using no freedom with others about their religious
sentiments.

Cultivate an enlarged charity for all mankind, however they may differ from
you in their religious opinions. That difference may probably arise from causes
in which you had no sha^ (...) from which you can derive no merit.

Show your regard to religion by a distinguishing respect to all its ministers,
of whatever persuasion, who do not, by their lives, dishonor their profession;
but never allow them the direction of your consciences, lest they taint you
with the narrow spirit of their party.

The best effect of your religion will be a diffusive humanity to all in
distress. Set apart a certain proportion of your income as sacred to charitable
purposes. But in this, as well as in the practice of every other duty,
carefully avoid ostentation. Vanity is always defeating her own purposes. Fame
is one of the natural rewards of virtue. Do not pursue her, and she will follow
you.

Do not confine your charity to giving money. You may have many opportunities
of showing a tender and compassionate spirit, where your money is not wanted.
There is a false and unnatural refinement in sensibility, which makes some
people shun the sight of every object in distress. Never indulge this,
especially where your friends or acquaintances are concerned. Let the days of
their misfortunes, when the world forgets or avoids them, be the season for you
to exercise your humanity and friendship. The sight of human misery softens the
heart, and makes it better: it checks the pride of health and prosperity, and
the distress it occasions, is amply compensated by the consciousness of doing
your duty, and by the secret endearment which nature has annexed to all our
sympathetic sorrows.

Women are greatly deceived, when they think they recommend themselves to our
sex, by their indifference about religion. Even those men who are themselves
unbelievers, dislike infidelity in you. Every man, who knows human nature,
connects a religious taste in your sex with softness and sensibility of heart;
at least; we always consider the want of it as a proof of that hard and
masculine spirit, which, of all your faults, we dislike the most. Besides, men
consider your religion as one of their principal securities for that female
virtue in which they are most interested. If a gentleman pretends an attachment
to any of you, and endeavors to shake your religious principles, be assured he
is either a fool, or has designs on you, which he dares not openly avow.

You will probably wonder at my having educated you in a church different from
my own. The reason was plainly this: I looked on the differences between our
churches to be of no real importance, and that a preference of one to the other
was a mere matter of taste. Your mother was educated in the church of England,
and had an attachment to it; and I had a prejudice in favor of every thing she
liked. It never was her desire, that you should be baptized by a clergyman of
the church of England, or be educated in that church. On the contrary, the
delicacy of her regard, to the smallest circumstance that could affect me in
the eye of the world, made her anxiously insist it might be otherwise. But I
could not yield to her in that kind of generosity. When I lost her, I became
still more determined to educate you in that church; as I feel a secret
pleasure in doing every thing that appears to me to express my affection and
veneration for her memory. I draw but a very faint and imperfect picture of
what your mother was, while I endeavor to point out what you should be. The
reader will remember, that such observations as respect equally both the sexes,
are all along as much as possible molded.


Conduct and Behavior.
ONE of the chief beauties, in a female character, is that modest reserve, that
retiring delicacy, which avoids the public eye, and is disconcerted even at the
gaze of admiration. I do not wish you to be insensible to applause; if you
were, you must become, if not worse, at least less amiable women: but you may
be dazzled by that admiration which yet rejoices your hearts.

When a girl ceases to blush, she has lost the most powerful charm of beauty.
That extreme sensibility which it indicates, may be a weakness and encumbrance
in our sex, as I have too often felt, but in yours it is peculiarly engaging.
Pedants, who think themselves philosophers, ask why a woman should blush, when
she is conscious of no crime? It is a sufficient answer, that nature has made
you to blush when you are guilty of no fault, and has forced us to love you,
because you do so. -- Blushing is so far from being necessarily an attendant on
guilt, that it is the usual companion of innocence.

This modesty, which I think so essential in your sex, will naturally dispose
you to be rather silent in company, especially in a large one. -- People of
sense and discernment will never mistake such silence for dullness. One may
take a share in conversation without uttering a syllable. The expression in the
countenance shows it, and this never escapes an observing eye.

I should be glad that you had an easy dignity in your behavior at public
places, but not that confident ease, that unabashed countenance, which seems to
set the company at defiance. If, while a gentleman is speaking to you, one of
superior rank addresses you, do not let your eager attention and visible
preference betray the flutter of your heart: let your pride on this occasion
preserve you from that meanness, into which your vanity would sink you.
Consider that you expose yourselves to the ridicule of the company, and affront
one gentleman only to swell the triumph of another, who perhaps thinks he does
you honor in speaking to you.

Converse with men even of the first rank with that dignified modesty which may
prevent the approach of the most distant familiarity, and consequently prevent
them from feeling themselves your superiors.

Wit is the most dangerous talent you can possess. It must be guarded with
great discretion and good nature; otherwise it will create you many enemies.
Wit is perfectly consistent with softness and delicacy; yet they are seldom
found united. Wit is so flattering to vanity, that they who possess it, become
intoxicated, and lose all self-command.

Humor is a different quality. It will make your company much solicited; but
be cautious how you indulge it. It is often a great enemy to delicacy, and a
still greater one to dignity of character. It may sometimes gain you applause,
but will never procure you respect.

Be even cautious of displaying your good sense. It will be thought you assume
a superiority over the rest of the company. But if you happen to have any
learning, keep it a profound secret, especially from the men, who generally
look with a jealous and malignant eye on a woman of great parts, and a
cultivated understanding.

A man of real genius and candor is far superior to this meanness; but such a
one will seldom fall in your way; and if by accident he should, do not be
anxious to show the full extent of your knowledge. If he has any opportunities
of seeing you, he will soon discover it himself; and if you have any advantages
of person or manner, and keep your own secret, he will probably give you credit
for a great deal more than you possess. The great art of pleasing in
conversation consists in making the company pleased with themselves. You will
more readily hear than talk yourselves into their good graces.

Beware of detraction, especially where your own sex are concerned. You are
generally accused of being particularly addicted to this vice -- I think,
unjustly. Men are equally guilty of it when their interests interfere. As your
interests more frequently clash, and as your feelings are quicker than ours,
your temptations to it are more frequent: for this reason be particularly
tender of the reputation of your own sex, especially when they happen to rival
you in our regard. We look on this as the strongest proof of dignity and true
greatness of mind.

Show a compassionate sympathy to unfortunate women, especially to those who
are rendered so by the villainy of men. Indulge a secret pleasure, I may say
pride, in being the friends and refuge of the unhappy, but without the vanity
of showing it.

Consider every species of indelicacy in conversation, as shameful in itself,
and as highly disgusting to us. All double entendre is of this sort. The
dissoluteness of men's education allows them to be diverted with a kind of wit,
which yet they have delicacy enough to be shocked at, when it comes from your
mouths, or even when you hear it without pain and contempt. -- Virgin purity is
of such a delicate nature, that it cannot bear certain things without
contamination. It is always in your power to avoid these. No man, but a brute
or a fool, will insult a woman with conversation which he sees gives her pain;
nor will he dare to do it, if she resent the injury with a becoming spirit.
There is a dignity in conscious virtue, which is able to awe the most shameless
and abandoned of men.

You will be reproached perhaps with prudery. By prudery is usually meant an
affectation of delicacy: Now I do not wish you to affect delicacy; I wish you
to possess it: at any rate, it is better to run the risk of being thought
ridiculous than disgusting.

The men will complain of your reserve. They will assure you, that a franker
behavior would make you more amiable. But, trust me, they are not sincere when
they tell you so. I acknowledge, that on some occasions it might render you
more agreeable as companions, but it would make you less amiable as women -- an
important distinction, which many of your sex are not aware of. After all, I
wish you to have great ease and openness in your conversation; I only point out
some considerations which ought to regulate your behavior in that respect.

Have a sacred regard to truth. Lying is a mean and despicable vice. I have
known some women of excellent parts, who were so much addicted to it, that they
could not be trusted in the relation of any story, especially if it contained
any thing of the mavelous, or if they themselves were the heroines of the
tale. This weakness did not proceed from a bad heart, but was merely the effect
of vanity, or an unbridled imagination. I do not mean to censure that lively
embellishment of a humourous story, which is only intended to promote innocent
mirth.

There is a certain gentleness of spirit and manners extremely engaging in your
sex -- not that indiscriminate attention, that unmeaning simper, which smiles
on all alike. This arises either from an affectation of softness, or from
perfect insipidity.

There is a species of refinement in luxury, just beginning to prevail among
the gentlemen of this country, to which our ladies are yet as great strangers
as any women upon earth; I hope, for the honor of the sex, that they may ever
continue so; I mean, the luxury of eating. It is a despicable, selfish vice in
men; but in your sex it is beyond expression indelicate and disgusting.

Every one, who remembers a few years back, is sensible of a very striking
change in the attention and respect formerly paid by the gentlemen to the
ladies: their drawing-rooms are deserted: and after dinner and supper, the
gentlemen are impatient till they retire. How they came to lose this respect,
which nature and politeness so well entitle them to, I shall not here
particularly enquire. The revolutions of manners in any country depend on
causes very various and complicated. I shall only observe, that the behavior
of the ladies in the last age was very reserved and sta^ely. It would now be
reckoned ridiculously stiff and formal. Whatever it was, it had certainly the
effect of making them more respected.

A fine woman, like other fine things in nature, has her proper point of view,
from which she may be seen to most advantage. To fix this point requires great
judgment, and an intimate knowledge of the human heart. By the present mode of
female manners, the ladies seem to expect that they shall regain their
acendency over us -- by the fullest display of their personal charms -- by
being always in our eye at public places -- by conversing with us, with the
same unreserved freedom as we do with one another -- in short, by resembling us
as nearly as they possibly can. -- But a little time and experience will show
the folly of this expectation and conduct.

The power of a fine woman over the hearts of men, of men of the finest parts,
is even beyond what she conceives. They are sensible of the pleasing illusion;
but they cannot, nor do they wish to dissolve it. But if she is determined to
dispel the charm, (...) certainly is in her power; she may soon reduce the
angel to a very ordinary girl.

There is a native dignity in ingenuous modesty to be expected in your sex,
which is your natural protection from the familiarities of the men, and which
you should feel previous to the reflection, that it (...) your interest to keep
yourselves sacred from all personal freedoms. The many nameless charms and
endearments of beauty should be reserved to bless the arms of the happy man to
whom you give your heart, but who, if he has the least delicacy, will despise
them if he knows that they have been prostituted to fifty men before him. The
sentiment, that a woman may allow all innocent freedoms, provided her virtue is
secure, is both grossly indelicate and dangerous, and has proved fatal to many
of your sex.

Let me now recommend to your attention that elegance, which is not so much a
quality itself, as the high polish of every other. It is what diffuses an
ineffable grace over every look, every motion, every sentence you utter; it
gives that charm to beauty, without which it generally fails to please. It is
partly a personal quality, in which respect it is the gift of nature; but I
speak of it principally as a quality of the mind. In a word, it is the
perfection of taste in life and manners -- every virtue and every excellency in
their most graceful and amiable forms.

You may perhaps think, that I want to throw every spark of nature out of your
composition, and to make you entirely artificial. Far from it. I wish you to
possess the most perfect simplicity of heart and manners. I think you may
possess dignity without pride, affability without meanness, and simple elegance
without affectation. Milton had my idea, when he says of Eve, Grace was in all
her steps, heaven in her eye,
In every gesture dignity and love.


Amusements.
EVERY period of life has amusements which are natural and proper to it. You
may indulge the variety of your tastes in these, while you keep within the
bounds of that propriety which is suitable to your sex.

Some amusements are conducive to health; as various kinds of exercise: some
are connected with qualities really useful; as different kinds of women's work,
and all the domestic concerns of a family: some are elegant accomplishments; as
dress, dancing, music, and drawing. Such books as improve your understanding,
enlarge your knowledge, and cultivate your taste, may be considered in a higher
point of view than mere amusements. There are a variety of others, which are
neither useful nor ornamental, such as play of different kinds.

I would particularly recommend to you those exercises that oblige you to be
much abroad in the open air, such as walking, and riding on horseback. This
will give vigor to your constitutions, and a bloom to your complexions. If you
accustom yourselves to go abroad always in chairs and carriages, you will soon
become so enervated, as to be unable to go out of doors without them. They are,
like most articles of luxury, useful and agreeable when judiciously used; but,
when made habitual, they become both insipid and pernicious.

An attention to your health is a duty you owe to yourselves and to your
friends. Bad health seldom fails to have an influence on the spirits and
temper. The finest geniuses, the most delicate minds, have very frequently a
correspondent delicacy of bodily constitution, which they are too apt to
neglect. Their luxury lies in reading and late hours, equal enemies to health
and beauty.

But though good health be one of the greatest blessings of life, never make a
boast of it, but enjoy it in grateful silence. We so naturally associate the
idea of female softness and delicacy with a corespondent delicacy of
constitution, that when a woman speaks of her great strength, her extraordinary
appetite, her ability to bear excessive fatigue, we recoil at a description in
a way she is little aware of.

The intention of your being taught needle work, knitting, and such like, is
not on account of the intrinsi^ value of all you can do with your hands, which
is tr^fling, but to enable you to judge more perfectly of that kind of work,
and to direct the execution of it in others. Another principal end is to enable
you to fill up, in a tolerably agreeable way, some of the many solitary hours
you must necessarily pass at home. It is a great article in the happiness of
life, to have your pleasures as independent of others as possible.

By continually gadding abroad, in search of amusement, you lose the respect of
all your acquaintances, whom you oppress with those visits, which, by a more
discreet management, might have been courted.

The domestic economy of a family is entirely a woman's province, and furnishes
a variety of subjects for the exertion both of good sense and good taste. If
you ever come to have the charge of a family, it ought to engage much of your
time and attention; nor can you be excused from this by any extent of fortune,
though, with a narrow one, the ruin that follows the neglect of it may be more
immediate.

I am at the greatest loss what to advise you in regard to books. There is no
impropriety in your reading history, or cultivating any art or science to which
genius or accident lead you. The whole volume of nature lies open to your eye,
and furnishes an infinite variety of entertainment. If I was sure that nature
had given you such strong principles of taste and sentiment as would remain
with you, and influence your future conduct, with the utmost pleasure would I
endeavor to direct your reading in such a way as might form that taste to the
utmost perfection of truth and elegance. But when I reflect how easy it is to
warm a girl's imagination, and how difficult deeply and permanently to affect
her heart -- how readily she enters into every refinement of sentiment, and how
easily she can sacrifice them to vanity or convenience -- I think I may very
probably do you an injury by artificially creating a taste, which, if nature
never gave it you, would only serve to embarrass your future conduct. I do not
want to make you any thing: I want to know what nature has made you, and to
perfect you o^ her plan. I do not wish you to have sentiments that might
perplex you; I wish you to have sentiments that may uniformly and steadily
guide you, and such as your hearts so thoroughly approve, that you would not
forego them for any consideration this world could offer.

Dress is an important article in female life. The love of dress is natural to
you, and therefore it is proper and reasonable. Good sense will regulate your
expense in it; and good taste will direct you to dress in such a way, as to
conceal any blemishes, and set off your beauties, if you have any, to the
greatest advantage. But much delicacy and judgment are required in the
application of this rule. A fine woman shows her charms to most advantage, when
she seems most to conceal them. The finest bosom in nature is not so fine as
what imagination forms. The most perfect elegance of dress appears always the
most easy, and the least studied.

Do not confine your attention to dress to your public appearances. Accustom
yourselves to an habitual neatness, so that in the most careless undress, in
your most unguarded hours, you may have no reason to be ashamed of your
appearance. You will not easily believe how much we consider your dress as
expressive of your characters. Vanity, levity, slovenliness, folly, appear
through it. An elegant simplicity is an equal proof of taste and delicacy.

In dancing, the principal points you are to attend to, are ease and grace. I
would have you to dance with spirit; but never allow yourselves to be so far
transported with mirth, as to forget the delicacy of your sex. Many a girl
dancing in the gaiety and innocence of her heart, is thought to discover a
spirit she little dreams of.

I know no entertainment that gives such pleasure to any person of sentiment or
humor, as the theater. But I am sorry to say, there are few English comedies a
lady can see, without a shock to delicacy. You will not readily suspect the
comments gentlemen make on your behavior on such occasions. Men are often best
acquainted with the most worthless of your sex, and from them too readily form
their judgment of the rest. A virtuous girl often hears very indelicate things
with a countenance no-wise emba^rassed, because in truth she does not
understand them. Yet this is, most ungenerously, ascribed to that command of
features, and that ready presence of mind, which you are thought to possess in
a degree far beyond us* or, by still more malignant observers, it is ascribed
to hardened effrontery.

Sometimes a girl laughs with all the simplicity of unsuspecting innocence, for
no other reason but being infected with other people's laughing: she is then
believed to know more than she should do. If she does happen to understand an
improper thing, she suffers a very complicated distress; she feels her modesty
hurt in the most sensible manner, and at the same time is ashamed of appearing
conscious of the injury. The only way to avoid these inconveniences, is never
to go to a play that is particularly offensive to delicacy. Tragedy subjects
you to no such distress. Its sorrows will soften and ennoble your hearts.

I need say little about gaming, the ladies in this country being as yet almost
strangers to it. It is a ruinous and incurable vice; and as it leads to all the
selfish and turbulent passions, is peculiarly odious in your sex. I have no
objection to your playing a little at any kind of game, as a variety in your
amusements, provided that what you can possibly lose is such a trifle as can
neither interest you, nor hurt you.

In this, as well as in all important points of conduct, show a determined
resolution and steadiness. This is not in the least inconsistent with that
softness and gentleness so amiable in your sex. On the contrary, it gives that
spirit to a mild and sweet disposition, without which it is apt to degenerate
into insipidity. It makes you respectable in your own eyes, and dignifies you
in ours.

Friendship, Love, Marriage.
THE luxury and dissipation that prevail in genteel life, as they corrupt the
heart in many respects, so they render it incapable of warm, sincere, and
steady friendship. A happy c^oice of friends will be of the utmost consequence
to you, as they may assist you by their advice and good offices. But the
immediate gratification which friendship affords to a warm, open, and ingenuous
heart, is of itself a sufficient motive to court it.

In the choice of your friends, have your principal regard to goodness of heart
and fidelity. If they also possess taste and genius, that will still make them
more agreeable and useful companions. You have particular reason to place
confidence in those who have shown affection for you in your early days, when
you were incapable of making them any return. This is an obligation for which
you cannot be too grateful. When you read this, you will naturally think of
your mother's friend, to whom you owe so much.

If you have the good fortune to meet with any who deserve the name of friends,
unbosom yourselves to them with the most unsuspicious confidence. It is one of
the world's maxims, never to trust any person with a secret, the discovery of
which could give you any pain: but it is the maxim of a little mind and a cold
heart, unless where it is the effect of frequent disappointments and bad usage.
An open temper, if restrained but by tolerable prudence, will make you, on the
whole, much happier than a reserved, suspicious one, although you may sometimes
suffer by it. Coldness and distrust are but the too certain consequences of age
and experience: but they are unpleasant feelings, and need not be anticipated
before their time.

But however open you may be in talking of your affairs, never disclose the
secret of one friend to another. These are sacred deposits, which do not belong
to you, nor have you any right to make use of them.

There is another case, in which I suspect it is proper to be secret, not so
much from motives of prudence, as delicacy; I mean in love matters. Though a
woman has no reason to be ashamed of an attachment to a man of merit, yet
nature, whose authority is superior to philosophy, has annexed a sense of shame
to it. It is even long before a woman of delicacy dares avow to her own heart
that she loves; and when all the subterfuges of ingenuity to conceal it from
herself fail, she feels a violence done both to her pride and to her modesty.
This, I should imagine, must always be the case where she is not sure of a
return to her attachment.

In such a situation, to lay the heart open to any person whatever, does not
appear to me consistent with the perfection of female delicacy. But perhaps I
am in the wrong. At the same time I must tell you, that, in point of prudence,
it concerns you to attend well to the consequences of such a discovery. These
secrets, however important in your own estim^^ion, may apper very trifling to
your friend, who possibly will not enter into your feelings, but may rather
consider them as a subject of pleasantry. For this reason, love secrets are of
all others the worst kept. But the consequences to you may be very serious, as
no man of spirit and delicacy ever valued a heart much hacknied in the ways of
love.

If, therefore, you must have a friend to pour out your heart to, be sure of
her honor and secrecy. Let her not be a married woman, especially if she lives
happily with her husband. There are certain unguarded moments, in which such a
woman, though the best and worthiest of her sex, may let hints escape, which,
at other times, or to any other person than her husband, she would be incapable
of; nor will a husband in this case feel himself under the same obligation of
secrecy and honor, as if you had put your confidence originally in himself,
especially on a subject which the world is apt to treat so lightly.

If all other circumstances are equal, there are obvious advantages in your
making friends of one another. The ties of blood, and your being so much united
in one common interest, form an additional bond of union to your friendship. If
your brothers should have the good fortune to have hearts susceptible of
friendship, to possess truth, honor, sense, and delicacy of sentiment, they
are the fittest and most unexceptionable confidants. By placing confidence in
them, you will receive every advantage which you could hope for from the
friendship of men, without any of the inconveniences that attend such
connexions with our sex.

Beware of making confidants of your servants. Dignity not properly understood
very readily degenerates into pride, which enters into no friendship, because
it cannot bear an equal, and is so fond of flattery as to grasp at it even from
servants and dependants. The most intimate confidants, therefore, of proud
people, are valets-de-chambre and waiting women. Show the utmost humanity to
your servants; make their situation as comfortable to them as possible: but if
you make them your confidants, you spoil them, and debase themselves.

Never allow any person, under the pretended sanction of friendship, to be so
familiar as to lose a proper respect to you. Never allow them to teaze you on
any subject that is disagreeable, or where you have once taken your resolution.
Many will tell you, that this reserve is inconsistent with the freedom which
friendship allows: but a certain respect is as necessary in friendship as in
love. Without it you may be liked as a child, but you will never be beloved as
an equal.

The temper and disposition of the heart in your sex make you enter more
readily and warmly into friendships than men. Your natural propensity to it is
so strong, that you often run into intimacies which you soon have sufficient
cause to repent of; and this makes your friendships so very fluctuating.

Another great obstacle to the sincerity, as well as steadiness of your
friendships, is the great clashing of your interests, in the pursuits of love,
ambition, or vanity. For these reasons, it would appear, at first view, more
eligible for you to contract your friendships with the men. Among other obvious
advantages of an easy intercourse between the two sexes, it occasions an
emulation and exertion in each to excel and be agreeable; hence their
respective excellencies are mutually communicated and blended. As their
interests in no degree interfere, there can be no foundation for jealousy, or
suspicion of rivalship. The friendship of a man for a woman is always blended
with tenderness, which he never feels for one of his own sex, even where love
is in no degree concerned. Besides, we are conscious of a natural title you
have to our protection and good offices, and therefore we feel an additional
obligation of honor to serve you, and to observe an inviolable secrecy,
whenever you confide in us.

But apply these observations with great caution. Thousands of women of the
best hearts and finest parts have been ruined by men who approach them under
the specious name of friendship. But supposing a man to have the most undoubted
honor, yet his friendship to a woman is so near akin to love, that if she be
very agreeable in her person, she will probably very soon find a lover, where
she only wished to meet a friend. Let me here, however, warn you against that
weakness so common among vain women -- the imagination, that every man, who
takes particular notice of you, is a lover. Nothing can expose you more to
ridicule than the taking up a man on the suspicion of being your lover, who
perhaps never once thought of you in that view, and giving yourselves those
airs so common among all silly women on such occasions.

There is a kind of unmeaning gallantry much practiced by some men, which, if
you have any discernment, you will find really very harmless. Men of this sort
will attend you to public places, and be useful to you by a number of little
observances, which those of a superior class do not so well understand, or have
not leisure to regard, or perhaps are too proud to submit to. Look on the
compliments of such men as words of course, which they repeat to every
agreeable woman of their acquaintance. There is a familiarity they are apt to
assume, which a proper dignity in your behavior will be easily able to check.

There is a different species of men whom you may like as agreeable companions,
men of worth, taste, and genius, whose conversation, in some respects, may be
superior to what you generally meet with among your own sex. It will be foolish
in you to deprive yourselves of an useful and agreeable acquaintance, merely
because idle people say he is your lover. Such a man may like your company,
without having any design on your person.

People whose sentiments, and particularly whose tastes correspond, naturally
like to associate together, although neither of them have the most distant view
of any further connection. But as this similarity of minds often gives rise to a
more tender attachment than friendship, it will be prudent to keep a watchful
eye over yourselves, lest your hearts become too far engaged before you are
aware of it. At the same time, I do not think that your sex, at least in this
part of the world, have much of that sensibility which disposes to such
attachments. What is commonly called love among you is rather gratitude, and a
partiality to the man who prefers you to the rest of your sex; and such a man
you often marry, with little of either personal esteem or affection. Indeed,
without an unusual share of natural sensibility, and very peculiar good
fortune, a woman in this country has very little probability of marrying for
love. These observations are hap^ (...) America, although perfectly jus^ (...)


It is a maxim laid down among you, and a very prudent one it is, that love is
not to begin on your part; but is entirely to be the consequence of our
attachment to you. Now, supposing a woman to have sense and taste, she will not
find many men to whom she can possibly be supposed to bear any considerable
share of esteem. Among these few, it is very great chance if any of them
distinguishes her particularly. Love, at least with us, is exceedingly
capricious, and will not always fix, where reason says it should. But supposing
one of them should become particularly attached to her, it is still extremely
improbable that he should be the man in the world her heart most approves of.

As, therefore, nature has not given you that unlimited range in your choice
which we enjoy, she has wisely and benevolently assigned to you a greater
flexibility of taste on this subject. Some agreeable qualities recommend a
gentleman to your common good liking and friendship. In the course of his
acquaintance, he contracts an attachment to you. When you perceive it, it
excites your gratitude: this gratitude rises into a preference: and this
preference, perhaps, at last advances to some degree of attachment, especially
if it meets with crosses and difficulties; for these, and a state of suspense,
are very great incitements to attachment, and are the food of love in both
sexes. If attachment was not excited in your sex in this manner, there is not
one of a million of you, that could ever marry with any degree of love.

A man of taste and delicacy marries a woman, because he loves her more that
any other. A woman of equal taste and delicacy marries him because she esteems
him, and because he gives her that preference. But if a man unfortunately
becomes attached to a woman whose heart is secretly pre-engaged, his
attachment, instead of obtaining a suitable return, is particularly offensive;
and if he persists to teaze her, he makes himself equally the object of her
scorn and aversion.

The effects of love among men are diversified by their different tempers. An
artful man may counterfeit every one of them so easily, as to impose on a young
girl of an open, generous, and feeling heart, if she be not extremely on her
guard. The finest parts in such a girl may not always prove sufficient for her
security. The dark and crooked paths of cunning are unsearchable and
inconceivable to an honorable and elevated mind.

The following, I apprehend, are the most genuine effects of an honorable
passion among the men, and the most difficult to counterfeit. A man of delicacy
often betrays his passion by his too great anxiety to conceal it, especially if
he has little hopes of success. True love, in all its stages, seeks
concealment, and never expects success. It renders a man not only respectful,
but timid to the highest degree, in his behavior to the woman he loves. To
conceal the awe she inspires him with, he may sometimes affect pleasantry; but
it sits aukwardly on him, and he quickly relapses into seriousness, if not into
dullness. He magnifies all her real perfections in his imagination, and is
either blind to her failings, or converts them into beauties. Like a person
conscious of guilt, he is jealous that every eye observes his; and to avoid
this, he shuns all the little observances of common gallantry.

His heart and his character will be improved in every respect by his
attachment. His manners will become more gentle, and his conversation more
agreeable: but diffidence and embarrassment will always make him appear to
disadvantage in the company of his mistress. If the fascination continue long*
it will totally depress his spirits, and extinguish every active, vigorous, and
manly principle of his mind. You will find this subject beautifully and
pathetically painted in Thomson's Spring.

When you observe, in a gentleman's behavior, these marks which I have
described above, reflect seriously what you are to do. If his attachment be
agreeable to you, I leave you to do as nature, good sense, and delicacy shall
direct you. If you love him, let me advise you never to discover to him ^he
full extent of your love, no not although you marry him. That sufficiently
shows your preference, which is all he is entitled to know. If he has delicacy,
he will ask for no stronger proof of affection, for your sake; if he has sense,
he will not ask it for his own. This is an unpleasant truth; but it is my duty
to let you know it. Violent love cannot subsist, at least cannot be expressed,
for any time together, on both sides; otherwise the certain consequence,
however concealed, is satiety and disgust. Nature in this case has laid the
reserve on you.

If you see evident proofs of a gentleman's attachment, and are determined to
shut your heart against him, as you ever hope to be used with generosity by the
person who shall engage your own heart, treat him honorably and humanely. Do
not let him linger in a miserable suspense; but be anxious to let him know your
sentiments with regard to him.

However people's hearts may deceive them, there is scarcely a person that can
love for any time, without at least some distant hope of success. If you really
wish to undeceive a lover, you may do it in a variety of ways. There is a
certain species of easy familiarity in your behavior, which may satisfy him,
if he has any discernment left, that he has nothing to hope for. But perhaps
your particular temper may not admit of this: you may easily show that you want
to avoid his company; but if he be a man whose friendship you wish to preserve,
you may not choose this method, because then you lose him in every capacity.
You may get a common friend to explain matters to him, or fall on many other
devices, if you be seriously anxious to put him out of suspense.

But if you be resolved against every such method, at least do not shun
opportunities of letting him explain himself. If you do this, you act
barbarously and unjustly. If he brings you to an explanation, give him a
polite, but resolute and decisive answer. In whatever way you convey your
sentiments to him, if he is a man of spirit and delicacy, he will give you no
further trouble, nor apply to your friends for their intercession. This last is
a method of courtship, which every man of spirit will disdain. He will never
whine nor sue for your pity: that would mortify him almost as much as your
scorn. In short, you may possibly break such a heart, but you can never bend
it. Great pride always accompanies delicacy, however concealed under the
appearance of the utmost gentleness and modesty, and is the passion of all
others the most difficult to conquer.

There is a case where a woman may coquette justifiably to the utmost verge
which her conscience will allow. It is where a gentleman purposely declines to
make his addresses, till such time as he thinks himself perfectly sure of her
consent. This, at bottom, is intended to force a woman to give up the undoubted
privilege of her sex, the privilege of refusing; it is intended to force her to
explain herself, in effect, before the gentleman deigns to do it, and by this
means to oblige her to violate the modesty and delicacy of her sex, and to
invert the clearest order of nature. All this sacrifice is proposed to be made
merely to gratify a most despicable vanity in a man, who would degrade the very
woman whom he wishes to make his wife.

It is of great importance to distinguish whether a gentleman who has the
appearance of being your lover, delays to speak explicitly, from the motive I
have mentioned, or from a diffidence inseparable from true attachment. In the
one case, you can scarcely use him too ill; in the other, you ought to use him
with great kindness: and the greatest kindness you can show him, if you are
determined not to listen to his addresses, is to let him know it as soon as
possible.

I know the many excuses with which women endeavor to justify themselves to
the world, and to their own consciences, when they act otherwise. Sometimes
they plead ignorance, or at least uncertainty, of the gentleman's real
sentiments. That may sometimes be the case. Sometimes they plead the decorum of
their sex, which enjoins an equal behavior to all men, and forbids them to
consider any man as a lover till he has directly told them so. Perhaps few
women carry their ideas of female delicacy and decorum so far as I do. But I
must say, you are not entitled to plead the obligation of these virtues, in
opposition to the superior ones of gratitude, justice, and humanity. The man is
entitled to all these, who prefers you to the rest of your sex, and perhaps
whose greatest weakness is this very preference. The truth of the matter is,
vanity, and the love of admiration, is so prevailing a passion among you, that
you may be considered to make a very great sacrifice whenever you give up a
lover, till every art of coquetry fails to keep him, or till he forces you to
an explanation. You can be fond of the love, when you are indifferent to, or
even when you despise the lover.

But the deepest and most artful coquetry is employed by women of superior
taste and sense, to engage and fix the heart of a man whom the world and whom
they themselves esteem, although they are firmly determined never to marry him.
But his conversation amuses them, and his attachment is the highest
gratification to their vanity: nay, they can sometimes be gratified with the
utter ruin of his fortune, fame, and happiness. God forbid I should ever think
so of all your sex! I know many of them have principles, have generosity and
dignity of soul, that elevate them above the worthless vanity I have been
speaking of.

Such a woman, I am persuaded, may always convert a lover, if she cannot give
him her affections, into a warm and steady friend, provided he is a man of
sense, resolution, and candor. If she explain herself with a generous openness
and freedom, he must feel the stroke as a man; but he will likewise bear it as
a man: what he suffers, he will suffer in silence. Every sentiment of esteem
will remain: but love, though it requires very little food, and is easily
surfeited with too much, yet it requires some. He will view her in the light of
a married woman; and though passion subsides, yet a man of a candid and
generous heart always retains a tenderness for a woman he has once loved, and
who has used him well, beyond what he feels for any other of her sex.

If he has not confided his own secret to any body, he has an undoubted title
to ask you not to divulge it. If a woman choose to trust any of her companions
with her own unfortunate attachments, she may, as it is her own affair alone:
but if she has any generosity or gratitude, she will not betray a secret which
does not belong to her.

Male coquetry is much more inexcusable than female, as well as more
pernicious; but it is rare in this country. Very few men will give themselves
the trouble to gain or retain any woman's affections, unless they have views on
them either of an honorable or dishonorable ^ind. Men employed in the
pursuits of business, ambition, or pleasure, will not give themselves the
trouble to engage a woman's affections, merely from the vanity of conquest, and
of triumphing over the heart of an innocent and defenseless girl. Besides,
people never value much what is entirely in their power. A man of parts,
sentiment, and address, if he lay aside all regard to truth and humanity, may
engage the hearts of fifty women at the same time, and may likewise conduct his
coquetry with so much art, as to put it out of the power of any of them to
specify a single expression that could be said to be directly expressive of
love.

This ambiguity of behavior, this art of keeping one in suspense, is the great
secret of coquetry in both sexes. It is the more cruel in us, because we can
carry it to what length we please, and continue it as long as we please,
without your being so much as at liberty to complain or expostulate; whereas we
can break our chain, and force you to explain, whenever we become impatient of
our situation.

I have insisted the more particularly on this subject of courtship, because it
may most readily happen to you at that early period of life, when you can have
little experience or knowledge of the world; when your passions are warm, and
your judgments not arrived at such full maturity as to be able to correct them.
I wish you to possess such high principles of honor and generosity, as will
render you incapable of deceiving, and at the same time to possess that ^^ute
discernment which may secure you against being deceived.

A woman in this country, may easily prevent the first impressions of love; and
every motive of prudence and delicacy should make her guard her heart against
them, till such time as she has received the most convincing proofs of the
attachment of a man of such merit, as will justify a reciprocal regard. Your
hearts, indeed, may be shut inflexibly and permanently against all the merit a
man can possess. That may be your misfortune, but cannot be your fault. In such
a situation, you would be equally unjust to yourself and your lover, if you
gave him your hand, when your heart revolted against him. But miserable will be
your fate, if you allow an attachment to steal on you before you are sure of a
return; or, what is infinitely worse, where there are wanting those qualities
which alone can insure happiness in a married state.

I know nothing that renders a woman more despicable, than her thinking it
essential to happiness to be married. Besides the gross indelicacy of the
sentiment, it is a false one, as thousands of women have experienced. But if it
were true, the belief that it is so, and the consequent impatience to be
married, is the most effectual way to prevent it.

You must not think from this, that I do not wish you to marry; on the
contrary, I am of opinion, that you may attain a superior degree of happiness
in a married state, to what you can possibly find in any other. I know the
forlorn and unprotected situation of an old maid, the chagrin and peevishness
which are apt to infect their tempers, and the great difficulty of making a
transition, with dignity and cheerfulness, from the period of youth, beauty,
admiration, and respect, into the calm, silent, unnoticed retreat of declining
years.

I see some unmarried women, of active, vigorous minds, and great vivacity of
spirits, degrading themselves; sometimes by entering into a dissipated course
of life, unsuitable to their years, and exposing themselves to the ridicule of
girls, who might have been their grandchildren; sometimes by oppressing their
acquaintances by impertinent intrusions into their private affairs; and
sometimes by being the propagators of scandal and defamation. All this is owing
to an exuberant activity of spirit, which, if it had found employment at home,
would have rendered them respectable and useful members of society.

I see other women, in the same situation, gentle, modest, blessed with sense,
taste, delicacy, and every milder feminine virtue of the heart, but of weak
spirits, bashful, and timid; I see such women sinking into obscurity and
insignificance, and gradually losing every elegant accomplishment; for this
evident reason, that they are not united to a partner who has sense, and worth,
and taste, to know their value; one who is able to draw forth their concealed
qualities, and show them to advantage; who can give that support to their
feeble spirits, which they stand so much in need of; and who, by his affection
and tenderness, might make such a woman happy, in exerting every talent, and
accomplishing herself in every elegant art that could contribute to his
amusement.

In short, I am of opinion, that a married state, if entered into from proper
motives of esteem and affection, will be the happiest for yourselves, make you
most respectable in the eyes of the world, and the most useful members of
society: but I confess I am not enough of a patriot, to wish you to marry for
the good of the public; -- I wish you to marry for no other reason but to make
yourselves happier. When I am so particular in my advices about your conduct, I
own my heart beats with the fond hopes of making you worthy the attachment of
men who will deserve you, and be sensible of your merit. But heaven forbid you
should ever relinquish the ease and independence of a single life, to become
the slaves of a fool or a tyrant's caprice.

As these have always been my sentiments, I shall do you but justice, when I
leave you in such independent circumstances, as may lay you under no temptation
to do from necessity what you would never do from choice. This will likewise
save you from that cruel mortification to a woman of spirit, the suspicion that
a gentleman thinks he does you an honor or a favor, when he asks you for his
wife.

If I live till you arrive at that age when you shall be capable to judge for
yourselves, and do not strangely alter my sentiments, I shall act toward you
in a very different manner from what most parents do. My opinion has always
been, that when that period arrives, the parental authority ceases.

I hope I shall always treat you with that affection and easy confidence which
may dispose you to look on me as your friend; in that capacity alone I shall
think myself entitled to give you my opinion; in the doing of which, I should
think myself highly criminal, if I did not, to the utmost of my power,
endeavor to divest myself of all personal vanity, and all prejudices in favor
of my particular taste. If you did not choose to follow my advice, I should
not, on that account, cease to love you as my children: though my right to your
obedience was expired, yet I should think nothing could release me from the
ties of nature and humanity.

You may, perhaps, imagine, that the reserved behavior which I recommend to
you, and your appearing seldom at public places, must cut off all opportunities
of your being acquainted with gentlemen; I am very far from intending this. I
advise you to no reserve, but what will render you more respected and beloved
by our sex. I do not think public places suited to make people acquainted
together: they can only be distinguished there by their looks and external
behavior; but it is in private companies alone, where you can expect easy and
agreeable conversation, which I should never wish you to decline. If you do not
allow gentlemen to become acquainted with you, you can never expect to marry
with attachment on either side. Love is very seldom produced at first sight, at
least it must have, in that case, a very unjustifiable foundation. True love is
founded on esteem, in a correspondence of tastes and sentiments, and steals on
the heart imperceptibly.

There is one advice I shall leave you, to which I beg your particular
attention: -- Before your affections come to be in the least engaged to any
man, examine your tempers, your tastes, and your hearts, very severely, and
settle in your own minds, what are the requisites to your happiness in a
married state; and, as it is almost impossible that you should get every thing
you wish, come to a steady determination what you are to consider as essential,
and what may be sacrificed.

If you have hearts disposed by nature for love and friendship, and possess
those feelings which enable you to enter into all the refinements and
delicacies of these attachments, consider well, for heaven's sake, and as you
value your future happiness, before you give them any indulgence. If you have
the misfortune (for a very great misfortune it commonly is to your sex) to have
such a temper and such sentiments deeply rooted in you, if you have spirit and
resolution to resist the solicitations of vanity, the persecution of friends
(for you will have lost the only friend that would never persecute you,) and
can support the prospect of the many inconveniences attending the state of an
old maid, which I formerly pointed out, then you may indulge yourselves in that
kind of sentimental reading and conversation which is most correspondent to
your feelings.

But if you find, on a strict self-examination, that marriage is absolutely
essential to your happiness, keep the secret inviolable in your own bosoms, for
the reasons I formerly mentioned: but shun, as you would do the most fatal
poison, all that species of reading and conversation which warms the
imagination, which engages and softens the heart, and raises the taste above
the level of common life: if you do otherwise, consider the terrible conflict
of passions this may afterward raise in your breasts.

If this refinement once takes deep root in your minds, and you do not obey its
dictates, but marry from vulgar and mercenary views, you may never be able to
eradicate it entirely, and then it will embitter all your married days. Instead
of meeting with sense, delicacy, tenderness, a lover, a friend, an equal
companion, in a husband, you may be tired with insipidity and dullness; shocked
with indelicacy, or mortified by indifference. You will find none to
compassionate, or even understand your sufferings; for your husbands may not
use you cruelly, and may give you as much money for your clothes, personal
expense, and domestic necessaries, as is suitable to their fortunes. The world
would therefore look on you as unreasonable women, and that did not deserve to
be happy, if you were not so. To avoid these complicated evils, if you are
determined at all events to marry, I would advise you to make all your reading
and amusements of such a kind, as do not affect the heart nor the imagination,
except in the way of wit or humor.

I have no view by these advices to lead your tastes; I only want to persuade
you of the necessity of knowing your own minds, which, though seemingly very
easy, is what your sex seldom attain on many important occasions in life, but
particularly on this of which I am speaking. There is not a quality I more
anxiously wish you to possess, than that collected, decisive spirit, which
rests on itself, which enables you to see where your true happiness lies, and
to pursue it with the most determined resolution. In matters of business,
follow the advice of those who know them better than yourselves, and in whose
integrity you can confide: but in matters of taste, that depend on your own
feeling, consult no one friend whatever, but consult your own hearts.

If a gentleman makes his addresses to you, or gives you reason to believe he
will do so, before you allow your affections to be engaged, endeavo^r, in the
most prudent and secret manner, to procure from your friends every necessary
piece of information concerning him; such as his character for sense, his
morals, his temper, fortune* and family; whether it is distinguished for parts
and worth, or for folly, knavery, and loathsome hereditary diseases. When your
friends inform you of these, they have fulfilled their duty. If they go
farther, they have not that deference for you, which a becoming dignity on your
part would effectually command.

Whatever your views are in marrying, take every possible precaution to prevent
their being disappointed. If fortune and the pleasures it brings, are your aim,
it is not sufficient that the settlements of a jointure and children's
provisions be ample, and properly secured; it is necessary that you should
enjoy the fortune during your own life. The principal security you can have for
this, will depend on your marrying a good-natured, generous man, who despises
money, and who will let you live where you can best enjoy that pleasure, that
pomp and parade of life, for which you married him.

From what I have said, you will easily see that I could never pretend to
advise whom you should marry; but I can with great confidence advise whom you
should not marry.

Avoid a companion that may entail any hereditary disease on your posterity,
particularly (that most dreadful of all human calamities) madness. It is the
height of imprudence to run into such a danger, and, in my opinion, highly
criminal.

Do not marry a fool; he is the most intractable of all animals; he is led by
his passions and caprices, and is incapable of hearing the voice of reason. It
may probably, too, hurt your vanity to have husbands for whom you have reason
to blush and tremble every time they open their lips in company. But the worst
circumstance that attends a fool, is his constant jealousy of his wife being
thought to govern him. This renders it impossible to lead him; and he is
continually doing absurd and disagreeable things, for no other reason but to
show he dares do them.

A rake is always a suspicious husband, because he has only known the most
worthless of your sex. He likewise entails the worst diseases on his wife and
children, if he has the misfortune to have any.

If you have a sense of religion yourselves, do not think of husbands who have
none. If they have tolerable understandings, they will be glad that you have
religion, for their own sakes, and for the sake of their families; but it will
sink you in their esteem. If they are weak men, they will be continually
teazing and shocking you about your principles. -- If you have children, you
will suffer the most bitter distress, in seeing all your endeavors to form
their minds to virtue and piety, all your endeavors to secure their present
and eternal happiness, frustrated and turned into ridicule.

As I look on your choice of a husband to be of the greatest consequence to
your happiness, I hope you will make it with the utmost circumspection. Do not
give way to a sudden sally of passion, and dignify it with the name of love. --
Genuine love is not founded in caprice; it is founded in nature, on honorable
views, on virtue, on similarity of tastes and sympathy of souls.

If ^ou have these sentiments, you will never marry any one, when you are not
in that situation, in point of fortune, which is necessary to the happiness of
either of you. What that competency may be, can only be determined by your own
tastes. It would be ungenerous in you to take advantage of a lover's
attachment, to plunge him into distress; and if he has any honor, no personal
gratification will ever tempt him to enter into any connection which will render
you unhappy. If you have as much between you, as to satisfy all your demands,
it is sufficient.

I shall conclude with endeavoring to remove a difficulty which must naturally
occur to any woman of reflection on the subject of marriage. What is to become
of all those refinements of delicacy, that dignity of manners, which checked
all familiarities, and suspended desire in respectful and awful admiration? In
answer to this, I shall only observe, that if motives of interest or vanity
have had any share in your resolutions to marry, none of these chimerical
notions will give you any pain: nay, they will very quickly appear as
ridiculous in your own eyes, as they probably always did in the eyes of your
husbands. They have been sentiments which have floated in your imagination, but
have never reached your hearts. But if these sentiments have been truly
genuine, and if you have had the singular happy fate to attach those who
understand them, you have no reason to be afraid.

Marriage, indeed, will at once dispel the enchantment raised by external
beauty; but the virtues and graces that first warmed the heart, that reserve
and delicacy which always left the lover something further to wish, and often
made him doubtful of your sensibility or attachment, may and ought ever to
remain. The tumult of passion will necessarily subside: but it will be
succeeded by endearment, that affects the heart in a more equal, more sensible,
and tender manner. But I must check myself, and not indulge in descriptions,
that may mislead you, and that too sensibly awake the remembrance of my happier
days, which, perhaps, it were better for me to forget for ever.

I have thus given you my opinion on some of the most important articles of
your future life, chiefly calculated for that period when you are just entering
the world. I have endeavored to avoid some peculiarities of opinion, which,
from their contradiction to the general practice of the world, I might
reasonably have suspected were not so well founded. But, in writing to you, I
am afraid my heart has been too full, and too warmly interested, to allow me to
keep this resolution. This may have produced some embarrassments and some
seeming contradictions. What I have written has been the amusement of some
solitary hours, and has served to divert some melancholy reflections. -- I am
conscious I undertook a task to which I was very unequal; but I have discharged
a part of my duty. -- You will, at least, be pleased with it, as the last mark
of your father's love and attention.

THE LADIES' LIBRARY. An unfortunate Mother's Advice to her absent Daughters,
in a Letter to Miss Pennington.
By the late Lady Pennington.
My Dear Jenny,
WAS there any probability that a letter from me would be permitted to reach
your hand alone, I should not have chosen this least eligible method of writing
to you. The public is no way concerned in family affairs, and ought not to be
made a party in them; but my circumstances are such, as lay me under the
necessity of either communicating my sentiments to the world, or of concealing
them from you: the latter would, I think, be the breach of an indispensable
duty, which obliges me to waive the impropriety of the former.

A long train of events, of a most extraordinary nature, conspired to remove
you very early from the tender care of an affectionate mother. You were too
young to be able to form any right judgment of her conduct; and since that time
it is very probable that it has been represented to you in a most unfavourable
light. The general prejudice against me I never gave myself the useless trouble
of any endeavor to remove. I do not mean to infer from hence, that the opinion
of others is of no material consequence; on the contrary, I would advise you
always to remember, that, next to the consciousness of acting right, the public
voice should be regarded; and to endeavor by a prudent behavior, even in the
most trifling instances, to secure it in your favor. The being educated in a
different opinion, was a misfortune to me. I was indeed early and wisely
taught, that virtue was the one thing necessary, and that without it no
happiness could be expected either in this, or in any future stat^ of
existence; but, with this good principle, a mistaken one was at the same time
inculcated, namely, that the self-approbation arising from conscious virtue was
alone sufficient; and, that the censures of an ill-natured world, ever ready to
calumniate, when not founded on truth, were beneath the concern of a person
whose actions were guided by the superior motive of obedience to the will of
heaven.

This notion, strongly imbibed before reason had gained sufficient strength to
discover its fallacy, was the cause of an inconsiderate conduct in my
subsequent life, which marked my character with a disadvantageous impression.
To you I shall speak with the most unreserved sincerity, not concealing a fault
which you may profit by the knowledge of; and therefore I freely own, that in
my younger years, satisfied with keeping strictly within the bounds of virtue,
I took a foolish pleasure in exceeding those of prudence, and was ridiculously
vain of indulging a latitude of behavior, into which others of my age were
afraid of launching: but then, in justice to myself, I must at the same time
declare, that this freedom was only taken in public company; and so extremely
cautious was I of doing any thing which appeared to me a just ground for
censure, that I call heaven to witness, your father was the first man whom I
ever made any private assignation with, or even met in a room alone; nor did I
tak^ that liberty with him till the most solemn mutual engagement, the
matrimonial ceremony, had bound us to each other. My behavior, then, he has
frequently since acknowledged, fully convinced him I was not only innocent of
any criminal act, but of every vicious thought; and that the outward freedom of
my deportment, which proceeded merely from a great gaiety of temper, and from a
very high flow of spirits, never broke (if the expression may be allowed) into
the formal rules of decorum. To sum up the whole in a few words, my private
conduct was what the severest prude could not condemn; my public, such as the
most finished coquet alone would have ventured upon: the latter only could be
known to the world, and consequently, from thence must their opinion be taken.
You will therefore easily be sensible, that it would not be favorable to me;
on the contrary, it gave a general prejudice against me: and this has been
since made use of as an argument to gain credit to the malicious falsehoods
laid to my charge. For this reason, convinced by long experience that the
greater part of mankind are so apt to receive, and so willing to retain a bad
impression of others, that, when it is once established, there is hardly a
possibility of removing it through life; I have, for some years past, silently
acquiesced in the dispensations of providence, without attempting any
justification of myself; and, being conscious that the infamous aspersions cast
on my character were not founded on truth, I have sat down content with the
certainty of an open and perfect acquittal of all vicious dispositions, or
criminal conduct, at that great day, when all things shall appear as they
really are, and when both our actions, and the most secret motives for them,
will be made manifest to men and angels.

Had your father been among the number of those who were deceived by
appearances, I should have thought it my duty to leave no method unessayed to
clear myself in his opinion; but that was not the case. He knows that many of
those appearances which have been urged against me, I was forced to submit to,
not only from his direction, but by his absolute command; which, contrary to
reason and to my own interest, I was, for more than tw^lve years, weak enough
implicitly to obey; and that others, even since our separation, were occasioned
by some particular instances of his behavior, which rendered it impossible for
me to act with safety in any other manner. To him I appeal for the truth of
this assertion, who is conscious of the meaning that may hereafter be explained
to you. Perfectly acquainted with my principles and with my natural
disposition, his heart, I am convinced, never here condemned me. Being greatly
incensed that my father's will gave to me an independent fortune; which will,
he imagined, I was accessory to, or at least that I could have prevented; he
was thereby laid open to the arts of designing men, who, having their own
interest solely in view, worked him up into a desire of revenge, and from
thence, upon probable circumstances, into a public accusation: though that
public accusation was supported only by the single testimony of a person, whose
known falsehood had made him a thousand times declare that he would not credit
her oath in the most trifling incident; yet, when he was disappointed of the
additional evidence he might have been flattered with the hope of obtaining, it
was too late to recede. This I sincerely believe to be the truth of the case,
though I too well know his tenacious temper, to expect a present justification;
but, whenever he shall arrive on the verge of eternity, if Reason holds her
place at the awful moment, and if religion has then any power on his heart, I
make no doubt, he will at that time acquit me to his children; and with truth
he must then confess, that no part of my behavior to him ever deserved the
treatment I have met with.

Sorry am I to be under the necessity of pointing out faults in the conduct of
another, which are, perhaps, long si^ce repented of, and ought in that case to
be as much forgotten as they are most truly forgiven. Heaven knows, that, so
far from retaining any degree of resentment in my heart, the person breathes
not, whom I wish to hurt, or to whom I would not this moment render every
service in my power. The injuries which I have sustained, had I no children,
should contentedly be buried in silence till the great day of retribution; but,
in justice to you, to them, and myself, it is incumbent on me, as far as
possible, to efface the false impressions, which by such silence, might be
fixed on your mind, and on those of your brothers and sisters, whom I include
with you. To this end, it will be necessary to enter into a circumstantial
history of near fifteen years, full of incidents of a nature so uncommon as
scarcely to be credible. This, I am convinced, will effectually clear me, in
your opinion, of the imputations I now lie under; and it will prove, almost to
a demonstration, the true cause of those proceedings against me that were
couched under pretended motives, as injurious to my reputation as they were
false in themselves.

But this must be deferred some time longer. You are all yet too young to enter
into things of this kind, or to judge properly of them. When a few years shall,
by ripening your understandings, remove this objection, you shall be informed
of the whole truth, most impartially and without disguise. 'Till then suspend
your belief of all that may have reached your ears with regard to me, and wait
the knowledge of those facts, which my future letters will reveal for your
information.

Thus much I thought it necessary to premise concerning myself, though foreign
to the design of this epistle, which is only to remind you that you have still
an affectionate mother, who is anxious for your welfare, and desirous of giving
you some advice with regard to your conduct in life. I would lay down a few
precepts for you, which, if attended to, will supply as far as it is in my
power to supply, the deprivation of a constant and tender maternal care. The
address is to you in particular, your sisters being yet too young to receive
it; but my intention is for the equal service of you all.

You are just entering, my dear girl, into a world full of deceit and
falsehood, where few persons or things appear in their true character. Vice
hides her deformity with the borrowed garb of virtue; and, though discernible
to an intelligent and careful observer, by the unbecoming awkwardness of her
deportment under it, she passes on thousands undetected. Every present pleasure
usurps the name of happiness, and as such deceives the unwary pursuer. Thus one
general mask disguises the whole face of things; and it requires a long
experience, and a penetrating judgment, to discover the truth. Thrice happy
they, whose docile tempers improve from the instructions of maturer age, and
who thereby attain some degree of this necessary knowledge, while it may be
useful in directing their conduct!

The turn which your mind may now take, will fix the happiness or misery of
your future life; and I am too nearly concerned for your welfare, not to be
most solicitously anxious that you may be early led into so just a way of
thinking, as will be productive to you of a prudent, rational behavior, and
which will secure to you a lasting felicity. You were old enough before our
separation, to convince me that heaven has not denied you a good natural
understanding. This, if properly cultivated, will set you above that trifling
disposition, too common among the female world, which makes youth ridiculous,
maturity insignificant, and old age contemptible. It is therefore needless to
enlarge on that head, since good sense is there the best adviser; and, without
it, all admonitions or directions on the subject would be as fruitless as to
lay down rules for the conduct or for the actions of an idiot.

There is no room to doubt but that sufficient care will be taken to give you a
polite education; but a religious one is still of greater consequence.
Necessary as the former is for your making a proper figure in the world, and
for your being well accepted in it, the latter is yet more so, to secure to you
the approbation of the greatest and best of Beings; on whose favor depends
your everlasting happiness. Let therefore your duty to GOD be ever the first
and principal object of your care. As your Creator and Governor, he claims
adoration and obedience; as your Father and Friend, he demands submissive duty
and affection. Remember that from this common parent of the universe you
received your life; that to his general providence you owe the continuance of
it; and to his bounty you are indebted for all the health, ease, advantages, or
enjoyments, which help to make that life agreeable. A sense of benefits
received naturally inspires a grateful disposition, with a desire of making
suitable returns. All that can here be made, for innumerable favors every
moment bestowed, is a thankful acknowledgment, and a willing obedience. In
these be never wanting. Make it an invariable rule to begin and end the day
with a solemn address to the Deity. I mean not by this, what is commonly, with
too much propriety, called saying of prayers, namely, a customary repetition of
a few good words, without either devotion or attention; than which nothing is
more inexcusable and affrontive to the Deity; it is the homage of the heart
that can alone be accepted by him. Expressions of our absolute dependence on,
and of our entire resignation to him -- thanksgivings for the mercies already
received -- petitions for those blessings it is fit for us to pray for -- and
intercessions for all our fellow creatures, compose the principal parts of this
duty; which may be comprised in a very few words, or may be more enlarged upon,
as the circumstances of time and disposition may render most suitable; for it
is not the length, but the sincerity and attention of our prayers that will
make them efficacious. A good heart, joined to a tolerable understanding, will
seldom be at a loss for proper words with which to clothe these sentiments: and
all persons being best acquainted with their own particular circumstances, may
reasonably be supposed best qualified for adapting their petitions and
acknowledgments to them; but for those who are of a different opinion, there
are many excellent forms of prayer already composed. Among these, none that I
know of, are equal to doctor Hoadley's, the late bishop of Winchester, which I
recommend to your perusal and use. In the preface to them, you will find better
instructions on this head, than I am capable of giving; and to these I refer
you.

It is acknowledged that our petitions cannot in any degree alter the intention
of a being, who is in himself invariable, and without a possibility of change:
all that can be expected from them is, that, by bettering ourselves, they will
render us more proper objects of his favorable regard: and this must
necessarily be the result of a serious, regular, and constant discharge of this
branch of our duty; for it is scarcely possible to offer up our sincere and
fervent devotions to heaven every morning and evening, without leaving on our
minds such useful impressions as will naturally dispose us to a ready and
cheerful obedience, and will inspire a filial fear of offending, the best
security virtue can have. As you value your own happiness, let not the force of
bad examples ever lead you into an habitual disuse of secret prayer; nor let an
unpardonable negligence so far prevail on you, as to make you rest satisfied
with a formal, customary, inattentive repetition of some w^^l-chosen words: let
your heart and attention always go with your lips; and experience will soon
convince you, that this permission of addressing the supreme being is the most
valuable prerogative of human nature; the chief, nay the only support under all
the distresses and calamities to which this state of sin and misery is liable;
the highest rational satisfaction the mind is capable of on this side the
grave; and the best preparative for everlasting happiness beyond it. This is a
duty ever in your own power; and therefore you only will be culpable by the
omission of it.

Public worship may not always be so: but whenever it is, do not wilfully
neglect the service of the church, at least on Sundays; and let your behavior
there be adapted to the solemnity of the place, and to the intention of the
meeting. Regard neither the actions nor the dress of others: let not your eyes
rove in search of acquaintance; but in the time of divine service avoid, as
much as possible, all complimental civilities, of which there is too great an
intercourse, in most of our churches. Remember that your only business there is
to pay a solemn act of devotion to Almighty God, and let every part of your
conduct be suitable to this great end. If you hear a good sermon, treasure it
in your memory, that you may reap all the benefit it was capable of imparting;
if you should hear but an indifferent one, some good things must be in it;
retain those, and let the remainder be buried in oblivion. Ridicule not the
preacher, who, no doubt, has done his best, and who is rather the object of
pity than of contempt, for having been placed in a situation of life, to which
his talents were not equal: he may perhaps be a good man, though he is not a
great orator.

I would also recommend to you the early and frequent participation of the
communion, or what is commonly called receiving the sacrament, as the
indispensible duty of every christian. There is no institution of our religion
more simple, plain, and intelligible than this, as delivered to us by our
Savior: and most of the elaborate treatises written on the subject have served
only to puzzle and to disturb weak minds, by throwing the dark veil of
superstition and of human invention over a plain, positive command, given by
him in so explicit a manner as to be easily comprehended by the meanest
capacity, and which is doubtless in the power of all his sincere followers to
pay an acceptable obedience to. Nothing has more contributed to the neglect of
this duty, than the numerous well-meaning books that have been written to
enjoin a month's or a week's preparation, as previously necessary to the due
performance of it: by these means filling the minds of many with needless
terror, putting it even out of the power of some to receive it at all, and
inducing great numbers to rest satisfied with doing it only once or twice a
year, on some high festival; whereas it was certainly the constant custom of
the aposties and primitive christians on every Sunday; and it ought to be
received by us as often as it is administered in the church we frequent, which
in most places is but once in a month. Nor do I think it excusable, at any
time, to turn our backs upon the table we see prepared for that purpose, on
pretense of not being fit to partake worthily of it. The best, the only true
preparation for this, and for every other part of religious duty, is a good and
virtuous life, by which the mind is constantly kept in such a devotional frame,
as to require but a little recollection to be suited to any particular act of
worship or of obedience that may occasionally offer: and without a good and
virtuous life, there cannot be a greater or more fatal mistake than to suppose
that a few days or weeks spent in humiliation and prayer will render us at all
the more acceptable to the Deity, or that we should be thereby better fitted
for any one instance of that duty which we must universally pay, to be either
approved by him, or to be advantageous to ourselves: I would not therefore
advise you to read any of those weekly preparatives, which are too apt to lead
the mind into error, by teaching it to rest in a mere shadow of piety, wherein
there is nothing rationally satisfactory. The best books which I have ever met
with on this subject, are bishop Hoadly's Plain account of the nature and end
of the sacrament of the Lord's supper, and Nelson's Great duty of frequenting
the christian sacrifice. To the former are annexed the prayers which I before
mentioned: these are well worth your attentive perusal: the design of the
institution is therein fully explained, agreeable both to scripture and to
reason; stripped of that veil of mystery which has been industriously thrown over
it by designing or by mistaken men; and it is there laid as plainly open to
every capacity, as it was at first left us by our great master. Read these
books with due attention: you will there find every necessary instruction
concerning the right, and every reasonable inducement to the constant and to
the conscientious performance of it.

The sincere practice of religious duties naturally leads to the proper
discharge of the social, which may be all comprehended in that one great
general rule of doing unto others as you would they should do unto you; but of
these more particularly hereafter. -- I shall first give you my advice
concerning employment, it being of great moment to set out in life in such a
method as may be useful to yourself and beneficial to others.

Time is invaluable; its loss is irretrievable! The remembrance of having made
an ill use of it must be one of the sharpest tortures to those who are on the
brink of eternity! and what can yield a more unpleasing retrospect, than whole
years idled away in an irrational, insignificant manner, examples of which are
continually before our eyes! Look on every day as a blank sheet of paper put
into your hands to be filled up: remember the characters will remain to endless
ages, and that they never can be expunged; be careful therefore not to write
any thing but what you may read with pleasure a thousand years after. I would
not be understood in a sense so strict as might debar you from any innocent
amusement, suitable to your age, and agreeable to your inclination. Diversions,
properly regulated, are not only allowable, they are absolutely necessary to
youth, and are never criminal, but when taken to excess; that is, when they
engross the whole thought, when they are made the chief business of life: they
then give a distaste to every valuable employment, and by a sort of
infatuation, leave the mind in a state of restless impatience from the
conclusion of one 'till the commencement of another. This is the unfortunate
disposition of many. Guard most carefully against it, for nothing can be
attended with more pernicious consequences. A little observation will convince
you that there is not, among the human species, a set of more miserable beings,
than those who cannot live out of a constant succession of diversions. These
people have no comprehension of the more satisfactory pleasure to be found in
retirement: thought is insupportable, and consequently solitude must be
intolerable to them; they are a burden to themselves, and a pest to their
acquaintance, by vainly seeking for happiness in company, where they are seldom
acceptable: I say vainly, for true happiness exists only in the mind; nothing
foreign can give it. The utmost to be attained by what is called a gay life, is
a short forgetfulness of misery, to be felt with accumulated anguish in every
interval of reflection. This restless temper is frequently the product of a too
eager pursuit of pleasure in the early part of life, to the neglect of those
valuable improvements which would lay the foundation of a more solid and
permanent felicity. Youth is the season for diversions; but it is also the
season for acquiring knowledge, for fixing useful habits, and for laying in a
stock of such well-chosen materials, as may grow into a serene happiness, which
will increase with every added year of life, and will bloom in the fullest
perfection in the decline of it. The great art of education consists in
assigning to each its proper place, in such a manner that the one shall never
become irksome by intrenching on the other. -- Our separation having taken from
me the pleasing task of endeavoring, to the best of my ability, to suit them
occasionally, as might be most conducive both to your profit and pleasure, it
only remains for me to give you general rules, which, indeed, accidents may
make it necessary sometimes to vary; those however must be left to your own
discretion; and I am convinced you have a sufficient share of understanding to
be very capable of making advantageously such casual regulations for yourself,
if the inclination is not wanting.

It is an excellent method to appropriate the morning wholly to improvement;
the afternoon may then be allowed to diversions. Under this last head, I place
company, books of the amusing kind, and entertaining productions of the needle,
as well as plays, balls, cards, etc. which more commonly go by the name of
diversions: the afternoon, and evening till supper, may by these be employed
with innocence and propriety; but let not one of them ever be suffered to
intrude on the former part of the day, which should be always devoted to more
useful employments. One half hour, or more, either before or immediately after
breakfast, I would have you constantly give to the attentive perusal of some
rationally pious author, or to some part of the New Testament, with which, and
indeed with the whole scripture, you ought to make yourself perfectly
acquainted, as the basis on which your religion is founded. From this practice
you will reap more real benefit, than can be supposed by those who have never
made the experiment. The other hours may be divided among those necessary and
polite acquisitions which are suitable to your sex, age, and to your rank in
life. -- Study your own language thoroughly, that you may speak correctly, and
write grammatically: do not content yourself with the common use of words,
which custom has taught you from the cradle, but learn from whence they are
derived, and what are their proper significations. -- French you ought to be as
well acquainted with as with English: and Italian might, without much
difficulty, be added. -- Acquire a good knowledge of history; that of your own
country first, then of the other European nations; read them not with a view to
amuse, but to improve your mind; and to that end make reflections on what you
have read, which may be useful to yourself, and will render your conversation
agreeable to others. -- Learn so much of geography as to form a just idea of
the situation of places, mentioned in any author: and this will make history
more entertaining to you.

It is necessary for you to be perfect in the first four rules of arithmetic:
more you can never have occasion for, and the mind should not be burdened with
needless application. -- Music and drawing are accomplishments well worth the
trouble of attaining, if your inclination and genius lead to either: if not, do
not attempt them; for it will be only much time and great labor unprofitably
thrown away; it being next to impossible to arrive at any degree of perfection
in those arts, by the dint of perseverance only, if a good ear and a native
genius be wanting. -- The study of natural philosophy you will find both
pleasing and instructive; pleasing, from the continual new discoveries to be
made of the innumerably various beauties of nature, a most agreeable
gratification of that desire of knowledge wisely implanted in the human mind;
and highly instructive, as those discoveries lead to the contemplation of the
great Author of nature, whose wisdom and goodness so conspicuously shine
through all his works, that it is impossible to reflect seriously on them,
without admiration and gratitude.

These, my dear, are but a few of those mental improvements I would recommend
to you. Indeed there is no branch of knowledge that your capacity is equal to,
and which you have an opportunity of acquiring, that, I think, ought to be
neglected. It has been objected against all female learning, beyond that of
household economy, that it tends only to fill the minds of the sex with a
conceited vanity, which sets them above their proper business; occasions an
indifference to, if not a total neglect of, their family affairs; and serves
only to render them useless wives, and impertinent companions. It must be
confessed, that some reading ladies have given but too much cause for this
objection; and could it be proved to hold good throughout the sex, it would
certainly be right to confine their improvements within the narrow limits of
the nursery, of the kitchen, and the confectionary: but, I believe, it will,
upon examination, be found, that such ill consequences proceed chiefly from too
great an imbecility of mind to be capable of much enlargement, or from a mere
affectation of knowledge, void of all reality. Vanity is never the result of
understanding. A sensible woman will soon be convinced, that all the learning
her utmost application can make her mistress of, will be, from the difference
of education, in many points, inferior to that of a schoolboy: this reflection
will keep her always humble, and will be an effectual check to that loquacity
which renders some women such insupportable companions.

The management of all domestic affairs is certainly the proper business of
woman; and, unfashionably rustic as such an assertion may be thought, it is not
beneath the dignity of any lady, however high her rank, to know how to educate
her children, to govern her servants; how to order an elegant table with
economy, and to manage her whole family with prudence, regularity, and method.
If in these she is defective, whatever may be her seize in any other
kinds of knowledge, she will act out of character; and, by not moving in her
proper sphere, she will become rather the object of ridicule than of
approbation. But I believe it may with truth be affirmed, that the neglect of
these domestic concerns has much more frequently proceeded from an exorbitant
love of diversions, from a ridiculous fondness for dress and gallantry, or from
a mistaken pride, that has placed such duties in a servile light, from whence
they have been considered as fit only for the employment of dependants, and
below the attention of a fine lady, than from too great an attachment to mental
improvements: yet, from whatsoever cause such a neglect proceeds, it is equally
unjustifiable. If any thing can be urged in vindication of a custom unknown to
our ancestors, which the prevalence of fashion has made so general among the
modern ladies; I mean, that of committing to the care and discretionary power
of different servants, the sole management of family affairs: nothing,
certainly, can be alleged in defense of such an ignorance, in things of this
nature, as renders a lady incapable of giving proper directions on all
occasions; an ignorance, which, in ever so exalted a station, will render her
contemptible, even to those servants, on whose understanding and fidelity she,
in fact, becomes dependent for the regularity of her house, for the propriety,
elegance, and frugality of her table: which last article is seldom regarded by
such sort of people, who too frequently impose on those by whom they are thus
implicitly trusted. Make yourself, therefore, so thoroughly requainted with the
most proper method of conducting a family, and with the necessary expense which
every article, in proportion to their number, will occasion, that you may come
to a reasonable certainty of not being materially deceived, without the
ridiculous drudgery of following your servants continually, and meanly peeping
into every obscure corner of your house: nor is this at all difficult to
attain, as it requires nothing more than an attentive observation.

It is of late, in most great families, become too much the custom, to be long
upon the books of every tradesman they employ. To assign a reason for this is
foreign to my purpose; but I am certain it would, in general, be better both
for themselves, and for the people they deal with, never to be on them at all;
and what difficulty or inconvenience can arise, in a well-regulated family,
from commissioning the steward or housekeeper to pay for every thing at the
time when it is brought in? This obsolete practice, though in itself very
laudable, is not at present, and perhaps never may be again, authorized by
fashion: however, let it be a rule with you to contract as few debts as
possible: most things are to be purchased both better in their kind, and at a
lower price, by paying for them at the time of purchasing. But if, to avoid the
supposed trouble of frequent trifling disbursements, you choose to have the
lesser articles thrown together in a bill, let a note of the quantity and price
be brought with every such parcel: file these notes, compare them with the bill
when delivered in, and let such bills be regularly paid every quarter: for it
is not reasonable to expect, that a tradesman should give longer credit,
without making up the interest of his money by an advanced price on what he
sells: and be assured, if you find it inconvenient to pay at the end of three
months, that inconvenience must arise from living at too great an expense, and
will consequently increase in six months, and grow still greater at the end of
the year. By making short payments, you will become the sooner sensible of such
a mistake, and you will find it at first more easy to retrench any
supernumeraries than after having been long habituated to them.

If your house is superintended by an housekeeper, and your servants are
accountable to her, let your housekeeper be accountable to yourself, and let
her be entirely governed by your directions. Carefully examine her bills, and
suffer no extravagances or unnecessary articles to pass unnoticed. Let these
bills be brought to you every morning: what they contain will then be easily
recollected without burdening your memory; and your accounts being short will
be adjusted with less trouble and with more exactness. Should you at any time
have an upper servant, whose family and education were superior to that state
of subjection to which succeeding misfortunes may have reduced her, she ought
to be treated with peculiar indulgence: if she has understanding enough to be
conversible, and humility enough always to keep her proper distance, lessen, as
much as possible, every painful remembrance of former prospects, by looking on
her as an humble friend, and making her an occasional companion. But never
descend to converse with those whose birth, education, and early views in life
were not superior to a state of servitude; their minds being in general suited
to their station, they are apt to be intoxicated by any degree of familiarity,
and to become useless and impertinent. The habit, which very many ladies have
contracted, of talking to and consulting with their women, has so spoiled that
set of servants, that few of them are to be met with, who do not commence their
service by giving their unasked opinion of your person, dress, or management,
artfully conveyed in the too generally accepted vehicle of flattery; and, if
they are allowed in this, they will next proceed to offer their advice on any
occasion that may happen to discompose or ruffle your temper: check, therefore,
the first appearance of such impertinence, by a reprimand sufficiently severe
to prevent a repetition of it.

Give your orders in a plain, distinct manner, with good nature joined to a
steadiness that will show they must be punctually obeyed. Treat all your
domestics with such mildness and affability, that you may be served rather out
of affection than fear. Let them live happily under you. Give them leisure for
their own business, time for innocent recreation, and more especially for
attending the public service of the church, to be instructed in their duty to
God; without which you have no right to expect the discharge of that owing to
yourself. When wrong, tell them calmly of their faults; if they amend not after
two or three such rebukes, dismiss them: but never descend to passion and
scolding, which is inconsistent with a good understanding, and beneath the
dignity of a gentlewoman.

Be very exact in your hours, without which there can be no order in your
family; I mean those of rising, eating, etc. Require from your servants
punctuality in these, and never be yourself the cause of breaking through the
rules you have laid down, by ^^ferring breakfast, putting back the dinner, or
letting it grow cold on the table, to wait your dressing; a custom by which
many ladies introduce confusion, and bring their orders into neglect. Be always
dressed at least half an hour before dinner. Having mentioned this important
article, I must be allowed a little digression on the subject.

Whatever time is taken up in dress, beyond what is necessary to decency and
cleanliness, may be looked upon, to say no worse, as a vacuum in life. By
decency, I mean such a habit as is suitable to your rank and fortune: an
ill-placed finery, inconsistent with either, is not ornamental but ridiculous.
A compliance with fashion, so far as to avoid the affectation of singularity,
is necessary: but to run into the extreme of fashions, more especially those
which are inconvenient, is the certain proof of a weak mind. Have a better
opinion of yourself, than to suppose you can receive any additional merit from
the adventitious ornaments of dress. Leave the study of the toilet to those who
are adapted to it; I mean that insignificant set of females, whose whole life
from the cradle to the coffin, is but a varied scene of trifling, and whose
intellectuals fit them not ^or any thing beyond it. Such as these may be
allowed to pass whole mornings at their looking-glass, in the important
business of suiting a set of rib^nds, adjusting a few curls, or determining the
position of a (...) one, perhaps, of the most innocent ways of idling. But let
as small a po^^on of your time as possible be taken up in dressing. Be always
perfectly clean and neat, both in your person and clothes: equally so when
alone, as in company. Look upon all beyond this as immaterial in itself, any
further than as the different ranks of mankind have made some distinction in
habit generally esteemed necessary; and remember, that it is never the dress,
however sumptuous, which reflects dignity and honor on the person: it is the
rank and merit of the person that give consequence to the dress. But to return:
--

It is your own steadiness and example of regularity that alone can preserve
uninterrupted order in your family. If, by forgetfulness or inattention, you at
any time suffer your commands to be disobeyed with impunity, your servants will
grow upon such neglect into a habit of carelessness, till repeated faults, of
which this is properly the source, rouse you into anger, which an even hand
would never have made necessary. Be not whimsical or capricious in your
likings: approve with judgment, and condemn with reason; that acting right may
be as certainly the means of obtaining your favor, as the contrary of
incurring your displeasure.

From what has been said, you will see, that in order to the proper discharge
of your domestic duties, it is absolutely necessary for you to have a perfect
knowledge of every branch of household economy, without which you can neither
correct what is wrong, approve what is right, nor give directions with
propriety. It is the want of this knowledge, that reduces many a fine lady's
family to a state of the utmost confusion and disorder, on the sudden removal
of a managing servant, till the place is supplied by a successor of equal
ability. How much out of character, how ridiculous must a mistress of a family
appear, who is entirely incapable of giving practical orders on such an
occasion! Let that never be your case! Remember, my dear, this is the only
proper temporal business assigned you by Providence, and in a thing so
indispensably needful, so easily attained, where so little study o^ application
is necessary to arrive at the most commendable degree of it, the want even of
perfection is almost inexcusable. Make yourself mistress of the theory, that
you may be able the more readily to reduce it into practice; and when you have
a family to command, let the care of it always employ your principal attention,
and let every part of it be subjected to your own inspection.

If you rise early, a custom I hope you have not left off since you were with
me, if you waste no unnecessary time in dressing, and if you conduct your house
in a regular method, you will find many vacant hours unfilled by this material
business; and no objection can be made to your employing those in such
improvements of the mind, as are m^st suitable to your genius and inclination.
I believe no man of understanding will think, that, under such regulations, a
woman will either make a less agreeable companion, a less useful wife, a less
careful mother, or a worse mistress of a family, for all the additional
knowledge her industry and application can acquire.

The morning being always thus advantageously engaged, the latter part of the
day, as I before said, may be given to relaxation and amusement. Some of these
hours may be very agreeably and usefully employed by entertaining books; a few
of which, in the English language, I will mention to you, as a specimen of the
kind I would recommend to your perusal; and I shall include some others,
religious and instructive.

Mason on Self Knowledge Economy of Human Life Seneca's Morals Epictetus's
Morals Cicero's Offices Collier's Antoninus Hoadly's Sermons Seed's Sermons
Sherlock's Sermons Sterne's Sermons Fordyce's Sermons Rollin's Belles Lettres
Nature Displayed The Spectator The Guardian The Female Spectator The Rambler
The Idler The Adventurer The World Cicero's Familiar Letters Pliny's Letters
Fitzoiborne's Letters Telemachus The Vicar of Wakefield Guthrie's Geographical
Grammar Potter's Antiquities of Greece Rollin's Ancient History Kennett's
Antiquities of Rome Hooke's Roman History Hume's History of England Robertson's
Works Milton's Poetical Works Pope's Works -- Homer Thomson's Works Young's
Works Mrs. Rowe's Works Langhorne's Works Moore's Fables for the Female Sex
Tales of the Genii Dodsley's Collection of Poems.
To the above list the editor of this volume begs leave to add the following
books, most of which have appeared since lady P.'s letter was first printed:
Blair's Sermons Franklin's Sermons White's Sermons Walker's Sermons West on the
Resurrection Lord Littleton on the Conversion of St. Paul Miss Talbot's
Reflections and Essays Dr. Watts on the improvement of the Mind Mrs. Chapone's
Letters and Miscellanies The Mirror, 2 vols. The Lounger, 2 vols. The Observer
Hayley's Triumphs of Temper Rasselas, Prince of Abyssinia Female Reader
Speaker, 2 vols. Mrs. Trimmer's Works Works of Madame de Genlis Marchioness de
Lambert's Works, 2 vols. Miss Burney's Eveilna, 2 vols. and Cecilia, 3 vols.
Mrs. Smith's Emmeline, 2 vols. General Biographical Dictionary, 12 vols. 8 vo.
Shakespeare's Plays Johnson's Poets, 75 vols. with their Lives Miss More's
Poems, and Prose Pieces Ethelinde, 3 vols. Miss Bowdler's Essays, etc. Elegant
Extracts, in Prose and Verse, 2 vols.


From these you may form a judgment of that sort of reading which will be both
useful and entertaining to you. I have named only those practical sermons,
which, I thought, would more directly influence your conduct in life. Our rule
of faith should be taken from the scripture alone, which we must understand for
ourselves; therefore the controverted opinions of others serve, in general,
rather to puzzle than to improve the mind.

Of novels and romances, very few are worth the trouble of reading: some of
them, perhaps, do contain a few good morals; but they are not worth the
finding, where so much rubbish is intermixed. Their moral parts, indeed, are
like small diamonds among mountains of dirt and trash, which, after you have
found them, are too inconsiderable to answer the pains of coming at; yet,
ridiculous as these fictitious tales generally are, they are so artfully
managed as to excite an idle curiosity to see the conclusion, by which means
the reader is drawn on, through a tiresome length of foolish adventures, from
which neither knowledge, pleasure, or profit, can accrue, to the common
catastrophe of a wedding. The most I have met with of these writings, to say no
worse, it is little better than the loss of time to peruse. But some of them
have more pernicious consequences. By drawing characters that never exist in
life, by representing persons and things in a false and extravagant light, and
by a series of improbable causes bringing on impossible events, they are apt to
give a romantic turn to the mind, which is often productive of great errors in
judgment, and of fatal mistakes in conduct. Of this I have seen frequent
instances, and therefore advise you scarcely ever to meddle with any of them.

In justice, however, to a late ingenious author, this letter must not be
reprinted, without my acknowledging that, since the last edition was published,
I have accidentally met with one exception to my general rule, namely, The
Vicar of Wakefield. That novel is equally entertaining and instructive, without
being liable to any of the objections that occasioned the above restriction.
This possibly may not be the only exceptionable piece of the kind; but as I
have not met with any other, among a number I have perused, a single instance
does not alter my opinion of that sort of writing; and I still think, the
chance is perhaps a thousand to one against the probability of obtaining the
smallest degree of advantage from the reading any of them, as well as that very
few are to be found, from which much injury may not be received.

Works of the needle, that employ the fancy, may, if they suit your
inclination, be sometimes a pretty amusement: but let this employment never
extend to large pieces, beyond what can be accomplished by yourself without
assistance. There is not a greater extravagance under the specious name of good
housewifery, than the furnishing of houses in this manner. Whole apartments
have been seen thus ornamented by the supposed work of a lady, who, perhaps,
never shaded two leaves in the artificial forest, but has paid four times its
value to the several people employed in bringing it to perfection. The expense
of these tedious pieces of work I speak of experimentally, having, many years
past, undertaken one of them, which, when finished, was not worth fifteen
pounds; and by a computation since made, it did not cost less than fifty, in
the hire and maintenance of the people employed in it. This, indeed, was at the
age of seventeen, when the thoughtless inexperience of youth could alone excuse
such a piece of folly. -- Embroideries in gold, silver, or shades of silk, come
within a narrower compass. Works of that kind, which may, without calling in
expensive assistance, or tiring the fancy, be finished in a summer, will be a
well-chosen change of amusement, and may, as there are three of you, be made
much more agreeable, by one alternately reading aloud, while the other two are
thus employed. -- All kinds of what is called plain-work, though no very polite
accomplishment, you must be so well versed in, as to be able to cut out, make,
and mend your own linen. Some fathers, and some husbands, choose to have their
daughters and their wives thus attired in the labor of their own hands, and,
from a mistaken notion, believe this to be the great criterion of frugal
economy. Where that happens to be the inclination or opinion of either, it
ought always to be readily complied with: but, exclusive of such a motive, I
see no other that makes the practical part necessary to any lady; excepting,
indeed, where there is such a narrowness of fortune as admits not conveniently
the keeping a servant, to whom such exercises of the needle much more properly
appertain.

The theater, which, by the indefatigable labor of the inimitable Mr. Garrick,
has been brought to very great perfection, will afford you an equally rational
and improving entertainment. Your judgment will not now be called in question,
your understanding affronted, nor will your modesty be offended by the indecent
ribaldry of those authors, who, to their defect in wit, have added the want of
good sense and of good manners. Faults of this kind, which, from a blameable
compliance with a corrupted taste, have sometimes crept into the works of good
writers, are, by his prudent direction, generally rectified or omitted on the
stage. You may now see many of the best plays performed in the best manner. Do
not, however, go to any that you have not before heard the character of: be
present only at those which are approved by persons of understanding and
virtue, as calculated to answer the proper end of the theater, namely, that of
conveying instruction in the most pleasing method. Attend to the sentiment,
apply the moral, and then you cannot, I think, pass an evening in a more
useful, or in a more entertaining diversion.

Dancing may also take its turn, as a healthful exercise, as it is generally
suitable to the taste and gaiety of young minds.

Part of the hours appropriated to relaxation must of necessity be less
agreeably taken up in the paying and receiving visits of mere ceremony and
civility; a tribute, by custom authorized, by good manners enjoined. In these,
when the conversation is only insignificant, join in it with an apparent
satisfaction. Talk of the elegance of a birthday suit, the pattern of a lace,
the judicious assortment of jewels, the cut of a ruffle, or the set of a
sleeve, with an unaffected ease; not according to the rank they hold in your
estimation, but proportioned to the consequence they may be of in the opinion
of those you are conversing with. The great art of pleasing is to appear
pleased with others; suffer not then an ill-bred absence of thought, or a
contemptuous sneer, ever to betray a conscious superiority of understanding,
always productive of ill nature and dislike. Suit yourself to the capacity and
to the taste of your company, when that taste is confined to harmless trifles:
but where it is so far depraved as to delight in cruel sarcasms on the absent,
to be pleased with discovering the blemishes in a good character, or in
repeating the greater faults of a bad one, religion and humanity in that case
forbid the least degree of assent. If you have not any knowledge of the persons
thus unhappily sacrificed to envy or to malice, and consequently are ignorant
as to the truth or falsehood of such aspersions, always suspect them to be
ill-grounded, or, at least, greatly exaggerated. Show your disapprobation by a
silent gravity, and by taking the first opportunity to change the subject. But
where any acquaintance with the character in question gives room for defending
it, let not an ill-timed complaisance prevail over justice: vindicate injured
innocence with all the freedom and warmth of an unrestrained benevolence; and
where the faults of the guilty will admit of palliation, urge all that truth
can allow in mitigation of error. From this method, besides the pleasure
arising from the consciousness of a strict conformity to the great rule of
doing as you would be done by, you will also reap to yourself the benefit of
being less fre^uently pestered with themes ever painful to a humane
disposition. If, unfortunately, you have some acquaintance, whose malevolence
of heart no sentiment of virtue, no check of good-manners, can restrain from
these malicious sallies of ill nature, to them let your visits be made as
seldom, and as short as decency will permit; there being neither benefit nor
satisfaction to be found in such company, among whom only cards may be
introduced with any advantage. On this account, it will be proper for you to
know how to play at the games most in use; because it is an argument of great
folly to engage in any thing without doing it well; but this is a diversion
which, I hope, you will have no fondness for, as it is in itself, to say no
worse, a very insignificant amusement.

With persons for whom you can have no esteem, good-breeding may oblige you to
keep up an intercourse of ceremonious visits; but politeness enjoins not the
length or frequency of them. Here inclination may be followed without a breach
of civility: there is no tax upon intimacy but from choice; and (...) choice
should ever be founded on merit, the certainty whereof you cannot be too
careful in previously examining. Great caution is necessary not to be deceived
by spe^ious appearances. A plausible behavior often, upon a superficial
knowledge, creates a prepossession in favor of particulars, who, upon a nearer
view, may be found to have no claim to esteem. The forming a precipitate
judgment sometimes leads into an unwary intimacy, which it may prove absolutely
necessary to break off: and yet that breach may be attended with innumerable
inconveniences; nay, perhaps, with very material and lasting ill consequences:
prudence, therefore, here enjoins the greatest circumspection.

Few people are capable of friendship; and still fewer have all the
qualifications one would choose in a friend. The fundamental point is a
virtuous disposition; but to that should be added a good understanding, a solid
judgment, sweetness of temper, steadiness of mind, freedom of behavior, and
sincerity of heart. Seldom as these are to be found united, never make a bosom
friend of any one greatly deficient in either. Be slow in contracting
friendship, and invariably constant in maintaining it. Expect not many friends,
but think yourself happy, if, through life, you meet with one or two who
deserve that name, and have all the requisites for the valuable relation. Thi^
may justly be deemed the highest blessing of mor^^lity. Uninterrupted health
has the general voice; but in my opinion, such an intercourse of friendship ^s
much deserves the preference, as the mental pleasures, both in nature and
degree, exceed the corporeal. The weaknesses, the pains of the body may be
inexpressibly alleviated by the conversation of a person, by affection
endeared, by reason approved -- whose tender sympathy partakes your
afflictions, and shares your enjoyments -- who is steady in the correction, but
mild in the reproof of your faults -- like a guardian angel, ever watchful to
warn you of unforeseen danger, and, by timely admonitions, to prevent the
mistakes incident to human frailty and to self-partiality: this is the true
office of friendship. With such a friend, no state of life can be absolutely
unhappy; but, destitute of some such connection, heaven has so formed our nature
for this intimate society, that amidst the affluence of fortune, and in the
flow of uninterrupted health, there will be an aching void in the solitary
breast, which can never otherwise know a plenitude of happiness.

Should the Supreme Disposer of all events bestow on you this superlative gift,
to such a friend let your heart be ever unreservedly open. Conceal no secret
thought, disguise no lat^nt weakness, but bare your bosom to the faithfu^ probe
of honest friendship, and shrink not, if it smarts beneath the touch; nor with
tenacious pride dislike the person who freely dares to condemn some favorite
foible; but, ever open to conviction, hear with attention, and receive with
gratitude, the kind reproof that flows from tenderness. When sensible of a
fault, be ingenuous in the confession; be sincere and steady in the correction
of it.

Happy is her lot, who in a husband finds this invaluable friend! Yet so great
is the hazard, so disproportioned the chances, that I could almost wish the
dangerous die was never to be thrown for any of you: but as probably it may,
let me conjure you all, my dear girls, if ever any of you take this most
important step in life, to proceed with the utmost care and with deliberate
circumspection. Fortune and family it is the sole province of your father to
direct in: he, certainly, has always an undoubted right to a negative voice,
though not to a compulsive one. As a child is very justifiable in the refusal
of her hand, even to the absolute command of a father, where her heart cannot
go with it; so is she extremely culpable in giving it, contrary to his
approbation. Here I must take shame to myself; and for this unpardonable fault,
I do justly acknowledge that the subsequent ill consequences of a most unhappy
marriage were the proper punishment. This, and every other error in my own
conduct, I do, and shall, with the utmost candor, lay open to you; sincerely
praying that you may reap the benefit of my experience, and that you may avoid
those rocks, which, either by carelessness, or sometimes, alas, by too much
caution, I have split against! But to return: --

The chief point, to be regarded in the choice of a companion for life, is a
really virtuous principle, an unaffected goodness of heart. Without this, you
will be continually shocked by indecency, and pained by impiety. So numerous
have been the unhappy victims to the ridiculous opinion, " A reformed libertine
makes the best husband^" that, did not experience daily evince the contrary,
one would believe it impossible for a girl, who has a tolerable degree of
common understanding, to be made the dupe of so erroneous a position, which has
not the least shadow of reason for its foundation, and which a small share of
observation will prove to be false in fact. A man, who has been long conversant
with the worst sort of women, is very apt to contract a bad opinion of, and a
contempt for, the sex in general. Incapable of esteeming any, he is suspicious
of all -- jealous without cause -- angry without provocation -- and his own
disturbed imagination is a continual source of ill humor. To this is
frequently joined a bad habit of body, the natural consequence of an irregular
life, which gives an additional sourness to the temper. What rational prospect
of happiness can there be with such a companion? And that this is the general
character of those who are called reformed rakes, observation will certify.
But, admit there may be some exceptions, it is a hazard upon which no
considerate woman would venture the peace of her whole future life. The vanity
of those girls, who believe themselves capable of working miracles of this
kind, and who give up their persons to men of libertine principles, upon the
wild expectation of reclaiming them, justly deserves the disappointment which
it will generally meet with; for, believe me, a wife is, of all persons, the
least likely to succeed in such an attempt. Be it your care to find that virtue
in a lover, which you must never hope to form in a husband. Good-sense and
goodnature are almost equally requisite. If the former is wanting, it will be
next to impossible for you to esteem the person, of whose behavior you have
cause to be ashamed; and mutual esteem is as necessary to happiness in the
married state as mutual affection: without the latter, every day will bring
with it some fresh cause of vexation; 'till repeated quarrels produce a
coldness, which will settle into an irreconcilable aversion, and you will
become not only each other's torment, but the object of contempt to your family
and to your acquaintance.

This quality of goodnature is, of all others, the most difficult to be
ascertained, on account of the general mistake of blending it with good humor,
as if they were in themselves the same; whereas, in fact, no two principles of
action are more essentially different. And this may require some explanation.
-- By goodnature I mean, that true benevol^nce which partakes in the felicity
of all mankind; which promotes the satisfaction of every individual within the
reach of its ability; which relieves the distressed, comforts the afflicted,
diffuses blessings, and communicates happiness, as far as its sphere of action
can extend; and which, in the private seenes of life, will shine conspicuous in
the dutiful son, the affectionate husband, the indulgent father, the faithful
friend, and the compassionate master both to man and beast: while good humor
is nothing more than a cheerful, pleasing deportment, arising either from a
natural gaiety of mind, or from an affectation of popularity, joined to an
affability of behavior, the result of good-breeding, and a ready compliance
with the taste of every company. This kind of mere good humor is, by far, the
most striking quality; it is frequently mistaken for, and complimented with, the
superior name of real goodnature. A man by this specious appearance has often
acquired that appellation, who, in all the actions of his private life, has
been a morose, cruel, revengeful, sullen, haughty tyrant. Let them put on the
cap, whose temples fit the galling wreath! On the contrary, a man of a truly
benevolent disposition, and formed to promote the happiness of all round him,
may sometimes, perhaps from an ill habit of body, an accidental vexation, or
from a commendable openness of heart, above the meanness of disguise, be guilty
of little sallies of peevishness, or of ill-humour, which, carrying the
appearance of ill nature, may be unjustly thought to proceed from it, by
persons who are unacquainted with his true character, and who take ill-humour
and ill nature to be synonimous terms, though, in reality, they bear not the
least analogy to each other. In order to the forming a right judgment, it is
absolutely necessary to observe this distinction, which will effectually secure
you from the dangerous error of taking the shadow for the substance; an
irretrievable mistake, pregnant with innumerable consequent evils!

From what has been said, it plainly appears, that the crite^ on of this
amiable virtue is not to be taken from the general opinion; mere good humor
being, to all intents and purposes, sufficient in this particular to establish
the public voice in favor of a man utterly devoid of every humane and
benevolent affection of heart. It is only from the less conspicuous scenes of
life, the more retired sphere of action, from the artless tenor of domestic
conduct, that the real character can with any certainty be drawn. These,
undisguised, proclaim the man: but, as they shun the glare of light, nor court
the noise of popular applause, they pass unnoticed, and are seldom known 'till
after an intimate acquaintance. The best method, therefore, to avoid deception
in this case, is to lay no stress on outward appearances, which are too often
fallacious, but to take the rule of judging from the simple, unpolished
sentiments of those, whose dependent connexions give them an undeniable
certainty; who not only see, but hourly feel the good or bad effects of that
disposition to which they are subjected. By this I mean, that if a man is
equally respected, esteemed, and beloved by his tenants, by his dependents and
domestics -- from the substantial farmer to the laborious peasant -- from the
proud steward to the submissive wretch, who, thankful for employment, humbly
obeys the menial tribe -- you may justly conclude he has that true goodnature,
that real benevolence, which delights in communicating felicity, and enjoys the
satisfaction it diffuses. But if by these he is despised and hated, served
merely from a principle of fear, devoid of affection -- which is very easily
discoverable -- whatever may be his public character, however favorable the
general opinion, be assured, that his disposition is such as can never be
productive of domestic happiness. -- I have been the more particular on this
head, as it is one of the most essential qualifications to be regarded, and of
all others the most liable to be mistaken.

Never be prevailed with, my dear, to give your hand to a person, defective in
these material points. Secure of virtue, of goodnature, and understanding in a
husband, you may be secure of happiness. Without the two former, it is
unattainable: without the latter, in a tolerable degree, it must be very
imperfect.

Remember, however, that infallibility is not the property of man, or you may
entail disappointment on yourself, by expecting what is never to be found. The
best men are sometimes inconsistent with themselves. They are liable to be
hurried, by sudden starts of passion, into expressions and actions which their
cooler reason will condemn. They may have some oddities of behavior, some
peculiarities of temper; they may be subject to accidental ill-humour, or to
whimsical complaints blemishes of this kind often shade the brightest
character: but they are never destructive of mutual felicity, unless when they
are made so by an improper resentment, or by an ill-judged opposition. Reason
can never be heard by passion; the offer of it tends only to inflame the more.
When cooled, and in his usual temper, the man of understanding, if he has been
wrong, will suggest to himself all that could be urged against him: the man of
goodnature will, un-upbraided, own his error: immediate contradiction is,
therefore, wholly unserviceable, and highly imprudent; and after repetition
equally unnecessary and injudicious. Any peculiarities in the temper or
behavior ought to be properly represented in the tenderest and in the most
friendly manner, and if the representation of them is made discreetly, it will
generally be well taken: but if they are so habitual as not easily to be
altered, strike not too often upon the unharmonious string: rather let them
pass as unobserved: such a cheerful compliance will better cement your union;
and they may be made easy to yourself, by reflecting on the superior good
qualities by which these trifling faults are so greatly overbalanced. -- You
must remember, my dear, these rules are laid down, on the supposition of your
being united to a person who possesses the three essential qualifications for
happiness beforementioned. In this case, no farther direction is necessary,
but that you strictly perform the duty of a wife, namely, to love, to honor,
and obey. The two first articles are a tribute so indispensibly due to merit,
that they must be paid by inclination; and they naturally lead to the
performance of the last, which will not only be an easy but a pleasing task,
since nothing can ever be enjoined by such a person that is in itself improper,
and few things will, that can with any reason be disagreeable to you.

Here should this subject end, were it not more than possible for you, after
all that has been urged, to be led by some inferior motive, to the neglect of
the primary caution; and that, either from an opinion too hastily entertained,
from an unaccountable partiality, or from the powerful prevalence of
persuasion, you may be unfortunately induced to give your hand to a man whose
bad heart and morose temper, concealed by a well practiced dissimulation, may
render every flattering hope of happiness abortive. -- May heaven, in mercy,
guard you from this fatal error! Such a companion is the worst of all temporal
ills; a deadly potion, that embitters every social scene of life, damps every
rising joy, and banishes that cheerful temper which alone can give a true
relish to the blessings of mortality. Most sincerely do I pray that this may
never be your lot! and I hope your prudent circumspection will be sufficient to
guard you from the danger. But the bare possibility of the event makes it not
unnecessary to lay down a few rules for the maintaining some degree of ease,
under such a deprivation of happiness. This is by far the most difficult part
of my present undertakin^; it is hard to advise here, and still harder to
p^ac^^e the advice; the subject also is too extensive to be minutely treated
within the compass of a letter, which must confine me to the most material
points only; in these I shall give you the best directions in my power, very
ardently wishing, that you may never have occasion to make use of them.

The being united to a man of irreligious principles makes it impossible to
discharge a great part of the proper duty of a wife. To name but one instance,
obedience will be rendered impracticable by frequent injunctions inconsistent
with and contrary to the higher obligations of morality. This is not
supposition, but is founded upon facts, which I have too often seen and can
attest. Where this happens, the reasons for noncompliance ought to be offered
in a plain, strong, good-natured manner; there is, at least, the chance of
success from being heard; but should those reasons be rejected, or the hearing
of them be refused, and silence on the subject enjoined -- which is most
probable, few people caring to hear what they know to be right, when determined
not to appear convinced by it -- obey the injunction, and urge not the argument
farther: keep, however, steady to your principles, and suffer neither
persuasion nor threats to prevail on you to act contary to them. All commands
repugnant to the laws of christianity, it is your indispensible duty to
disobey; all requests that are inconsistent with prudence, or incompatible with
the rank and character which you ought to maintain in life, it is your interest
to refuse. A compliance with the former would be criminal; a consent to the
latter highly indiscreet; and it might thereby subject you to general censure:
for a man capable of requiring from his wife what he knows to be in itself
wrong, is equally capable of throwing the whole blame of such misconduct on
her, and of afterward upbraiding her for a behavior, to which he will, upon
the same principle, disown that he has been accessory. Many similar instances
have come within the compass of my own observation. In things of a less
material nature, that are neither criminal in themselves nor pernicious in
their consequences, always acquiesce, if insisted on, however disagreeable they
may be to your own temper and inclination. Such a compliance will evidently
prove that your refusal in the other cases, proceeds not from a spirit of
contradiction, but merely from a just regard to that superior duty, which can
never be infringed with impunity. Passion may resent, but reason must approve
this conduct; and therefore it is the mos^ likely method, in time, to make a
favorable impression. But, if you should fail of such success, you will at
least enjoy that satisfactory self-approbation, which is the inseparable
attendant of a truly religious and rational deportment.

Should the painful task of dealing with a morose, tyrannical temper be
assigned you, there is little more to be recommended, than a patient submission
to an evil which admits not of a remedy. Ill Nature is increased, obstinacy
confirmed, by opposition: the less such a temper is contradicted, the more
supportable will it be to those who are under its baneful influence. When all
endeavors to please are ineffectual, and when a man seems determined to find
fault with every thing, as if his chief pleasure consisted in tormenting those
about him, it requires a more than common degree of patience and resolution to
forbear uttering reproaches, which such a behavior may be justly allowed to
deserve: yet it is absolutely necessary to the maintaining any tolerable degree
of ease, not only to restrain all expressions of resentment, but to withhold
even those disdainful looks which are apt to accompany a contemptuous silence;
and they both equally tend only to increase the malady. This infernal delight
in giving pain is most unwearied in the search of matter for its gratification,
and can either find, or unaccountably can form it, in almost all the
occurrences of life; but, when suffered, unobstructed and unregarded, to run
its malicious course, it will quickly vent its blunted arrows, and will die of
disappointment; while all endeavors to appease, all complaints of unkindness,
will but sharpen against yourself the weapon's edge, and, by proving your
sensibility of the wound, will give the wished-for satisfaction to him who
inflicts it. Prudence, in this case, directs more than ordinary circumspection,
that every part of your behavior may be as blameless as possible, even to the
abstaining from the least appearance of evil; and after you have, to the utmost
of your power, strove to merit approbation, expect not to meet with it: by
these means you will escape the mortification of being disappointed, which,
often repeated, is apt to give a gloomy sourness to the temper, incompatible
with any degree of contentment. You must, so situated, learn to be satisfied
with the consciousness of acting right, according to your best abilities, and,
if possible, you should look with an unconcerned indifference on the reception
of every unsuccessful attempt to please.

This, it must be owned, is a hard lesson of philosophy: it requires no less
than an absolute command over the passions; but let it be remembered, that such
a command will itself most amply recompense every difficulty: it will
compensate every pain, which it may cost you to obtain it: besides, it is, I
believe, the only way to preserve any tranquillity of mind, under so
disagreeable a connection.

As the want of understanding is by no art to be concealed, by no address to be
disguised, it might be supposed impossible for a woman of sense to unite
herself to a person whose defect, in this instance, must render that sort of
rational society which constitutes the chief happiness of such an union,
impossible; yet, here, how often has the weakness of female judgment been
conspicuous! The advantages of great superiority in rank or fortune have
frequently proved so irresistible a temptation, as, in opinion, to outweigh not
only the folly but even the vices of its possessor: a grand mistake, ever
tacitly acknowledged by a subsequent repentance, when the expected pleasures of
affluence, equipage, and all the glittering pomp of useless pageantry have been
experimentally found insufficient to make amends for the want of that constant
satisfaction, which results from the social joy of conversing with a reasonable
friend! But however weak this motive must be acknowledged, it is more excusable
than another, which, I fear, has sometimes had an equal influence on the mind;
I mean so great a love of sway, as to induce her to give the preference to a
person of weak intellectuals, in hopes thereby of holding, uncontrouled, the
reins of government. The expectation is, in fact, ill-grounded obstinacy: and
pride being generally the companion of folly, the silliest people are usually
the most tenacious of their opinions, and consequently, the hardest of all
others to be managed: but admit the contrary, the principle is in itself bad:
it tends to invert the order of nature, and to counteract the design of
Providence.

A woman can never be seen in a more ridiculous light, than when she appears to
govern her husband. If, unfortunately, the superiority of understanding is on
her side, the apparent consciousness of that superiority betrays a weakness,
that renders her contemptible in the sight of every considerate person, and it
may, very probably, fix in his mind a dislike never to be eradicated. In such a
case, if it should ever be your own, remember that some degree of dissimulation
is commendable, so far as to let your husband's defect appear unobserved. When
he judges wrong, never flatly contradict, but lead him insensibly into another
opinion, in so discreet a manner that it may seem entirely his own; and let the
whole credit of every prudent determination rest on him, without indulging the
foolish vanity of claiming any merit to yourself. Thus a person of but an
indifferent capacity may be so assisted as, in many instances, to shine with a
borrowed luster, scarcely distinguishable from the native, and, by degrees, he
may be brought into a kind of mechanical method of acting properly, in all the
common occurrences of life. Odd as this position may seem, it is founded in
fact; and I have seen the method successfully practiced by more than one
person, where a weak mind, on the governed side, has been so prudently set off
as to appear the sole director; like the statue of the Delphic god, which was
thought to give forth its own oracles, while the humble priest, who lent his
voice, was by the shrine concealed, nor sought a higher glory than a supposed
obedience to the power he would be thought to serve.

From hence it may be inferred, that by a perfect propriety of behavior, ease
and contentment, at least, are attainable with a companion who has not the most
exalted understanding: but then, virtue and goodnature are presupposed, or
there will be nothing to work upon.

A vicious, ill-natured fool being so untractable and tormenting an associate,
there needs only to add jealousy to the composition, to make the curse
complete. This passion, once suffered to get footing in the heart, is hardly
ever to be extirpated: it is a constant source of torment to the breast that
gives it reception, and is an inexhaustible fund of vexation to the object of
it. With a person of this unfortunate disposition, it is prudent to avoid the
least appearance of concealment. A whisper in a mixed company, a message given
in low voice to a servant, have, by the power of a disturbed imagination, been
magnified into a material injury. Whatever has the air of secrecy raises terror
in a mind naturally distrustful. A perfect, unreserved openness, both in
conversation and behavior, starves the anxious expectation of discovery, and
may very probably lead into an habitual confidence, the only antidote against
the poison of suspicion. It is easier to prevent than remove a received ill
impression; and, consequently, it is much wiser to be sometimes deficient in
little points of civility, which, however indifferent in themselves, may happen
unaccountably to clash with the ease of a person, whose repose it is both your
duty and interest to promote. It is much more commendable, contentedly to incur
the censure of a trifling disposition, by a circumstantial, unasked relation of
insignificant incidents, than to give any room for apprehending the least
degree of reserve. Such a constant method of proceeding, together with a
reasonable compliance, is the most likely to cure this painful turn of mind;
for, by withholding every support that could give strength to it, the want of
matter to feed on may probably in time cause its extinction. If, unhappily, it
is so constitutional, so interwoven with the soul as to become, in a manner,
inseparably united with it, nothing remains but to submit patiently to the will
of heaven, under the pressure of an unalterable evil; to guard carefully
against the natural consequence of repeated undeserved suspicions, namely, a
growing indifference, which too frequently terminates in aversion; and, by
considering such a situation as a trial of obedience and resignation, to
receive the comfort that must arise from properly exercising one of the most
exalted of the christian virtues. I cannot dismiss this subject without adding
a particular caution to yourself concerning it.

Jealousy is, on several accounts, still more inexcusable in a woman. There is
not any thing that so much exposes her to ridicule, or so much subjects her to
the insult of affrontive addresses: it is an inlet to almost every possible
evil, the fatal source of innumerable indiscretions, the sure destruction of
her own peace, and is frequently the bane of her husband's affection. Give not
a momentary harbor to its shadow in your heart; fly from it, as from the face
of a fiend, that would lead your unwary steps into a gulf of unalterable
misery. When once embarked in the matrimonial voyage, the fewer faults you
discover in your partner, the better. Never search after what it will give you
no pleasure to find; never desire to hear what you will not like to be told;
therefore avoid that tribe of impertinents, who, either from a malicious love
of discord, or from the meaner, though less criminal motive of ingratiating
themselves by gratifying the blameable curiosity of others, sow dissension
wherever they gain admittance; and by telling unwelcome truths, or, more
frequently, by insinuat^ng invented falsehoods, injure innocent people, disturb
domestic union, and destroy the peace of families. Treat these emissaries of
Satan with the contempt they deserve; hear not what they offer to communicate,
but give them at once to understand, that you can never look on those as your
friends, who speak in a disadvantageous manner of that person whom you would
always choose to see in the most favorable light. If they are not effectually
silenced by such rebukes, be inaccessible to their visits, and break off all
acquaintance with such incorrigible pests of society, who will be ever upon the
watch to seize an unguarded opportunity of disturbing your repose.

Should the companion of your life be guilty of some secret indiscretions, run
not the hazard of being told by these malicious meddlers, what, in fact, it is
better for you never to know: but if some unavoidable accident betrays an
imprudent correspondence, take it for a mark of esteem, that he endeavors to
conceal from you what he knows you must, upon a principle of reason and
religion, disapprove: and do not, by discovering your acquaintance with it,
take off the restraint which your supposed ignorance lays him under, and
thereby, perhaps, give a latitude to undisguised irregularities. Be assured
whatever accidental sallies the gaiety of inconsiderate youth may lead him
into, you can never be indifferent to him, whilst he is careful to preserve
your peace, by concealing what he imagines might be an infringement of it. Rest
then satisfied, that time and reason will most certainly get the better of all
faults which proceed not from a bad heart; and that, by maintaining the first
place in his esteem, your happiness will be built on too firm a foundation to
be easily shaken.

I have been thus particular on the choice of a husband, and on the material
parts of conduct in a married life, because thereon depends not only the
temporal, but often the eternal felicity of those who enter into that state; a
constant scene of disagreement, of ill nature and quarrels, necessarily
unfitting the mind for every religious and social duty, by keeping it i^ a
disposition directly opposite to that christian piety, to that practical
benevolence and rational composure, which alone can prepare it for everlasting
happiness.

Instructions on this head, considering your tender age, may seem premature,
and should have been deferred, 'till occasion called for them, had our
situation allowed me frequent opportunities of communicating my sentiments to
you; but that not being the case, I choose, in this epistle, at once to offer
you my best advice in every circumstance of great moment to your well being,
both here and hereafter, lest at a more proper season it may not happen to be
in my power. You may defer the particular consideration of this part, 'till the
design of entering into a new scene of life may make it useful to you; which, I
hope, will not be for some years; an unhappy marriage being more generally the
consequence of a too early engagement, before reason has gained sufficient
strength to form a solid judgment, on which only a proper choice can be
determined. Great is the hazard of a mistake, and irretrievable the effects of
it! Many are the degrees between happiness and misery! Absolute misery, I will
venture to affirm, is to be avoided by a proper behavior, even under all the
complicated ills of human life; but to arrive at that proper behavior,
requires the highest degree of christian philosophy. And who would voluntarily
put themselves upon a state of trial so severe, in which not one of a thousand
has been found able to come off victorious? Between this and positive happiness
there are innumerable steps of comparative evil; each has its separate
conflict, variously difficult, differently painful, under all which a patient
submission and a conscious propriety of behavior is the only attainable good.
Far short, indeed, of possible temporal felicity is the ease arising from
hence! Rest not content with the prospect of such ease, but fix on a more
eligible point of view, by aiming at true happiness; and, take my word, that
can never be found in a married state, without the three essential
qualifications already mentioned, virtue, goodnature, and good-sense, in a
husband. Remember, therefore, my dear girl, this repeated caution, if you ever
resolve on marriage, never to give your hand to a man who wants either of them,
whatever other advantages he may be possessed of; so shall you not only escape
all those vexations which thousands of unthinking mortals hourly repent of
having brought upon themselves; but, most assuredly, if it is not your own
fault, you will enjoy that uninterrupted domestic harmony, in the affectionate
society of a virtuous companion, which constitutes the highest satisfaction of
human life. Such an union, founded on reason and religion, cemented by mutual
esteem and tenderness, is a kind of faint emblem, if the comparison may be
allowed, of the promised reward of virtue in a future state; and most
certainly, it is an excellent preparative for it, by preserving a perfect
equanimity, by keeping a constant composure of mind, which naturally lead to
the proper discharge of all the religious and social duties of life, the
unerring road to everlasting peace. The first have been already spoken to; it
remains only to mention some few of the latter.

Among these, ECONOMY may, perhaps, be thought improperly placed; yet many of
the duties we owe to society being often rendered impracticable by the want of
it, there is not so much impropriety in ranking it under this head, as may at
first be imagined. For instance, a man who lives at an expense beyond what his
income will support, lays himself under a necessity of being unjust, by
withholding from his creditors what they have a right to demand from him as
their due, according to all laws both human and divine: and thereby he often
entails ruin on an innocent family, who, but for the loss sustained by his
extravagance, might have comfortably subsisted on the profits of their
industry. He likewise puts it out of his own power to give that relief to the
indigent, which, by the laws of humanity, they have a right to expect; the
goods of fortune being given, as a great divine excellently observes, for the
use and support of others, as well as for the person on whom they are bestowed.
These are surely great breaches of that duty we owe to our fellow creatures,
and are effects very frequently and naturally produced by the want of economy.

You will find it a very good method, so to regulate your stated expenses as to
bring them always one-fourth part within your certain annual income: by these
means you will avoid being at any time distressed by unforeseen accidents, and
you will have it more easily in your power materially to relieve those who
deserve assistance. But the giving trifling sums, indiscriminately, to such as
appear necessitous, is far from being commendable; it is an injury to society;
it is an encouragement to idleness, and helps to fill the streets with lazy
beggars, who live upon misapplied bounty, to the prejudice of the industrious
poor. These are useful members of the commonwealth; and on them such
benefactions might be serviceably bestowed. Be sparing, therefore, in this kind
of indiscriminate donations; they are too constantly an insignificant relief to
the receivers, supposing them really in want; and, frequently repeated, they
amount to a considerable sum in the year's account. The proper objects of
charity are those, who by unavoidable misfortunes have fallen from affluent
circumstances into a state of poverty and distress; those also, who, by
unexpected disapointments in trade, are on the point of being reduced to an
impossibility of carrying on that business, on which their present subsistence
and their future prospect in life depend, from the incapacity of raising an
immediate sum to surmount the difficulty; and those who, by their utmost
industry, can hardly support their families above the miseries of want; or who,
by age or by illness, are rendered incapable of labor. Appropriate a certain
part of your income to the relief of these real distresses. To the first, give
as largely as your circumstances will allow; to the second, after the example
of an excellent prelate of our own church, lend, if it is in your power, a
sufficient sum to prevent the threatened ruin, on condition of being repaid the
loan, without interest, if Providence enables them, by future success, to do it
with convenience. The same method may be used where indigence renders industry
unavailable, by depriving it of the means to lay in a small original stock to
be improved. Never take a note of hand or any acknowledgment of such loan, lest
what you intended for a benefit, should be afterward made the instrument of
ruin to the receiver, by a different disposition in your successor. But such
assistance ought not to be given to any, without a thorough knowledge of their
character, and having good reason to believe them not only industrious, but
strictly honest, which will be a sufficient obligation on them for the
repayment: and the sums so repaid ought to be laid by, 'till an opportunity
again offers of making them in like manner serviceable to others. The latter
sort, who are able to work, may, by a small addition to the profits of their
own labor, be rescued from misery, and may be put into a comfortable way of
subsistence. Those who, by age or by infirmity, are rendered utterly incapable
of supporting themselves, have an undoubted right, not only to the necessaries,
but even to some of the conveniences of life, from all, whom Providence has
placed in the more happy state of affluence and independence.

As your fortune and situation are yet undetermined, I have purposely laid down
such rules as may be adapted to every station. A large fortune gives greater
opportunity of doing good, and of communicating happiness in a more extensive
degree: but a small one is no excuse for withholding a proportionate relief
from real and deserving objects of compassion. To assist them is an
indispensible duty of christianity. The first and great commandment is, to love
God with all your heart; the second, to love your neighbor as yourself: Whosoever
sees his brother in need, and shuts up his bowels of compassion, how
dwells the love of God in him? or how the love of his neighbor? If deficient
in these primary duties, vain are the hopes of acceptance, built on a partial
obedience to the lesser branches of the law! -- Inability is often pleaded as
an excuse for the want of charity, by persons who make no scruple of daily
lavishing on their pleasures, what, if better applied, might have made an
indigent family happy through life. These persons lose sight of real felicity,
by the mistaken pursuit of its shadow: the pleasures, which engross their
attention, die in the enjoyment, are often succeeded by remorse, and always by
satiety; whereas the true joy, the sweet complacency resulting from benevolent
actions, increases by reflection, and must be immortal as the soul. So exactly,
so kindly is our duty more to coincide with our present as well as future
interest, that incomparably more satisfaction will accrue to a considerate mind
from denying itself even some of the agreeables of life, in order the more
effectually to relieve the unfortunate, than could arise from a full indulgence
of every temporal gratification.

However small your income may be, remember that a part of it is due to merit
in distress. Set by an annual sum for this purpose, even though it should
oblige you to abate some necessary expense to raise the fund: by this method,
persons of slender fortune have been enabled to do much good, and to give
happiness to many. If your stock will not admit of frequent draughts upon it,
be the more circumspect with regard to the merit of those you relieve, that
bounties, not in your power to repeat often, may not be misapplied. But if
Providence, by a more ample fortune, should bless you with a larger ability of
being serviceable to your fellow creatures, prove yourself worthy of the trust
reposed in you, by making a proper use of it. Wide as your influence can
extend, turn the cry of distress and danger into the song of joy and safety;
feed the hungry, clothe the naked, comfort the afflicted, give medicine to the
sick, and, with either, bestow all the alleviation their unfortunate
circumstances can admit of. Thus may you truly make a friend of the unrighteous
mammon. Thus you may turn the perishable goods of fortune into everlasting
blessings. Upon earth you will partake that happiness you impart to others; and
you will lay up for yourself treasures in heaven, where neither moth nor rust
can corrupt, and where thieves do not break through nor steal.

A person who has once experienced the advantages of a right action, will be
led by the motive of present self-interest, as well as by future expectation,
to the continuance of it. There is no injunction of christianity that a sincere
christian, by obedience, will not find so calculated, as to be directly, in
some measure, its own reward.

The forgiveness of injuries, to which is annexed the promise of pardon for our
own offenses, (and which is required by the gospel, not only so far as to
forbear all kinds of retaliation, but also to render us equally disposed to
serve with our utmost power those persons who have wilfully injured us, as if
no such injury had been received from them) has by some been accounted a hard
precept* yet the difficulty of it arises merely from, and is proportionable to,
the badness of the heart by which it is so esteemed. A good disposition finds a
superlative pleasure in returning good for evil; and, by an inexpressible
satisfaction of mind in so doing, feels the present reward of obedience:
whereas a spirit of revenge is incompatible with happiness, an implacable
temper being a constant torment to its possessor; and the man who returns an
injury, feels more real misery from the rancour of his own heart, than it is in
his power to inflict upon another.

Should a friend wound you in the most tender part, by betraying a confidence
reposed, prudence forbids the exposing yourself to a second deception, by
placing any future trust in such a person. But though here all obligations of
intimacy cease, those of benevolence and humanity remain still in full force,
and are equally binding, and call for every act of service and assistance, even
to the suffering a lesser evil yourself, in order to secure a much greater good
to the person by whom you have been thus ill-used. This is in general allowed
to be the duty of every individual to all, as a member of society; but it is
particularly instanced in the present case, to show, that not even a breach of
friendship, the highest of all provocations, will cancel the duty, at all times
equally and unalterably binding -- the duty of promoting both the temporal and
eternal happiness of all your fellow creatures by every method in your power.

It has been by many thought impertinent at any time to offer unasked advice;
the reason of which maybe chiefly owing to its being too frequently tendered
with a supercilious air, that implies a conceited consciousness of superior
wisdom: it is the manner, therefore, more than the thing itself, which gives
disgust.

If those, with whom you have any degree of intimacy, are guilty of what to you
appears either wrong or indiscreet, speak your opinion to them with freedom,
though you should even lose a nominal friend by so doing. Silence makes you, in
some measure, an accessory to the fault: but having thus once discharged your
duty, rest there: they are to judge for themselves: to repeat such admonitions
is both useless and impertinent, and they will then be thought to proceed
rather from pride than from good nature. To the persons concerned only are you
to speak your disapprobation of their conduct: when they are censured by
others, say all that truth or probability will permit in their justification.

It often happens, that upon an accidental quarrel between friends, they
separately appeal to a third person. In such case, alternately take the
opposite side, alleging every argument in favor of the absent party, and
placing the mistakes of the complainer in the strongest light. This method may
probably at first displease, but is always right, as it is the most likely to
procure a reconciliation. If that takes place, each, equally obliged, will
thankfully approve your conduct: if not, you will have the satisfaction of, at
least, endeavoring to have been the restorer of peace. A contrary behavior,
which generally proceeds from the mean desire of pleasing by flattery, at the
expense of truth, often widens a trifling breach into open and irreconcilable
enmity. People of this disposition are the worst sort of incendiaries, the
greatest plague of human society, because the most difficult to be guarded
against, from their always wearing the specious disguise of pretended
approbation and friendship to the present, and equally deceitful resentment
against the absent person or company.

To enumerate all the social duties would lead me too far; suffice it
therefore, my dear, in a few words to sum up what remains.

Let truth ever dwell upon your tongue.

Scorn to flatter any, and despise the person who would practice so base an art
upon yourself.

Be honestly open in every part of your behavior and conversation.

All, with whom you have any intercourse, even down to the meanest station,
have a right to civility and good humor from you. A superiority of rank or
fortune is no license for a proud, supercilious behavior: the disadvantages of
a dependant state are alone sufficient to labor under; it is both unjust and
cruel to increase them, either by a haughty deportment, or by the unwarrantable
exercise of a capricious temper.

Examine every part of your conduct toward others by the unerring rule of
supposing a change of places. This will certainly lead to an impartial
judgment. Do then what appears to you right, or, in other words, what you would
they should do unto you; which comprehends every duty relative to society.

Aim at perfection, or you will never reach to an attainable height of virtue.

Be religious without hypocrisy, pious without enthusiasm.

Endeavor to merit the favor of God by a sincere and uniform obedience to
whatever you know, or believe, to be his will; and should afflictive evils be
permitted to cloud the sunshine of your brightest days, receive them with
submission; satisfied that a being equally wise, omniscient, and beneficent, at
once sees and intends the good of his whole creation; and that every general or
particular dispensation of his providence, toward the rational part of it, is
so calculated as to be productive of ultimate happiness, which nothing but the
misbehaviour of individuals can prevent to themselves.

This truth is surely an unanswerable argument for absolute resignation to the
will of God; and such a resignation, founded upon reason and choice, not
enforced by necessity, is unalterable peace of mind, fixed on too firm a basis
to be shaken by adversity. Pain, poverty, ingratitude, calumny, and even the
loss of those we hold most dear, may each transiently affect, but, united,
cannot mortally wound it. Upon this principle, you will find it possible not
only to be content, but cheerful, under all the disagreeable circumstances this
state of probation is liable to; and, by making a proper use of them, you may
effectually remove the garb of terror from the last of all temporal evils.
Learn, then, with grateful pleasure to meet approaching death as the kind
remover of every painful sensation, the friendly guide to perfect and to
everlasting happiness.

Believe me, this is not mere theory. My own experience every moment proves the
fact undeniably true. My conduct, in all those relations which still subsist
with me, nearly as human imperfection will allow, is governed by the rules here
laid down for you; and it produces the constant rational compos^re, which
constitutes the most perfect felicity of human life: for with truth I can aver,
that I daily feel incomparably more real satisfaction, more true contentment in
my present retirement, than the gayest scenes of festive mirth ever afforded
me. I am pleased with this life, without an anxious thought for the continuance
of it; and am happy in the hope of hereafter exchanging it for a life
infinitely better. My soul, unstained by the crimes unjustly imputed to me,
most sincerely forgives the malicious authors of these imputations: it
anticipates the future pleasure of an open acquittal, and, in that expectation,
loses the pain of present and undeserved censure. By this is meant the instance
that was made the supposed foundation for the last of innumerable injuries
which I have received, through him, from whom I am conscious of having deserved
the kindest treatment. Other faults, no doubt, I might have many; to him I had
very few: nay, for several years, I cannot, upon reflection, accuse myself of
any thing but of a too absolute, too unreserved obedience to every injunction,
even where plainly contrary to the dictates of my own reason. How wrong such a
compliance was, has been clearly proved by many instances, in which it has been
since most ungenerously and most ungratefully urged as a circumstantial
argument against me.

It must, indeed, be owned, that for the two or three last years, tired with a
long series of repeated insults, of a nature almost beyond the power of
imagination to conceive, my temper became soured: a constant, fruitless
endeavor to oblige was changed into an absolute indifference about it; and ill
humor occasioned by frequent disappointment -- a consequence I have
experimentally warned you against -- was perhaps sometimes too much indulged.
How far the unequalled provocations may be allowed as an excuse for this,
heaven only must determine, whose goodness has thought fit to release me from
the painful situation; though by a method, at present, not the most eligible,
as it is the cause of a separation from my children also, and thereby has put
it out of my power to attend, in the manner I could have wished, to their
education; a duty that inclination would have led me with equal care and
pleasure more amply to fulfill, had they continued under my direction. But as
Providence has thought fit otherwise to determine, contented I submit to every
dispensation, convinced that all things are ordered for the best, and that they
will, in the end, work together for good to them that fear God, and who
sincerely endeavor to keep his commandments. If in these I err, I am certain
it is owing to a mistake in the judgment, not to a defect of the will.

Thus have I endeavored, my dear girl, in some measure, to compensate both to
you and to your sisters the deprivation of a constant maternal care, by
advising you according to my best ability, in the most material parts of your
conduct through life, as particularly as the compass of a letter would allow
me. May these few instructions be as serviceable to you as my wishes would make
them! and may that Almighty being, to whom my daily prayers ascend for your
preservation, grant you his heavenly benediction! May he keep you from all
moral evil, lead you into the paths of righteousness and peace, and may he gi^e
us all a happy meeting in that future state of un^lterable felicity, which is
prepared for those who, by patient continuance in well-doing, seek after glory
and immortality!

THE LADIES' LIBRARY. Advice of a Mother to her Daughter.
By the Marchioness de Lambert.
THE world has, in all ages, been very negligent in the education of daughters;
all their care is laid out entirely upon the men; and, as if the women were a
distinct species, they leave them to themselves without any helps, without
thinking that they compose one half of the world; that the two sexes are
necessarily united together by alliances; that the women make either the
happiness or misery of the men, who always feel the want of having them
reasonable; that they are a great means of the rise and ruin of families; that
they are entrusted with the education of the children in their early youth, a
season of life in which they receive the liveliest and deepest impressions.
What would they have them inspire into their children, when, from their very
infancy, they are left themselves in the hands of governantes, who, as they are
generally taken out of the low world, inspire them with low sentiments,
encourage all the timorous passions, and form them ^o superstition instead of
religion. 'Twould ^e a subject worthier of their thoughts to contrive how to
make certain virtues hereditary to their families, by conveying them down from
the mother to the children, than how to secure their estates by entails.
Nothing, therefore, is so much mistaken as the education which they give to
young women: they design them to please; they give them no instructions but for
the ornament and graces of the body; they flatter their self-love; they give
them up to effeminacy, to the world and to false opinions; they give them no
lectures of virtue and fortitude: surely it is unreasonable or rather downright
madness to imagine that such an education should not turn to their prejudice.

It may be necessary, my daughter, to observe all the outward rules of decorum;
but this is not enough to gain you the esteem of the world; it is the sentiments
of the mind that form the character of a person; that lead the understanding;
that govern the will; ^^at secure the reality and duration of all our virtues:
but religion should be the principle and foundation of these sentiments. When
religion is once engraven on our heart, all the virtues will naturally flow
from that source; all the duties of life will be regularly practiced in their
respective order. It Is not enough for the conduct of young persons, to oblige
them to do their duty; they must be brought to love it. Authority is a tyrant
only over the outward behavior; it has no sway over the inward sentiments.
When one prescribes a conduct, we should represent the reasons and the motives
of it, and give them a relish for what we advise them.

It Is so much for our interest to practice virtue, that we should never
consider it as our enemy, but rather as the source of happiness, of glory, and
of peace.

You are just coming into the world: enter it, my daughter, with some
principles: you cannot fortify yourself too much against what you will meet
with there: bring along with you all your religion: nourish it in your heart by
your sentiments; confirm it in your mind by proper reflections, and by reading
adapted to encourage it.

There is nothing more necessary, and indeed more happy for us than to keep up
a sentiment that makes us love and hope; that gives us a prospect of an
agreeable futurity; that reconciles all times; that insures all the duties of
life; that answers for us to ourselves, and is our guarantee with regard to
others. What a support will you find from religion under the misfortunes that
threaten you! for a certain number of misfortunes must fall to your share.
'Twas a saying of one of the ancients, That he wrapped himself up in the mantle
of his virtue: Wrap yourself up in that of your religion; it will be a great
help to you against the weakness of youth, and a sure refuge in your riper
years.

Women, who have cultivated their understanding with nothing but the maxims of
the world, are presented at last with an universal blank, and find themselves
in a terrible want of thought and employment, the most irksome situation in
life. As they advance in age, the world quits them, and reason tells them they
should quit the world; but where must they go for relief? The time past
furnishes us with regrets, the present with inquietudes, and the time to come
with fears. Religion alone calms all our uneasiness, and comforts us under all
misfortunes: by uniting you to God, it reconciles you with the world, and
yourself too.

A young person, when she comes into the world, frames to herself an high
notion of the happiness reserved for her. She sets herself to obtain it; it is
the source of all her cares. She is always on the hunt after her notion, and in
hopes of finding a perfect happiness: this is the occasion of lightness and
inconstancy.

The pleasures of the world are deceitful; they promise more than they perform;
the quest of them is full of anxiety: their enjoyment is far from yielding any
true satisfaction, and their loss is attended with vexation.

To fix your desires, think that no solid or lasting happiness is to be found
any where but in your own breast. Honors and riches have no charms that are
lasting for any length of time: their possession extends our view, and gives us
new desires. Pleasures, when they grow familiar, lose their relish. Before you
have tasted them, you may do without them; whereas enjoyment makes that
necessary to you, which was once superfluous, and you are worse at your ease
than you were before. By enjoying them you grow used to them, and when you lose
them, they leave you nothing but emptiness and want. What affects us sensibly
is the passage from one circumstance of life to another; the interval between a
miserable season and a happy one. The sense of pleasure wears off as soon as we
grow habituated to it. 'Twould be a great advantage, if reason could at once
lay before us all that is necessary for our happiness. Experience brings us
back to ourselves; spare yourself that expense, ^^d lay it early down for a
maxim, with a firmness and resolution to determine your conduct, that true
felicity consists in peace of mind, in reason, and in the discharge of our
duty. Let us not fancy ourselves happy, my daughter, till we feel our pleasures
of this sort flow from the bottom of our soul.

These reflections seem too strong for a young person, and are proper for a
riper age: however, I believe you are capable of them; and besides, I am
instructing myself. We cannot engrave the precepts of wisdom too deeply in our
hearts; the impressions that they make are always too light; but it cannot be
denied that such as use themselves to make reflections, and fortify their hearts
with principles, are in a fairer way to virtue than such as neglect them. If we
are unhappy enough to be defective in the practice of our duty, let us at least
not be wanting in our affection to it: let us then, my daughter, make use of
these precepts for a continual help to our virtue.

It Is commonly said, there are two prejudices with which every body must
comply: religion and honor. It Is a wrong expression to call religion a
prejudice. A prejudice is an opinion that may be subservient to error as well
as truth; the term ought never to be applied but to things that are uncertain;
and religion is not so.

Honor is, indeed, an invention merely human; yet nothing is more real than
the evils that people suffer who would get rid of it; 'twould be dangerous to
shake it off; we should rather do all we can to fortify a sentiment that ought
to be a rule to our conduct, since nothing is more destructive of our quiet, or
makes our life more unequal, than to think one way and act another. Possess
your heart as much as is possible with sentiments for the conduct that you
ought to observe; fortify this prejudice of honor in your mind; you cannot be
too scrupulously nice on this subject.

Never warp in the least from these principles; never entertain a notion, as if
the virtue of women was a virtue only enjoined by custom; nor allow yourself to
think you have sufficiently discharged your obligations if you can but escape
the eyes of the world. There are two courts before which you must inevitably
appear in judgment, your conscience and the world; you may possibly get clear
of the world, but you can never get clear of conscience. Secure her testimony
in favor of your honesty; it is what you owe to yourself; but withal do not
neglect the approbation of the public; for a contempt of reputation naturally
leads to a contempt of virtue.

When you are a little acquainted with the world, you will find that there is
no need of the sanctions and terror of laws to keep you within the bounds of
your duty: the example of such as have deviated from it, and the calamities
that have ever attended them, is enough to stop any inclination in the midst of
its career; for there is no coquet but must own, if she would be sincere, that
it is the greatest misfortune in the world to be forgotten and neglected.

Shame is a passion that might be of excellent advantage to us, if we managed
it well: I do not mean that false shame which only serves to disturb our quiet,
without being of any service to our behavior; I speak of that which keeps us
from evil, out of fear of dishonor: we must confess, this shame is sometimes
the surest guard of the women's virtue; there are very few virtuous for virtue
itself.

There are some great virtues, which, when they are carried to a certain
degree, make a great many defects be overlooked; such as extraordinary valor
in the men, and extreme modesty in the women. Agrippina, the wife of
Germanicus, was excused of all her faults on account of her chastity. This
princess was ambitious and haughty; but, says Tacitus, all her passions were
consecrated by her chastity.

If you are sensible and nice in the point of reputation, if you are
apprehensive of being attacked as to essential virtues, there is one sure mean
to calm your fears, and satisfy your nicety; it is to be virtuous. Be sure
always to keep well with yourself; it is a sure income of pleasures; and will
gain you praise, and a good reputation besides; in a word, be but truly
virtuous, and you will find admirers enough.

The virtues that make a figure in the world do not fall to the women's share;
their virtues are of a simple and peaceable nature: fame will have nothing to
do with us. 'Twas a saying of one of the ancients, that "the great virtues are
for the men!" he allows the women nothing but the single merit of being
unknown; and such as are most praised, (says he) are not always the persons
that deserve it best; but rather such as are not talked of at all. The notion
seems to me to be wrong; but to reduce this maxim into practice, I think it
best to avoid the world and making a figure, which always strikes at modesty,
and be contented with being one's own spectator.

The virtues of the women are difficult, because they have no help from glory
to practice them. To live at home -- to meddle with nothing but one's self and
family -- to be simple, just, and modest -- are painful virtues, because they
are obscure. One must have a great deal of merit, to shun making a figure, and
a great deal of courage to bring one's self to be virtuous only to one's own
eyes. Grandeur and reputation serve for supports to our weakness, for such, in
reality, is our desire to distinguish and raise ourselves. The mind rests in
the public approbation: but true glory consists in being satisfied without it.
Let it not enter, then, into the motives of your actions: it is enough that it
is the recompense of them.

Be assured, my daughter, that perfection and happiness cling together; that
you can never be happy but by virtue, and scarcely ever unhappy but by ill
conduct. Whosoever examine themselves strictly, will find that they never had
any grievous affliction, but they occasioned it themselves by some fault, or by
being wanting in some duty. Anxiety always follows the loss of innocence: but
virtue is ever attended with an inward satisfaction, that is a constant spring
of felicity to all its votaries.

Do not, however, imagine that your only virtue is modesty; there are abundance
of women that have no notion of any other, and fancy, that by practicing it
they discharge all the duties of society: they think they have a right to
neglect all the rest, and to be as proud and censorious as they please. Anne of
Bretagne, a proud and imperious princess, made Lewis XII. suffer exceedingly;
and the good prince was used to say when he submitted to her humor, "we must
pay dear for the women's chastity." Make nobody pay for yours; think rather
that it is a virtue which regards only yourself, and loses its greatest luster,
if it be not attended with the other virtues.

We should be very tender in our modesty; inward corruption passes from the
heart to the mouth, and occasions loose discourse. The most violent passions
have need of modesty to show themselves in a seducing form: it should
distinguish itself in all your actions; it should set off and embellish all
your person.

They say, that when Jove formed the passions, he assigned every one of them
its distinct abode. Modesty was forgotten; and when she was introduced to him,
he could not tell where to place her; she was therefore allowed to consort with
all the rest. Ever since that time, she is inseparable from them* she is the
friend of truth, and betrays the lie that d^res attack it; she is in a strict
and intimate union with love: she always attends, and frequently discovers and
proclaims it: love, in a word, loses his charms, whenever he appears without
her: there is not a more glorious ornament for a young lady than modesty.

Let the chief part of your finery then be modesty: it has great advantages; it
sets off beauty, and serves for a veil to ugliness: modesty is the supplement
of beauty. The great misfortune of ugliness, is, that it smothers and buries
the merit of women. People do not go to look in a forbidding figure for the
engaging qualities of the mind and heart; it is a very difficult affair, when
merit must make its way, and shine through a disagreeable outside.

You do not want graces to make you agreeable; but you are no beauty: this
obliges you to lay up a stock of merit: the world will compliment you with
nothing. Beauty has great advantages. One of the ancients said of it, that it
was a short tyranny, and the greatest privilege in nature; that handsome
persons carry letters of recommendation in their looks.

Beauty inspires a pleasing sentiment, which prepossesses people in its favor.
If you have made no such impressions, you must expect to be taken to pieces.
Take care that there be nothing in your air or manners to make any body think
that you do not know yourself: an air of confidence, in an ordinary figure, is
shocking enough. Let nothing in your discourse or dress look like art; at
least, let it not be easy to find it out; the most refined art never lets
itself be seen.

You are not to neglect the accomplishments and ornaments proper to make you
agreeable; for women are designed to please; but you should rather think of
acquiring a solid merit, than of employing yourself in trifling things. Nothing
is shorter than the reign of beauty* nothing is more melancholy than the latter
part of the lives of women, who never knew any thing but that they were
handsome. If any body makes their court to you for the sake of your agreeable
accomplishments, make their regards center in friendship, and secure the
continuance of that friendship by your merits.

It Is a difficult matter to lay down any sure rules to please. The graces,
without merit, cannot please long: and merit, without the graces, may command
the esteem of men, but can never move them. Women, therefore, must have an
amiable merit, and join the graces to the virtues. I do not confine the merit
of women merely to modesty; I give it a much larger extent. A valuable woman
exerts the manly virtues of friendship, probity, and honor, in the punctual
discharge of all her obligations. An amiable woman should not only have the
exterior graces but all the graces of the heart and fine sentiments of the
mind. There is nothing so hard as to please, without being so intent upon it,
that it shall look a little like coquetry. Women generally please the men of
the world more by their faults than their good qualities. The men are for
making their advantages of the weaknesses of amiable women: they would have
nothing to do with their virtues; they do not care to esteem them; they had
much rather be amused by persons of little or no merit, than be forced to
admire such as are virtuous.

One must know human nature, if one designs to please. The men are much more
affected with what is new, than with what is excellent: but the flower of
novelty soon fades; what pleased when it was new, soon displeases when it grows
common. To keep up this taste of novelty, we must have a great many resources
and various kinds of merit within ourselves; we must not stick only at the
agreeable ccomplishments: we must strike their fancy with a variety of graces
and merits, to keep up their inclinations, and make the same object afford them
all the pleasures of inconstancy.

Women are born with a violent desire to please. As they find themselves barred
from all the ways that lead to glory and authority, they take another road to
arrive at them, and make themselves amends by their agreeableness. Beauty
imposes on the person that has it, and infatuates the soul; yet remember, that
there is but a very small number of years difference between a fine woman and
one that is no longer so. Get over this excessive desire to please; at least
keep from showing it. We must not be extravagant in our dress, or let it take
up all our time; the real graces do not depend on a studied finery: we must
submit to the mode as a troublesome sort of slavery, but comply with it no more
than we are obliged in decency. The mode would be reasonable, if it could be
fixed to a point of perfection, convenience, and gracefulness; but to be always
changing, is inconstancy, rather than politeness and a good taste.

A good taste avoids all excessive niceness; it treats little things as little
ones, and gives itself very little trouble about them. Neatness is, indeed,
agreeable, and deserves to be ranked among things that are graceful; but it
commences littleness, when it is carried to an excess: it is a much better
temper to be careless in things of little consequence, than to be too nice
about them.

Young persons are very subject to the spleen; as they are quite destitute of
knowledge, they run with eagerness toward sensible objects; their spleen,
however, is the least evil they have to dread: excessive joys are no part of
the train of virtue. All violent and moving pleasures are dangerous. Though one
is discreet enough not to break through the rules of decency, and to keep
within the bounds of modesty; yet when the heart is once moved with the
pleasure it feels, a sort of softness diffuses itself over the soul, and takes
away its relish for every thing that is called virtue; it stops and makes you
cool in the practice of your duty. A young person does not see the consequences
of this flattering poison, the least mischief of which is to disturb the quiet
of life, to deprave the taste, and render all simple pleasure insipid. When one
sees a young person happy enough not to have had her heart touched (as there is
a natural disposition in us to a union, and this disposition has not been
exercised), she easily complies, and gives herself naturally to the person
designed for her.

Be very cautious on the article of plays, and the like public diversions.
There is no dignity in showing one's self continually, nor is it an easy matter
to preserve a strict modesty in a constant hurry of diversions. It is mistaking
one's interest to frequent them: If you have beauty, you must not wear out the
taste of the world by showing yourself continually: you must be still more
reserved if you want graces to set you off; besides, the constant use of
diversions lessens the relish of them.

When all your life has been spent in pleasures, and they come to leave you,
either because your taste for them is over, or because your reason forbids you
the enjoyment of them, your mind finds itself in a most uneasy situation for
want of employment. If you would, therefore, have your pleasures and amusements
last, use them only as diversions to relieve you after more serious
occupations. Entertain yourself with your own reason; keep up that
correspondence, and the absence of pleasures will not leave you any time upon
your hands, nor any hankering after them.

It behooves us, therefore, to husband our tastes; there is no relishing life
without them: but innocence only can preserve them in their integrity;
irregularity is sure to deprave them.

When we have found a heart, we make an advantage of every thing, and turn it
into a source of pleasures. We come frequently to pleasures with a sick's man's
palate: we fancy ourselves nice, when we are only surfeited and out of taste.
When we have not spoiled our mind and heart by sentiments that seduce the
fancy, or by any flaming passion, it is easy to find delight; health and
innocence are the true fountains of joy. But when we have had the misfortune to
habituate ourselves to vehement pleasures, we become insensible to moderate
ones. We spoil our taste by diversions, and use ourselves so much to violent
pleasures, that we cannot take up with such as are simple and regular.

We should always dread such great emotions of the soul as leave us flat and
out of sorts. Young persons have the greater reason to fear them, in that they
are less capable of resisting what flatters their sense. "Temperance," said one
of the ancients, "is the best caterer for luxury." With this temperance, which
makes the health both of mind and body, one has always a pleasing and an equal
joy; one has no need of diversions and expense; reading, work, and
conversation, afford a purer joy than all the train of the greatest pleasures.
In a word, innocent delights are of most advantage; they are always ready at
hand; they are beneficent, and are never purchased at too dear a rate. Other
pleasures flatter, but they do mischief: they alter the constitution of the
mind, and spoil it like that of the body.

Be regular in all your views and in all your actions; it would be happy if our
fortune was such as to make computation of our income unnecessary; but as yours
is narrow, it obliges you to be regular. Be discreet in the article of your
expenses; if you do not observe a moderation in them, you will soon see your
affairs in disorder: as soon as you lay aside economy, you can answer for
nothing.

Pompous living is the high road to ruin; and the ruin of people's fortune is
almost always followed with corruption of manners: but in order to be regular,
it is no way necessary to be covetous. Remember, that avarice is of little
service, and dishonours a person infinitely. All that one should aim at, in a
regular management, is to avoid the shame and injustice that always attend an
irregular conduct. We must retrench superfluous expenses only to be in a better
condition to afford such as decency, friendship, and charity engage us to make.

It is good order, and not the looking into little matters, that turns to any
great account. Pliny, when he sent his friend back a bond for a considerable
sum which his father owed him, with a general acquittance, told him, I have but
a small estate, and am obliged to be at great expenses; but my frugality serves
for a fund to supply me wherewith to do the service that I render to my
friends. Borrow from your fancies and diversions, that you may have something
to gratify the sentiments of generosity, which every person of a genteel spirit
ought to have.

Never mind the wants that vanity creates. "We must be" they say, "like
others;" this like goes a vast way. Have a nobler emulation, and allow nobody
^o have more honor, probity, and integrity than yourself. Be always sensible
of the necessity of virtue: poorness of soul is worse than poverty of fortune.

Whilst you are young, form your reputation; raise your credit; put your
affairs in order: you would have more trouble about it in another season of
life. Charles the fifth used to say, that fortune loved young folks. In the
time of youth, all the world offer themselves to you, and lend you a helping
hand: young people govern without thinking of it. But in more advanced age, you
have no helps from any quarter; you have no longer that bewitching charm which
has an influence on every body: you have nothing for you but reason and truth,
which do not ordinarily govern the world.

"You are going," said Montaigne to some young people, toward reputation and
credit; but I am returning back. When you cease to be young, you have no
acquisition left you to make, but in point of virtue. In all your undertakings
and actions, always aim at the highest perfection; form no project, and set
about nothing without saying to yourself, "Could not I do better?" By this
means you will insensibly contract a habit of justice and virtue, which will
make the practice thereof easier to you. Do what Seneca advised his friend
Lucilius: "Choose," said he to him, among great men some one that you think is
most to be admired: do nothing but in his presence; give him an account of all
your actions. Happy the man that is esteemed enough to be pitched on for this
purpose! This is the more easy, because young folks have a natural disposition
to imitation. They run less hazard when they choose their patterns from
antiquity, where we generally meet with none but great examples. Among the
moderns it may have its inconveniences; the copies of them very rarely succeed.
It has been said long ago, that every copy ought to tremble before its
original; they never follow it but at a distance: and yet it takes away your
natural character, which is generally the truest and the most simple. You are
apt to grow negligent as to yourself, when you fix yourself to a model;
besides, a great part of our faults come from imitation. Learn then to
reverence and stand in awe of yourself: let your scrupulousness be your own
censor.

Use all your application to make yourself happy in your station of life;
improve all the means you have: you lose a thousand advantages for want of it.
It is our attention, and comparing of things, that makes us happy.

The more address and capacity you have, the more will you make of your
circumstances, and the more will you extend your pleasures. It is not
possession that makes us happy; it is enjoyment; and enjoyment lies in
attention.

If people knew how to enjoy themselves in their condition, they would not be
troubled either with ambition or envy, and would be blessed with a perfect
tranquillity: but we do not live enough in the present moment; our desires and
hopes are always pushing us on toward futurity.

There are two sorts of madmen in the world; the one always live upon futurity,
and feed themselves with nothing but hopes; and as they are not wise enough to
calculate them rightly, they pass their lives in a continual mistake.
Reasonable persons are never taken up with any desires, but such as are within
their reach: they often gain their point, and though they should be mistaken,
they would easily console themselves under the disappointment; they know
likewife that our fondness for things wears off upon the possession of them, or
ceases upon seeing the impossibility of obtaining what we desire: wise men
always make themselves easy with such reflections. There is another sort of
madmen, that make too much of the present, and take no manner of care for
futurity; they ruin their fortune, their reputation, and their taste of life,
by not managing them discreetly. Men of sense join these two times together;
they enjoy the present, and yet do not neglect the future.

It is a duty, my daughter, to employ our time; but what use do we make of it?
Few people know how to value it as it deserves. Account to yourself, says one
of the ancients, for every moment of your time; that after making a just use of
the present, you may have less occasion for the future. Time flies with
rapidity: learn to live, that is, to make a good use of your time; but life is
spent too often in vain hopes, in quest of fortune, or in waiting for it. All
mankind feel the vanity of their condition, always taken up without being ever
satisfied. Remember, that life does not consist in the space of time that you
live, but in the use you should make of it: consider, that you have a mind to
cultivate and feed with truth -- a heart to purify and regulate -- and a
religious worship to pay to the Deity.

As the first years of life are precious, remember, daughter, to make an
advantageous use of them. While the mind easily receives impressions, embellish
your memory with valuable things, and consider, that you are laying in a
provision for your whole life. The memory is formed and improved by exercising
it.

Curiosity is a sentiment that you should not stifle: it wants only to be
managed, and placed on a right object. Curiosity is a knowledge begun, which
makes you advance farther and quicker in the road of truth: it is a natural
disposition that meets instruction halfway: it should not be stopped by
laziness and love of ease.

It is very useful for young persons to employ their time in solid sciences;
the Greek and Roman history elevate the mind, and raise the courage by the
great actions that we see there related. We ought not to be ignorant of the
history of our own country. I should not even blame a little philosophy,
especially the new, if one has a capacity for it; it helps to give you a clear
judgment, to distinguish your ideas, and to teach you to think justly. I would
likewise have a little morality: by the bare reading of Cicero, Pliny, and
others, one gets a taste for virtue: it makes an insensible impression on us,
that is of great advantage to our morals. The inclination to vice is corrected
by the example of so many virtues, and you will rarely find an evil disposition
have any relish for this sort of reading. We do not love to see what is always
upbraiding and condemning us.

As for languages, though a woman ought to be satisfied with speaking that of
her own country, I should not thwart the inclination one might have for Latin.
It opens you a gate to all the sciences: it lets you into conversation with the
best part of the world in all ages. Women are ready enough to learn Italian:
but I think it dangerous; it is the language of love: the Italian writers are
not very correct; you see in all their works a jingle of words, and a loose
imagination, inconsistent with a just way of thinking.

Poetry may produce some inconveniences: I should however be loath to forbid
the reading of the fine tragedies of Corneille: but the best of them often give
you lectures of virtue, and leave you an impression of vice.

The reading of romances is still more dangerous: I would not have them much
used; they inure the mind to falsehoods. Romances having no foundation of truth
to support them, warm the imagination, impair modesty, put the heart in
disorder, and if a young person have but the least disposition to tenderness,
they hurry on and fire her inclination. One should not increase the charms and
delusions of love; the more it is softe^ed, and the more modest it appears, the
mo^^ dangerous it is. I would not forbid them; all prohibitions entrench upon
liberty, and raise the desire: but we should, as much as we are able, use
ourselves to so^id reading, which improve the understanding and fortify the
heart: we cannot too carefully avoid such as leave impressions ^ard to be
effaced.

Moderate your fondness for extraordinary sciences; they are dangerous, and
(...) teach one nothing but a vast deal of vanity: they depress the activity of
the soul. If you have a very warm and active imagination, and a curiosity which
nothing can stop, it is much better to employ these dispositions in the
sciences, than to run the hazard of their being turned to serve your passions:
but remember, that a young lady should have almost as nice a modesty in the
article of sciences, as she has with regard to vice.

Guard yourself therefore against the inclination of setting up for a virtuoso;
do not amuse yourself in running after vain sciences, and such as are above
your reach. Our soul is much better qualified for enjoyment than it is for
knowledge; we have all the knowledge that is proper and necessary for our well
being; but we will not stick there; we are still running after truths that were
not designed for us.

Before we engage in enquiries, that are above our capacities, we should know
the just extent of our understanding, and what rule we should have for
determing our persuasion: we should learn to distinguish between opinion and
knowledge, and should have resolution enough to doubt, when we have no clear
notion of things, as well as courage to be ignorant of what surpasses us.

The better to prevent a vain opinion of our capacity, and abate a confidence
in our understanding, let us consider that the two principles of all our
knowledge, reason and the senses, want sincerity, and often deceive us. The
senses impose on reason; and reason misleads them in its turn. These are our
two guides, and both of them lead us out of the way. Such reflections should
naturally put us out of conceit with abstracted sciences; it is much better for
us to employ our time in useful points of knowledge.

Docility is a quality very necessary for a young person, who should never have
much confidence in herself: but this docility must not be carried too far. In
point of religion, indeed, it must submit to authority; but on any other
subject it must receive nothing but from reason and evidence. By carrying
docility too far, you do an injury to your reason; you make no use of your own
judgment and understanding, which are impared for want of exercise. You set too
narrow bounds to your ideas, when you confine them to those of other people.
The testimony of men only deserves credit in proportion to the degree of
certainty which they have acquired by examining into facts. There lies no
prescription against truth: it is for all persons and all times. In a word, as
a great man says, To be a christian, one must believe implicitly: but to be a
wise man, one must see clearly.

Accustom yourself to exercise your understanding, and make more use of it than
of your memory. We ^ll our heads with the notions of other people, and take no
care to form any of our own. We fancy that we have made a great progress, when
we load our memory with histories and facts; but this is of very little service
to perfect our understanding. We must use ourselves to thinking. The
understanding extends and improves itself by exercise; yet few persons take
care to exert i^.

Among our sex the art of thinking is a sort of dormant talent. Historical
facts, and the opinions of philosophers, will not defend you against a calamity
that presses you: you will not find yourself much the stronger for them. When
an affliction comes upon you, you have recourse to Seneca and Epictetus: Is it
for their reason to give you consolation? Is it not rather the business of your
own? Make use of your own stock; in the calm of life, make a proper provision
against the time of affliction, which you are sure to meet with: you will find
yourself much better supported by your own reason than by that of other people.

If you can govern your imagination, and make it submit to reason and truth, it
will be a great step toward your perfection and happiness. Women are generally
governed by their imagination; as they are not employed in any thing solid, and
are not in the course of their lives troubled either with the care of their
fortune, or the management of their affairs, they give themselves up entirely
to their pleasures. Plays, dress, romances, and inclinations, all depend upon
imagination. I know well enough, that if you keep it within due bounds, you
take so much off from your pleasures; for imagination is the source of them;
and the things that please us most, derive from her the charm and illusion in
which all their agreeableness consists: but for one pleasure of her creating,
what evils does she not make us suffer? She stands continually between truth
and us: Reason dares not show herself, where imagination bears the sway. We see
only as she pleases; and those that are led by her, know what they suffer from
her by woeful experience. It would be a very happy composition to make with her,
to give her back all her pleasures on condition that she made you feel none of
her pains: in a word, there is nothing so inconsistent with happiness, as a
fine, lively, and too heated imagination.

Possess yourself with a true notion of things, and take not up with the
sentiments of the people: form your own judgment without giving into received
opinions, and get over the prejudices of your infancy. When you feel yourself
under any uneasiness, take the following method: I have found the use of it:
Examine into the occasion of your trouble; strip it of all the disguise that is
about it, and of all the embroidery of imagination, and you will find that it
is generally nothing at all, or at least great allowances are to be made. Value
things only according to their real worth. We have a great deal more reason to
complain of our false notions than of our fortune; it is very frequently not so
much things that hurt us, as the opinion we have of them.

In order to be happy, we must think rightly: we owe a great respect to the
common opinions, when they concern religion; but we ought to think very
differently from the vulgar in what regards morality and the happiness of life.
By the vulgar, I mean every body that has a low and vulgar way of thinking; the
court is filled with such sort of creatures; and the world talks of nothing but
fortune and credit; all the cry there is, Go on, make haste forward; whereas
wisdom says, Take up with simple things; choose an obscure but quiet life; get
out of the hurry of the world; avoid a crowd. Fame is not all the recompense of
virtue; the main part of it lies in the testimony of your own conscience. A
great virtue is surely enough to comfort you for the loss of a little glory.

Be assured, that the greatest science is to know how to be independent. "I
have learnt," said one of the ancients, to be my own friend, so I shall never
be alone. You must provide yourself some resources against the inquietudes of
life, and some equivalent for the goods you had depended on. Secure yourself a
retreat and a place of refuge in your own breast; you can always return
thither, and be sure to find yourself again. When the world is less necessary
to you, it will have less power over you: when you do not, by some solid
inclinations place your dependence on yourself, you depend upon every thing
else.

Use yourself to solitude: there is nothing more useful and necessary to weaken
the impression that sensible objects make upon us. You should therefore from
time to time retire from the world to be alone. Assign some hours in the day
for reading, and for making your own reflections. "Reflection," says a father of
the church, is the eye of the soul; it lets light and truth into it. -- I will
lead him into solitude, says wisdom, and there I will speak to his heart. It is
there, indeed, where truth gives her instructions; where prejudices vanish,
where prepossession wears off, and where opinion, that governs all, begins to
lose its influence. When one considers the uselessness and insignificancy of
life, one is forced to say with Pliny, It is much better to pass one's life in
doing nothing at all, than in doing trifles of nothing.

I have told you already, daughter, that happiness consists in peace of mind:
you cannot enjoy the pleasures of the mind without health of mind: every thing
almost is a pleasure to a sound mind. If you would live with tranquillity,
these are the rules you are to observe. The first is, not to give yourself up
to things that please; to use them only occasionally; not to expect too much
from the men, for fear of being disappointed; to be your own principal friend.
Solitude too will insure you tranquillity, and is a friend to wisdom: it is
within you, that peace and truth take up their abode. Avoid the great world;
there is no security in it; it always awakens some sentiment or other that we
had almost crushed; there are but too many people in it that encourage
looseness; the more one converses with it, the more authority do one's passions
gain: it is hard to resist the attack of vice, when it comes so well attended:
in a word, one comes back from it much weaker, less modest, and more unjust,
for having been among the men. The world easily instills its poison into tender
souls. We should likewise shut up all the avenues to the passions; it is much
easier to keep them off, than vanquish them; and though one should be happy
enough to banish them, yet from the time that they made their impression, they
make us pay dear for their abode. The first motions of them is what cannot be
refused to nature; but she often carries her influence too far; and when you
come to yourself again, you find abundant reason to repent.

One should always have some resources and last shifts: calculate your strength
and your courage; and for this end, in all cases where you have any
apprehensions, consider every thing at the worst. Wait for the misfortune that
may happen to you with firmness: look it bravely in the face; view it in all
its most terrible circumstances, and do not let yourself sink under it.

A favorite, raised to the height of grandeur, was showing his riches to a
friend. As he took out a box, he said to him, Here it is that my treasure lies.
His friend pressed him to show it him, and he allowed him to open the box:
there was nothing in it but an old ragged coat. His friend seemed surprised at
it: the favorite said to him, When fortune shall send me back to my original
condition, I am ready for it. What a noble resource it is to consider every
thing at the worst, and feel fortitude enough in one's self to stand the shock!

How strongly soever you wish for any thing, begin with examining the thing you
wish: set before your eyes the good which it promises you, and the evils that
follow it: remember the passage of Horace, Pleasure goes before you, but keeps
her retinue out of sight. You will cease to fear, as soon as ever you cease to
desire. Depend upon it a wise man does not run after felicity, but makes his
own happiness: it must be your own doing, and it is in your own power.
Remember, that a very small matter will serve for all the real wants of life;
but there must be an infinite deal to satisfy the imaginary wants of opinion;
and that you will much sooner reduce your desires to the level of your fortune,
than raise your fortune to the level of your desires. If honors and riches
could satiate us, we might heap them up; but the thirst of them increases by
acquiring them: he that desires most, is certainly the most indigent.

Young persons live upon hope. M. de la Rochefoucault says, that it carries one
an agreeable road to the end of life. It would be, indeed, short enough, if
hope did not lengthen it; it is a very comfortable sentiment, but may prove
dangerous, by occasioning you often a great many disappointments. The least
evil that happens from it is, that we often lose what we possess, by waiting
for what we desire.

Our self-love makes us blind to ourselves, and diminishes all our defects. We
live with them as we do with the perfumes that we wear; we do not smell them;
they only incommode others: to see them in their right light we must see them
in other people. View your own ^mperfections with the same eyes with which you
view those of others: be always exact in keeping to this rule: it will accustom
you to equity. Examine your own nature, and make the best of your defects:
there is none of them but may be tacked to some virtues, and be made to favor
them. Morality does not propose to destroy nature, but to perfect it. Are you
vainglorious? Make use of that sentiment to raise yourself above the
weaknesses of your sex, and to avoid the faults that abase it. Every unruly
passion has a pain and shame annexed to it, which solicit you to quit it. Are
you timorous? Turn that weakness into prudence; let it keep you from exposing
yourself. Are you lavish? Do you love to give? It is easy to turn prodigality
into generosity. Give with choice and judgment; but do not neglect indifferent
people: lend when it is necessary; but give to such as cannot return your
kindness; by so doing you strike in with your inclination, and do good actions:
there is no weakness, but, if you please, virtue can make a good use of it.

In the afflictions which befall you, and which make you sensible of your little
stock of merit, instead of fretting and opposing the opinion that you have of
yourself to the injustice which you pretend has been done you, consider that
the persons who are the authors of it are better able to judge of you than you
are yourself; that you should sooner believe them than self-love, which always
flatters; and that with regard to what concerns yourself, your enemy is nearer
truth than you are: that you should have no merit in your own eyes, but what
you have in other people's. One has too great a disposition to flatter one's
self, and men are too near themselves, to judge impartially in the case.

These are general precepts for opposing the vices of the mind: but your first
care should be to perfect your heart and your sentiments: it depends on your
heart to make your virtue sure and lasting; it is properly that which forms
your character; and to make yourself mistress of it, observe this method. When
you feel yourself agitated with a strong and violent passion, desire it to
allow you a little time, and compound with your weakness. If, without hearing
it a moment, you are for sacrificing every thing to your reason and your duty,
there is room to fear that your passion may rebel, and grow stronger than ever.
You are under its command, and must manage it with address: you will receive
more help than you think, from such a conduct: you will find some sure remedies
even in your passion. If it be that of hatred, you will see that you have not
altogether so much reason to hate and revenge yourself, as you at first
imagined. If, by misfortune, it be the contrary sentiment that has seized you,
there is no passion which furnishes you surer remedies against itself.

If your heart has the misfortune to be attacked by love, these are the
remedies to stop its progress: think that its pleasures are neither solid nor
constant; they quit you; and if this was all the harm they would do you, it is
enough. In passions, the soul proposes itself an object, and is more intimately
united to it either by desire or enjoymemt, than it is to its own being; it
places all its felicity in its possession, and all its misery in the loss of
the object. Yet this felicity of the imagination, this good of the soul's
choice, is neither solid nor lasting: it depends upon others; it depends upon
yourself; and you cannot answer either for others or for yourself.

Love, in the beginning, offers you nothing but flowers, and hides all the
danger from you; it imposes on you; it always takes some form which is not its
own: the heart being in secret intelligence with it, conceals its inclination
from you, for fear of alarming your reason and modesty. You fancy it a mere
amusement; it is only the person's wit or good sense that pleases us. In a
word, love is almost always unknown, till he has got the mastery. As soon as he
comes to be felt, fly that instant, and hearken not to the complaints of your
heart. Love is not rooted out of the soul with ordinary efforts; it has too
many partisans within us: as soon as it has surprised you, every thing is on
its side against you, and nothing will serve you against love. It is the most
cruel situation a rational person can be in -- where there is nothing to
support you -- where you have no spectator but yourself. You must summon up
your courage immediately; and remember, that you must make a much more
sorrowful use of it, if you yield to your passion in the least.

Reflect upon the fatal consequences of passions, and you will find but too
many examples to instruct you: but we are often convinced of our mistake,
without being cured of our passion. Reckon up, if possible, the evils that flow
from love: it imposes on the reason; it fills the soul and the senses with
trouble; it takes away the flower of innocence; it stuns virtue; it blasts the
reputation, shame being almost always the consequence of love. Nothing debases
you to such a degree, and sinks you so much below yourself, as the passions.
They degrade you: there is nothing but reason that can maintain your dignity.
It is far more unhappy to stand in need of one's courage to bear a misfortune,
than to avoid it. The pleasure of doing one's duty is a comfort to you; but
never applaud yourself, for fear of being humbled. Remember, that you carry
your enemy about with you; adhere strictly to a conduct that may answer for you
to yourself. Avoid plays and passionate representations; you must not see what
you would not feel; music, poetry, all this is of the retinue of sensual
pleasure. Use yourself to reading on solid subjects, to fortify your reason.

Do not converse with your imagination. It will paint love to you with all its
charms. It is all seduction and illusion, when she makes the representation:
there is always a great drawback, when you quit her to come to the reality. St.
Augustine has given us a description of his condition, when he was inclined to
quit love and pleasures. He says, that what he loved, presented itself to him
under a charming figure: he represents what passed in his heart in such moving
terms, that there is no reading it without danger. One must pass slightly over
the pictures of pleasure; she is always to be feared, even at the very time we
are taking measures against her; and when we are fullest of the disasters she
has occasioned, we are still to mistrust ourselves. The passion is apt to get
ground by the examining of one's self; forgetfulness is the only security to be
taken against love. You must call yourself seriously to account, and say, What
do I mean to do with the inclination that is seizing me? Are not such and such
misfortunes sure to attend me, if I have the weakness to yield to it?

Borrow forces and succor from your enemy and the very nature of love. If you
would not flatter him, he will supply you with them. Strip him of all the
charms that your fancy gives him; lend him nothing; give him no favor; and you
will see he will have but little left. -- After this, think no more of him;
take a firm resolution to fly from him; and depend-upon it, we are as strong as
we resolve to be. Diversion and simple amusements are necessary; but we must
shun all pleasures that affect the heart.

It is not always our faults that ruin us, but the manner of our conduct, after
we have committed them. An humble acknowledgment of our faults disarms
resentment, and stops the violence of anger. Women that have had the misfortune
to deviate from their duty, to break through decorum, to part with their virtue
and modesty, owe so much regard to custom, and ought to have such a sense of
their breach of chastity, as to appear with a mortified air. It is a sort of
satisfaction that the public expect from them; they are sure to remember your
faults, whenever you appear to forget them. Repentance insures a change of your
conduct; prevent the malignity which is natural to mankind; put yourself in the
place that their pride allots you; they would have you humbled; and when you
have made yourself so to their hands, they will have no more to say to you: but
she that is proud after committing faults, calls them to mind, and makes them
immortal.

Let us now pass, my daughter, to the social duties. I thought I was in the
first place to draw you out of the common education and the prejudices of
childhood, and that it was necessary to fortify your reason, and give you some
solid principles to support you. I thought most of the disorders of life were
owing to false opinions; that false opinions produced loose sentiments; and
that when the understanding is not enlightened, the heart is exposed to
passions; that there must be some truths fixed in the mind to preserve us from
error; and that one must have some sentiments in the heart to keep out the
passions. When you have once a knowledge of truth, and a love for justice,
there is no danger of all the other virtues.

The first duty of civil life is to take care of others; such as live only for
themselves, fall into contempt, and are neglected by every body. If you require
too much from others, they will refuse you every thing, their friendship, their
affections, and their services. Civil life is a mutual intercourse of good
offices: the most valuable part of mankind go still further: by promoting the
happiness of others, you insure your own; it is the truest politics to think in
this manner.

Nothing can be more odious than people that make every body see that they live
only for themselves. An extravagant self-love is the source of great crimes;
some degrees lower it occasions vices: but let there be ever so little a spice
of it in a person, it impairs all the virtues and charms of society.

It Is impossible to make a friendship with persons who have a predominant
self-love, and take care to show it: and yet we can nver strip ourselves of it
entirely; as long as we are attached to life, we shall be attached to ourselves.

But there is a qualified self-love that is not exercised at the expense of
others.

We fancy we exalt ourselves by depressing (...) equals: this makes us
censorious and envious. Good^ nature turns to more account than maligni^y. Do
good when it is in your power; speak well of all the world, and never judge
with rigor. Such acts of goodness and generosity, frequently repeated, will
gain you at least a great and excellent reputation. All the world is engaged to
commend you, to extenuate your defects, and enhance your good qualities. You
should found your reputation upon your own virtues, and not upon the demerit of
others: consider that their good qualities take nothing at all from you, and
that the diminution of your reputation can be imputed to no body but yourself.

One of the things that contributes most to make us unhappy, is, that we depend
too much upon the men; it is the source too of our injustice. We pick quarrels
with them, not on account of what they owe us, or of what they have promised
us, but on account of what we have hoped from them. We depend absolutely upon
our hopes, which occasion us abundance of disappointments.

Be not rash in your judgments and give no ear to calumnies: never give in to
the first appearance of things, nor be in haste to condemn any body. Remember
that there are things probable which are not true, as there are things true,
which are not probable.

We should, in our private judgments, imitate the equity of solemn judgments.
Judges never decide without having examined, heard, and confronted the
witnesses with the parties concerned. But we, without any commission, set up
for umpires of reputation: and every proof is sufficient, every authority
appears good, when the business is to condemn. Prompted by our natural
malignity, we fancy that we give ourselves what we take away from others: hence
arise animosities and enmities; for every thing is sure to be known.

Be equitable, therefore, in your judgments; the same justice that you do to
others, they will return to you. Would you have them think and speak well of
you, never speak ill of any body.

Civility, which is an imitation of charity, is another of the social virtues:
it puts you above others, when you have it in a more eminent degree; but it is
practiced and maintained at the expense of self-love. Civility is always
borrowing something from yourself, and turning it to the advantage of others.
It Is one of the great bonds of society, and the only quality that makes one
safe and easy in the intercourse of life.

We naturally love to govern; it is an unjust inclination. Whence have we our
right to pretend to exalt ourselves above others? There is but one just and
allowable superiority; it is that which virtue gives you; have more goodness and
generosity than others: be beforehand with them, more in services than
benefits; it is the way to raise yourself. A great disinterestedness makes you
as independent, and raises you higher than the amplest fortune: nothing sinks
us so much, as a fondness for our own interest.

The qualities of the heart have the greatest concern in the commerce of life.
The understanding does not endear us to others; and you frequently see men very
odious with great parts; they are for giving you a good opinion of themselves;
they are for getting an ascendant over and depressing others.

Though humility has only been considered as a christian virtue, it must be
owned to be a social virtue; and so necessary a one, that without it, it is a
very ticklish matter to have to do with you. It Is the conceit that you have of
yourself, which makes you maintain your rights with so much arrogance, and
entrench on those of other people.

We must never be strict in calling any body to account. Exact civility does
not insist on all that is due to you. Do not be afraid of being beforehand
with your friends: if you have a mind to be a true friend, never insist on any
thing too stiffly; but that your behavior may not be inconsistent, as it
expresses your inward disposition, make often serious reflections on your
weaknesses, and take yourself to pieces. This examination will make you
entertain sentiments of humility for yourself, and of indulgence with regard to
others.

Be humble without being bashful. Shame is a secret pride; and pride is an
error with regard to one's own worth, and an injustice with regard to what one
has a mind to appear to others.

Reputation is an advantage very desirable; but it is a weakness to court it
with too much ardour, and do nothing but with a view to it. We ought to content
ourselves with deserving it. We should not discourage sensibility for glory;
it is the surest help we have to virtue; but the business is to make choice of
true glory.

Accustom yourself to see what is above you without either admiration or envy;
and what is below you without contempt. Do not let the pomp of greatness impose
on you. None but little souls fall down and worship grandeur. Admiration is
only due to virtue.

To use yourself to value men by their proper qualities, consider the condition
of a person loaded with honors, dignities, and riches, who seems to want
nothing at all, but really wants every thing, by being destitute of true goods,
of those internal qualities that are necessary to the enjoyment and use of
them. He suffers as much as if his poverty was real, so long as he has the
sense of poverty, and is wishing for more. "There is nothing worse," says one
of the ancients, than poverty in the midst of riches, because the evil lies in
the mind. The man that is in this situation, feels all the evils of opinion,
without enjoying the goods of fortune. He is blinded by error, and tormented by
his passions: while a reasonable person, who has nothing at all, but
substitutes wise and solid reflections to supply the place of riches and
honors, enjoys a tranquillity which nothing can equal. The happiness of the
one, and the misery of the other, come only from their different manner of
thinking.

If you find yourself disposed to resentment and revenge, strive to keep down
that sentiment; there is nothing so mean as to revenge one's self. If you meet
with ill-treatment from any body, you owe them only contempt; it is a debt easy
to be paid. If they have offended you only in slight matters, you owe them
indulgence: but there are certain seasons in life, when you must meet with
injuries -- seasons when the friends for whom you have done most, fall foul
upon and condemn you: in such a case, after having done all you can, to
undeceive them, do not be obstinate in disputing with them. One ought to court
the esteem of one's friends: but when you find people that will only view you
through their prejudices* when you have disputes with such hot and fiery
imaginations as will admit of nothing but what favors their injustice, you
have nothing to do but retire and set your heart at rest. Do what you will,
you will get nothing from them but discontent. When you thus suffer from their
ill-usage and shame of recanting, comfort yourself in your innocence, and the
assurance that you have not offended. Think, that if your worth was not greater
at the time they raised you, it is not at all less now they are for crushing
you: you should, without being more mortified at it, pity them, and not be
exasperated, if possible, but say, They see in a wrong light. Consider that
with good qualities one may at least get over resentment and envy. Let the
hopes you draw from virtue, keep up your courage, and be your consolation.

Do not think of revenging yourself any way but by using more moderation in
your conduct, than those that attack you, have malice. None but sublime souls
are touched with the glory of pardoning injuries.

Set yourself to deserve your own esteem, the better to console yourself for
the esteem which others deny you. You can allow yourself but one sort of
vengeance; it is that of doing good to such as have offended you: it is the most
exquisite revenge, and the only one that is allowable. You gratify your
passion, and you entrench upon no virtue. Caesar has set us an example of it.
His lieutenant Labienus deserted from him at a time that he stood in most need
of him, and went over to Pompey, leaving great riches in Cesar's camp. Caesar
sent them after him, with a message to tell him, that was the manner of Cesar's
revenge.

It Is prudent to make a good use of other people's faults, even when they do us
mischief; but very often they only begin the wrongs, and we finish them; they
give us indeed a right against themselves, but we make an ill use of it: we are
for taking too much advantage of their faults. This is an injustice and a
violence that makes the standers-by against us. If we suffered with moderation,
all the world would be for us, and the faults of those that attack us, would be
doubled by our patience.

When you know that your friends have not treated you as they ought, take no
notice of it. As soon as ever you show that you perceive it, their malignity
increases, and you give a loose to their hatred: whereas by dissembling it, you
flatter their self-love; they enjoy the pleasure of imposing on you; they fancy
themselves your superiors, as long as they are not discovered; they triumph in
your mistake, and feel another pleasure in not ruining you quite. By not
letting them see that you know them, you give them time to repent and come to
themselves; and there needs nothing but a seasonable piece of service, and a
different manner of taking things, to make them more attached to you than ever.

Be inviolable in your word. But to gain it an entire confidence, remember that
you must be extremely scrupulous in keeping it. Show your regard to truth even
in things indifferent; and consider that there is nothing so despicable as to
deviate from it. It Is a common saying, that lying shows that people despise
God, and stand in fear of man; and that the man who speaks truth, and does
good, resembles the Diety. We should likewise avoid swearing; the bare word of
an honest person should have all the credit and authority of an oath.

Politeness is a desire of pleasing: nature gives it, education and the world
improve it. Politeness is a supplement to virtue. They say it came into the
world, when that daughter of heaven abandoned it. In ruder times, when virtue
bore a greater sway, they knew less of politeness: it came in with
voluptuousness; it is the daughter of luxury and delicacy. It has been
disputed, whether it approaches nearest to vice or virtue. Without pretending
to decide the question, or define politeness: may I be allowed to speak my
sentiments of it? I take it to be one of the greatest bonds of society, as it
contributes most to the peace of it; it is a preparation to charity, and an
imitation, too, of humility. True politeness is modest; and, as it aims to
please, it knows that the way to carry its point, is to show that we do not
prefer ourselves to others, but give them the first rank in our esteem.

Pride keeps us off from society: our self-love gives us a peculiar rank, which
is always disputed with us. Such a high esteem of ourselves, as makes others
feel it, is almost always punished with an universal contempt. Politeness is
the art of reconciling agreeably what we owe to others, and what one owes to
one's self; for these duties have their bounds, which when they exceed, it is
flattery with regard to others, and pride with regard to yourself. It is the
most seducing quality in nature.

The most polite persons have generally a good deal of sweetness in their
conversation, and engaging qualities: it is the girdle of Venus; it sets off,
and gives graces and charms to all that wear it; and with it, you cannot fail
to please.

There are several degrees of politeness. You carry it to a higher point in
proportion to the delicacy of your way of thinking. It distinguishes itself in
all your behavior, in your conversation, and even in your silence.

Perfect politeness forbids us to display our parts and talents with assurance;
it even borders upon cruelty, to show one's self happy when we have certain
misfortunes before our eyes. Conversation in the world is enough to polish our
outward behavior; but there must be a good deal of delicacy to form a
politeness of mind. A nice politeness, formed with art and taste, will make the
world excuse you a great many failings, and improve your good qualities. Such
as are defective in point of behavior, have the greater need of solid
qualities, and make slower advances in gaining a reputation. In a word,
politeness costs but little, and is of vast advantage.

Silence always becomes a young person. There is a modesty and dignity in
keeping it; you sit in judgment upon others, and run no hazard yourself. But
guard yourself against a proud and insulting silence; it should be the result
of your prudence, and not the consequence of your pride. But as there is no
holding our peace always, it is fit for us to know, that the principal rule for
speaking well, is to think well.

When your notions are clear and distinct, your discourse will be so too; let a
proper decorum and modesty run through it. In all your discourses, pay a regard
to received customs and prejudices. Expressions declare the sentiments of the
heart, and the sentiments form the behavior.

Be particularly careful not to set up for a joker; it is an ill part to act;
and by making others laugh, we seldom make ourselves esteemed. Pay a great deal
more attention to others, than to yourself, and think how to set them out,
rather than to shine yourself. We should learn how to listen to other people's
discourse, and not betray an absence of mind either by our eyes or our manner.
Never dwell upon stories. If you chance to tell any, do it in a genteel and
close manner; let what you say be new, or at least give it a new turn. The
world is full of people, that are dinning things into your ears, without saying
any thing to entertain the mind. Whenever we speak, we should take care either
to please or instruct. When you call for the attention of the company, you
should make them amends by the agr^^ableness of what you say. An indifferent
discourse cannot be too short.

You may approve what you hear; but should very seldom admire it: admiration is
proper to blockheads. Never let your discourse have an air of art and cunning;
the greatest prudence lies in speaking little, and showing more diffidence of
one's self, than of other people. An upright conduct, and a reputation for
probity, gains more confidence and esteem, and, at the long-run, more
advantages, too, in point of fortune, than any by-ways. Nothing makes you so
worthy of the greatest matters, and raises you so much ^bove others, as an
exact probity.

Use yourself to treat your servants with kindness and humanity. It Is a saying
of one of the ancients, "that we ought to consider them as unhappy friends."
Remember that the vast difference between you and them, is owing merely to
chance -- never make them uneasy in their state of life, or add weight to the
trouble of it. There is nothing so poor and mean as to be haughty to any body
that is in your service.

Never use any harsh language. It should never come out of the mouth of a
delicate and polite person. Servitude being settled in opposition to the
natural equality of mankind, it behooves us to soften it. What right have we to
expect our servants should be without faults, when we give them instances every
day of our own? Let us rather bear with them. When you show yourself in all
your humors and fits of passion (for we often lay ourselves open before our
servants) how do you expose yourself to them? (an you have any right afterward
to reprimand them? A mean familiarity with them is indeed ever to be avoided;
but you owe them assistance, advice, and bounties suitable to their condition
and wants.

One should keep up authority in one's family; but it should be a mild
authority. We should not indeed always threaten without punishing, for fear of
bringing our threats into contempt: but we should not call in authority, till
persuasion has failed. Remember, that humanity and christianity put all the
world on the same foot. The impatience and heat of youth, joined to the false
notion they give you of yourself, make you look upon your servants as creatures
of a different species; but how contrary are such sentiments to the modesty
that you owe to yourself, and the humanity you owe to others!

Never relish or encourage the flattery of servants; and to prevent the
impression which their fawning speeches, frequently repeated, may make upon
you, consider that they are hirelings paid to serve your weaknesses and pride.

If by misfortune, daughter, you should not think fit to follow my advice and
precepts, though they be lost upon you, they will still be useful to myself, as
laying me under new obligations. These reflections are fresh engagements to me
to exert myself in the way of virtue. I fortify my reason even against myself;
for I am now under a necessity of following it, or else I expose myself to the
shame of having known it, and yet been false to it.

There is nothing, my daughter, more mortifying than to write upon subjects
that put me in mind of all my faults. By laying them open to you, I give up my
right to reprimand you; I furnish you with arms against myself. And I allow you
freely to use them, if you see any vices in me inconsistent with the virtues
that I recommend to you; for all advice and precepts want authority, when they
are not supported by example.

THE LADIES' LIBRARY. Letter on the Government of the Temper. To a young Lady.
By Mrs. Chapone.
A great Point of Importance to your future happiness, my dear, is what your
parents have, doubtless, been continually attentive to from your infancy, as it
is impossible to undertake it too early -- I mean the due regulation of your
temper. Though you are in a great measure indebted to their forming hands for
whatever is good in it, you are sensible, no doubt, as every human creature is,
of propensities to some infirmity of temper, which it must now be your own care
to correct and to subdue; otherwise the pains that have hitherto been taken
with you, may all become fruitless: and, when you are your own mistress, you
may relapse into those faults, which were originally in your nature, and which
will require to be diligently watched and kept under, through the whole course
of your life.

If you consider, that the constant tenor of the gospel precepts is to promote
love, peace, and good will among men, you will not doubt that the cultivation
of an amiable disposition is a great part of your religious duty; since nothing
leads more directly to the breach of charity, and to the injury and molestation
of our fellow creatures, than the indulgence of an ill temper. Do not,
therefore, think lightly of the offenses you may commit, for want of a due
command over it, or suppose yourself responsible for them to your
fellow creatures only; but be assured, you must give a strict account of them
all to the Supreme Governor of the world, who has made this a great part of
your appointed trial upon earth.

A woman, bred up in a religious manner, placed above the reach of want, and
out of the way of sordid and scandalous vices, can have but few temptations to
the flagrant breach of the divine laws. It particularly concerns her,
therefore, to understand them in their full import, and to consider, how far
she trespasses against them, by such actions as appear trivial, when compared
with murder, adultery, and theft, but which become of very great importance, by
being frequently repeated, and occurring in the daily transactions of life.

The principal virtues or vices of a woman must be of a private and domestic
kind. Within the circle of her own family and dependants lies her sphere of
action -- the scene of almost all those tasks and trials, which must determine
her character, and her fate here, and hereafter. Reflect for a moment, how much
the happiness of her husband, children, and servants, must depend on her
temper; and you will see that the greatest good, or evil, which she ever may
have in her power to do, may rise from her correcting or indulging its
infirmities.

Though I wish the principle of duty toward God to be your ruling motive in
the exercise of every virtue, yet, as human nature stands in need of all
possible helps, let us not forget how essential it is to present happiness, and
to the enjoyment of this life, to cultivate such a temper as is likewise
indispensably requisite to the attainment of higher felicity in the life to
come. The greatest outward blessings cannot afford enjoyment to a mind ruffled
and uneasy within itself. A fit of ill-humour will spoil the finest
entertainment, and is as real a torment as the most painful disease. Another
unavoidable consequence of ill-temper is the dislike and aversion of all who
are witnesses to it, and, perhaps, the deep and lasting resentment of those,
who suffer from its effects. We all, from social or self-love, earnestly desire
the esteem and affection of our fellow creatures; and indeed our condition
makes them so necessary to us, that the wretch, who has forfeited them, must
feel desolate and undone, deprived of all the best enjoyments and comforts the
world can afford, and given up to his inward misery, unpitied and scorned. But
this can never be the fate of a good-natured person: whatever faults he may
have, they will generally be treated with lenity; he will find an advocate in
every humane heart; his errors will be lamented rather than abhorred; and his
virtues will be viewed in the fairest point of light: his good humor, without
the help of great talents or acquirements, will make his company preferable to
that of the most brilliant genius, in whom this quality is wanting: in short,
it is almost impossible that you can be sincerely beloved by any body, without
this engaging property, whatever other excellencies you may possess: but, with
it, you will scarcely fail of finding some friends and favorers, even though
you should be destitute of almost every other advantage.

Perhaps you will say, all this is very true, but our tempers are not in our
own power -- we are made with different dispositions, and, if mine is not not
amiable, it is rather my unhappiness than my fault. This, my dear, is commonly
said by those who will not take the trouble to correct themselves. Yet be
assured, it it a delusion, and will not avail in our justification before him.
who knows whereof we are made, and of what we are capable. it is true, we are
not all equally happy in our dispositions: but human virtue consists in
cherishing and cultivating every good inclination, and in checking and subduing
every propensity to evil. If you had been born with a bad temper, it might have
been made a good one, at least with regard to its outward effects, by
education, reason, and principle: and, though you are so happy as to have a
good one while young, do not suppose it will always continue so, if you neglect
to maintain a proper command over it. Power, sickness, disappointments or
worldly cares, ^ay corrupt and embitter the finest disposition, if they are not
counteracted by reason and religion.

It is observed, that every temper is inclined, in some degree, either to
passion, peevishness, or obstinacy. Many are so unfortunate as to be inclined
to each of the three in turn: it is necessary, therefore, to watch the bent of
our nature, and to apply the remedies proper for the infirmity to which we are
most liable. With regard to the first, it is so injurious to society, and so
odious in itself, especially in the female character, that one would think
shame alone would be sufficient to preserve a young woman from giving way to
it; for it is as unbecoming her character to be betrayed into ill behavior by
passion as by intoxication; and she ought to be ashamed of the one, as much as
of the other. Gentleness, meekness, and patience, are her peculiar
distinctions; and an enraged woman is one of the most disgusting sights in
nature.

It is plain, from experience, that the most passionate people can command
themselves, when they have a motive sufficiently strong -- such as the presence
of those they fear, or to whom they particularly desire to recommend
themselves: it is therefore no excuse to persons, whom you have injured by
unkind reproaches, and unjust aspersions, to tell them you were in a passion:
the allowing yourself to speak to them in a passion, is a proof of an insolent
disrespect, which the meanest of your fellow creatures would have a right to
resent. When once you find yourself heated so far as to desire to say what you
know would be provoking and wounding to another, you should immediately resolve
either to be silent, or to quit the room, rather than give utterance to any
thing dictated by so bad an inclination. Be assured, you are then unfit to
reason or to reprove, or to hear reason from others. It is therefore your part
to retire from such an occasion of sin; and wait till you are cool, before you
presume to judge of what has passed. By accustoming yourself thus to conquer
and disappoint your anger, you will by degrees, find it grow weak and
manageable, so as to leave your reason at liberty. You will be able to restrain
your tongue from evil, and your looks and gestures from all expressions of
violence and ill will. Pride, which produces so many evils in the human mind,
is the great source of passion. Whoever cultivates in himself a proper
humility, a due sense of his own faults and insufficiencies, and a due respect
for others, will find but small temptation to violent or unreasonable anger.

In the case of real injuries, which justify and call for resentment, there is
a noble and generous kind of anger, a proper and necessary part of our nature,
which has nothing in it sinful or degrading. I would not wish you insensible to
this; for the person, who feels not an injury, must be incapable of being
properly affected by benefits. With those, who treat you ill without
provocation, you ought to maintain your own dignity. But, in order to do this,
while you show a sense of their improper behavior, you must preserve calmness
and even good-breeding -- and thereby convince them of the impotence, as well
as injustice of their malice. You must also weigh every circumstance with
candor and charity, and consider whether your showing the resentment deserved,
may not produce ill consequences to innocent persons -- as is almost always the
case in family quarrels -- and whether it may not occasion the breach of some
duty, or necessary connection, to which you ought to sacrifice even your just
resentments. Above all things, take care that a particular offense to you does
not make you unjust to the general character of the offending person. Generous
anger does not preclude esteem for what is really estimable, nor does it
destroy good will to the person of its object: it even inspires the desire of
overcoming him by benefits, and wishes to inflict no other punishment than the
regret of having injured one, who deserved his kindness: it is always placable,
and ready to be reconciled, as soon as the offender is convinced of his error;
nor can any subsequent injury provoke it to recur to past disobligations, which
had been once forgiven. But it is perhaps unnecessary to give rules for this
case. -- The consciousness of injured innocence naturally produces dignity, and
usually prevents excess of anger. Our passion is most unruly, when we are
conscious of blame, and when we apprehend that we have laid ourselves open to
contempt. Where we know we have been wrong, the least injustice in the degree
of blame imputed to us, excites our bitterest resentment; but, where we know
ourselves faultless, the sharpest accusation excites pity or contempt, rather
than rage. Whenever therefore you feel yourself very angry, suspect yourself to
be in the wrong, and resolve to stand the decision of your own conscience
before you cast upon another the punishment, which is perhaps due to yourself.
This self-examination will at least give you time to cool, and, if you are
just, will dispose you to balance your own wrong with that of your antagonist,
and to settle the account with him on equal terms.

Peeveshness, though not so violent and fatal in its immediate effects, is
still more unamiable than passion, and, if possible, more destructive of
happiness, in as much as it operates more continually. Though the fretful man
injures us less, he disgusts us more than the passionate one -- because he
betrays a low and little mind, intent on trifles, and engrossed by paltry
self-love, which knows not how to bear the very apprehension of any
inconvenience. It is self-love then, which we must combat, when we find
ourselves assaulted by this infirmity; and by voluntarily enduring
inconveniences, we shall habituate ourselves to bear them with ease, and good
humor, when occasioned by others. Perhaps this is the best kind of religious
mortification, as the chief end of denying ourselves any innocent indulgences
must be to acquire a habit of command over our passions and inclinations,
particularly such as are likely to lead us into evil. Another method of
conquering this enemy is to abstract our minds from that attention to trifling
circumstances, which usually creates this uneasiness. Those who are engaged in
high and important pursuits are very little affected by small inconveniences.
The man whose head is full of studious thought or whose heart is full of care,
will eat his dinner without knowing whether it was well or ill dressed, or
whether it was served punctually at the hour or not: and though absence from
the common things of life is far from desirable -- especially in a woman -- yet
too minute and anxious an attention to them seldom fails to produce a teazing,
mean, and fretful disposition. I would therefore wish your mind to have always
some objects in pursuit worthy of it; that it may not be engrossed by such as
are in themselves scarce worth a moment's anxiety. It is chiefly in the decline
of life, when amusements fail, and when the more importunate passions subside,
that this infirmity is observed to grow upon us -- and perhaps it will seldom
fail to do so, unless carefully watched and counteracted by reason. We must
then endeavor to substitute some pursuits in the place of those, which can
only engage ^s in the beginning of our course. The pursuit of glory and
happiness in another life, by every means of improving and exalting our own
minds, becomes more and more interesting to us, the nearer we draw to the end
of all sublunary enjoyments. Reading, reflection, rational conversation, and,
above all, conversing with God, by prayer and meditation, may preserve us from
taking that anxious interest in the little comforts and conveniences of our
remaining days, which usually gives birth to so much fretfulness in old people.
But though the aged and infirm are most liable to this evil -- and they alone
are to be pitied for it -- yet we sometimes see the young, the healthy, and
those who enjoy most outward blessings, inexcusably guilty of it. The smallest
disappointment in pleasure, or difficulty in the most trifling employment, will
put wilful young people out of temper, and their very amusements frequently
become sources of vexation and peevishness. How often have I seen a girl,
preparing for a ball, or for some other public appearance -- unable to satisfy
her own vanity -- fret over every ornament she put on, quarrel with her maid,
with her clothes, her hair; and growing still more unlovely as she grew more
cross, be ready to fight with her looking-glass, for not making her as handsome
as she wished to be! She did not consider that the traces of this ill-humour on
her countenance would be a greater disadvantage to her appearance than any
defect in her dress -- or even than the plainest features enlivened by joy and
good humor. There is a degree of resignation necessary even to the enjoyment
of pleasure; we must be ready and willing to give up some part of what we could
wish for, before we can enjoy that which is indulged to us. I have no doubt
that she, who frets all the while she is dressing for an assembly, will suffer
still greater uneasiness when she is there. The same craving, restless vanity
will there endure a thousand mortifications, which in the midst of seeming
pleasure, will secretly corrode her heart; whilst the meek and humble generally
find more gratification than they expected, and return home pleased and
enlivened from every scene of amusement, though they could have staid away from
it with perfect ease and contentment.

Sullenness, or obstinacy, is perhaps a worse fault of temper than either of
the former -- and, if indulged, may end in the most fatal extremes of stubborn
melancholy, malice and revenge. The resentment which, instead of being
expressed, is nursed in secret, and continually aggravated by the imagination,
will, in time, become the ruling passion; and then, how horrible must be his
case, whose kind and pleasurable affections are all swallowed up by the
tormenting as well as detestable sentiments of hatred and revenge? -- Ecclus.
xix.13.
Admonish thy friend, peradventure he has not done it: or, if he has, that he
do it no more. -- Admonish thy friend, peradventure he has not said it: or, if
he has, that he speak it not again. -- Brood not over a resentment which
perhaps was at first ill grounded, and which is undoubtedly heightened by an
heated imagination. But, when you have first subdued your own temper, so as to
be able to speak calmly, reasonably, and kindly, then expostulate with the
person you suppose to be in fault -- hear what she has to say; and either
reconcile yourself to her, or quiet your mind under the injury, by the
principle of christian charity. But if it should appear that you yourself have
been most to blame, or if you have been in an error, acknowledge it fairly and
handsomely: if you feel any reluctance to do so, be certain that it arises from
pride, to conquer which is an absolute duty -- "A soft answer turns away
wrath:" and a generous confession oftentimes more than atones for the fault
which requires it. Truth and justice demand that we should acknowledge
conviction, as soon as we feel it, and not maintain an erroneous opinion, or
justify a wrong conduct, merely for the false shame of confessing our past
ignorance. A false shame it undoubtedly is, and as impolitic as unjust; since
your error is already seen by those who endeavor to set you right: but your
conviction, and the candor and generosity of owning it freely, may still be an
honor to you, and would greatly recommend you to the person with whom you
disputed. With a disposition strongly inclined to sullenness or obstinacy, this
must be a very painful exertion; and to make a perfect conquest over yourself
may at once perhaps appear impracticable, while the zeal of self justification,
and the abhorrence of blame, are strong upon you. But, if you are so unhappy as
to yield to your infirmity, at one time, do not let this discourage you from
renewing your efforts. Your mind will gain strength from the contest; and your
internal enemy will by degrees be forced to give ground. Be not afraid to
revive the subject, as soon as you find yourself able to subdue your temper;
and then frankly lay open the conflict you sustained at the time; by this you
will make all the amends in your power for your fault, and will certainly
change the disgust you have given into pity at least, if not admiration.
Nothing is more endearing than such a confession: -- and you will find such a
satisfaction in your own consciousness, and in the renewed tenderness and
esteem you will gain from the person concerned, that your task for the future
will be made more easy, and your reluctance to be convinced, will on every
occasion grow less and less.

The love of truth, and a real desire of improvement, ought to be the only
motives of argumentation: and, where these are sincere, no difficulty can be
made of embracing the truth, as soon as it is perceived. But, in fact, people
oftener dispute from vanity and pride, which make it a grievous mort^fication
to allow that we are the wiser for what we have heard from another. To receive
advice, reproof, and instruction, properly, is the surest sign of a sincere and
humble heart -- and shows a greatness of mind, which commands our respect and
reverence, while it appears so willingly to yield to us the superiority.

Observe, notwithstanding, that I do not wish you to hear of your faults
without pain: such an indifference would afford small hopes of amendment. Shame
and remorse are the first steps to true repentance; yet we should be willing to
bear this pain, and thankful to the kind hand that inflicts it for our good.
Nor must we, by sullen silence under it, leave our kind physician in doubt,
whether the operation has taken effect or not, or whether it has not added
another malady, instead of curing the first. You must consider, that those who
tell you of your faults, if they do it from motives of kindness and not of
malice, exert their friendship in a painful office, which must have cost them
as great an effort as it can be to you to acknowledge the service; and, if you
refuse this encouragement, you cannot expect that any one, who is not
absolutely obliged to it by duty, will a second time undertake such an
ill-requited trouble. What a loss would this be to yourself! -- how difficult
would be our progress to that degree of perfection, which is necessary to our
happiness, was it not for the assistance we receive from each other! -- this
certainly is one of the means of grace held out to us by our merciful judge,
and, if we reject it, we are answerable for all the miscarriages we may fall
into for want of it.

I know not, whether that strange caprice, that inequality of taste and
behavior, so commonly attributed to our sex, may be properly called a fault of
temper -- as it seems not to be connected with, or arising from our animal
frame, but to be rather the fruit of our own self-indulgence, degenerating by
degrees into such a wantonness of will as knows not how to please itself. When,
instead of regulating our actions by reason and principle, we suffer ourselves
to be guided by every slight and momentary impulse of inclination, we shall,
doubtless, appear so variable and inconstant, that nobody can guess, by our
behavior today, what may be expected from us tomorrow; nor can we ourselves
tell whether what we delighted in a week ago, will now afford us the least
degree of pleasure. It is in vain for others to attempt to please us -- we
cannot please ourselves, though all we could wish for waits our choice: and
thus does a capricious woman become sick of herself, through very selfishness:
And, when this is the case, it is easy to judge how sick others must be of her,
and how contemptible and disgusting she must appear. This wretched state is the
usual consequence of power and flattery. May my dear child never meet with the
temptation of that excessive and ill-judged indulgence from a husband, which
she has happily escaped from her parents, and which seldom fails to reduce
women to the miserable condition of a humoured child, always unhappy from
having nobody's will to study but its own! The insolence of such demands for
yourself, and such disregard to the choice and inclinations of others, can
seldom fail to make you as many enemies as there are persons obliged to bear
with your humors; whilst a compliant, reasonable, and contented disposition
would render you happy in yourself, and beloved by all your companions --
particularly by those, who live constantly with you; and, of what consequence
this is to your happiness, a moment's reflection will convince you. Family
friendships are the friendships made for us, if I may so speak, by God himself.
With the kindest intentions, he has knit the bands of family love, by
indispensable duties; and wretched are they who have burst them asunder by
violence and ill will, or worn them out by constant little disobligations, and
by the want of that attention to please, which the presence of a stranger
always inspires, but which is so often shamefully neglected toward those, whom
it is most our duty and interest to please. May you, my dear, be wise enough to
see that every faculty of entertainment, every engaging qualification, which
you possess, is exerted to the best advantage for those, whose love is of most
importance to you -- for those who live under the same roof, and with whom you
are connected for life, either by the ties of blood, or by the still more
sacred obligations of a voluntary engagement.

To make you the delight and darling of your family, something more is required
than barely to be exempt from ill temper and troublesome humors. The sincere
and genuine smiles of complacency and love must adorn your countenance. That
ready compliance, that alertness to assist and oblige, which demonstrates true
affection, must animate your behavior, and endear your most common actions.
Politeness must accompany your greatest familiarities, and restrain you from
every thing that is really offensive, or which can give a moment's unnecessary
pain. Conversation, which is so apt to grow dull and insipid in families, nay,
in some to be almost wholly laid aside, must be cultivate^ with the frankness
and openness of friendship, and by the mutual communication of whatever may
conduce to the improvement or innocent entertainment of each other.

Reading, whether apart or in common, will furnish useful and pleasing
subjects; and the sprightliness of youth will naturally inspire harmless mirth
and native humor, if encouraged by a mutual desire of diverting each other,
and making the hours pass agreeably in your own house: every amusement that
offers will be heightened by the participation of these de^r companions, and by
talking over every incident together and every object of pleasure. If you have
any acquired talent of entertainment, such as music, painting, or the like,
your own family are those before whom you should most wish to excel, and for
whom you should always be ready to exert yourself; not suffering the
accomplishments which you have gained, perhaps by their means, and at their
expense, to lie dormant, till the arrival of a stranger gives you spirit in the
performance. Where this last is the case, you may be sure vanity is the only
motive of the exertion: A stranger will praise you more: But how little
sensibility has that heart, which is not more gratified by the silent pleasure
painted on the countenance of a partial parent, or of an affectionate brother,
than by the empty compliments of a visitor, who is perhaps inwardly more
disposed to criticize and ridicule than to admire you!

I have been longer in this letter than I intended; yet it is with difficulty I
can quit the subject, because I think it is seldom sufficiently insisted on,
either in books or in sermons -- and because there are many persons weak enough
to believe themselves in a safe and innocent course of life, while they are
daily harrassing every body about them by their vexatious humors. But you
will, I hope, constantly bear in mind, that you can never treat a fellow
creature unkindly, without offending the kind Creator and Father of all -- and
that you can no way render yourself so acceptable to him as by studying to
promote the happiness of others, in every instance, small as well as great --
The favor of God, and the love of your companions, will surely be deemed
rewards sufficient to animate your most fervent endeavors; yet this is not
all: the disposition of mind, which I would recommend, is its own reward, and
is in itself essential to happiness. Cultivate it therefore, my dear child,
with your utmost diligence -- and watch the symptoms of ill-temper, as they
rise, with a firm resolution to conquer them, before they are even perceived by
any other person. In every such inward conflict, call upon your Maker to assist
the feeble nature he has given you -- and sacrifice to Him every feeling that
would tempt you to disobedience: So will you at length attain that true
christian meekness which is blessed in the sight of God and man, which has the
promise of this life, as well as of that which is to come. Then will you pity,
in others, those infirmities, which you have conquered in yourself; and will
think yourself as much bound to assist, by your patience and gentleness, those
who are so unhappy as to be under the dominion of evil passions, as you are to
impart a share of your riches to the poor and miserable.

THE LADIES' LIBRARY. A Letter to a very young Lady on her Marriage.
By Dean Swift,
Madam,
THE hurry and impertinence of receiving and paying visits on account of your
marriage, being now over, you are beginning to enter into a course of life,
where you will want much advice to divert you from falling into many errors,
fopperies, and follies, to which your sex is subject. I ^e always borne an
entire friendship to your fat^ and mother: and the person they have chosen for
your husband, has been, for some years past, my particular favorite. I have
long wished you might come together; because I hoped, that from the goodness of
^our disposition, and by following the counsel of wise friends, you might, in
time, make yourself worthy of him. Your parents were so far in the right, that
they did not produce you much into the world, whereby you avoided many wrong
steps which others have taken, and have fewer ill impressions to be removed.
But they failed, as it is generally the case, in too much neglecting to
cultivate your mind; without which it is impossible to acquire or preserve the
friendship and esteem of a wise man, who soon grows weary of acting the lover,
and treating his wife like a mistress, but wants a reasonable companion, and a
true friend, through every stage of his life. It must be therefore your
business to qualify yourself for those offices; wherein I will not fail to be
your director, as long as I shall think you deserve it, by letting you know how
you are to act, and what you are to avoid.

And beware of despising or neglecting my instructions, whereon will depend not
only your making a good figure in the world, but your own real happiness, as
well as that of the person who ought to be the dearest to you.

I must therefore desire you, in the first place, to be very slow in changing
the modest behavior of a virgin: It is usual in young wives, before they have
been many weeks married, to assume a bold, forward look and manner of talking,
as if they intended to signify in all companies, that they were no longer
girls, and consequently that their whole demeanor, before they got a husband,
was all but a countenance and constraint upon their nature; whereas, I suppose,
if the votes of wise men were gathered, a very great majority would be in
favor of those ladies, who, after they were entered into that state, rather
chose to double their portion of modesty and reservedness.

I must likewise warn you strictly against the least degree of fondness to your
husband, before any witness whatsoever, even before your nearest relations, or
the very maids of your chamber. This proceeding is so exceedingly odious and
disgustful to all who have either good breeding or good sense, that they assign
two very unamiable reasons for it: the one is gross hypocrisy; and the other
has too bad a name to mention. If there is any difference to be made, your
husband is the lowest person in company, either at home or abroad; and every
gentleman present has a better claim to all marks of civility and distinction
from you. Conceal your esteem and love in your own breast, and reserve your
kind looks and language for private hours, which are so many in the four and
twenty, that they will afford time to employ a passion as exalted as any that
was ever described in a French romance.

Upon this head, I should likewise advise you to differ in practice from those
ladies who affect abundance of uneasiness while their husbands are abroad --
start with every knock at the door -- and ring the bell incessantly for the
servants to let in their master; will not eat a bit at dinner or supper, if the
husband happens to stay out; and receive him at his return, with such a medley
of chiding and kindness, and catechizing him where he has been, that a shrew
from Billingsgate would be a more easy and eligible companion.

Of the same leaven are those wives, who, when their husbands are gone a
journey, must have a letter every post, upon pain of fits and hysterics; and a
day must be fixed for their return home, without the least allowance for
business, or sickness, or accidents, or weather: upon which, I can only say,
that in my observation, those ladies who are apt to make the greatest clutter
on such occasions, would liberally have paid a messenger for bringing them
news, that their husbands had broken their ^cks on the road.

You will perhaps be offended, when I advise you to abate a little of that
violent passion for fine clothes, so predominant in your sex. It is a little
hard, that ours, for whose sake you wear them, are not admitted to be of your
council. I may venture to assure you, that we will make an abatement at any
time of four pounds a yard in a brocade, if the ladies will but allow a
suitable addition of care in the cleanliness and sweetness of their persons.
For the satirical part of mankind will needs believe, that it is not impossible
to be very fine and very filthy; and that the capacities of a lady are
sometimes apt to fall short in cultivating cleanliness and finery together. I
shall only add, upon so tender a subject, what a pleasant gentleman said
concerning a silly woman of quality; that nothing could make her supportable
but cutting off her head; for his ears were offended by her tongue, and his
nose by her hair and teeth.

I am wholly at a loss how to advise you in the choice of company, which,
however, i^ a point of as great importance as any in your life. If your general
acquaintance be among ladies, who are your equals or superiors, provided they
have nothing of what is commonly called an ill reputation, you think you are
safe; and this, in the style of the world, will pass for good company. Whereas
I am afraid it will be hard for you to pick out one female acquaintance in this
town, from whom you will not be in manifest danger of contracting some foppery,
affectation, vanity, folly, or vice. Your only safe way of conversing with them
is, by a firm resolution to proceed, in your practice and behavior, directly
contrary to whatever they shall say and do: and this I take to be a good
general rule, with very few exceptions. For instance: in the doctrines they
usually deliver to young married women for managing their husbands -- their
several accounts of their own conduct in that particular, to recommend it to
your imitation -- the reflections they make upon others of their sex for acting
differently -- their directions how to come off with victory upon any dispute
or quarrel you may have with your husband -- the arts, by which you may
discover and practice upon his weak side -- when to work by flattery and
insinuation -- when to melt him with tears, and when to engage with a high
hand. In these, and a thousand other cases, it will be prudent to retain as
many of their lectures in your memory as you can, and then determine to act in
full opposition to them all.

I hope your husband will interpose his authority to limit you in the trade of
visiting; half a dozen fools are in all conscience as many as you should
require; and it will be sufficient for you to see them twice a year: For I
think the fashion does not exact, that visits should be paid to friends.

I advise that your company at home should consist of men, rather than women.
To say the truth, I never yet knew a tolerable woman to be fond of her own sex.
I confess, when both are mixed and well ^hosen, and put their best qualities
forward, there may be an intercouse of civility and good will; which, with the
addition of some degree of sense, can make conversation or any amusement
agreeable. But a knot of ladies got together by themselves, is a very school of
impertinence and detraction, and it is well if those be the worst.

Let your men-acquaintance be of your husband's choice, and not recommended to
you by any she-companions; because they will certainly fix a coxcomb upon you;
and it will cost you some time and pains before you can arrive at the knowledge
of distinguishing such a one from a man of sense.

Never take a favorite waiting-maid into your cabinet-council, to entertain
you with histories of those ladies whom she has formerly served, of their
diversions and their dresses; to insinuate how great a fortune you brought, and
how little you are allowed to squander; to appeal to her from your husband, and
to be determined by her judgment, because you are sure it will be always for
you; to receive and discard servants by her approbation or dislike; to engage
you, by her insinuations, into misunderstandings with your best friends; to
represent all things in false colors, and to be the common emissary of scandal.

But the grand affair of your life will be to gain and preserve the friendship
and esteem of your husband. You are married to a man of good education and
learning, of an excellent understanding, and an exact taste. It is true, and it
is happy for you, that these qualities in him are adorned with great modesty, a
most amiable sweetness of temper, and an unusual disposition to sobriety and
virtue. But neither goodnature nor virtue will suffer him to esteem you
against his judgment; and though he is not capable of using you ill, yet you
will in time grow a thing indifferent and perhaps contemptible, unless you can
supply the loss of youth and beauty with more durable qualities. You have a
very few years to be young and handsome in the eyes of the world; and as few
months to be so in the eyes of a husband, who is not a fool; for I hope you do
not still dream of charms and raptures, which marriage ever did, and ever will,
put a sudden end to. Besides yours was a match of prudence and common
good-liking, without any mixture of that ridiculous passion, which has no being
but in play-books and romances.

You must therefore use all endeavors to attain to some degree of those
accomplishments which your husband most values in other people, and for which
he is most valued himself. You must improve your mind, by closely pursuing such
a method of study as I shall direct or approve of. You must get a collection of
history and travels, which I will recommend to you, and spend some hours every
day in reading them, and making extracts from them, if your memory be weak. You
must invite persons of knowledge and understanding to an acquaintance with you,
by whose conversation you may learn to correct your taste and judgment; and
when you can bring yourself to comprehend and relish the good sense of others,
you will arrive in time to think rightly yourself, and to become a reasonable
and agreeable companion. This must produce in your husband a true rational love
and esteem for you, which old age will ^ot diminish. He will have regard for
your judgment and opinion in matters of the greatest weight; you will be able
to entertain each other without a third person to relieve you by finding
discourse. The endowments of your mind will even make your person more greeable
to him: and when you are alone, your time will not lie heavy upon your hands,
for want of some trifling amusement.

As little respect as I have for the generality of your sex, it has sometimes
moved me with pity, to see the lady of the house forced to withdraw immediately
after dinner, and this in families where there is not much drinking; as if it
were an established maxim, that women are incapable of all conversation. In a
room where both sexes meet, if the men are discoursing upon any general
subject, the ladies never think it their business to partake in what passes,
but in a separate club entertain each other with the price and choice of lace,
and silk, and what dresses they liked or disapproved at the church or the
playhouse. And when you are among yourselves, how naturally, after the first
compliments, do you apply your hands to each other's lappets and ruffles, and
mantua's, as if the whole business of your lives, and the public concern of the
world depended upon the cut or color of your dresses. As divines say, that
some people take more pains to be damned, than it would cost them to be saved;
so your sex employs more thought, memory and application, to be fools, than
would serve to make them wise and useful. When I reflect on this, I cannot
conceive you to be human creatures, but a sort of species hardly a degree above
a monkey; which has more diverting tricks than any of you; is an animal less
mischievous and expensive; might in time be a tolerable critic in velvet and
brocade; and, for aught I know, would equally become them.

I would have you look upon finery as a necessary folly, as all great ladies
did, whom I have ever known: I do not desire you to be out of the fashion, but
to be the last and least in it. I expect that your dress shall be one degree
lower than your fortune can afford; and in your own heart I would wish you to
be an utter contemner of all distinctions which a finer petticoat can give you;
because it will neither make you richer, handsomer, younger, better natured,
more virtuous, or wise, than if it hung upon a peg.

If you are in company with men of learning, though they happen to discourse of
arts and sciences out of your compass, yet you will gather more advantage by
listening to them, than from all the nonsense and frippery of your own sex; but
if they be men of breeding as well as learning, they will seldom e^gage in any
conversation where you ought not to be a hearer, and in time have your part. If
they talk of the manners and customs of the several kingdoms of Europe, of
travels into remoter nations, of the state of their own country, or of the
great men and actions of Greece and Rome; if they give their judgment upon
English and French writers, either in verse or prose, or of the nature and
limits of virtue and vice, it is a shame for an English lady not to relish such
discourses, not to improve by them, and endeavor, by reading and information,
to have her share in those entertainments, rather than turn aside, as it is the
usual custom, and consult with the woman who sits next her, about a new cargo
of fans.

It is a little hard, that not one gentleman's daughter in a thousand should be
brought to read or understand her own natural tongue, or to be a judge of the
easiest books that are written in it; as any one may find, who can have the
patience to hear them, when they are disposed to mangle a play or a novel,
where the least word out of the common road is sure to disconcert them. It is
no wonder, when they are not so much as taught to spell in their ^hildhood, nor
can ever attain to it in their whole lives. I advise you therefore to read
aloud, more or less, every day to your husband, if he will permit you, or to
any other friend, (but not a female one) who is able to set you right; and as
for spelling, you may compass it in time, by making collections from the books
you read.

I know very well that those, who are commonly called learned women, have lost
all manner of credit by their impertinent talkativeness and conceit of
themselves: but there is an easy remedy for this, if you once consider, that
after all the pains you may be at, you never can arrive, in point of learning,
to the perfection of a schoolboy. The reading I would advise you to, is only
for improvement of your own good sense, which will never fail of being mended
by discretion. It is a wrong method, and ill choice of books, that makes those
learned ladies just so much worse for what they have read. And therefore it
shall be my care to direct you better, a task for which I take myself to be not
ill-qualified; because I have spent more time, and have had more opportunities
than many others, to observe and discover from what ources the various follies
of women are derived.

Pray observe how insignificant things are the common race of ladies, when they
have passed their youth and beauty; how contemptible they appear to the men,
and yet more contemptible to the younger part of their own sex; and have no
relief but in passing their afternoons in visits, where they are never
acceptable; and their evenings at cards among each other; while the former part
of the day is spent in spleen and envy, or in vain endeavors to repair, by art
and dress, the ruins of time. Whereas I have known ladies at sixty, to whom all
the polite part of the court and town paid their addresses, without any farther
view than that of enjoying the pleasure of their conversation.

I am ignorant of any one quality that is amiable in a man, which is not
equally so in a woman: I do not except even modesty and gentleness of nature.
Nor do I know one vice or folly which is not equally detestable in both. There
is, indeed, one infirmity which seems to be generally allowed you, I mean that
of cowardice: yet there should seem to be something very capricious, that when
women profess their admiration for a colonel or a captain on account of his
valor, they should fancy it a very graceful, becoming quality in themselves to
be afraid of their own shadows, to scream in a barge when the weather is
calmest, or in a coach at the ring; to run from a cow at a hundred yards
distance; to fall into fits at the sight of a spider, an earwig, or a frog. At
least, if cowardice be a sign of cruelty, (as it is generally granted) I can
hardly think it an accomplishment so desirable as to be thought worth improving
by affectation.

And as the same virtues equally become both sexes, so there is no quality
whereby women endeavor to distinguish themselves from men, for which they are
not just so much the worse, except that only of reservedness; which, however,
as you generally manage it, is nothing else but affectation or hypocrisy. For
as you cannot too much discountenance those of our sex, who presume to take
unbecoming liberties before you; so you ought to be wholly unconstrained in the
company of deserving ^en, when you have had sufficient experience of their
discretion.

There is never wanting in this town, a tribe of bold, swaggering, rattling
ladies, whose talents pass among coxcombs for wit and humor; their excellency
lies in rude, shocking expressions, and what they call running a man down. If a
gentleman in their company happens to have any blemish in his birth or person,
if any misfortune has befallen his family or himself, for which he is ashamed,
they will be sure to give him broad hints of it without any provocation. I
would recommend you to the acquaintance of a common prostitute, rather than to
that of such termagants as these. I have often thought that no man is obliged
to suppose such creatures to be women; but to treat them like insolent rascals
disguised in female habits, who ought to be stripped and kicked down stairs.

I will add one thing, although it be a little out of place, which is to
desire, that you will learn to value and esteem your husband for those good
qualities which he really possesses, and not to fancy others in him which he
certainly has not. For although this latter is generally understood to be a
mark of love, yet it is indeed nothing but affectation or ill judgment. It is
true, he wants so very few accomplishments, that you are in no great danger of
erring on this side; but my caution is occasioned by a lady of your
acquaintance, married to a very valuable person, whom yet she is so unfortunate
as to be always commending for those perfections to which he can least pretend.

I can give you no advice upon the article of expense, only I think you ought
to be well informed how much your husband's revenue amounts to, and be so good
a computer as to keep within it, in that part of the management which falls to
your share; and not to put yourself in the number of those politic ladies, who
think they gain a great point, when they have teized their husbands to buy them
a new equipage, a laced head, or a fine petticoat, without once consi^ering
what long scores remain unpaid to the but^er.

I desire you will keep this letter in your cabinet, and often examine
impartially your whole conduct by (...): and so God bless you, and make you a
fair exam^le to your sex, and a perpetual comfort to your hus^and and your
parents. I am, with great truth and ^ffection,

MADAM, Your most faithful Friend, and humble Servant.

THE LADIES' LIBRARY. Fables for the Female Sex.
By Edward Moore.
FABLE I. The Eagle, and the Assembly of Birds. To her Royal Highness the
Princess of Wales.
THE moral lay, to beauty due,
I write, fair excellence, to you;
Well pleased to hope my vacant hours
Have been employed to sweeten yours.
Truth under fiction I impart,
To weed out folly from the heart,
And show the paths, that lead astray
The wandering nymph from wisdom's way.
I flatter none. The great and good
Are by their actions understood;
Your monument if actions raise,
Shall I deface by idle praise?
I echo not the voice of fame,
That dwells delighted on your name;
Her friendly tale, however true,
Were flattery if I told it you.
The proud, the envious, and the vain,
The jilt, the prude, demand my strain;
To these, detesting praise, I write,
And vent, in charity, my spite.
With friendly hand I hold the glass
To all, promiscuous as they pass;
Should Folly there her likeness view,
I fret not that the mirror's true.
If the fantastic form offend,
I made it not, but would amend.
Virtue, in every clime and age,
Spurns at the folly-soothing page,
While Satire, that offends the ear
Of Vice and Passion, pleases her.
Premising this, your anger spare,
And claim the fable, you, who dare.
The birds in place, by factions pressed,
To Jupiter their prayers addressed;
By specious lies the state was vexed,
Their counsels libellers perplexed.
They begged (to stop seditious tongues)
A gracious hearing of their wrongs.
Jove grants their suit. The eagle sat,
Decider of the grand debate.
The pie, to trust and power preferred,
Demands permission to be heard.
Says he, prolixity of phrase
You know I hate. This libel says,
"Some birds there are, who, prone to noise,
Are hired to silence Wisdom's voice;
And, skilled to chatter out the hour,
Rise by their emptiness to power."
That this is aimed direct at me,
No doubt, you will readily agree;
Yet well this sage assembly knows,
By parts to government I rose;
My prudent counsels prop the state;
Magpies were never known to prate.
The kite rose up. His honest heart
In Virtue's sufferings bore a part.
That there were birds of prey, he knew;
So far the libeller said true.
"Voracious, bold, to rapine prone,
Who knew no interest but their own;
Who, hovering over the farmer's yard,
Nor pigeon, chick, nor duckling spared."
This might be true; but if applied
To him, in troth, the sland'rer ly'd.
Since Ignorance then might be misled,
Such things, he thought, were best unsaid.
The crow was vexed. As yester-morn
He flew across the new sown corn,
A screaming boy was set for pay,
He knew, to drive the crows away;
Scandal had found him out in turn,
And buzzed abroad, that crows love corn.
The owl arose, with solemn face,
And thus harangu'd upon the case.
That magpies prate, it may be true;
A kite may be voracious too;
Crows sometimes deal in new sown pease;
He libels not, who strikes at these.
The slander's here -- "But there are birds,
Whose wisdom lies in looks, not words;
Blund're^^, who level in the dark,
And alway^ shoot beside the mark."
He names not me: but these are hints,
Which manifest at whom he squints;
I were, indeed, that blund'ring fowl,
To question if he meant an owl.
"Ye wretches, hence!" the eagle cries;
"'It Is conscience, conscience that applies;
The virtuous mind takes no alarm,
Secured by Innocence from harm,
While Guilt, and his associate, Fear,
Are startled at the passing air."
FABLE II. The Panther, the Horse, and other Beasts.
THE man, who seeks to win the fair,
(So custom says) must truth forbear;
Mu^^ fawn and flatter, cringe and lie,
And raise the goddess to the sky;
For truth is hateful to her ear,
A rudeness which she cannot bear --
A rudeness? -- Yes, -- I speak my thoughts;
For truth upbraids her with her faults.
How wretched, Chloe, then am I
Who love you, and yet cannot lie,
And still to make you less my friend,
I strive your errors to amend?
But shall the senseless fop impart
The softest passions to your heart,
While he, who tells you honest truth,
And points to happiness your youth,
Determines, by his care, his lot.
And lives neglected and forgot?
Trust me, my dear, with greater ease,
Your taste for flattery I could please.
And similes in each dull line,
Like glowworms in the dark, should shine.
What if I say your lips disclose
The freshness of the opening rose?
Or that your cheeks are beds of flowers,
Enrip'ned by refreshing showers?
Yet certain as these flowers shall fade,
Time every beauty will invade.
The butterfly of various hue,
More than the flower, resembles you;
Fair, fluttering, fickle, busy thing,
To pleasure ever on the wing,
Gayly coquetting for an hour,
To die, and never be thought of more.
Would you the bloom of youth should last?
It Is Virtue that must bind it fast,
An easy carriage, wholly free
From sour reserve, or levity;
Good-natured mirth, an open heart,
And looks unskilled in any art;
Humility, enough to own
The frailties, which a friend makes known,
And decent pride, enough to know
The worth that Virtue can bestow.
These are the charms which never decay
Though youth, and beauty fade away,
And Time, which all things else removes,
Still heightens virtue, and improves.
You Will frown, and ask, to what i^^^nt
This blunt address to you is sent?
I Will spare the question, and confess
I Would praise you, if I loved you less;
But rail, be angry, or complain,
I will be rude, while you are vain.
Beneath a lion's peaceful reign,
When beasts met friendly on the plain,
A panther, of majestic port,
(The vainest female of the court)
With spotted skin, and eyes of fire,
Filled every bosom with desire;
Wherever she moved, a servile crowd
Of fawning creatures cring'd and bowed;
Assemblies every week she held,
(Like modern belles) with coxcombs filled,
Where noise, and nonsense, and grimace,
And lies and scandal, filled the place.
Behold the gay, fantastic thing,
Encircled by the spacious ring;
Low-bowing, with important look,
As first in rank, the monkey spoke.
"Gad take me, madam, but I swear,
No angel ever looked so fair --
Forgive my rudeness, but I vow,
You were not quite divine till now.
Those limbs! that shape! and then those eyes!
O close them, or the gazer dies!"
"Nay, gentle pug, for goodness hush,
I vow, and swear, you make me blush:
I shall be angry at this rate --
It Is so like flattery, which I hate."
The fox, in deeper cunning versed,
The beauties of her mind rehearsed,
And talked of knowledge, taste, and sense,
To ^^ich the fair have vast pretense!
Yet well he knew them always vain
Of what they strive not to attain,
And played so cunningly his part,
That pug was rivaled in his art.
The goat avowed his amorous fla^^^,
And burnt -- for what he durst not name;
Yet hoped a meeting in the wood
Might make his meaning understood.
Half angry at the bold address,
She frowned: but yet she must confess,
Such beauties might inflame his blood,
But still his phrase was somewhat rude*
The hog her neatness much admired;
The formal ass her swiftness sir'd;
While all to feed her folly strove,
And by their praises shared her love.
The horse, whose generous heart disdained
Applause, by servile flattery gained,
With graceful courage, silence broke,
And thus with indignation spoke.
When flattering monkeys fawn and prate,
They justly raise contempt, or hate
For merit's turned to ridicule,
Applauded by the grinning fool.
The artful fox your wit commends,
To lure you to his selfish ends;
From the vile flatt'rer turn a^ay;
For knaves make friendship to betray.
Dismiss the train of fops, and fools,
And learn to live by wisdom's rules.
Such beauties might the lion warm,
Did not ^our folly break the charm;
For who would court that lovely shape,
To be the rival of an ape*
He said; and, snorting in disdain,
Spurned at the crowd, and sought the plain.
FABLE III. The Nightingale and Glow wo^w
THE prudent nymph, whose cheek disclose
The lilly, and the blushing rose,
From public view her charms will skreen,
And rarel^ in the crowd be seen;
This simple truth shall keep her wise,
"The fairest fruits attract the flies."
One night, a glowworm, proud and vain,
Contemplating her glittering train,
Cried, "sure there never was in nature
So elegant, so fine a creature!
All other insects that I see,
The frugal ant, industrious be,
Or silkworm, with contempt I view;
With all that low, mechanic crew.
Who servilely their lives employ
In business, enemy to joy.
Mean, vulgar herd! ye are my scorn,
For grandeur only I was born;
Or sure am sprung from race divine,
And placed on earth, to live and shine.
Those lights, that sparkle so on high,
Are but the glowworms of the sky:
And kings on earth their gems admire,
Because they imitate my fire."
She spoke. Attentive on a spray,
A nightingale forbore his lay;
He sa^ the shining morsel near,
And flew, directed by the glare;
A while he gazed with sober look,
And thus the trembling prey bespoke.
"Deluded fool, with pride elate,
Know, it is thy beauty brings thy fate;
Less dazzing, long thou might have ^ain
Unheeded on the velvet plain;
Pride, soon or late, degraded mourns,
And beauty wrecks whom she adorns."
FABLE IV. Hymen and Death.
SIXTEEN, do you say. Nay, then it is time,
Another year destroys your prime.
But stay -- The settlement! "That Is made."
Why then is my simple girl afraid?
Yet hold a moment, if you can,
And heedfully the fable scan.
The shades were fled, the morning blushed,
The winds were in their caverns hushed,
When Hymen, pensive and sedate,
Held over the fields his musing gait.
Behind him, through the green-wood shade,
Death's meagre form the God surveyed,
Who quickly with gigantic stride,
Out-went his pace, and joined his side.
The chat on various subjects ran,
Till angry Hymen thus began.
"Relentless death, whose iron sway,
Mortals, reluctant, must obey,
Still of thy pow'er shall I complain,
And thy too partial hand arraign?
When Cupid brings a pair of hearts,
All over stuck with equal darts,
Thy cruel shafts my hopes deride,
And cut the knot, that Hymen tied.
"Shall not the bloody, and the bold,
The miser hoarding up his gold,
The harlot, reeking from the stew,
Alone thy fell revenge pursue?
But must the gentle, and the kind,
Thy fury, undistinguished, find?"
The monarch calmly thus repyl'd;
"Weigh well the cause, and then decide.
That friend of yours you lately named,
Cupid, alone, is to be blamed;
Then let the charge be justly laid.
That idle boy neglects his trade,
And hardly once in twenty years,
A couple to your temple bears.
The wretches, whom your office blends,
Silenus now, or Plutus sends;
Hence care, and bitterness, and strife
Are common to the nuptial life.
Believe me; more than all mankind,
Your vot'ries my compassion find;
Yet cruel am I called, and base,
Who seek the wretched to release,
The captive from his bonds to free,
Indissoluble, but for me.
"'It Is I entice him to the yoke;
By me, your crowded altars smoke;
For mortals boldly dare the noose,
Secure that death will set them loose."
FABLE V. The Poet and his Patron.
WHY, Celia, is your spreading waist
So loose, so negligently laced?
Why must the wrapping bed-gown hide
Your snowy bosom's swelling pride?
How ill that dress adorns your head,
Distained, and rumpled from the bed!
Those clouds, that shade your blooming face,
A little water might displace;
As nature every morn bestows
The crystal dew to cleanse the rose.
Those tresses, as the raven black,
That waved in ringlets down your back,
Uncomb'd, and injured by neglect,
Destroy the face, which once they decked.
Whence this forgetfulness of dress?
Pray, madam, are you married? Yes.
Nay, then indeed the wonder ceases;
No matter now how loose your dress is;
The end is won; your fortune's made;
Your sister now may take the trade.
Alas! what pity it is to find
This fault in half the female kind!
From hence proceed aversion, strife,
And all that sours the wedded life.
Beauty can only point the dart,
It Is neatness guides it to the heart;
Let neatness then, and beauty strive
To keep a wavering flame alive.
It Is harder far (you will find it true)
To keep the conquest than subdue;
Admit us once behind the screen,
What is there farther to be seen?
A newer face may raise the flame,
But every woman is the same.
Then study chiefly to improve
The charm, that fixed your husband's love;
Weigh well his humor. Was it dress,
That gave your beauty power to bless?
Pursue it still; be neater seen;
It Is always frugal to be clean;
So shall you keep alive desire,
And Time's swift wing shall fan the fire.
In garret high (as stories say)
A poet sung his tuneful lay;
So soft, so smooth his verse, you would swear,
Apollo and the Muses there.
Through all the town his praises rung,
His sonnets at the playhouse sung;
High waving over his laboring head,
The goddess Want her pinions spread,
And with poetic fury fired
What Phoebus faintly had inspired.
A noble youth, of taste and wit,
Approved the sprightly things he writ,
And sought him in his cobweb dome,
Discharged his rent, and brought him home.
Behold him at the stately board,
Who, but the poet, and my lord!
Each day, deliciously he dines,
And, greedy, quaffs the generous wines.
His sides were plump; his skin was sleek;
And Plenty wantoned on his cheek.
Astonished at the change so new,
Away the inspiring goddess flew.
Now, dropped for politics, and news,
Neglected lay the drooping Muse.
Unmindful whence his fortune came,
He stifled the poetic flame;
Nor tale, nor sonnet, for my lady,
Lampoon, nor epigram was ready.
With just contempt his patron saw,
(Resolved his bounty to withdraw)
And thus, with anger in his look,
The late-repenting fool bespoke.
"Blind to the good that courts thee grown,
Whence has the sun of favor shone?
Delighted with thy tuneful art,
Esteem was growing in my heart,
But idly thou reject'st the charms,
That gave it birth, and kept it warm."
Unthinking fools alone despise
The arts, that taught them first to rise.
FABLE VI. The Wolf, the Sheep, and the Lamb.
DUTY demands, the parent's voice
Should sanctify the daughter's choice;
In that is due obedience shown;
To choose belongs to her alone.
May horror seize his midnight hour,
Who builds upon a parent's power,
And claims, by purchase vile and base,
The loathing maid for his embrace.
Hence virtue sickens; and the breast,
Where Peace had built her downy nest,
Becomes the troubled seat of care,
And pines with anguish and despair.
A wolf, rapacious, rough, and bold,
Whose nightly plunders thinn'd the fold,
Contemplating his ill-spent life,
And cloyed with thefts, would take a wife.
His purpose known, the savage race,
In numerous crowds, attend the place
For why, a mighty wolf he was,
And held dominion in his jaws.
Her favorite whelp each mother brought,
And humbly his alliance fought;
But, cold by age, or else too nice,
None found acceptance in his eyes.
It happened, as at early dawn,
He, solitary, crossed the lawn,
Strayed from the fold, a sportive lamb
Skip'd wanton by her fleecy dam;
When Cupid, foe to man and beast,
Discharged an arrow at his breast.
The timorous breed the robber knew,
And, trembling, over the meadow flew;
Their nimblest speed the wolf o'ertook,
And, courteous, thus the dam bespoke.
"Stay, fairest, and suspend your fear,
Trust me, no enemy is near.
These jaws, in slaughter often imbrued,
At length have known enough of blood,
And kinder business brings me now,
Vanquished, at beauty's feet to bow.
You have a daughter -- sweet, forgive
A wolf's address -- in her I live;
Love from her eye like lightning came,
And set my marrow all on flame.
Let your consent confirm my choice,
And ratify our nuptial joys.
Me ample wealth and power attend;
Wide over the plains my realms extend;
What midnight robber dare invade
The fold, if I the guard am made?
At home, the shepherd's cur may sleep,
While I secure his master's sheep."
Discourse like this, attention claimed;
Grandeur the mother's breast inflamed;
Now fearless by his side she walked,
Of settlements and jointures talked;
Proposed, and doubled her demands
Of flowery fields, and turnip-lands.
The wolf agrees. Her bosom swells;
To miss her happy fate she tells.
And, of the grand alliance vain,
Con^^mns her kindred of the plain.
The loathing lamb with horror hears,
And wearies out her dam with prayers;
But all in vain. Mamma best knew
What unexperienced girls should do;
So, to the neighboring meadow carried,
A formal ass the couple married.
Torn from the tyrant-mother's side,
The trembler goes a victim-bride,
Reluctant meets the rude embrace,
And bleats among the howling race.
With horror often her eyes behold
Her murdered kindred of the fold;
Each day a sister-lamb is served,
And at the glutton's table carved;
The crashing bones he grinds for food,
And slakes his thirst with streaming blood.
Love, who the cruel mind detests,
And lodges but in gentle breasts,
Was now no more. Enjoyment past,
The savage hunger'd for the feast;
But (as we find in human race,
A mask conceals the villain's face)
Justice must authorize the treat;
Till then he longed, but durst not eat.
As forth he walked, in quest of prey,
The hunters met him on the way;
Fear wings his flight; the marsh he fought,
The snuffing dogs are set at fault.
His stomach b^^^lk'd, now hunger gnaws,
Howling he grinds his empty jaws;
Food must be ha^ -- and lamb is nigh;
His maw invokes the fraudful lie.
"Is this^ (dissembling rage, he cried)
"The gentle virtue of a bride?
That, leagued with man's destroying race,
She sets her husband for the chase?
By treach'ry prompts the noisy hound
To scent his footsteps on the ground?
Thou trait'ress vile! for this thy blood
Shall glut my rage, and dye the wood!"
So saying, on the lamb he flies,
Beneath his jaw the victim dies.
FABLE VII. The Goose and the Swans.
I HATE the face, however fair,
That carries an affected air.
The lisping tone, the shape constrained,
The studied look, the passion feigned,
Are fopperies, which only tend
To injure what they strive to m^nd.
With what superior grace enchants
The face which nature's pencil paints!
Where eyes, unexercis'd in art,
Glow with the meaning of the heart!
Where freedom and good humor sit,
And easy gaiety, and wit!
Though perfect beauty be not there,
The master lines, the finished air,
We catch from every look delight,
And grow enamored at the sight;
For beauty, though we all approve,
Excites our wonder, more than love,
While the agreeable strikes sure,
And gives the wounds, we cannot cure*
Why then, my Amoret, this care,
That forms you, in effect, less fair?
If nature on your cheek bestows
A bloom, that emulates the rose,
Or from some heavenly image drew
A form, Appelles never knew,
Your ill-judg'd aid will you impart,
And spoil by meretricious art?
Or had you, nature's error, come
Abortive from the mother's womb,
Your forming care she still rejects,
Which only heightens her defects.
When such, of glittering jewels proud,
Still press the foremost in the crowd,
At every public show are seen,
With look awry, and awkward mien,
The gaudy dress attracts the eye,
And magnifies deformity.
Nature may under-do her part,
But seldom wants the help of art;
Trust her, she is your surest friend,
Nor made your form for you to mend.
A goose, affected, empty, vain,
The shrillest of the cackling train,
With proud, and elevated crest,
Precedence claimed above the rest.
Says she, "I laugh at human race,
Who say, geese hobble in their pace;
Look here! the sland'rous lie detect;
Not haughty man is so erect.
That peacock yonder! lord, how vain
The creature's of his gaudy train!
If both were stripped, I Would pawn my word,
A goose would be the finer bird.
Nature, to hide her own defects,
Her bungled work with fin'ry decks;
Were geese set off with half that show,
Would men admire the peacock? no."
Thus vaunting, cross the mead she stalks,
The cackling breed attend her walks;
The sun shot down his noontide beams,
The swans were sporting in the streams;
Their snowy plumes, and stately pride
Provoked her spleen, "Why there," she cried,
"Again, what arrogance we see! --
Those creatures! how they mimic me!
Shall every fowl the waters skim,
Because we geese are known to swim?
Humility they soon shall learn,
And their own emptiness discern."
So saying, with extended wings,
Lightly upon the wave she springs.
Her bosom swells, she spreads her plumes,
And the swan's stately crest assumes.
Contempt and mockery ensued,
And bursts of laughter shook the flood.
A swan, superior to the rest,
Sprung forth, and thus the fool addressed.
"Conceited thing! elate with pride,
Thy affectation all deride;
These airs thy aukwardness impart,
And show thee plainly as thou art.
Among thy equals of the flock,
Thou had escape the public mock,
And as thy parts to good conduce,
Been deemed an honest hobbling goose.
"Learn hence, to study wisdom's rules;
Know, foppery's the pride of fools,
And striving nature to conceal,
You only her defects reveal."
FABLE VIII. The Lawyer and Justice.
LOVE! thou divinest good below,
Thy pure delights few mortals know.
Our rebel hearts thy sway disown,
While tyrant lust usurps thy throne!
The bounteous God of nature made
The sexes for each other's aid,
Their mutual talents to employ,
To lessen ills, and heighten joy.
To weaker woman he assigned
That softening gentleness of mind,
That can with sympathy impart
Its likeness* to the roughest heart.
Her eyes with magic power endu'd,
To fire the dull, and awe the rude,
His rosy fingers on her face
Shed, lavish, every blooming grace,
And stamped (perfection to display)
His mildest image on her clay.
Man, active, resolute, and bold,
He fashioned in a different mould.
With useful arts his mind informed,
His breast with nobler passions warmed;
He gave him knowledge, taste, and sense,
And courage for the fair's defense.
Her frame, resistless to each wrong,
Demands protection from the strong;
To man she flies, when fear alarms,
And claims the temple of his arms.
By nature's Author thus declared
The woman's sovereign, and her guard,
Shall man, by treacherous wile invade
The weakness, he was meant to aid?
While beauty, given to inspire
Protecting love, and soft desire,
Lights up a wildfire in the heart,
And to its own breast points the dart,
Becomes the spoiler's base pretense,
To triumph over innocence?
The wolf, that tears the timorous sheep,
Was never set the fold to keep;
Nor was the tiger, or the pard
Meant the benighted trav'ler's guard;
But man, the wild^st beast of prey,
Wears friendship's emblance to betray;
His strength against the weak employs,
And, where he should protect, destroys.
Past twelve o'clock, the watchman cried,
His brief the studious lawyer plied;
The all-prevailing fee lay nigh,
The earnest of tomorrow's lie;
Sudden the furious winds arise,
The jarring casement shattered flies,
The doors admit a hollow sound,
And, rattling from their hinges, bound;
When Justice, in a blaze of light,
Revealed her radiant form to sight.
The wretch with thrilling horror shook,
Loose every joint, and pale his look,
Not having seen her in the courts,
Or found her mentioned in reports,
He asked, with fault'ring tongue, her name,
Her errand there, and whence she came?
Sternly the white-rob'd shade replied,
(A crimson glow her visage died)
"Can thou be doubtful who I am?
Is Justice grown so strange a name?
Were not your courts for Justice raised?
'Twas there of old my altar blazed:
My guardian thee did I elect,
My sacred temple to protect,
That thou and all thy venal tribe
Should spurn the goddess for a bribe?
Aloud the ruined client cries,
Justice has neither ears, nor eyes!
In foul alliance with the bar,
Against me the judge denounces war,
And rarely issues his decree,
But with intent to baffle me."
She paused. Her breast with fury burned,
The trembling lawyer thus returned: --
"I own the charge is justly laid,
And weak the excuse that can be made;
Yet search the spacious globe, and see
If all mankind are not like me.
The gown-man, skilled in Romish lies,
By faith's false glass deludes our eyes,
Over conscience rides without control,
And robs the man, to save his soul.
The doctor, with important face,
By sly design, mistakes the case,
Prescribes, and spins out the disease,
To trick the patient of his fees.
The soldier, rough with many a scar,
And red with slaughter, leads the war;
If he a nation's trust betray,
The foe has offered double pay.
"When Vice over all mankind prevails,
And weighty Interest turns the scales,
Must I be better than the rest,
And harbor Justice in my breast?
On one side only take the fee,
Content with poverty and thee?"
"Thou blind to sense, and vile of mind,"
The exasperated shade rejoined,
"If virtue from the world is flown,
Will others' faults excuse thy own?
For sickly souls the priest was made,
Physicians, for the body's aid,
The soldier guarded liberty,
Man woman, and the lawyer me;
If all are faithless to their trust,
They leave not thee the less unjust,
Henceforth your pleadings I disclaim,
And bar the sanction of my name;
Within your courts it shall be read,
That Justice from the law is fled."
She spoke; and hid in shades her face,
'Till HARDWICK soothed her into grace.
FABLE IX. The Farmer, the Spaniel, and the Cat.
WHY knits my dear her angry brow?
What rude offense alarms you now?
I said, that Delia's fair, it is true;
But did I say, she equaled you?
Cannot I another's face commend,
Or to her virtues be a friend,
But instantly your forehead lours,
As if her merit lessened yours?
From female envy never free,
All must be blind, because you see.
Survey the gardens, fields, and bowers,
The buds, the blossoms, and the flowers,
Then tell me where the wood-bine grows,
That vies in sweetness with the rose?
Or where the lily's snowy white,
That throws such beauties on the sight?
Yet folly is it to declare,
That these are neither sweet, nor fair.
The cristal shines with fainter rays,
Before the diamond's brighter blaze;
And fops will say the diamond dies
Before the luster of your eyes;
But I, who deal in truth, deny,
That neither shine when you are by.
When zephyrs over the blossoms stray,
And sweets along the air convey,
Shall Not I the fragrant breeze inhale,
Because you breathe a sweeter gale?
Sweet are the flowers that deck the field,
Sweet is the smell the blossoms yield,
Sweet is the summer gale that blows,
And sweet, though sweeter you, the rose.
Shall envy then torment your breast,
If you are lovelier than the rest?
For while I give to each her due,
By praising them, I flatter you,
And praising most, I still declare
You fairest, where the rest are fair.
As at his board a farmer sat,
Replenished by his homely treat,
His favorite spaniel near him stood,
And with his master shared the food,
The crackling bones his jaws devoured,
His lapping tongue the trenchers scoured;
Till, sated now, supine he lay,
And snor'd the rising fumes away,
The hungry cat, in turn, drew near,
And humbly craved a servant's share.
Her modest worth the master knew,
And straight the fat'ning morsel threw;
Enraged, the snarling ^ur awoke,
And thus, with spiteful envy, spoke.
"They only claim a right to eat,
Who earn by services their meat;
Me, zeal and industry inflame
To scour the fields and spring the game.
Or, plunging in the wintry wave,
For man the wounded bird to save:
With watchful diligence I keep,
From prowling wolves, his fleecy sheep:
At home, his midnight hours sec^re,
And drive the robber from the door.
For this, his breast with kindness glows;
For this, his hand the food bestows;
And shall thy indolence impart
A warmer friendship to his heart,
That thus he robs me of my due,
To pamper such vile things as you?"
"I own" (with meekness puss replied)
"Superior merit on your side;
Nor does my breast with envy swell,
To find it recompensed so well;
Yet I, in what my nature can,
Contribute to the good of man.
Whose claws destroy the pilf'ring mouse?
Who drives the vermin from the house?
Or, watchful for the laboring swain,
From lurking rats secures the grain?
From hence if he rewards bestow,
Why should your heart with gall overflow?
Why pine, my happiness to see,
Since there is enough for you and me?"
Thy words are just, the farmer cried,
And spurned the snarler from his side.
FABLE X. The Spider and the Be.
THE nymph, who walks the public streets,
And sets her cap at all she meets,
May catch the fool who turns to stare:
But men of sense avoid the snare.
As on the margin of the flood,
With silken line, my Lydia stood,
I smiled to see the pains you took,
To cover over the fraudful hook:
Along the forest as we strayed,
You saw the boy his lime-twigs spread;
Guessed you the reason of his fear?
Lest, heedless, we approached too near;
For as behind the bush we lay,
The linnet fluttered on the spray.
Needs there such caution to delude
The scaly fry, and feathered bro^d?
And think you, with inferior art,
To captivate the human heart?
The maid, who modestly conceals
Her beauties, while she hides, reveals:
Give but a glimpse, and Fancy draws,
Whatever the Grecian Venus was.
From Eve's first fig-leaf, to brocade,
All dress was meant for Fancy's aid;
Which, evermore, delighted dwells
On what the bashful nymph conceals.
When Celia struts in man's attire,
She shows too much, to raise desire:
But from the hoop's bewitching round
Her very shoe has power to wound.
The roving eye, the bosom bare,
The forward laugh, the wanton air
May catch the fop; for gudgeons strike
At the bare hook, and bait, alike,
While salmon play regardless by,
'Till art, like nature, forms the fly.
Beneath a peasant's homely thatch,
A spider long had held her watch;
From morn to night with restless care,
She spun her web, and wove her snare.
Within the limits of her reign,
Lay many a heedless captive slain,
Or fluttering struggled in the toils,
To burst the chains, and shun her wiles.
A straying be, that perched hard by,
Beheld her with disdainful eye,
And thus began: "Mean thing, give over,
And lay thy slender threads no more;
A thoughtless fly, or two at most,
Is all the conquest thou can boast;
For bees of sense thy arts evade,
We see so plain the nets are laid.
"The gaudy tulip, that displays
Her spreading foliage to the gaze,
That points her charms at all she sees,
And yields to every wanton breeze,
Attracts not me. Where blushing grows,
Guarded with thorns, the modest rose,
Enamored round and round I fly,
Or on her fragrant bosom lie;
Reluctant she my ardour meets,
And bashful renders up her sweets.
"To wiser heads attention lend,
And learn this lesson from a friend.
She, who with modesty retires,
Adds fuel to her lover's fires,
While such incautious jilts as you,
By folly your own schemes undo."
FABLE XI. The young Lion and the Ape.
IT IS true, I blame your lover's choice,
Though flattered by the public voice,
And peevish grow, and sick to hear
His exclamations, O how fair!
I listen not to wild delights,
And transports of expected nights;
What is to me your hoard of charms,
The whiteness of your neck and arms?
Needs there no acquisition more,
To keep contention from the door?
Yes; pass a fortnight, and you will find,
All beauty cloys, but of the mind.
Sense and good humor ever prove
The surest cords to fasten love.
Yet Phillis (simplest of your sex)
You never think, but to perplex.
Coquetting it with every ape,
That struts abroad in human shape;
Not that the coxcomb is your taste,
But that it stings your lover's breast;
Tomorrow you resign the sway,
Prepared to honor, and obey,
The tyrant-mistress change for life,
To the submission of a wife.
Your follies, if you can, suspend,
And learn instruction from a friend.
Reluctant hear the first address,
Think often, 'ere you answer, yes;
But, once resolved, throw off disguise,
And wear your wishes in your eyes.
With caution every look forbear,
That might create one jealous fear,
A lover's ripening hopes confound,
Or give the generous breast a wound.
Contemn the girlish arts to teaze,
Nor use your power unless to please;
For fools alone with rigor sway,
When, soon or late, they must obey.
The king of brutes, in life's decline,
Resolved dominion to resign;
The beasts were summoned to appear,
And bend before the royal heir.
They came; a day was fixed; the crowd
Before their future monarch bowed.
A dapper monkey, proud and vain,
Stepped forth, and thus addressed the train.
"Why cringe my friends with slavish awe,
Before this pageant king of straw?
Shall we anticipate the hour,
And, ere we feel it, own his power?
The counsels of experience prize,
I know the maxims of the wise;
Subjection let us cast away,
And live the monarchs of today;
It Is ours the vacant hand to spurn,
And play the tyrant each in turn,
So shall he right from wrong discern,
And mercy, from oppression, learn,
At others' woes be taught to melt,
And loath the ills himself has felt."
He spoke. His bosom swelled with pride,
The youthful lion thus replied.
"What madness prompts thee to provoke
My wrath, and dare the impending stroke?
Thou wretched fool! can wrongs impart
Compassion to the feeling heart?
Or teach the grateful breast to glow,
The hand to give, or eye to flow!
Learned in the practice of their schools,
From women thou have drawn thy rules;
To them return, in such a cause,
From only such expect applause;
The partial sex I don't condemn,
For liking those, who copy them.
"Would'd thou the generous lion bind,
By kindness bribe him to be kind;
Good offices their likeness get,
And payment lessens not the debt;
With multiplying hand he gives
The good from others he receives;
Or for the bad makes fair return,
And pays with interest scorn for scorn."
FABLE XII. The Colt and the Farmer.
TELL me, Corinna, if you can,
Why so averse, so coy to man?
Did nature, lavish of her care,
From her best pattern form you fair,
That you, ungrateful to her cause,
Should mock her gifts, and spurn her laws?
And, miser-like, withold that store,
Which, by imparting, blesses more?
Beauty's a gift, by heaven assigned
The portion of the female kind;
For this the yielding maid demands
Protection at her lover's hands;
And though by wasting years it fade,
Remembrance tells him, once 'twas paid.
And will you then this wealth conceal,
For age to rust, or time to steal?
The summer of your youth to rove,
A stranger to the joys of love?
Then, when life's winter hastens on,
And youth's fair heritage is gone,
Dow'rless to court some peasant's arms,
To guard your withered age from harms?
No gratitude to warm his breast,
For blooming beauty, once possessed;
How will you curse that stubborn pride,
Which drove your bark across the tide,
And sailing before Folly's wind,
Left sense and happiness behind!
Corinna, lest these whims prevail,
To such as you, I write my tale.
A colt, for blood and mettled speed,
The choicest of the running breed,
Of youthful strength and beauty vain,
Refused subjection to the rein;
In vain the groom's officious skill
Opposed his pride, and checked his will;
In vain the master's forming care
Restrained with threats, or soothed with prayer.
Of freedom proud, and scorning man,
Wild over the spacious plains he ran,
Wherever luxuriant nature spread
Her flowery carpet over the mead,
Or bubbling streams, soft-gliding, pass,
To cool and freshen up the grass,
Disdaining bounds, he crop'd the blade,
And wantoned in the spoil he made.
In plenty thus the summer passed,
Revolving winter came at last.
The trees no more a shelter yield;
The verdure withers from the field;
Perpetual snows invest the ground;
In icy chains the streams are bound:
Cold, nipping winds, and rattling hail
His lank, unshelter'd sides assail.
As round he cast his rueful eyes,
He saw the thatch-roof'd cottage rise.
The prospect touched his heart with cheer,
And promised kind deliverance near.
A stable, erst his scorn, and hate,
Was now become his wished retreat;
His passion cool, his pride forgot,
A farmer's welcome yard he sought.
The master saw his woeful plight,
His limbs, that tottered with his weight,
And, friendly, to the stable led,
And, saw him litter'd, dressed and fed.
In slothful ease, all night he lay;
The servants rose at break of day;
The market calls. Along the road,
His back must bear the ponderous load*
In vain he struggles, or complains,
Incessant blows reward his pains,
Tomorrow varies but his toil;
Chained to the plough, he breaks the soil;
While scanty meals at night repay
The painful labors of the day.
Subdued by toil, with anguish rent,
His self-upbraidings found a vent.
"Wretch that I am!" he sighing said
"By arrogance, and folly led;
Had but my restive youth been brought
To learn the lesson nature taught,
Then had I, like my sires of yore,
The prize from every courser bore;
While man bestowed rewards and praise,
And females crowned my latter days.
Now lasting servitude's my lot,
My birth contemned, my speed forgot,
Doomed am I, for my pride to bear
A living death, ^^om year to year."
FABLE XIII. The Owl and the Nightingale.
TO know the mistress' humor right,
See if her maids are clean and tight:
If Betty waits without her stays,
She copies but her lady's ways.
When miss comes in with boisterous shout,
And drops no court'sey, going out,
Depend upon it, mama is one,
Who reads, or drinks too much alone.
If bottled beer her thirst assuage,
She feels enthusiastic rage,
And burns with ardour to inherit
The gifts and workings of the spirit,
If learning crack her giddy brains,
No remedy, but death remains.
Sum up the various ills of life,
And all are sweet to such a wife.
At home, superior wit she vaunts,
And twits her husband with his wants;
Her ragged offspring all around,
Like pigs are wallowing on the ground,
Impatient ever of control,
She knows no order but of soul;
With books her litter'd floor is spread
Of nameless authors, never read;
Foul linen, petticoats, and lace
Fill up the intermediate space.
Abroad, at visitings, her tongue
Is never still, and always wrong;
All meanings she defines away,
And stands, with truth and sense, at bay.
If ever she meets a gentle heart,
Skilled in the housewife's useful art,
Who makes her family her care,
And builds Contentment's temple there,
She starts at such mistakes in nature,
And cries, "lord help us! what a creature!"
Melissa, if the moral strike,
You Will find the fable not unlike.
An owl puffed up with self-conceit,
Loved learning better than his meat;
Old manuscripts he treasured up,
And rummag'd every grocer's shop;
At pastry-cooks was known to ply,
And strip, for science, every pie.
For modern poetry and wit,
He had read all that Blackmore writ.
So intimate with Curl was grown,
His learned treasures were his own,
To all his authors had access,
And sometimes would correct the press.
In logic he acquired such knowledge,
You Would swear him fellow of a college.
Alike to every art and science,
His daring genius bid defiance,
And swallowed wisdom with that haste,
That cits do custard at a feast.
Within the shelter of a wood,
One evening, as he musing stood,
Hard by, upon a leafy spray,
A nightingale began his lay.
Sudden he starts, with anger stung,
And, screeching, interrupts his song.
"Pert, busy thing, thy airs give over,
And let my contemplations soar.
What is the music of thy voice,
But jarring dissonance and noise?
Be wise. True harmony thou wilt find,
Not in the throat, but in the mind;
By empty chirping not attained,
But by laborious study gained.
Go, read the authors, Pope explodes,
Fathom the depth of Cibber's odes.
With modern plays improve thy wit,
Read all the learning, Henly writ,
And if thou needs must sing, sing then,
And emulate the ways of men:
So shall thou grow, like me, refined,
And bring improvement to thy kind."
"Thou wretch," the little warbler cried,
"Made up of ignorance and pride,
Ask all the birds, and they will declare,
A greater blockhead wings not air.
Read over thyself; thy talents scan;
Science was only meant for man.
No senseless authors me molest,
I mind the duties of my nest,
With careful wing protect my young,
And cheer their ev'nings with a song.
Make short the weary trav'ler's way,
And warble in the poet's lay.
"Thus following nature, and her laws,
From men and birds I claim applause,
While, nursed in pedantry and sloth,
An owl is scorned alike by both."
FABLE XIV. The Sparrow and the Dove.
IT was, as learned traditions say,
Upon an April's blithsome day,
When Pleasure ever on the wing,
Ruturn'd companion of the Spring,
And cheered the birds with amorous heat,
Instructing little hearts to beat;
A sparrow, frolic, gay, and young,
Of bold address, and flippant tongue,
Just left his lady of a night,
Like him, to follow new delight.
The youth, of many a conquest vain,
Flew off to seek the chirping train;
The chirping train he quickly found,
And with a saucy ease bowed round.
For every she his bosom burns,
And this, and that he wooes by turns;
And here a sigh, and there a bill,
And here -- "those eyes! so formed to kill!
And now with ready tongue, he strings
Unmeaning, soft, resistless things;
With vows, and dem-me's skilled to woo,
As other pretty fellows do.
Not that he thought this short essay
A prologue needful to his play;
"No, trust me," says our learned letter,
"He knew the virtuous sex much better;
But these he held as specious arts,
To show his own superior parts,
The form of decency to shield,
And give ajust pretense to yield."
Thus finishing his courtly play,
He marked the favorite of a day;
With careless impudence drew near,
And whispered Hebrew in her ear:
A hint, which, like the masons' sign,
The conscious can alone divine.
The flut'ring nymph, expert at feigning,
Cried, "Sir! -- pray Sir, explain your meaning --
Go prate to those that may endure ye --
To me this rudeness! -- I Will assure ye!" --
Then off she glided like a swallow,
As saying -- you guess where to follow.
To such as know the party set,
It Is nedless to declare they met;
The parson's barn, as authors mention,
Confessed the fair had apprehension.
Her honor there secure from stain,
She held all farther trifling vain,
No more affected to be coy,
But rushed, licentious, on the joy.
"Hist, love!" the male companion cried;
"Retire a while; I fear we are spied."
Nor was the caution vain. He saw
A turtle, rustling in the straw,
While over her callow brood she hung,
And fondly thus address' her young: --
"Ye tender objects of my care!
Peace, peace, ye little helpless pair;
Anon he comes, your gentle sire,
And brings you all your hearts require.
For us, his infants, and his bride,
For us, with only love to guide,
Our lord assumes an eagle's speed,
And, like a lion, dares to bleed.
Nor yet by wintry skies confined,
He mounts upon the rudest wind,
From danger tears the vital spoil,
And with affection sweetens toil.
Ah cease, too venurous! cease to dare;
In thine, our dearer safety spare:
From him ye cruel falcons stray,
And turn, ye fowlers, far away!
"Should I survive to see the day,
That tears me from myself away,
That cancels all that heaven could give,
The life, by which alone, I live,
Alas, how more than lost were I,
Who, in the thought, already die!
"Ye powers, whom men and birds obey,
Great rulers of your creatures, say,
Why mourning comes, by bliss conveyed,
And even the sweets of love allayed?
Where grows Enjoyment, tall, and fair,
Around it twines entangling Care;
While Fear, for what our souls possess,
Enervates every power to bless;
Yet Friendship forms the bliss above,
And, life! what art thou, without love?"
Our hero, who had heard apart,
Felt something moving in his heart,
But quickly, with disdain, suppressed
The virtue, rising in his breast;
And first he feigned to laugh aloud,
And next, approaching, smiled and bowed.
"Madam, you must not think me rude;
Good manners never can intrude;
I vow I came through pure good nature!
(Upon my soul, a charming creature)
Are these the comforts of a wife?
This careful, cloistered, moaping life?
No doubt, that odious thing called duty,
Is a sweet province for a beauty.
Thou pretty ignorance! thy will
Is measured to thy want of skill;
That good old-fashioned dame, thy mother,
Has taught thy infant years no other --
The greatest ill in the creation
Is sure the want of education.
"But think ye -- tell me without feigning --
Have all these charms no farther meaning?
Dame nature, if you don't forget her,
Might teach your ladyship much better.
For shame, reject this mean employment,
Enter the world, and taste enjoyment,
Where time, by circling bliss we measure;
Beauty was formed alone for pleasure;
Come, prove the blessing; follow me;
Be wise, be happy, and be free."
"Kind sir," replied our matron chaste,
Your zeal seems pretty much in haste;
I own, the fondness to be blessed,
Is a deep thirst in every breast,
Of blessings too I have my store;
Yet quarrel not, should heaven give more;
Then prove the change to be expedient,
And think me, sir, your most obedient."
Here turning, as to one inferior,
Our gallant spoke, and smiled superior.
"Methinks, to quit your boasted station
Requires a world of hesitation;
Where brats and bonds are held a blessing,
The case, I doubt, is past redressing.
Why, child, suppose the joys I mention,
Were the mere fruits of my invention,
You Have cause sufficient for your carriage,
In flying from the curse of marriage;
That sly decoy, with varied snares,
That takes your widgeons in by pairs;
Alike to husband, and to wife,
The cure of love, and bane of life;
The only method of forecasting,
To make misfortune firm and lasting;
The sin, by heaven's peculiar sentence,
Unpardoned, through a life's repentance.
It is the double snake, that weds
A common tail to different heads,
That leads the carcass still astray,
By dragging each a different way.
Of all the ills, that may attend me,
From marriage, mighty gods, defend me!
"Give me frank nature's wild demesne,
And boundless track of air serene,
Where Fancy, ever winged for change.
Delights to sport, delights to range;
There, Liberty! to thee is owing
Whatever of bliss is worth bestowing;
Delights, still varied and divine,
Sweet goddess of the hills, are thine.
"What say you now, you pretty pink you?
Have I, for once, spoke reason, think you?
You take me now for no romancer --
Come, never study for an answer;
Away; cast every care behind you,
And fly, where joy alone shall find you."
"Soft yet, returned our female fencer,
A question more, or so -- and then, sir.
You Have rallied me with sense exceeding,
With much fine wit, and better breeding.
But pray, sir, how do you contrive it?
Do those of your world never wive it?"
"No, no," -- "How then?" -- "Why dare I tell?
What does the business full as well."
"Do you never love?" -- "An hour at leisure."
"Have you no friendships? -- "Yes, for pleasure."
"No care for little ones? -- "We get 'em,
"The rest the mothers mind -- and let 'em."
"Thou wretch," rejoined the kindling dove,
"Quite lost to life, as lost to love!
Whenever misfortune comes, how just!
And come misfortune surely must;
In the dread season of dismay,
In that your hour of trial, say,
Who then shall prop your sinking heart,
Who bear affliction's weightier part?
"Say, when the black-brow'd welkin bends,
And winter's gloomy form impends,
To mourning turns all transient cheer,
And blasts the melancholy year;
For times at no persuasion stay,
Nor Vice can find perpetual May;
Then where is the tongue, by Folly led,
That soul of pertness, whither fled?
All shrunk within thy lonely nest,
Forlorn, abandoned, and unblessed?
No friends, by cordial bonds allied,
Shall seek thy cold, unsocial side;
No chirping pratlers to delight
Shall turn the long-enduring night;
No bride her words of balm impart,
And warm thee at her constant heart.
"Freedom, restrained by Reason's force,
Is as the sun's unvarying course,
Benignly active, sweetly bright,
Affording warmth, affording light;
But, torn from Virtue's sacred rules,
Becomes a comet, gazed by fools.
Foreboding cares, and storms, and strife,
And fraught with all the plagues of life.
"Thou fool! by union every creature
Subsists, through universal nature;
And this, to beings void of mind,
Is wedlock, of a meaner kind,
"While womb'd in space, primaeval clay
A yet unfashion'd embryo lay,
The source of endless good above
Shot down his spark of kindling love;
Touched by the all-enliv^ing flame,
Then Motion first exulting came,
Each atom sought its separate class,
Through many a fair enamored mass;
Love cast the central charm around,
And with eternal nuptials bound.
Then Form and Order over the sky,
First trained their bridal pomp on high,
The sun displayed his orb to sight,
And burned with hymeneal light.
"Hence nature's virgin womb conceived,
And with the genial burden heaved;
Forth came the oak, her firstborn heir,
And scaled the breathing steep of air;
Then infant stems, of various use,
Imbibed her soft, maternal juice;
The flowers, in early bloom disclosed,
Upon her fragrant breast reposed;
Within her warm embraces grew
A race of endless form, and hue;
Then poured her lesser offspring round,
And fondly clothed their parent ground.
"Nor here alone the virtue reigned,
By matter's cumb'ring form detained;
But thence, subliming, and refined,
Aspired, and reached its kindred mind.
Caught in the fond celestial fire,
The mind perceived unknown desire,
And now with kind effusion flowed,
And now with cordial ardours glowed,
Beheld a sympathetic fair,
And loved its own resemblance there;
On all with circling radiance shone,
But cent'ring, fixed on one alone;
There clasped the heav'n-appointed wife,
And doubled every joy of life.
"Here ever blessing, ever blessed,
Resides this beauty of the breast.
As from his palace, here the god
Still beams effulgent bliss abroad,
Here gems his own eternal round,
The ring, by which the world is bound,
Here bids his seat of empire grow.
And builds his little heaven below.
"The bridal partners thus allied,
And thus in sweet accordance tied,
One body, heart, and spirit live,
Enriched by every joy they give;
Like echo, from her vocal hold,
Returned in music twenty fold.
Their union, firm and undecay'd,
Nor time can shake, nor power invade;
But as the stem, and scion stand,
Ingrasted by a skilful hand,
They check the tempest's wintry rage,
And bloom and strengthen into age.
A thousand amities unknown,
And powers, perceived by Love alone,
Endearing looks, and chaste desire,
Fan and support the mutual fire,
Whose flame, perpetual, as refined,
Is fed by an immortal mind.
"Nor yet the nuptial sanction ends:
Like Nile it opens and descends;
Which, by apparent windings led,
We trace to its celestial head.
The fire, first springing from above,
Becomes the source of life and love,
And gives his filial heir to flow,
In fondness down on sons below:
Thus rolled in one continued tide,
To time's extremest verge they glide,
While kindred streams, on either hand,
Branch forth in blessings over the land.
"Thee, wretch! no ^isping babe shall name,
No late-returning brother claim,
No kinsman on thy road rejoice,
No sister greet thy entering voice,
With partial eyes no parents see,
And bless their years, restored in thee.
"In age rejected, or declined,
An alien, even among thy kind,
The partner of thy scorned embrace,
Shall play the wanton in thy face,
Each spark unplume thy little pride,
All friendship fly thy faithless side;
Thy name shall, like thy carcass, rot,
In sickness spurned, in death forgot.
"All giving power! great source of life!
O hear the parent! hear the wife!
That life, thou lendest from above,
Though lit^^e, make it large in love.
O bid my feeling heart expand*
To every claim, on every hand,
To those, from whom my days I drew,
To these, in whom those days renew,
To all my kin, however wide,
In cordial warmth, as blood allied,
To friends with steely fetters twined,
And to the cruel, not unkind.
But chief, the lord of my desire,
My life, my self, my soul, my sire,
Friends, children, all that wish can claim,
Chaste passion clasp, and rapture name;
O spare him, spare him, gracious power!
O give him to my latest hour!
Let me my length of life employ,
To give my sole enjoyment joy!
His love, let mutual love excite,
Turn all my cares to his delight,
And every needless blessing spare,
Wherein my darling wants a share.
"When he with graceful action wooes,
And sweetly bills, and fondly cooes,
Ah! deck me to his eyes alone,
With charms attractive as his own.
And in my circling wings caressed,
Give all the lover to my breast.
Then in our chaste, connubial bed,
My bosom pillow'd for his head,
His eyes, with bliss^^^ slumbers close,
And watch, with me, my lord's repose,
Your peace around his temples twine,
And love him with a love like mine.
"And for I know his generous flame,
Beyond whatever my sex can claim.
Me too to your protection take,
And spare me for my husband's sake;
Let one unruffled calm delight
The loving and beloved unite,
One pure desire our bosoms warm,
One will direct, one wish inform;
Through life, one mutual aid sustain,
In death, one peaceful grave contain."
While, swelling with the darling theme,
Her accents poured an endless stream,
The well-known wings a sound impart,
That reached her ear, and touched her heart.
Quick dropped the music of her tongue,
And forth with eager joy she sprung.
As swift her entering consort flew,
And plumed and kindled at the view;
Their wings, their souls embracing meet,
Their hearts with answ'ring measure beat:
Half lost in sacred sweets, and blessed
With raptures felt, but never expressed.
Straight to her humble roof she led
The partner of her spotless bed;
Her young, a fluttering pair, arise,
Their welcome sparkling in their eyes:
Transported, to their sire they bound,
And hang with speechless action round*
In pleasure wrapped, the parents stand,
And see their little wings expand;
The sire his life-sustaining prize
To each expecting bill applies,
There fondly pours the wheaten spoil,
With transport given, though won with toil:
While, all collected at the sight
And silent through supreme delight,
The fair high heaven of bliss beguiles,
And on her lord and infants smiles.
The sparrow, whose attention hung
Upon the dove's enchanting tongue,
Of all his little slights disarmed,
And from himself, by virtue, charmed,
When now he saw, what only seemed,
A fact, so late a fable deemed,
His soul to envy he resigned,
His hours of folly to the wind,
In secret wished a turtle too,
And sighing to himself, withdrew.
FABLE XV. The Female Seducers.
IT IS said of widow, maid, and wife,
That honor is a woman's life;
Unhappy sex! who only claim
A being in the breath of fame,
Which tainted, not the quickening gales,
That sweep Sabaea's spicy vales,
Nor all the healing sweets restore,
That breathe along Arabia's shore.
The trav'ler, if he chance to stray,
May turn uncensur'd to his way:
Polluted streams again are pure;
And deepest wounds admit a cure;
But woman no redemption knows,
The wounds of honor never close.
Though distant every hand to guide,
Nor skilled on life's tempestuous tide,
If once her feeble bark recede,
Or deviate from the course decreed,
In vain she seeks the friendly shore,
Her swifter folly flies before;
The circling ports against her close,
And shut the wanderer from repose,
'Till by conflicting waves oppressed,
Her found'ring pinnace sinks to rest.
Are there no offerings to atone
For but a single error? -- None.
Though woman is avowed of old,
No daughter of celestial mould,
Her temp'ring not without allay,
And formed but of the finer clay,
We challenge from the mortal dame,
The strength angelic natures claim;
Nay more, for sacred stories tell,
That even immortal angels fell.
Whatever fills the teeming sphere
Of humid earth, and ambient air,
With varying elements endu'd,
Was formed to fall, and rise renewed.
The stars no fixed duration know;
Wide oceans ebb, again to flow;
The moon reple^es her waining face,
All-beauteous, from her late disgrace,
And suns, that mourn approaching night,
Refulgent rise, with newborn light.
In vain may Death and Time subdue,
While nature mints her race anew,
And holds some vital spark apart,
Like virtue, hid in every heart;
It Is hence, reviving warmth is seen,
To clothe a naked world in green.
No longer barred by winter's cold,
Again the gates of life unfold:
Again each insect tries his wing,
And lifts fresh pinions on the spring*
Again from every latent root
The bladed stem and tendril shoot,
Exhaling incense to the skies,
Again to perish, and to rise.
And must weak woman then disown
The change to which a world is prone?
In one meridian brightness shine
And never like evening suns decline?
Resolved and firm alone? Is this
What we demand of woman! -- Yes.
But should the spark of vestal fire,
In some unguarded hour expire,
Or should the nightly thief invade
Hesperia's chaste and sacred shade,
Of all the blooming spoils possessed,
The dragon Honor charmed to rest,
Shall Virtue's flame no more return?
No more with virgin splendour burn?
No more the ravaged garden blow
With Spring's succeeding blossom? -- No.
Pity may mourn but not restore;
And woman falls -- to rise no more.
Within this sublunary sphere,
A country lies -- no matter where;
The clime may readily be found,
By all, who tread poetic ground.
A stream, called life, across it glides,
And equally the land divides;
And here of Vice, the province lies,
And there the hills of Virtue rise.
Upon a mountain's airy stand,
Whose summit looked to either land,
An ancient pair their dwelling chose,
As well for prospect, as repose;
For mutual faith they long were famed,
And Temperance, and Religion, named.
A numerous progeny divine,
Confessed the honors of their line;
But in a little daughter fair,
Was centered more than half their care
For heaven, to gratulate her birth,
Gave signs of future joy to earth:
White was the robe this infant wore,
And Chastity the name she bore.
And now the maid in stature grew,
(A flower just opening to the view)
Often through her native lawns she strayed,
And wrestling with the lambkins played,
Her looks diffusive sweets bequeathed;
The breeze grew purer as she breathed;
The morn her radiant blush assumed;
The spring with earlier fragrance bloomed;
And nature, yearly, took delight,
Like her, to dress the world in white.
But when her rising form was seen,
To reach the crisis of fifteen;
Her parents up the mountain's head,
With anxious step their darling led;
By turns they snatched her to their breast,
And thus the fears of age expressed.
"O joyful cause of many a care!
O daughter, too divinely fair!
You world, on this important day,
Demands thee to a dangerous way;
A painful journey, all must go,
Whose doubted period none can know,
Whose due direction who can find,
Where Reason's mute, and sense is blind?
Ah, what unequal leaders these,
Through such a wide perplexing maze!
Then mark the warnings of the wise,
And learn, what love and years advise.
"Far to the right thy prospect bend,
Where yonder towering hills ascend;
Lo, there the arduous path's in view,
Which Virtue and her sons pursue;
With toil over lessening earth they rise,
And gain, and gain upon the skies.
Narrow's the way her children tread,
No walk for pleasure smoothly spread,
But rough, and difficult, and steep,
Painful to climb, and hard to keep,
"Fruits immature those lands dispense,
A food indelicate to sense,
Of taste unpleasant, yet from those
Pure Health, with cheerful Vigor flows,
And Strength, unfeeling of decay,
Throughout the long laborious way.
"Hence as they sc^^e that heavenly road,
Each limb is lightened of its load;
From earth refining still they go,
And leave the mortal weight below;
Then spreads the strait, the doubtful clears,
And smooth the rugged path appears:
For custom turns fatigue to ease,
And taught by Virtue, pain can please.
At length, the toilsome journey over,
And near the bright, celestial shore,
A gulf, black, fearful, and profound,
Appears, of either world the bound,
Through darkness, leading up to light;
Sense backward shrinks, and shuns the sight;
For there the transitory train,
Of Time, and Form, and Care, and Pain,
And Matter's gross, incumb'ring mass,
Man's late associates, cannot pass,
But sinking, quit the immortal charge,
And leave the wondering soul at large;
Lightly she wings her obvious way,
And mingles with eternal day.
"Thither, O thither wing thy speed,
Though pleasure charm, or pain impede;
To such the all-bounteous power has given,
For present earth, a future heaven;
For trivial loss, unmeasured gain,
And endless bliss, for transient pain.
Then fear, ah! fear to turn thy sight,
Where yonder flowery fields invite;
Wide on the left the pathway bends,
And with pernicious ease descends;
There, sweet to sense, and fair to show,
New-planted Edens seem to blow,
Trees, that delicious poison bear;
For death is vegetable there.
"Hence is the frame of health unbrac'd,
Each sinew slack'ning at the taste;
The soul to Passion yields her throne,
And sees with organs not her own;
While, like the slumb'rer in the night,
Pleased with the shadowy dream of light,
Before her alienated eyes,
The scenes of fairy-land arise;
The puppet-world's amusing show,
Dipped in the gaily-colour'd bow,
Sceptres, and wreaths, and glittering things,
The toys of infants, and of kings,
That tempt along the baneful plain,
The idly wise, and lightly vain,
'Till verging on the gulphy shore,
Sudden they sink, and rise no more.
"But list to what thy fates declare,
Though thou art woman, frail as fair,
If once thy sliding foot should stray,
Once quit yon heav'n-appointed way,
For thee, lost maid, for thee alone,
Nor prayers shall plead, nor tears atone;
Reproach, scorn, infamy, and hate,
On thy returning steps shall wait.
Thy form be loathed by every eye,
And every foot thy presence fly."
Thus armed with words of potent sound,
Like guardian-angels placed around,
A charm, by truth divinely cast,
Forward our young advent'rer passed*
Forth from her sacred eyelids sent,
Like morn, fore-running radiance went,
While Honor, handmaid late assigned,
Upheld her lucid train behind.
"Awe-struck, the much admiring crowd
Before the virgin vision bowed,
Gazed with an ever new delight,
And caught fresh virtue at the sight;
For not of earth's unequal frame
They deemed the heav'n-compounded dame,
If matter, sure the most refined,
High-wrought and tempered into mind,
Some darling daughter of the day,
And body'd by her native ray.
Wherever she passes, thousands bend,
And thousands, where she moves, attend*
Her ways observant eyes confess,
Her steps pursuing praises bless;
While to the elevated maid
Oblations, as to heaven, are paid.
'Twas on an ever-blithsome day,
The jovial birth of rosy May,
When genial warmth, no more suppressed,
New melts the frost in every breast,
The cheek with secret flushing dies,
And looks kind things from chastest eyes;
The sun with healthier visage glows,
Aside his clouded kerchief throws,
And dances up the etherial plain,
Where late he used to climb with pain,
While nature, as from bonds set free,
Springs out, and gives a loose to glee.
And now for momentary rest,
The nymph her traveled step repressed,
Just turned to view the stage attained;
And gloried in the height she gained.
Out-stretch'd before her wide survey,
The realms of sweet perdition lay,
And pity touched her soul with woe,
To see a world so lost below;
When straight the breeze began to breathe
Airs, gently wafted from beneath,
That bore commissioned witchcraft thence,
And reached her sympathy of sense;
No sounds of discord, that disclose
A people sunk, and lost in woes.
But as of present good possessed;
The very triumph of the blessed,
Mhe maid in wrapt-attention hung,
While thus approaching sirens sung.
"Hither, fairest, hither haste,
Brightest beauty, come and taste
What the powers of bliss unfold,
Joys, too mighty to be told;
Taste what ecstasies they give,
Dying raptures taste, and live.
"In thy lap, disdaining measure,
Nature empties all her treasure,
Soft desires, that sweetly languish,
Fierce delights, that rise to anguish;
Fairest, do thou yet delay?
Brightest beauty, come away.
"List not, when the froward chide,
Sons of pedantry, and pride,
Snarlers, to whose feeble sense,
April sunshine is offense;
Age and Envy will advise
Even against the joys they prize.
"Come, in Pleasure's balmy bowl,
Slake the thirstings of thy soul,
'Till thy raptured powers are fainting
With enjoyment, past the painting;
Fairest, do thou yet delay?
Brightest beauty, come away."
So sung the sirens, as of yore,
Upon the false Ausonian shore;
And, O! for that preventing chain,
That bound Ulysses on the main,
That so our fair one might withstand
The covert ruin now at hand.
The song her charmed attention drew,
When now the tempters stood in view;
Curiosity with prying eyes,
And hands of busy, bold emprize;
Like Hermes, feathered were her feet,
And, like fore-running Fancy, fleet,
By search untaught, by toil untir'd,
To novelty she still aspired,
Tasteless of every good possessed,
And but in expectation blessed.
With her, associate, Pleasure came,
Gay Pleasure, frolic-loving dame,
Her mien, all swimming in delight,
Her beauties, half revealed to sight;
Loose flowed her garments from the ground,
And caught the kissing winds a round.
As erst Medusa's looks were known
To turn beholders into stone,
A dire reversion here they felt,
And in the eye of Pleasure melt.
Here glance, with sweet persuasion charmed,
^^ner^'d the strong, the steeled disarmed;
No safety, ev^n the flying ^^^d,
Who, venurous, look but once behind.
Thus was the much-admiring maid,
While distant, more than half betrayed.
With smiles, and adulation bland,
They joined her side, and seized her hand;
Their touch envenomed sweets instilled,
Her frame with new pulsations thrilled,
While half consenting, half denying,
Reluctant now, and now complying.
Amidst a war of hopes, and fears,
Of trembling wishes, smiling tears,
Still down, and down, the winning pair
Compelled the struggling, yielding fair.
As when some stately vessel; bound
To blessed Arabia's distant ground,
Borne from her courses, happily lights
Where Barca's flowery clime invites,
Concealed around whose treacherous land,
Lurks the dire rock, and dangerous sand;
The pilot warns with sail and oar,
To shun the much-suspected shore,
In vain; the tide, too subtly strong,
Still bears the wrestling bark along,
Till, found'ring, she resigns to fate,
And sinks, overwhelmed, with all her freight.
So, baffling every bar to sin,
And heaven's own pilot, placed within,
Along the devious smooth descent,
With powers increasing as they went,
The dames, accustomed to subdue,
As with a rapid current, drew,
And over the fatal bounds conveyed
The lost, the long-reluctant maid.
Here stop, ye fair ones, and beware,
Nor send your fond affections there;
Yet, yet your darling, now deplored,
May turn, to you and heaven restored;
Till then, with weeping Honor wait,
The servant of her better fate,
With Honor, left upon the shore,
Her friend and handmaid now no more;
Nor, with the guilty world, upbraid
The fortunes of a wretch, betrayed;
But over her failing cast aveil,
Rememb'ring, you yourselves are frail.
And now from all-enquiring light,
Fast fled the conscious shades of night,
The damsel, from a short repose,
Confounded at her pligh,t arose.
As when, with slumb'rous weight oppressed
Some wealthy miser sinks to rest,
Where felons eye the glittering prey,
And steal his hoard of joys away;
He, borne where golden Indus streams,
Of pearl and quarry'd diamond dreams,
Like Midas, turns the glebe to ore,
And stands all wrapped amidst his store;
But wakens, naked, and despoiled
Of that, for which his years had toiled.
So fared the nymph, her treasure flown,
And turned, like Niobe, to stone,
Within, without, obscure, and void,
She felt all ravaged, all destroyed.
And, O thou cursed, insidious coast!
Are these the blessings thou can boast?
These, Virtue! these the joys they find,
Who leave thy heav'n-topt hills behind?
Shade me, ye pines! ye caverns, hide!
Ye mountains, cover me! she cried.
Her trumpet Slander raised on high!
And told the tidings to the sky:
Contempt discharged a living dart,
A side-long viper to her heart:
Reproach breathed poisons over her face,
And soiled, and blasted every grace;
Officious Shame, her handmaid new,
Still turned the mirror to her view;
While those in crimes the deepest died,
Approached to whiten at her side,
And every lewd, insulting dame
Upon her folly rose to fame.
What should she do? Attempt once more
To gain the late-deserted shore?
So trusting, back the mourner flew,
As fast the train of fiends pursue.
Again, the farther shore's attained;
Again the land of virtue gained;
But Echo gathers in the wind;
And shows her instant foes behind.
Amazed, with headlong speed she tends,
Where late she left an host of friends;
Alas! those shrinking friends decline,
Nor longer own that form divine,
With fear they mark the following cry,
And from the lonely trembler fly,
Or backward drive her on the coast,
Where peace was wrecked, and honor lost.
From earth, thus hoping aid in vain,
To heaven not daring to complain,
No truce, by hostile clamor given,
And from the face of friendship driven,
The nymph sunk prostrate on the ground,
With all her weight of woes around.
Enthroned within a circling sky,
Upon a mount over mountains high,
All radiant sat, as in a shrine,
Virtue, first effluence divine;
Far, far above the scenes of woe,
That shut this cloud-wrapt world below;
Superior goddess, essence bright,
Beauty of uncreated light,
Whom should Mortality survey,
As doomed upon a certain day,
The breath of Frailty must expire,
The world dissolve in living fire,
The gems of heaven, and solar flame*
Be quenched by her eternal beam;
And nature, quick'ng in her eye,
To rise a newborn phoenix, die.
Hence, unreveal^d to mortal view,
A veil around her form she threw,
Which three sad sisters of the shade,
Pain, Care, and Melancholy made.
Through this her all-enquiring eye,
Attentive from her station high,
Beheld, abandoned to despair,
The ruins of her favorite fair;
And with a voice, whose awful sound,
Appal'd the guilty world around,
Bid the tumultuous winds be still,
To numbers bowed each listening hill,
Uncurl'd the surging of the main,
And smoothed the thorny bed of pain,
The golden harp of heaven she strung,
And thus the tuneful goddess sung.
"Lovely penitent, arise,
Come and claim thy kindred skies,
Come, thy sister angels say,
Thou have wept thy stains away.
"Let experience now decide,
'Twixt the good, and evil tried,
In the smooth, enchanted ground,
Say, unfold the treasures found.
"Structures, raised by morning dreams,
Sands, that trip the flitting streams,
Down, that anchors on the air,
Clouds, that paint their changes there,
"Seas, that smoothly dimpling lie,
While the storm impends on high,
Showing in an obvious glass,
Joys, that in possession pass.
"Transient, sickle, light, and gay,
Flattering, only to betray;
What, alas, can life contain!
Life! like all its circles -- vain.
"Will the stork, intending rest,
On the billow build her nest?
Will the be demand his store
From the bleak and bladeless shore?
"Man, alone, intent to stray,
Ever turns from Wisdom's way,
Lays up wealth in foreign land,
Sows the sea, and ploughs the sand.
"Soon this elemental mass,
Soon the encumbring world shall pass,
Form be wrapped in wasting fire,
Time be spent, and life expire.
"Then, ye boasted works of men,
Where is your asylum then?
Sons of Pleasure, sons of Care,
Tell me, mortals, tell me where?
"Gone, like traces on the deep,
Like a scepter, grasped in sleep,
Dews, exhaled from morning glades,
Melting snows, and gliding shades.
"Pass the world, and what is behind?
Virtue's gold, by fire refined;
From an universe depraved,
From the wreck of nature saved.
"Like the life-supporting grain,
Fruit of patien^e, and of pain,
On the swain's autumnal day,
Winnow'd from the chaff away.
"Little trembler, fear no more,
Thou have plenteous crops in store --
Seed, by genial sorrows sown,
More than all thy scorners own.
"What though hostile earth despise,
Heaven beholds with gentler eyes;
Heaven thy friendless steps shall guide,
Cheer thy hours, and guard thy side.
"When the fatal trump shall sound,
When the immortals pour around,
Heaven shall thy return attest,
Hailed by myriads of the blessed.
"Little native of the skies,
Lovely penitent, arise,
Calm thy bosom, clear thy brow,
Virtue is thy sister now
"More delightful are my woes,
Than the rapture, Pleasure knows,
Richer far the weeds I bring,
Than the robes that grace a king.
"On my wars of shortest date,
Crowns of endless triumph wait,
On my cares, a period blessed,
On my toils, eternal rest.
"Come, with Virtue at thy side,
Come, be every bar defied,
Till we gain our native shore*
Sister, come, and turn no more."
FABLE XVI. Love and Vanity.
THE breezy morning breathed perfume,
The wak'ning flow^rs unveil^d their bloom,
Up with the sun, from short repose,
Gay Health, and lusty Labor rose;
The milk-maid carol'd at her pail,
And shepherds whistled over the dale;
When Love, who led a rural life,
Remote from bustle, state, and strife,
Forth from his thatch-roof'd cottage strayed,
And strol'd along the dewy glade.
A nymph, who lightly tripp'd it by,
To quick attention turned his eye;
He marked the gesture of the fair,
Her self-sufficient grace and air,
Her steps, that, mincing, meant to please,
Her studied negligence and ease;
And, curious to enquire what meant
This thing of prettiness and paint,
Approaching, spoke, and bowed observant,
The lady, slightly, "S^r, your servant,"
"Such beauty in so rude a place!
Fair one, you do the country grace;
At court, no doubt, the public care;
But Love has small acquaintance there."
"Yes, Sir," replied the fluttering dame,
"This form confesses whence it came;
But dear variety, you know,
Can make us pride and pomp forego.
My name is Vanity. I sway
The utmost islands of the sea.
Within my court all honor centers;
I raise the meanest soul that enters,
Endow with latent gifts and graces,
And model fools for posts and places.
"As Vanity appoints at pleasure,
The world receives its weight, and measure:
Hence all the grand concerns of life,
Joy, cares, plagues, passions, peace, and strife.
"Reflect how far my power prevails,
When I step in, where nature fails,
And every breach of sense repairing,
Am bounteous still, where heaven is sparing.
"But chief in all their arts, and airs,
Their playing, painting, pouts and prayers.
Their various habits, and complexions,
Fits, frolics, foibles, and perfections,
Their robing, curling, and adorning,
From noon to night, from night to morning,
From six to sixty, sick or sound,
I rule the female world around."
"Hold there a moment," Cupid cried,
"Nor boast dominion quite so wide,
Was there no province to invade,
But that by love and meekness swayed?
All other empire I resign,
But be the sphere of beauty mine.
"For in the downy lawn of rest,
That opens on a woman's breast,
Attended by my peaceful train,
I choose to live, and choose to reign.
"Far-sighted Faith I bring along,
And Truth above an army strong, --
And Chastity, of icy mold,
Within the burning tropics cold, --
And Lowliness, to whose mild brow,
The power and pride of nations bow --
And Modesty, with downcast eye,
That lends the morn her virgin dye --
And Innocence, arrayed in light,
And Honor, as a tow^r upright;
With sweetly winning graces, more
Than poets ever dreamt of yore,
In unaffected conduct free,
All smiling sisters, three times three --
And rosy Peace, the cherub blessed,
That nightly sings us all to rest.
"Hence, from the bud of nature's prime;
From the first step of infant time,
Woman, the world's appointed light,
Has skirted every shade with white;
Has stood for imitation high,
To every heart and every eye;
From ancient deeds of fair renown,
Has brought her bright memorials down,
To Time affixed perpetual youth,
And formed each tale of love and truth.
"Upon a new Promethean plan,
She molds the essence of a man --
Tempers his mass, his genius fires,
And, as a better soul, inspires.
"The rude she softens, warms the cold,
Exalts the meek, and checks the bold,
Calls Sloth from his supine repose,
Within the coward's bosom glows,
Of pride unplumes the lofty crest,
Bids bashful merit stand confessed,
And, like coarse metal from the mines,
Collects, irradiates, and refines.
The gentle science, she imparts,
All manners smooths, informs all hearts;
From her sweet influence are felt,
Passions that please, and thoughts that melt;
To stormy rage she bids control,
And sinks serenely on the soul,
Softens Deucalion's flinty race,
And tunes the warring world to peace.
"Thus armed to all that is light and vain,
And freed from thy fantastic chain,
She ^s the sphere, by heaven assigned,
An^ rul^d by me, o'er-rules mankind."
He spoke. The nymph impatient stood,
And laughing, thus her speech renewed.
"And pray, sir, may I be so bold,
To hope your pretty tale is told,
And next demand, without a cavil,
What new Utopia do you travel
Upon my word these high-flown fancies
Show depth of learning -- in romances.
Why, what unfashion^d stuff you tell us,
Of buckram dames, and tiptoe fellows!
Go, child! and when yo^e grown maturer,
You^ll shoot your next opinion surer.
"O such pretty knack at painting!
And all for softening and for sain^^ng!
Guess now, who can, a single feature,
Through the whole piece of fem^le nature!
Then mark, my looser hand may fit
The lines too coarse for Love to hit.
"'It Is said, that woman, prone to cha^ging,
Through all the rounds of folly ranging
On life's uncertain ocean riding,
No reason, rule, nor rudder guiding,
Is like the comet's wand^ring light,
Excentric, ominous, and bright.
Trackless, and shifting as the wind,
A sea, whose fathom none can find,
A moon, still changing, and revolving,
A riddle, past all human solving,
A bliss, a plague, a heaven, a hell,
A -- something, that no man can tell.
"Now learn a secret from a friend,
But keep your couneil, and attend.
"Though in their tempers thought so distant.
Nor with their sex, nor selves consistent,
It Is but the difference of a name,
And every woman is the same.
For as the world, however varied,
And, through unnumber'd changes carried,
Of elemental modes and forms,
Clouds, meteors, colors, calms, and storms,
Though in a thousand suits arrayed,
Is of one subject matter made,
So, sir, a woman's constitution,
The world's enigma, finds solution.
And let her form be what you will,
I am the subject essence still.
"With the first spark of female sense,
The speck of being, I commence,
Within the womb make fresh advances,
And dictate future qualms and fancies;
Thence in the growing form expand,
With childhood travel hand in hand,
And give a taste to all their joys,
In gewgaws, rattles, pomp, and noise.
And now, familiar, and unawed,
I send the fluttering soul abroad;
Praised for her shape her air, her mein,
The little goddess, and the queen,
Takes at her infant shri^e oblation,
And drinks sweet draughts of adulation.
"Now, blooming, tall, erect, and fair,
To dress, becomes her darling care;
The realms of beauty then I bound,
I swell the hoop's enchanted round,
Shrink in the waist^s descending size,
Heav^d in the snowy bosom, rise,
High on the floating lappet sail,
Or, curled in tresses* kiss the gale.
Then to her glass, I lead the fair,
And show the lovely idol there,
Where, struck as by divine emotion,
She bows with most sincere devotion,
And numb'ring every beauty over,
In secret bids the world adore.
"Then all for parking, and parading,
Coque^ing, dancing masquerading
For balls, plays, (...) and ^rouds what passion!
And churches, so^etimes -- if the fashion;
For woman's sense of right and wrong,
Is ruled by the almighty throng,
Still turns to each meander tame,
And swims the straw of every stream.
Her soul intrinsic worth rejects,
Accomplish^d only in defects,
Such excellence is her ambition,
Folly, her wisest acquisition,
And even from pity and disdain,
She Will c^ll some reason to be vain.
"Thus, sir, from every form and feature,
The wealth and wants of female nature,
And even from Vice, which you would admire,
I gath^r fuel to my fire,
And on the very base of Shame,
Erect my monument of fame.
"Let me another truth attempt,
Of which your godship has not dreamt.
"Those shining virtues, which you muster,
Whence, think you, they derive their luster?
From native honor, and devotion?
O yes, a mighty likely notion!
Trust me, from titled dames to spinners,
It Is I make saints, whoever makes sinners;
It Is I instruct them to withdraw,
And hold presumptuous man in awe;
For female worth, as I inspire,
In just degrees, still mounts the higher,
And Virtue, so extremely nice,
Demands long toil, and mighty price.
Like Sampson's pillars, fixed elate,
I bear the sex's tottering state,
Sap these, and in a moment's space,
Down sinks the fabric to its base.
Alike from titles, and from toys,
I spring, the sount of female joys,
In every widow, wife, and miss,
The sole artificer of bliss.
For them each tropic I explore;
I cleave the sand of every shore;
To them uniting India's sail,
Sabaea breathes her farthest gale;
For them the bullion I refine,
Dig sense, and virtue from the mine,
And from the bowels of invention,
Spin out the various arts you mention.
"Nor bliss alone my powers bestow;
They hold the sovereign balm of woe.
Beyond the stoic's boasted art,
I soothe the heavings of the heart;
To pain give splendour and relief,
And gild the pallid face of Grief.
"Alike the palace and the plain
Admit the glories of my reign;
Through every age, in every nation,
Taste, talents, tempers, state, and station,
Whatever a woman says, I say;
Whatever a woman spends, I pay;
Alike I fill, and empty bags,
Flutter in finery, and rags,
With light coquets through folly range,
And with the prude disdain to change.
"And now you would think, 'twixt you and I,
That things were ripe for a reply --
But soft, and while I Am in the mood,
Kindly permit me to conclude,
Their utmost mazes to unravel,
And touch the farthest step they travel.
"When every pleasure's run aground,
And Folly tired through many a round,
The nymph conceiving discontent hence,
May ripen to an hour's repentance,
And vapors shed in pious moisture,
Dismiss her to a church, or cloister;
Then on I lead her, with devotion,
Conspicuous in her dress and motion,
Inspire the heav'nly-breathing air,
Roll up the lucid eye in prayer,
Soften the voice, and in the face,
Look melting harmony and grace.
"Thus far extends my friendly power,
Nor quits her in her latest hour;
The couch of decent pain I spread,
In form recline her languid head,
Her thoughts I methodize in death,
And part not with her parting breath;
Then do I set, in order bright,
A length of funeral pomp to sight,
The glittering tapers, and attire,
The plumes that whiten over her bier;
And last, presenting to her eye
Angelic fineries on high,
To scenes of painted bliss I waft her,
And form the heaven she hopes hereafter.
"In truth," rejoined Love's gentle god,
"You Have gone a tedious length of road,
And strange, in all the toilsome way,
No house of kind refreshment lay,
No nymph, whose virtues might have tempted,
To hold her from her sex exempted.
"For one, we'll never quarrel, man;
Take her, and keep her if you can;
And pleased I yield to your petition,
Since every fair, by such permission,
Will hold herself the one selected,
And so my system stands protected."
"O deaf to virtue, deaf to glory,
To truths divinely vouched in story!"
The godhead in his zeal returned,
And kindling at her malice burned.
Then sweetly raised his voice, and told
Of heavenly nymphs, revered of old;
Hypsipyle, who saved her sire;
And Portia's love, approved by fire;
Alike Penelope was quoted,
Nor laureled Daphne passed unnoted,
Nor Laodamia's fatal garter,
Nor famed Lucretia, honor's martyr,
Alceste's voluntary steel,
And Cath'rine, smiling on the wheel.
But who can hope to plant conviction,
Where cavil grows on contradiction?
Some she evades or disavows,
Demurs to all, and none allows;
A kind of ancient thing, called fables!
And thus the goddess turned the tables.
Now both in argument grew high,
And choler flashed from either eye;
Nor wonder each refused to yield
The conquest of so fair a field.
When happily arrived in view,
A goddess, whom our grandames knew,
Of aspect grave, and sober gait,
Majestic, awful, and sedate --
As heaven's autumnal eve serene,
Where not a cloud overcast the scene;
Once Prudence called, a matron famed,
And in old Rome, Cornelia named.
Quick at a venture, both agree
To leave their strife to her decree.
And now by each the facts were stated,
In form, and manner as related;
The case was short. They craved opinion,
Which held over females chief dominion;
When thus the goddess, answ'ring mild,
First shook her graci^us head, and smiled.
"Alas! how willing to comply,
Yet how unfit a judge am I!
In times of golden date, it is true,
I shared the fickle sex with you;
But from their presence long precluded,
Or held as one whose form intruded,
Full fifty annual suns can tell,
Prudence has bid the sex farewell."
In this dilemma, what to do
Or who to think of, neither knew;
For both, still biased in opinion,
And arrogant of sole dominion,
Were forced to hold the case compounded,
Or leave the quarrel where they found it.
When in the nick, a rural fair,
Of inexperienc'd gait and air,
Who never had crossed the neighboring lake,
Nor seen the world beyond a wake,
With cambrick coif, and kerchief clean,
Tript lightly by them over the green.
"Now, now!" cried Love's triumphant child,
And at approaching conquest smiled,
"If Vanity will once be guided,
Our difference soon may be decided;
Behold yon wench, a fit occasion,
To try your force of gay persuasion.
Go you, while I retire aloof,
Go, put those boasted powers to proof;
And if your prevalence of art
Transcends my yet unerring dart,
I give the favorite contest over,
And never will boast my empire more."
At once, so said, and (...) ^onsented;
And well our goddess seemed contented;
Nor pausing made a moment's stand,
But tript and took the girl in hand,
Mean while the godhead, unalarm'd,
As one to each occasion armed,
Forth from his quiver culled a dart,
That erst had wounded many a heart;
Then bending, drew it to the head;
The bowstring twang'd, the arrow fled,
And, to her secret soul address^d,
Transfixed the whiteness of her breast.
But here the dame, whose guardian care
Had to a moment watched the fair,
At once her pocket mirror drew,
And held the wonder f^ll in view;
As quickly, ranged in order bright,
A thousand beauties rush to sight,
A world of charms, till now unknown,
A world, reveal^d to her alone;
Enraptur^d stands the lovesick maid,
Suspended over the darling shade,
Here only fixes ^o admire*
And centers every fond desire.
FINIS.
CONTENTS.
Miss More's Essays.
Introduction, Page 5 Dissipation, Page 10 Thoughts on conversation, Page 18
Envy, Page 28 Danger of sentimental or romantic connexions, Page 33 True and
false meekness, Page 44 Thoughts on the cultivation of the heart and temper in
the education of daughters, Page 50 Importance of religion to the female
character, Page 62 Miscellaneous observations on genius, taste, good sense,
etc. Page 70
Gregory's Legacy.
Introduction, Page 86 Religion, Page 88 Conduct and behavior, Page 93
Amusements, Page 98 Friendship, love and marriage, Page 102
Lady Pennington's unfortunate mother's advice to her daughters, Page 123
Marchioness of Lambert's advice of a mother to her daughter, Page 175 Mrs.
Chapone on the government of the temper Page 211 Dean Swift's letter to a lady
newly married, Page 225 Moore's Fables.
1. The eagle and the assembly of birds, Page, 237 2. The panther, the horse,
and other beasts, Page, 239 3. The nightingale and the glowworm, Page, 242 4.
Hymen and death, Page, 243 5. The poet and his patron, Page, 245 6. The wolf,
the sheep, and the lamb, Page, 247 7. The goose and the swans, Page, 249 8. The
lawyer and Justice, Page, 252 9. The farmer, the spaniel, and the cat, Page,
255 10. The spider and the be, Page, 257 11. The young lion and the ape, Page,
259 12. The colt and the farmer, Page, 261 13. The owl and the nightingale,
Page, 263 14. The sparrow and the dove, Page, 265 15. The female seducers,
Page, 275 16. Love and vanity, Page, 288


