A CONSTITUTION OR FORM OF GOVERNMENT FOR THE STATE OF KENTUCKY.

LEXINGTON: Printed by JOHN BRADFORD. M.DCC.XCII.

A CONSTITUTION OR FORM OF GOVERNMENT FOR THE STATE OF KENTUCKY.
WE THE REPRESENTATIVES of the People of the State of KENTUCKY in Convention
Assembled, do Ordain and establish this Constitution for its Government.

ARTICLE I.
SECTION 1. THE powers of Government shall be divided into three distinct
departments, each of them to be consided to a separate body of Magistracy, to
wit; those which are Legislative to one, those which are Executive to another
and those which are Judiciary to another.

SEC. 2. No person or collection of persons being of one of these departments,
shall exercise any power properly belonging to either of the others, except in
the instances herein after expressly permitted.

SEC. 3. The Legislative power of this Common wealth shall be vested in a
General Assembly, which shall consist of a Senate and house of Representatives.

SEC. 4. The Representatives shall be chosen annually, by the qualified
electors of each county respectively on the first Tuesday in May; but the
several elections may be continued for three days, it in the opinion of the
presiding officer or officers, it shall be necessary and no longer.

SEC. 5. No person shall be a Representative, who shall not have attained the
age of Twenty-four years, and have been a citizen and inhabitant of the State
two years next preceding his election, and the last six months thereof an
inhabitant of the county in which he may be chosen; unless he shall have been
absent on the public business of the United States or of this State.

SEC. 6. Within two years after the first meeting of the General Assembly and
within every subsequent term of four years, an enumeration of the free male
inhabitants above Twenty-one years of age, shall be made in such manner as may
be directed by Law. The number of Representatives shall at the several periods
of making such enumeration be fixed by the Legislature, and apportioned among
the several counties, according to the number of free male inhabitants above
the age of Twenty-one years in each, and shall never be less than Forty nor
greater than One Hundred; But no county hereafter erected, shall be entitled to
a separate representation, until a sufficient number of free male inhabitants
above the age of Twenty-one years shall be contained within it, to entitle them
to one Representative appreciable to the ratio which shall then be established.

SEC. 7. The Senators shall be chosen for Four years.

SEC. 8. Until the first enumeration be made, the Senate shall consist of
Eleven members, and thereafter for every Four members added to the house of
Representatives, One member shall be added to the Senate.

SEC. 9. In choosing the Senate, one mem-at least shall be elected from each
county, until the number of counties is equal to the number of Senators: after
which, when a new county is made, it shall as to the choice of Senators, be
considered as being a part of the county or counties from which it shall have
been taken.

SEC. 10. The Senate shall be chosen in the following manner; All persons
qualisied to vote for Representatives, shall on the first Tuesday in May in the
present year, and on the same day in every fourth year for ever thereafter, at
the place appointed by Law for choosing Representatives, elect by ballot, by a
majority of votes as many persons as they (...) to have for Representatives for
their respective counties, to be electors of the cenate.

SEC. 11. No person shall be chosen an elector, who shall not have resided in
the State Three years next before his election, and who shall not have attained
the age of Twenty-seven years.

SEC. 12. The electors of the Senate, shall meet at such place as shall be
appointed for convening the Legislature; on the Third Tuesday in May in the
present year, and on the same day in every fourth year for ever thereafter; and
they or a majority of them so met, shall proceed to elect by ballot as
Senators, men of the most wisdom, experience and virtue, above Twenty-seven
years of age, who shall have been residents of the State above two whole years
next preceding the election. If on the ballot two or more persons shall have
an equal number of ballots in their favor, by which the choice shall not be
determined by the first ballot, then the electors shall again ballot before
they separate, in which they shall be consined to the persons, who on the first
ballot shall have had an equal number, and they who shall have the greatest
number in their favor on the second ballot, shall be accordingly declared and
returned duly elected; and if on the second ballot an equal number shall still
be in favor of two or more persons, then the election shall be determined by
lot, between those who have equal numbers; which proceedings of the electors
sh^^ be certified under their hands, and returned to the Secretary for the time
being; to whom shall also be made by the proper officers, returns of the
persons chosen as electors in the respective counties.

SEC. 13. The electors of Senators, shall judge of the qualifications and
elections of members of their own body; and on a contested election, shall
admit to a seat as an elector, such qualified person as shall appear to them to
have the greatest number of legal votes in his favor.

SEC. 14. The electors, immediately on their meeting and before they proceed to
the election of Senators, shall take an oath or make affirmation of fidelity to
this State, and also an oath or affirmation to elect without favor, affection,
partiality or prejudice, such person for Governor and such persons for
Senators, as they in their judgment and conscience, believe best qualified for
the respective offices.

SEC. 15. That in case of resusal, death, resignation, disqualification or
removal out of this State of any Senator, the Senate shall immediately
thereupon or at their next meeting thereafter, elect by ballot, in the same
manner as the electors are herein directed to choose Senators, another person in
his place, for the residue of the said term of Four years.

SEC. 16. The General Assembly shall meet on the first Monday in November in
every year, ^'til the time of their meeting shall be altered by the
Legislature, unless sooner convened by the Governor.

SEC. 17. Each house shall choose (...) Speaker and other officers, and the
Senate shall also choose a Speaker pro tempore, when their Speaker shall
exercise the office of Governor.

SEC. 18. Each house snail judge of the qualifications of its members;
contested elections shall be determined by a committee to be selected, formed
and regulated, in such manner as shall be directed by Law. A majority of each
house shall constitute a quorum to do business, but a smaller number may
adjourn from day to day, and may be authorized by Law to compel the attendance
of absent Members, in such manner and under such penalties as may be provided.

SEC. 19. Each house may determine the rules of its proceedings, punish its
members for disorderly behavior, and with the concurrence of two thirds, expel
a member; but not a second time for the same cause.

SEC. 20. Each house shall keep a Journal of its proceedings and publish them
weekly, except such parts of them as may require seeresy, and the Yeas and Nays
of the Members on any question, shall, at the desire of any two of them, be
entered on the Journals.

SEC. 21. The doors of each house and of committees of the whole, shall be open
unless when the business, shall be such as ought to be kept secret.

SEC. 22. Neither house shall, without the consent of the other, adjourn for
more than Three days; nor to any other place than that in which the two houses
shall be sitting.

SEC. 23. The Members of the General Assembly, and the electors of the Senate,
shall receive from the public Treasury, a compensation for their services,
which for the present shall be Six shillings a day during their attendance on,
going to and returning from the Legislature, and the place for choosing the
Senators; but the same may be increased or diminished by Law, if circumstances
shall require it, but no alteration shall be made, to take effect during the
existence of the Legislature which shall make such alteration: They shall in
all cases except Treason, Felony, breach or surety of the peace, be privileged
from arrest, during their attendance at the Session of the respective houses,
and at the place for choosing Senators, and in going to and returning from the
same; And for any speech or debate in either house, they shall not be
questioned in any other place.

SEC. 24. No Senator or Representative shall, during the time for which he
shall have been elected, or for one year afterward, be appointed to any civil
office under this State, which shall have been created or the emoluments of
which shall have been increased, during the time such Senator or Representative
was in office: Provided that no member of the first Legislature which shall be
assembled under this constitution, shall be precluded from being appointed to
any office which may have been created, during his time of service in the said
Legislature; And no Minister of religious scanties, member of Congress or other
person holding any office of profit under the United States or this Commons
ealth, except Attorneys at Law, Justices of the Peace, M^^^a officers and
Coroners, shall be a member of either house, during his continuance to act as a
Minister, in Congress or in office.

SEC. 25. When vacancies happen in the house of Representatives, the Speaker
shall issue writs of election to fill such vacancies.

SEC. 26. All bills for raising Revenue, shall originate in the house of
Representatives, but the Senate may propose amendments as in other bills.

SEC. 27. Each Senator, Representative and Sheriff, shall, before he be
permitted to act as such, take an oath or make affirmation, that he has not
directly or indirectly, given or promised any bribe or treat to procure his
election to the said office; and every person shall be disqualified from
serving as a Senator, Representative or sheriff, for the term for which he
shall have been elected, who shall be convicted of having given or offered any
bribe or treat, or canvassed for the said office.

SEC. 28. Every bill which shall have passed both houses, shall be presented to
the Governor, if he approve he shall sign it, but if he shall not approve, he
shall return it with his objecions, to the house in which it shall have
originated, who shall enter the objections at large upon their Journals and
proceed to reconsider it; if after such reconsideration, two thirds of that
house shall agree to pass the bill, it shall be sent with the objections to the
other house, by which it shall likewise be reconsidered, and if approved by two
thirds of that house, it shall be a Law: but in such cases, the votes of both
houses shall be determined by Yeas and Nays, and the names of the persons
voting for or against the bill, shall be entered on the Journals of each house
respectively; if any bill shall not be returned by the Governor within ten days
(Sundays excepted) after it shall have been presented to him, it shall be a Law
in like manner as if he had signed it; unless the General Assembly by their
adjournment prevent its return, in which case it shall be a Law, unless sent
back within three days after their next meeting.

SEC. 29. Every Order, Resolution or vote, to which the concurrence of both
houses may be necessary, except on a question of adjournment, shall be
presented to the Governor, and before it shall take effect, be approved by him;
or, being disapproved, shall be re-passed by two thirds of both houses,
according to the rules and limitations preset bed in case of a bill.

ARTICLE II.
SECTION 1. THE Supreme Executive power of this Commonwealth shall be vested in
a Governor.

SEC. 2. The Governor shall be chosen by the electors of the Senate, at the
same time, at the same place, and in the same manner that they are herein
directed to elect Senators, and the said electors shall make return of their
proceedings in the choice of a Governor, to the Secretary for the time being.

SEC. 3. The Governor shall hold his office during Four years from the first
day of June next ensuing his election.

SEC. 4. He shall be at least Thirty years of age, and have been a citizen and
inhabitant of this State at least two years next before his election, unless he
shall have been absent on the public business of the United States or of this
State.

SEC. 5. No member of Congress or person holding any office under the United
States, or this State, shall exercise the office of Governor.

SEC. 6. The Governor shall at stated times, receive for his services, a
compensation, which shall neither be increa^ed nor diminished during the period
for which he shall have been elected.

SEC. 7. He shall be Commander in chief of the Army and Navy of this
Commonwealth, and of the Militia except when they shall be called into the
service of the United States.

SEC. 8. He shall nominate, and by and with the advice and consent of the
Senate, appoint all officers, whose offices are established by this
Constitution, or shall be established by Law: and whose appointments are not
herein otherwise provided for; but no person shall be appointed to an office
within any county, who shall not have been a citizen and inhabitant therein one
year next before his appointment, if the county shall have been so long
erected; but if it shall not have been so long erected, then within the limits
of the county or counties out of which it shall have been taken.

SEC. 9. The Governor shall have power to fill up all vacancies, that may
happen during the recess of the Senate, by granting commissions which shall
expire at the end of their next session.

SEC. 10. He shall have power to rem^t fines and forfeitures, and grant
reprieves and pardons, except in cases of impeachment^ in cases of Treason, he
shall have power to grant reprieves until the end of the next (...) of the
General A^ssembly, in whom the power of pardoning shall be vested.

SEC. 11. He may require information in writing from the officers in the
Executive department upon any subject relating to the duties of their
respective offices.

SEC. 12. He shall from time to time give to the General Assembly information
of the state of the Commonwealth, and recommend to their consideration, such
measures as he shall judge expedient.

SEC. 13. He may on extraordinary occasions convene the General Assembly, and
in case of disagreement between the two houses, with respect to the time of
adjournment, adjourn them to such time as he shall think proper not exceeding
four months.

SEC. 14. He shall take care that the Laws be faithfully executed.

SEC. 15. In case of the death or resignation of the Governor, or of his
removal from office, the Speaker of the Senate shall exercise the office of
Governor, until another shall be duly qualified.

SEC. 16. An Attorney General shall be appointed and commissioned during good
behavior; He shall appear for the Commonwealth in all Criminal prosecutions,
and in all Civil cases, in which the Commonwealth shall be interested, in any
of the Superior courts; shall give his opinion when called upon for that
purpose, by either branch of the Legislature or by the Executive, and shall
perform such other duties as shall be enjoined him by Law.

SEC. 17. A Secretary shall be appointed and commissioned during the Governor's
continuance in office, if he shall so long behave himself well, he shall keep a
fair register of, and attest all the official acts and proceedings of the
Governor, and shall when required, lay the same and all papers, minutes and
vouchers relative thereto, before either branch of the Legislature, and shall
perform such other duties as shall be enjoined him by Law.

ARTICLE III.
SECTION 1. IN elections by the citizens, all free male citizens of the age of
21 years, having resided in the State two years, or the county in which they
offer to vote one year next before the election, shall enjoy the rights of an
Elector, but no person shall be entitled to vote except in the county in which
he shall actually reside at the time of the election.

SECT. 2d. All elections shall be by Ballot.

SECT. 3. Electors shall in all cases except Treason, Felony and breach or
surety of the peace, be privileged from arrest during their attendance at
elections, and in going to and returning from them.

ARTICLE IV.
SECTION 1. THE house of Representatives shall have the sole power of
impeaching.

SEC. 2. All impeachments shall be tried by the Senate; when setting for that
purpose, the Senators shall be upon oath or affirmation: No person shall be
convicted without the concurrence of two thirds of the members present.

SEC. 3. The Governor and all other civil officers shall be liable to
impeachment for any misdemeanor in office; but judgment in such cases shall not
extend further than to removal fron office and disqualification to hold any
office of honor, trust or profit under this Commonwealth; but the party
convicted shall nevertheless be liable and subject to indictment, trial and
punishment according to law.

ARTICLE V.
SECTION 1. THE Judicial power of this Commonwealth both as to matters of law
and equity, shall be vested in one Supreme Court, which shall be styled the
Court of Appeals, and in such inferior courts a^ the Legislature may from time
to time ordain and establish.

SEC. 2. The Judges both of the Supreme and inferior courts shall hold their
offices during good behavior; but for any reasonable cause which shall not be
sufficient ground of impeachment, the Governor may remove any of them on the
address of two thirds of each branch of the Legislature. They shall at stated
times receive for their services an adequate compensation to be fixed by law,
which shall not be diminished during their (...) in office.

SEC. 3. The supreme court shall have of (...) and (...) in all cases (...) the
titles to land under the present land (...) of Virginia, including those which
may ^^depending in the present Supreme Court for the District of Kentucky, at
the time of establishing the said Supreme Court; and in a^l cases concerning
contracts for land, (...) to the establishing of those titles. And the (...)
court shall have power to hear and determine the same in a summary way, and to
direct the mode of bringing the same to a hearing, so as to enable them to do
right and justice to the parties, with as little delay and at as small an
expense as the nature of the business will allow; but the said court shall, in
all such cases oblige the parties to state the mare^ial parts of their
complaint and defense in writing; and shall on the conclusion of every cause,
state on the records, the whole merits of the case, the questions arising
therefrom, the opinions of the Court thereupon, and a summary of the reasons in
support of those opinions.

SEC. 4. And it shall be the duty of each judge of the Supreme court, present
at the hearing of any such cause, and differing from a majority of the court,
to deliver his opinion in writing, to be entered as aforesaid; and each judge
shall deliver his opinion in open court. And the said court shall have power on
the determination of any such case, to award the legal costs against either
party or to divide the same among the different parties, as to them shall seem
just and right. And the said Court shall have full power to (...) such steps as
they may judge pr^per, to (...) testimony in all cases concerning such titles.
Provided that a jury shall always be ^^p^^neled for the finding of such facts
(...) not agreed by the parties; unless the (...) or their attorn^es, shall
wave their (...) of trial by Jury, and refer the matter (...) to the (...) of
the court. Provided also, that the legisla^ure may whenever they may judge it
expedient, pass an act or acts to regulate the mode of proceedings in such
case, or to take away entirely the original jurisdiction hereby given to the
said Court in such cases.

SEC. 5. In all other cases the supreme Court shall have appellate jurisdiction
only, with such exceptions and under such regulations as the legislature shall
make; and the legislature may from time to time vest in the (...) and inferior
courts, or either of them (...) powers both in law and equity, as they shall
judge proper and necessary, for the (...) administration or justice.

SEC. 6. A competent number of Justices of the peace shall be appointed in each
county, they shall be commissioned during good behavior, but may be removed on
conviction of misbehaviour in office, or of any infamous (...), or on the
address of both houses of the Legislature.

SEC. 7. The Judges shall by virtue of the^^ office be conserveators of the
peace throughout the State. The style of all process shall be, "The
Commonwealth of KENTUCKY," all prosecutions shall be carried on in the name and
by the authority of the Commonwealth of Kentucky, and conclude against the
peace and dignity of the same.

ARTICLE VI.
SECTION 1. SHERIFFS, and Coroners, shall at the times and places of elections
of representatives, be chosen by the citizens of each county, qualified to
(...) for representatives. They shall hold their offices for three years, if
they shall so long behave themselves well, and until a successor be d^^y
qualified; but no pers^n shall be twice chosen or appointed Sheriff in any term
of six years. Vacancies in either of the said offices, shall be filled by a new
appointment to be made by the Governor, to continue until the next general
election, and until a successor shall be chosen and qualified as aforesaid.

SEC. 2. The free men of this Commonwealth shall be armed and disciplined for
^s defense. Those who conscienciously scruple to bear arms, shall not be
compelled to do ^o; but shall pay an equivalent for personal service.

SEC. 3. The field and staff officers of the (...) shall be appointed by the
Governor, except the Battallion staff officers who shall be appointed by the
field officers of each Battallion respectively.

SEC. 4. The officers of companies shall be chosen by the persons enrolled in
the list of each company, and the whole shall be commissioned during good
behavior, and during their residence in the bounds of the Battallion or
company to which they shall be appointed.

SEC. 5. Each Court shall appoint its own clerk who shall hold his office
during good behavior; but no person shall be appointed clerk only pro tempore,
who shall not produce to the court appointing him, a certificate from a
majority of the judges of the court of Appeals, that he has been examined by
their clerk in their presence, and under their direction, and that they judge
him to be well qualified to execute the office of clerk to any court of the
same dignity with that for which he offers himself. They shall be removable for
breach of good behavior, by the court of Appeals only, who shall be judges of
the fact as well as of the law. Two thirds of the members present must concur
in the sentence.

SEC. 6. All commissions shall be in the name and by the authority of the State
of Kentucky, and be sealed with the state seal, and signed by the Governor.

SEC. 7. The state treasurer shall be appointed annually by the joint ballot of
both houses.

ARTICLE VII.
SECTION 1. MEMBERS of the General Assembly, and all officers Executive and
Judicial, before they enter upon the execution of their respective offices,
shall take the following oath or affirmation. "I do solemnly swear (or affirm
as the case may be) that I will be faithful and true to the Commonwealth of
Kentucky, so long as I continue a citzen thereof, and that I will faithfully
execute to the best of my abilities the office of (...) according to Law".

ARTICLE VIII.
SECTION 1. TREASON against the Commonwealth, shall consist only in levying war
against it, or in adhering to its enemies, giving them aid and comfort. No
person shall be convicted of treason, unless on the testimony of two witnesses
to the same overt act, or on his own confession in open court.

SEC. 2. Laws shall be made to exclude from office and from suffrage, those who
shall thereafter be convicted of bribery, perjury, forgery or other high crimes
or misdemeanors. The privilege of free suffrage, shall be supported by laws
regulating elections, and prohibiting under adequate penalties, all undue
influence thereon from power, bribery, tumult or other improper practices.

SEC. 3. No money shall be drawn from the Treasury, but in consequence of
appropriations made by Law, nor shall any appropriations of money for the
support of an Army, be made for a longer term than one year, and a regular
statement and account of the receipts and expenditures of all public money,
shall be published Annually.

SEC. 4. The Legislature shall direct by law, in what manner and in what
Courts, suits may be brought against the Commonwealth.

SEC. 5. The manner of administering an oath or affirmation, shall be such as
is most consistent with the conscience of the deponent, and shall be esteemed
by the Legislature the most solemn appeal to God.

SEC. 6. All Laws now in force in the State of Virginia, not inconsistent with
this Constitution, which are of a general nature, and not local to the Eastern
part of that State, shall be in force in this State, until they shall be
altered or repealed by the Legislature.

SEC. 7. The compact with the State of Virginis, subject to such alterations as
may be made therein, agreeably to the mode prescribed by the said compact,
shall be considered as a part of this Constitution.

ARTICLE IX.
SECTION 1. THE Legislature, shall have no power to pass Laws for the
emancipation of Slaves without the consent of their owners, or without paying
their owners, previous to such emancipation, a full equivalent in money, for
the Slaves so emancipated. They shall have no power to prevent emigrants to
this State, from bringing with them such persons as are deemed Slaves by the
laws of any one of the United States, so long as any person of the same age or
description, shall be continued in Slavery by the laws of this State. That they
shall pass laws to permit the owners of Slaves to emancipate them, saving the
rights of creditors, and preventing them from becoming a charge to the county
in which they reside. They shall have full power to prevent Slaves being
brought into this State as merchandise. They shall have full power to prevent
any Slaves being brought into this State from a foreign country, and to prevent
those from being brought into this State, who have been since the first day of
January one thousand, seven hundred and eighty-nine: or may hereafter be
imported into any of the United States from a foreign country. And they shall
have full power to pass such laws as may be necessary, to oblige the owners of
Slaves to treat them with humanity, to provide for them necessary clothing and
provision, to abstain from all injuries to them extending to life or limb, and
in case of their neglect, or refusal to comply with the directions of such
laws, to have such Slave or slaves sold for the benefit of their owner or
owners.

ARTICLE X.
SECTION 1. THE place for the seat of Government shall be fixed in the
following manner. The House of Representatives, shall, during their Session,
which shall be held in the year One Thousand, Seven Hundred and Ninety two,
choose by ballot, Twenty one persons, from whom the representation from Mercer
and Faverte counties then present, shall alternately strike out one, until the
number shall be reduced to five, who, or any three of them concurring in
opinion, shall have power to six on the place for the s^^t of Government. to
receive grants (...) and to make (...), of the land so pit^hed of by the (...),
as to (...) shall seem right, and shall be agreed to by the said proprietor or
proprietors; and lay off a town thereon, in such manner as they shall judge
most proper.

SEC. 2. The General Assembly and the Sapreme Courts shall within five years,
hold their sessions at the place so pitched upon by the said commissioners; and
the seat of Government so fixed, shall continue until it shall be changed by
two thirds of both branches of the Legislature. The commissioners, before they
proceed to act, shall take an oath or make affirmation that they will discharge
the trust repoted in them, in such manner, as in their judgment will be most
beneficial to the State at large.

ARTICLE XI.
SECTION 1. THAT the citizens of this State, may have an opportunity to amend
or change this Constitution in a peaceable manner, if, to them it shall seem
expedient; the persons qualified to ^^te for Representatives, shall, at the
general election to be held in the year One Thousand Seven Hundred and
Ninety-Seven, vote also, by ballot, for or against a Convention, as they shall
severally choose to do; and if thereupon it shall appear that a majority of all
the citizens in the State voting for Representatives, have voted for a
Convention, the General Assembly shall direct that a similar ballot shall be
taken the next year; and if thereupon, it shall also appear that a majority of
all the citizens of the State, voting for representatives have voted for a
Convention, the General Assembly shall at their next Session, call a Convention
to consist of as many members as there shall be in the House of
Representatives, to be chosen in the same manner, at the same places and at the
same time that representatives are, by the citizens entitled to vote for
representatives, and to meet within three months after the said election, for
the purpose of re-adopting, amending or changing this Constitution. If it shall
appear upon the ballot of either year, that a majority of the citizens voting
for representatives, is not in favor of a Convention being called, it shall not
be done until two thirds of both branches of the Legislature shall deem it
expedient.

ARTICLE XII.
That the general great and effential principles of liberty and free government
may be recognize^ and established; WE DECLARE,

SECTION 1. THAT all men, when they form a social compact, are equal and that
no man or set of men, are entitled to exclusive separate public emoluments or
privileges from the community, but in consideration of public services.

SEC. 2. That all power is inherent in the people and all free governments are
founded on their authority and instituted for their peace, safety and
happiness. For the advancement of these ends, they have at all times an
unalienable and indefeasible right to alter, reform or abolish their
government, in such manner as they may think proper.

SEC. 3. That all men have a natural and indefeasible right to worship
Almighyty GOD, according to the dictates of their own consciences; that no man
can of right be compelled to attend, erect or support any place of worship, or
to maintain any ministry against his consent; that no human authority can in
any case whatever, control or interfere with the rights of conscience; and that
no preference shall ever be given by law, to any religious societies or modes
of worship.

SEC. 4. That the civil rights, privileges or capacities of any citizen shall
in no wise be diminished or enlarged on account of his religion.

SEC. 5. That all elections shall be free and equal.

SEC. 6. That trial by jury shall be as heretofore, and the right thereof
remain inviolate.

SEC. 7. That Printing presses shall be free to every person who undertakes to
examine the proceedings of the legislature or any branch of Government; and no
law shall ever be made to restrain the right thereof. The free communication of
thoughts and opinions is one of the invaluable rights of man, and every citizen
may freely speak, write and print on any subject, being responsible for the
abuse of that liberty.

SEC. 8. In prosecutions for the publication of papers, invest gating the
official conduct of officers or men in a public capacity, or where the matter
published is proper for public information, the truth thereof may be given in
evidence. And in all indictments for libels, the jury shall have a right to
determine the Law and the facts, under the direction of the Court as in other
cases.

SEC. 9. That the people shall be secure in their persons, houses, papers and
possessions, from unreasonable seizures and searches; and that no warrant to
searh any place or to seize any person or things, shall issue without
describing them as nearly as may be, nor without probable cause supported by
oath or affirmation.

SEC. 10. That in all criminal prosecutions, the accused has a right to be
heard by himself and his counsel: to demand the nature and cause of the
accusation against him, to meet the witnesses face to face, to have compulsory
process for obtaining witnesses in his favor: and in prosecutions by
indictment or information, a speedy public trial by an impartial Jury of the
vicinage; that he cannot be compelled to give evidence against himself, nor can
he be deprived of his life, liberty or property, unless by the judgment of his
peers, or the law of the land.

SEC. 11. That no person shall for any indictable oftence be proceeded against
criminally by intormation; except in cases arising in the land or naval forces,
or in the militia when in actual service, in time of war or public danger, or
by leave of the Court for oppression or misdemeanor in office.

SEC. 12. No person shall, for the same of s^^ce be (...) put in Jeopardy of
his life or (...), nor shall any man's property be taken or applied to public
use without the consent of his repre!entatives, and without just compensation
being previously made to him.

SEC. 13. That all Courts shall be open, and every person for an injury done
him in his lands, goods, person or reputation, shall have remedy by the due
course of Law; and right and justice administered, without sale, denial or
delay.

SEC. 14. That no power of suspending Laws shall be exercised, unless by the
Legislature or its authority.

SEC. 15. That excessive bail shall not be required, nor excessive fines
imposed, nor crupunishments inflicted.

SEC. 16. That all prisoners shall be bailable by sufficient sureties, unless
for capital offenses, when the proof is evident or presumption great; and the
privilege of the writ of Habeas Corpus, shall not be suspended unless when in
cases of rebellion or invasion, the public safety may require it.

SEC. 17. That the person of a debtor where there is not strong presumption of
fraud, shall not be continued in prison after delivering up his estate for the
benefit of his creditors, in such manner as shall be prescribed by law.

SEC. 18. That no expost facto law, nor any law imp^^^ing contracts shall be
made

SEC. 19. That no person shall be attainted of treason or felony by the
Legislature.

SEC. 20. That no attainder shall work corruption of blood, nor except during
the life of the offender, forfeiture of estate to the Commonwealth.

SEC. 21. That estates of such persons as shall destroy their own lives, shall
descend or vest as in case of natural death, and if any person shall be killed
by casualty, there shall be no forfeiture by reason thereof.

SEC. 22. That the citizens have a right in a peaceable manner, to assemble
together for their common good, and to apply to those invested with the powers
of government for redress of grievances or other proper purposes by petition,
address or remonstrance.

SEC. 23. That the rights of the citizens to bear arms in defense of themselves
and the State shall not be questioned.

SEC. 24. That no standing army shall in time of peace, be kept up without the
consent of the legislature, and the military shall in all cases and at all
times be in strict subordination to the civil power.

SEC. 25. That no Soldier shall in time of peace, be quartered in any house,
without the consent of the owner, nor in time of war, but in a manner to be
prescribed by law.

SEC. 26. That the Legislature shall not grant any title of nobility or
hereditary distinction, nor create any office the appointment to which shall be
for a longer term than during good behavior.

SEC. 27. That Emigration from the State shall not be prohibited.

SEC. 28. To guard against transgressions of the high powers which we have
delegated. WE DECLARE, that every thing in this article is exccepted out of the
general powers of government, and shall forever remain in violate; and that all
laws contrary thereto or contrary to this Constitution shall be void.

SCHEDULE.
That no inconvenience may arise from the establishing the Government of this
State, And in order to carry the same into complete operation, It is hereby
declared and ordained,

SECTION 1. THAT all rights, actions, prosecutions, claims and contracts, as
well of individuals as of bodies corporate, shall continue as if the said
government had not been established.

SEC. 2. That all officers civil and military now in commission under the State
of Virginia, shall continue to hold and exercise their offices until the tenth
day of August next and no longer.

SEC. 3. That until the first enumeration shall be made as directed by the
sixth Section of the first article of this Constitution, the Country of
Jefferson, shall be entitled to elect (...) The County of Lin^^ (...) The
County of Fayette nine Representatives; the County of Nelson six
Representatives; the County of Mercer four Representatives; the County of
Madison three Representatives; the County of Bourbon, five Representatives; The
County of Woodford, four Representatives, and the County of Mason, two
Representatives.

SEC. 4. The General Assembly shall meet at Lexington on the fourth day of June
next.

SEC. 5. All returns herein directed to be made to the Secretary, shall,
previous to his appointment, be made to the Clerk of the Supreme Court for the
District of Kentucky.

SEC. 6. Until a Seal shall be procured for the State, the Governor shall be at
liberty to use his private Seal.

SEC. 7. The oaths of office herein directed to be taken, may be administered
by any Justice of the Peace, until the Legislature shall otherwise direct.

SEC. 8. All bonds given by any officer within the district of Kentucky,
payable to the Governor of Virgina may be prosecuted in the name of the
Governor of Kentucky.

SEC. 9. All offenses against the Laws of Virginia, which have been committed
within the present District of Kentucky, or which may be committed within the
same before the first day of June next, shall be cognizable in the courts of
this state in the same manner that they would be, if they were committed within
this State, after the said first day of June.

SEC. 10. At the elections herein directed to be held in May next, the Sheriff
of each county, or in case of his absence, one of his deputies shall preside,
and if they neglect or refuse to act, the said elections shall be held by any
one of the justices of the peace for the county where such refusal or neglect
shall happen; each officer holding such election having first taken an oath
before a Justice of the peace to conduct the said election with impartiality,
shall have power to administer to any person offering to vote at such election,
the following oath or affirmation "I do swear (or affirm) that I am qualified
to vote for representatives in the county of agreeably to the Constitution
formed for the State of Kentucky," and such officer shall have a right to
refuse to receive the vote of any person who shall refuse to take the said oath
or make affirmation when tendered to him. And the said elections shall be held
at the several places appointed for holding Courts in the different counties.

SEC. 11. The Government of the Commonwealth of Kentucky, shall commence on the
first day of June next.

DONE in Convention, at Danville, the Nineteenth day of April, One Thousand
Seven Hundred and Ninety Two, and of the Independence of the United States of
America, the Sixteenth.

BY ORDER of the CONVENTION. SAMUEL M'DOWELL, P. C.

Attest. THOMAS TODD, C. C.


