INTERESTING MEMOIRS.

BY A LADY.

IN TWO VOLUMES.

VOL. I.

THE FOURTH EDITION.

NEW YORK: PRINTED BY T. ALLEN, BOOKSELLER AND STATIONER, NO. 12, QUEEN STREET.

1792.

THE Author's Preface.
TAKING advantage of the prevailing rage for Novels, the vehicles by which the
most fatal poison is often conveyed to the heart, I send these Volumes into the
world, with the humane intention, perhaps presumptuous hope, of counteracting
the effects of such productions, by inspiring my young Readers with juster
sentiments, and a more correct taste, than what is usually acquired by perusing
books of mere amusement.

To beguile the remembrance of real and recent misfortunes, by relating a
story, the incidents of which are partly fictitious, I have been insensibly led
to compile this little Work: But though the story is indebted to fancy, the
reflections with which it is interspersed, are those of sentiment, and flow
directly from the heart.

Should the friends in whom mine is most tenderly interested, reap either
pleasure or improvement from this Work -- should I, by means of it, inspire one
virtuous aim, or cherish one pious sentiment in the minds of youth, I shall
submit contentedly to the award of an impartial Public with respect to its
literary merit, of which I am not qualified to judge; but which, in my
estimation, is comparatively of little importance.

EDINBURGH, September 16, 1785.
INTERESTING MEMOIRS.
THE spirit of true valor which animated the heroes in the age of Louis XIV,
was not confined to France. The contagious manners of a voluptuous monarch, and
a licentious court, had not yet diffused themselves through the people of
England; and their ancient spirit seemed to revive, at the very moment when the
rival powers of Europe required that England should take a decided part in
their quarrels, in order to preserve that balance on which their mutual safety
depends.

Adversity is often the parent of virtue. The domestic troubles in which that
kingdom had lately been involved, not only gave a check to the progress of vice
and luxury, but led men to think justly, which is the first step toward acting
nobly.

Amongst those who, disgusted with the pursuit of pleasure, or indulgence of
sloth, wished to distinguish themselves in the field of glory and fame, were
the young Earl of Granville, and his friend Mr. Seymour. -- The name of a Conde
inspired them with an ardent ambition, not only to share in his glory, but to
emulate his virtues. Accordingly, having no parents to control them, or combat
what some would deem a romantic enthusiasm, they embarked for France; reached
the army which was then encamped at Siennes, and introduced themselves to the
Prince, as two young soldiers of fortune, who wished to fight under his banner,
whilst opposing their common enemies.

It is needless to say that our young heroes suffered no opportunity to escape
of signalizing themselves; and so successful were they in their various
enterprises, that at the peace of (...) Lord Granville was possessed of a
Captain's and Mr. Seymour of a Colonel's commission. The former returned to
England, but the latter entered into the service of the Dutch.

Tired at length with the fatigues of war, Colonel Seymour determined to
abandon them for a life of domestic quiet. He returned to his native country,
which acquaintance with others had only served to endear. With part of his
paternal fortune he purchased a retired and beautiful farm. He married an
amiable woman, reflected on the various blessings he possessed, and resolved to
be happy.

Habit, however, is often more powerful than principle. Accustomed to an active
life, the powers of his mind languished for want of employment. His haughty and
imperious temper, which he had been at no pains to subdue, having now no
objects for its exercise, degenerated into peevishness, caprice, and discontent.

His gentle partner bore her share of this unequal yoke with patient
submission. Perhaps, had she exerted a little more spirit, the demands made on
her forbearance would neither have been so numerous, nor so frequent; but her
soul was of that sensitive nature, which shrinks from the approach of strife or
unkindness; and she resolved quietly to bear, what she had neither strength to
oppose, nor skill to remedy.

Colonel Seymour was determined in the choice of his residence, from its
vicinity to the Castle of Hastings; the seat of his ancient friend Lord
Granville, who was in truth one of the most respectable characters of that age.
He had early imbibed those just notions of honor, that fortitude, magnanimity,
and love of true glory, and all those exalted virtues which were displayed in
the conduct of a Villeroy, a Conde, and a Turenne. But, along with these, he
had cherished also the gentler virtues of the heart: The former serve to
recommend us to the esteem of others; but it is from the latter we must derive
our self-enjoyment.

With all these advantages, the character of Lord Granville was strongly marked
by ambition and high notions of birth. Conscious of having deserved the favor
of his sovereign, his claims, perhaps, bore a juster proportion to his deserts
than to the power of his master; whose profusion and love of pleasure deprived
him of the means of rewarding merit, by leading him to bestow his favors
chiefly on those who contributed at once to his enjoyment and his infamy.

Disgusted with the Court, the manners of which incurred both his hatred and
contempt, he retired to the seat of his ancestors, where, following the natural
bias of his exalted mind, he strove to promote the happiness, as he had
formerly done the glory, of his country.

He married his cousin Lady Louisa Howard; who, by the prudence of her mother,
had been sheltered in the quiet of retirement from the general contagion; that
lady choosing rather, by living in the country, to deprive her daughter of the
high polish of a court, than to stain the purity of her mind, by exposing her
to its corrupting manners and example.

A year after their marriage, Lord Granville's happiness received a greater
addition than he thought it could admit of, by the birth of a son; and before
other two expired, his lady presented him likewise with a daughter. But the
last only survived long enough to make her excellent parents experience the
whole bitterness of sorrow; by giving early proofs of talents fitted to adorn a
public station, and virtues to endear a domestic character.

The strictest intimacy had subsisted in early life, between Lady Granville and
Mrs. Seymour, whose education had been carried on together under the inspection
of Lady Howard. And though neither of these young ladies possessed that
sanguine temper and lively imagination, which gave birth to the enthusiasm of
friendship, they felt for each other that settled esteem and complacency which
often forms the most lasting attachments.

Theirs was afterward strengthened and confirmed by constant intercourse
between the two families, and acquired a peculiar tenderness from their mutual
distresses: For it is certain, those amicable connections are ever the most
lasting, which take their rise from mutual dependence and sympathy.

In the kind and gentle bosom of Mrs. Seymour, Lady Granville reposed that
tender sorrow which the loss of her daughter occasioned, and which the fear of
increasing the distress of a husband she fondly loved, made her repress in his
presence.

The sufferings of Mrs. Seymour from the constant bad humor of the Colonel,
were of a very different nature; and though they could not be concealed from
the observation of her friend, yet so sacred did she hold the weakness of a
character, with which she was so nearly connected, that she never mentioned
them, but with a view to palliate what she vainly endeavored to hide, and
never could hope to amend.

The temper of Colonel Seymour, however, seemed sensibly changed, by an event
equally agreeable and unexpected. After having been several years married
without children, Mrs. Seymour was delivered of a fine girl, who awakened in
the bosom of her father sensations the most tender and delightful; and
agreeably employed his mind in forming schemes for her future education and
improvement.

The birth of this child was considered by Lady Granville as the happiest
circumstance that could befall her friend; nor did it seem of much less
consequence to herself. The young Lord Hastings having been sent about this
time on a visit to his grandmother, Lady Granville felt, that the death of her
daughter, and absence of her son, was a trial too great for her weak spirits to
support: Heaven seemed to have sent this child to supply, in some measure, the
void thus left in her heart. She visited Springwood every day, and never failed
to caress the sweet innocent with all a mother's fondness. Mrs. Seymour, well
knowing the attachment Lady Granville had to the name of Louisa, which her
lamented child had borne, requested her to become godmother to the little
stranger, and to allow it to be christened by that name.

"I receive with gratitude this instance of your delicate attention," replied
Lady Granville; "but, indeed my beloved friend, though I accept the name, you
must pardon me for declining the office of godmother. An oath is of two sacred
a nature to be unnecessarily undertaken; the parents are certainly the most
proper sponsors for their children: I have never asked any person to stand for
mine, because I think this not only a useless ceremony, but, with the
generality of the world, a criminal profanation of a most sacred engagement."

For some time the lovely Louisa seemed to restore peace and even cheerfulness
to the bosom of her parents.

Their fondness for her was great, but it was justified by the beauty and
sweetness of their little darling. Her time was divided between them and Lord
and Lady Granville, whose affection for her seemed almost equal to that which
nature inspires.

Her education, during the first years of her life, agreeably occupied those
hours which used to hang heavy on the hands of her fond father; and he
afterward continued to superintend himself her progress in those branches
which required the aid of superior masters. In the midst of these agreeable
occupations, however, the family at Springwood received a shock, which being
alike unfortunate and unforeseen, produced the most fatal consequences.

The Colonel's fortune, consisting of fifteen thousand pounds, he was advised
to secure in the funds; and for that purpose had collected and placed it in the
hands of an eminent broker, who was to have transacted the business the very
day on which he died. His affairs were found in the greatest confusion; and
after every attempt to assert his just claims, the Colonel could only recover
three of the fifteen thousand.

This blow, to a man advanced in years, chagrined in temper, and declining in
health, was indeed a dreadful one. The Colonel was neither possessed of that
philosophy which teaches us to bear patiently what we cannot escape, nor
soothed with that religion which palliates the bitterness of disappointed hope
with the assurance of certain felicity.

To a person about to quit life, one would think the goods of fortune would
seem trivial and insignificant; but the mind grasps at those objects in which
it has long delighted, and feels its fondness for them increase, by the near
prospect of a separation.

The Colonel strove to brave the storm, and support this stroke with the
resolution of a soldier. The hardy oak proudly opposes the whole fury of the
elements, and is scorched by the lightning, or overthrown by the tempest;
whilst the humble willow, by gently yielding to its force, preserves secure its
unenvied station. Such were the different tempers with which the Colonel and
his amiable wise encountered adversity, and such too were the different effects
produced by it. -- Colonel Seymour did not long lament his loss of fortune; a
sudden stroke of the palsy put a period to that life, which was already wearing
toward its close.

Though the distress and constant inquietude which his caprice and illhumour
had inflicted on his gentle partner, were now no more; yet after his death, she
experienced pangs a thousand times more severe than any his harshness had
occasioned. In the grave of a friend we bury all his foibles; there we
sacrifice our little disgusts and resentments: Time, whilst it throws a sacred
veil over his errors, serves also greatly to magnify his virtues. We remember
them without those shades which the imperfection of human nature had mingled
with them, -- we feel our irreparable loss, -- we deplore it, -- and the
tenderness of melancholy, uniting with the admiration of virtue, gives birth
(...) a sentiment too exquisite to be defined; and which, by constantly
accompanying the idea of our departed friend, renders our mournful recollection
of past pleasures often more delightful than the enjoyment of such as are
present.

At leisure to reflect on the various situations and infirm health of Colonel
Seymour, his afflicted wife found a thousand reasons to excuse, and even
justify his capricious temper. A thousand proofs of his tenderness rushed on
her mind; and she accused herself continually of having been impatient under
the one and ungrateful for the other. Unhappy effect of an excess of the most
amiable virtues, humility and ingenuity!

The friendship of Lady Granville sustained at this trying juncture the
feebleness of her mind, and aided the efforts of her reason, to dispel the
cloud with which grief had enveloped it. Her heart found its chief consolation
in the innocent endearments and watchful attentions of her charming daughter,
who was now become the only source of her comfort, the only object of her care.

The singular beauty of her person, whilst it flattered the vanity of a mother,
awakened in her bosom a variety of apprehensions. She never regretted the loss
of fortune on her own account; but when she considered the dangers and
mortifications to which it would subject her child, accustomed to associate
with people in a superior rank, and educated with the prospect of an
independent fortune, her heart died within her; nor was this the chief source
of her inquietude. She early discovered in Louisa, that refined and ingenuous
sensibility, which would at once expose her to the most exquisite sufferings,
and incapacitate her for supporting them.

The various anxities that preyed on her mind, enfeebled her body, and impaired
her health with terror and anguish. Louisa saw her daily declining. Afraid to
awaken those apprehensions in the bosom of her mother, which she could no
longer banish from her own, she communicated her fears to her sympathising
friend Lady Granville; who, on pretense of a call in passing, brought an
eminent physician to visit Mrs. Seymour. He made no scruple to pronounce her in
danger of a decline, and advised immediate change of climate as the only
possible means of prolonging her life.

It was a necessary, but painful office, to communicate this information to
Mrs. Seymour. Lady Granville did so in the most cautious manner. -- Think not,
my watchful friend, replied she, that I am either ignorant of my malady, or
shocked with my danger. Death has for some time been familiar to my thoughts,
and, as far as was allowable, the object of my wishes. That I have hitherto
been silent on this subject, proceeded entirely from aversion to give you pain,
and to afflict my beloved child, whose heart, alas! is but too sensible to
every distress of her mother's.

If we must part, to you I confide my treasure; on you I rely for supplying her
loss, and even teaching her to forget it, by your generous, constant
friendship.

Lady Granville was deeply affected by this conversation, and after the most
solemn assurances of fidelity to the trust reposed in her, urged Mrs. Seymour,
in the strongest terms, to consent to going abroad without delay. She opposed
her arguments with a variety of pleas; at last, looking tenderly at her friend,
and pausing for a moment, Why, why, my dearest Lady Granville, should you be
thus anxious to preserve a life, which is evidently hastening to a period; and
which I cannot even prolong, but at an expense which my little fortune can ill
support. You know the whole amount of Colonel Seymour's effects does not exceed
three thousand pounds; a sum by no means adequate to the expensive education of
Louisa, and which, if I cannot increase by my economy, I will at least never
diminish in the way of a doubtful experiment. With me, indeed, its effects are
not doubtful, since I am convinced by my feelings, that I never can recover.

Lady Granville ceased to urge her friend; but on her returning home, wrote her
the following letter, enclosing a draught on her banker for a thousand pounds.

To Mrs. Seymour.
I trust my dear Mrs. Seymour is not to learn that the only advantage which
wealth can confer on her friend, is the power of bestowing it on others. I
never knew till now the value of money; much, indeed, shall I feel myself
indebted to Providence, if it can in the smallest degree contribute to your
health or enjoyment.

I will not injure your friendship, by supposing that you will refuse this
small testimony of mine; but should you feel the slightest hesitation about
accepting it, think for a moment what you would suffer, if you saw me in
distress which you could alleviate, but which a false and cruel delicacy on my
part opposed, and rendered impracticable. Make this appeal to your own
ingenuous heart, and I will trust my cause to its decision.

I ever am, with confirmed esteem, and tender affection,

Yours, LOUISA GRANVILLE.


To Lady Granville.
Did I stand in need of proofs of the most generous and constant attachment,
the letter before me would supply incontestible evidence of yours.

With a mind weakened by disease, I dare hardly trust to the appeal you
require. Something within this bosom, whether pride or delicacy I know not,
revolts at the idea of receiving a gift of this nature, which it is utterly
impossible I can ever repay. But from whatever principle these feelings are
derived, I shall readily sacrifice them to the certainty of giving you
pleasure, and the hope of proving myself worthy of the greatest of all
blessings, your esteem and approbation.

These have long constituted the chief enjoyment of

Your devoted friend, ELIZA SEYMOUR.


To Lady Granville.
My mother has just informed me of the letter you have sent her. O Lady
Granville! O my dear second parent! how can I restrain my gratitude, my
admiration of your goodness, or rather how can I express it? Your noble
generosity quite overpowers my heart. This gift to my mother, so surprising, so
unexpected -- but why do I talk in this manner? Is there any thing great or
good that is not familiar to Lady Granville? Dearest Madam! I can only thank
you with my tears; but do not restrain them; they are accompanied with a
feeling so delightful, that I would rather weep with you than rejoice with all
the world. Could envy find a place in the bosom of her whom you honor with
your friendship, I should certainly envy you your present feelings. But I can
truly say, had I the power, I should know no delight equal to that of obliging
you.

Perhaps it may prove that I am not altogether unworthy of your goodness, when
I declare, that though yours inspires me with equal pleasure and gratitude, you
are the only person in the world from whom I could receive such an obligation,
without feeling sensible pain. May I never forfeit your esteem, or forget your
goodness; and may you, dear Madam, long live to fulfill the benevolent purposes
of your heart; where, I trust, you will ever find a place for

your much obliged, obedient, and grateful LOUISA SEYMOUR.


It being now the month of September, there was no time to lose in making
preparations for the departure of Mrs. Seymour and her daughter. About this
time, Lord and Lady Granville received the most lively satisfaction by the
return of Lord Hastings from an academy where he had spent the last six years.
The master of it, having long officiated as chaplain in the regiment commanded
by Colonel Seymour, had recommended himself to the esteem of all the officers,
by his good sense, liberal sentiments, and unaffected ^^ety; and by his
unassuming manners and strict regard to his duty, was revered even by those who
lived in the constant violation of theirs -- Such is the power of real goodness!

The advantages to be reaped from such an instructor, were too many, not to
over balance, in minds like Lord and Lady Granville's, the natural desire of
having their only son placed near them. And as Dr. Melville complained, that
the frequent avocations occasioned by the holidays, had a bad effect in
dissipating the minds of his young pupils, and giving them habits of
inattention, his fond parents sacrificed their indulgence to his improvement,
and never brought him home but a Christmas.

Nine months had elapsed since his last visit at the castle, and the change
which that time had produced on his person, was remarked with admiration by all
its inhabitants.

He had just reached his twenty-second year; a period, when young men of rank
too often appear in a disagreeable light, either from the rude indifference or
affected petulance of their manners. Equally remote from the clown and the
coxcomb, Lord Hastings appeared with that modesty and reserve which agreed so
well with the dignity of his aspect, and singular elegance of his person, that
it was as impossible to behold him without complacency, as to listen to him
without admiration. His fine intelligent eyes convinced one before he spoke,
that one had every thing noble to expect from the mind that informed them; and
as their expression varied with every varying sentiment, the feeling heart took
an immediate interest in their language.

It is highly flattering to our self-love, to find our first impressions
confirmed. The character of Lord Hastings did more than fulfill the agreeable
presages to which the first sight of his person gave birth.

It was impossible that two young people, so perfectly amiable as Miss Seymour
and Lord Hastings, could behold each other with indifference; but wholly
unaccustomed to the society of women, he felt himself embarrassed in her
presence; and from a sort of secret consciousness, appeared deficient even in
such little attentions as politeness teaches those who do not feel their
propriety; but which his natural sensibility and good taste would certainly
have led him to pay any other woman. The admiration her beauty excited was a
sentiment wholly new and delightful; but his heart was in no danger from any
other, as the opportunities of seeing Miss Seymour seldom occurred; and her
attention was so entirely engrossed by her mother, that she scarcely ever spent
an hour at the castle.

Every thing being adjusted for their departure, Mrs. Seymour and her charming
daughter took a very tender leave of Lord and Lady Granville. Lord Hastings was
present at this interview, and felt himself deeply affected by the behavior of
Louisa; who, on embracing her benefactress, seemed wholly to forget that there
were any witnesses of her emotions, and bursting into tears, with much
difficulty articulated these words: "Oh Lady Granville! what do I not owe you?
-- Perhaps the life of my beloved parent! -- But heaven will reward you, -- I
never, never can."

Lord Hastings presented her his hand; here is trembled exceedingly from the
agitation of her mind. He conveyed her to the chaise, in which her mother
waited for her; he wished Mrs. Seymour every advantage she could possibly
desire from her journey; he would have said something to Louisa, but the sight
of her lovely face, bedewed with tears, deprived him of utterance. He had time
only to bid her adieu, the chaise drove off, and left him in a state of mind
equally new and agitating; the cause of which he did not discover, because,
perhaps, he was at no pains to inquire.

On his entering the parlour, the conversation naturally turned on the
travelers. Both Lord and Lady Granville joined in the highest encomiums on the
character of Mrs. Seymour, and the singular beauty and sweetness of her
daughter; whose filial piety Lady Granville praised, with the enthusiasm of a
friend, and the fondness of a mother.

The speech Louisa had made at parting dwelt on the mind of Lord Hastings; and
no sooner did his father leave the room, than he eagerly demanded an
explanation of it from Lady Granville.

She hesitated a few moments, and then taking out of her pocket the two letters
she had received a fortnight before -- "The occasion of these, my dear Henry,"
said she, "was my sending a draught to my valuable friend, to defray the
expense of a journey, which she would not undertake, for fear of encroaching
too far on her daughter's slender fortune. -- Heaven grant this journey
success!"

Lord Hastings read the letters with the most earnest attention; on ^inishing
that from Louisa, he arose with visible emotion, returned them to his mother,
and grasping her hand, which he pressed to his lips, he looked at her for some
moments with eyes that spoke both love, gratitude, and admiration; then,
heaving a sigh, he exclaimed, -- "Oh may I never, never give pain to a soul so
tender, so generous as yours!" and hastily quitted the room.

He retired to his own apartment, and full of the scenes which had just passed,
took up his pen, and addressed his friend Mr. Beaufort, with whom he had long
been accustomed to share every thought; and who had gone lately to the
university at Cambridge, whither he was soon to follow:

To Mr. Beaufort.
As I never can enjoy any satisfaction in which my dear Beaufort does not
partake, I hasten to tell you, that the tenderness with which I am treated by
the best of parents, makes me almost forget the absence of my friend. Often
have we admired together, the great, the awful virtues of a Cato, a Brutus, and
a Fabius: but with what superior delight do I contemplate those of a mild,
gentle, domestic nature, which are daily displayed at the castle of Hastings!
With what reverence do I behold the generosity, with what gratitude feel the
affection of Lord and Lady Granville; who, forgetting the authority of parents,
condescend to treat me with the confidence and familiarity of friends.

Upon my arrival here, I was introduced by my mother to her most intimate
friend, the widow of Colonel Seymour; and her daughter, a beautiful girl about
seventeen. The former appears to be sensible, modest, and agreeable, but in a
very declining state of health. I would attempt a description of the latter,
but am aware of your raillery. I will confess, however, I never saw so
interesting a countenance, or so much beauty joined with such engaging
simplicity. For the last quality, she is probably indebted to her retired
manner of life, which has been spent here at a sweet romantic farm called
Springwood, purchased by Colonel Seymour, on account of its nearness to the
castle; he and my father having been intimately acquainted when abroad.

These ladies are just set out on a visit to the Continent, as change of
climate is thought essentially necessary for poor Mrs. Seymour.

"With much pleasure should I have accompanied them, but my father wishes me to
spend one year at Cambridge, in the midst of my friends, before setting out on
my travels. Adieu.


To the same.
You rally me, Beaufort, as I foresaw would be the case; you even pronounce me
downrightly in love, and affirm, that my wound is already too deep to bear
being probed: You tell me that consciousness alone could make me fear the
raillery of my friend, and that it would have been more natural at twenty-two
to have launched out in the praise of a young beauty, than to harangue on the
virtues of an old father and mother.

Well; enjoy your fancied penetration: to dispute your opinion, I plainly
perceive, would be to confirm you in error. Yet spite of your malice, I would
attempt a description of this charming girl, were I not conscious that I am
utterly incapable of doing justice, either to her mind or person.

Brought up at a distance from the gay world, she blends the modesty of
innocence with the ease of politeness; she is a stranger to its customs; but
from the readiness of her apprehension, the elegance of her manners, and the
warmth of her heart, appears only to be ignorant of its vices and follies.

The delicacy of her form agrees with that of her mind; I fear she possesses
too great a share of that sensibility, which, though the source of our most
exquisite enjoyments, often too occasions our most lasting inquietudes; by
exposing us to danger from every quarter, and rendering us vulnerable on every
side. To be serious, Beaufort, I should reckon an attachment to Miss Seymour a
very real misfortune. She seems perfectly amiable, and qualified to adorn any
station; but you are no stranger to the high spirit of my father, and cannot
doubt that he would greatly disapprove of his only son entertaining a serious
passion for the daughter of a private gentleman, with scarce any other
patrimony than the liberal education he has bestowed on her.

I am extremely concerned for the situation of poor Talbot; his misfortunes
will not be the less severely felt, for being the consequence of his own folly.

Poor fellow! he has many good qualities; but a certain pliancy of disposition,
joined to an intemperate love of pleasure, is his ruin. Could you wean him from
the worst of all vices, gaming, I should still have hopes of his reformation;
but that I fear is impossible. Take what method you judge most proper of
conveying the enclosed to him; do not mention my name; but, if possible,
prevent its being lavished on villains and sharpers.

I shall be with you on Tuesday; till then adieu.

HASTINGS.


To Lord Hastings, at Cambridge.
I am pleased, my dear Henry, by my promise to you, to be under the necessity
of indulging myself. You may be assured no employment can be half so agreeable
as that by which my son may reap either pleasure or improvement.

It was with peculiar satisfaction I remarked during your last visit, that your
studies had not been confined to what was only elegant and entertaining, but
that you had made science rather than literature the object of your pursuit.

The possessors of the former are ever modest and reserved; those of the latter
are generally proud and loquacious. The sphere of real knowledge is very
narrow, but the immensity of space lies open to hypothesis, the favorite
business of Literature.

The extent of her domain renders her insolent, and the deference paid to her
opinions teaches her to over-rate her powers. The case is quite different with
Science. Not content with the information of others, she explores truth by the
help of her own eyes; but conscious that these are liable to deception, and
take in only a very limited prospect, she is afraid to pronounce dogmatically
on any question. She never impiously attempts to pass the boundaries which have
been assigned her by Heaven, and is ever more ready to assume the character of
the pupil than the preceptor.

Good taste, my dear Henry, is a powerful coadjutor to reason in the conduct of
life. The perception of moral beauty is much akin to that of natural; and a
mind capable of receiving vivid impressions of the latter, will easily feel the
influence of the former. Strive then to cultivate the love of every thing
great, sublime, and beautiful, whether in the natural or moral world; you will
find this a powerful preservative against those dangers to which your youth,
rank, and fortune peculiarly expose you. Unhappily they attack us most
powerfully at that period, when we have neither strength to resist, nor skill
to elude their force; but good taste, uniting with good principles, will enable
you to stand your ground, and even baffle all the arts of seduction. Farewell.
To preserve you virtuous, in order to render you happy, is the constant aim of
your affectionate father.

GRANVILLE.


To the same.
CASTLE HASTINGS.
I send my dear Henry the draught he desires, but have doubled the sum, that he
may be under no temptation to repress one wish of his generous heart.

Polished, or, in other words, luxurious nations, are peculiarly favorable to
the growth of self-love; there, individuals feel so many wants, that their
attention is chiefly engrossed by private concernments. Hence it arises, that
men acquire an extraordinary importance in their own eyes, and center all their
views in the single point of selfish gratification.

But though I hope you will ever ^ind your highest enjoyment in the exercise of
benevolence, yet let me warn you, not to be imposed on by those who are
improper objects of your bounty. In this case, your intended charity not only
deprives the virtuous poor of their claims, but proves an encouragement to vice
and sloth. It is necessity, not choice, that incites the lower classes of
mankind to action; and were the indigent secure of food and clothing from the
opulent, there would be a final cessation of industry; and then what dreadful
disorders would ensue?

The desire of knowledge at your age is both natural and proper; but take care
that your pursuit be properly directed. Metaphysical refinements and
disquisitions, whilst they flatter the pride of man, mislead his judgment, and
corrupt his heart; and whilst they deceive him with promises of superior light,
steal from him insensibly those hopes and fears, which Omniscience has assigned
as the great springs of human conduct; and plunge him at length in darkness and
despair. Religion is the only sure basis of morality. Do not even its enemies
confess this, when they term it a political engine? In truth, human society
cannot subsist without the aid of religion; and the wisest legislators have
acknowledged, that it was safer for the populace to have a fabulous creed, than
none at all.

Make religion then, my dear Henry, a subject of attentive enquiry; but always
remember it is its evidence, not its doctrines, of which you are to constitute
reason the judge. Whatever is derived from a Being of infinite wisdom must be
supposed to contain many things above human comprehension. The path of duty is
plain; be that your chief study.

Your mother had a letter yesterday from Mrs. Seymour, who has borne the
journey to Dover pretty well. She and her amiable daughter present their
compliments to you. Adieu.

GRANVILLE.


To the same.
CASTLE HASTINGS.
I have just been examining with attention, the absurd and monstrous opinions
entertained by the heathen world, of the nature and attributes of the Deity,
and confess myself shocked beyond expression, at human weakness and error.
Where was that reason which philosophers proudly boasted as an infallible guide
in their researches after truth, when they adopted notions so repugnant to her
dictates?

I am persuaded, we who are enlightened by Revelation are very incompetent
judges of the extent of unassisted reason; and often attribute to her natural
force, what is the effect of supernatural illumination. Some trifling critics
have condemned the ancient poets for ascribing the victories of their heroes to
the interposition of their gods. "What merit," say they, "is there in obtaining
a conquest by the assistance of Jove?" Homer has had juster notions of the
importance of divine aid, than many who call themselves Christians. He saw that
it was absolutely necessary to the performance of any great or good action.

The study of history I would particularly recommend to my dear Henry. It
presents a wide field, in which you may collect a variety of materials, highly
useful for the conduct of life. It has likewise the strongest tendency to exalt
our ideas of the Divine government, by displaying to us the supreme Disposer of
all events, educing good from evil, order from confusion, and rendering the
deepest laid plans of treachery and violence, not only subversive of the ends
proposed, but evidently conducive to the contrary.

There too, you will discover the superior excellency of Christianity wherever
it has had its full effect. Its internal evidence, and natural tendency, is
what I would chiefly have you to consider. In truth, my son, however abused by
the weakness or wickedness of mankind, the Christian scheme is indubitably the
only one worthy of its great Author. Adopt its principles, cherish its hopes,
rely on its promises; they will give dignity and consistency to your character.
Frequently contrast that of a man who joins piety to God with benevolence to
men, and maintains his integrity through life, with that of the boasting
infidel so strikingly described in these words: Vois tu ce Libertin en public
intrepide,
Qui preche contre un Dieu que dans sons ame il croit;
It iroit embrasser la verite qu'il voit,
Mais des ses saux amiss il craint la raillerie,
Et ne brave ainsi Dieu que par poltronnerie.


To apologize to you for being serious, would be to affront your judgment, and
injure that esteem and confidence, with which I am your sincere friend, as well
as your affectionate father.

GRANVILLE.


Mrs. Seymour and her daughter reached Dover without any cross accident. While
they waited for the packet, a coach drove into the yard, the liveries of which
Mrs. Seymour instantly recollected to belong to the Honorable Mr. Stanhope,
with whose family she had become acquainted, whilst on a visit at London. He
was possessed of an ample fortune, but had the affliction to see his only son
in so alarming a state of health after a fall from his horse, that, by advice
of his physicians, Mr. and Mrs. Stanhope were resolved to carry him abroad, to
try the effect of a warmer climate.

Few things could have proved more fortunate or agreeable to the two families,
than this rencounter; they immediately joined companies; the anxieties of Mrs.
Stanhope's mind were considerably alleviated by communicating them to her
sensible friend; and the languor inseparable from bad health, awakened in the
compassionate bosom of Louisa a degree of solicitude to amuse young Mr.
Stanhope, which often made him forget that he had any cause of complaint.

They arrived at Paris at a time when travelers would have found objects
sufficient to gratify both taste and curiosity; but, health being the sole end
of their pursuit, they declined accepting the many polite invitations they
received from people of the first fashion, to whom they had brought letters of
recommendation. In consequence of one of these, the Marchioness de St. Croix
waited on Mrs. Seymour, and urged her in such strong, yet polite terms, to
accompany her for a few days to her delightful villa on the borders of the
Forest of St. Germain's, that it was impossible to refuse her request.

The Marchioness was a widow; her family consisted of a son and three
daughters, all of whom were educated in a manner suitable to their birth; but
their fortune being very small, as is customary in France, two of them were
destined to the conventual life.

Adelaide, the youngest, who had been some time a boarder in the Nunnery of St.
Cire, was now on a visit to her mother, before entering on her noviciate there.
She was about two years older than Miss Seymour; alike amiable and engaging,
though not possessed of such regular beauty. When these two ladies met, the
impression they made on each other was too strong ever to be erased.
Philosophers tell us, when kindred souls come within the sphere of each other's
influence, they as naturally attract and are attracted by each other, as
homogeneous bodies.

An air of melancholy, spread over the soft features of Adelaide, sensibly
touched the heart of Louisa, which vibrated to every expression of tenderness.

Strangers to suspicion or disguise, the unhappy fruits of commerce with the
world, their friendship commenced at first sight.

In forming an amicable connection, there is no need of laying down rules, or
specifying the duties incumbent on the several parties. The soul which is
capable of that exalted union, will itself suggest every sentiment, and lead to
every action, which real friendship involves in it.

During her residence at the Villa de St. Croix, Mrs. Seymore was so much
recruited, that she sometimes prevailed with her daughter to accompany the
Marchioness to Paris, in order to sha^e in the public amusements. But how
insipid to her were the most brilliant assemblies, in which her heart took no
interest, compared with those placid hours which she spent with her favorite
Adelaide in the country! Indeed, the hurry and bustle of public life only
serve, with persons of her character, more to endear the quiet of retirement.

She returned to St. Germains, with a double relish for its peaceful shades and
innocent amusements; and looked back with pity on those who pursue pleasure
with such eagerness, that they generally run it down in the chase.

Mrs. Seymour received a letter from Mrs. Stanhope, informing her of her
resolution of spending the remainder of the winter at Montpellier, and
entreating her to accompany her thither. The heart of Louisa was divided on
this occasion; as her mother was sensibly better, she was strongly tempted to
yield to the solicitations of her gentle friend, who urged her to spend some
time with her in the Convent before the awful ceremony of her admission.

As there were some branches of education, particularly music, in which Louisa
required still further instructions, Mrs. Seymour joined her entreaties with
those of Adelaide; and at last persuaded her duteous and affectionate child, to
commit her, for a short time, to the care of Mr. and Mrs. Stanhope, and return
with Adelaide to St. Cire.

By an application to the respectable foundress of this noble institution, Miss
Seymour was admitted there as a boarder; though not being of the noblesse, this
was an infringement of the established rules; but that convent being then in
its infancy, engaged Madame Maintenon to dispense with them on this occasion.

She was greatly struck with the first view of this noble edifice, and the
magnificent park of Versailles, in which it is situated; but her walks were
chiefly confined to the gardens, where alone she could enjoy the society of her
beloved friend.

The melancholy which Louisa had formerly remarked in Adelaide, seemed to
increase every day; and was become so habitual, that she could not help
suspecting it arose from dislike to the manner of life on which she was about
to enter.

She questioned her with much earnestness on the subject; and conjured her, by
their mutual friendship, to lay open her heart to her without reserve; to
receive the consolation of her sympathy, and confide in her inviolable
attachment.

Adelaide appeared so much affected during this discourse, that Louisa began to
repent having introduced it. At length bursting into tears, "O my Louisa! cried
she, why should I longer strive to conceal from you the sorrow that preys upon
my heart! Yes, my friend, I am indeed unhappy, but not from the cause you
imagine.

You have a claim to my utmost confidence; and believe me, the only reason for
withholding it, has been a regard to your ease and honor. I feared lest my
mother should have questioned you on a subject, which would have forced you
either to have sacrificed your own ingenuity, or the peace of your friend.

You have heard my brother mention the name of Grammont, with those encomiums
which are due to his merit. Before joining his regiment, in which he holds only
the rank of a captain, he came to spend some weeks with my brother at St.
Germains. Prepared to admire his talents by the enthusiastic praises of his
friend, I soon learnt also to love his virtues by acquaintance with himself.
Oh, Louisa! what science is so easily acquired as that of admiring merit; what
transition is so natural as from admiring to loving it?

But I will not tire you with a repetition of the various circumstances which
confirmed my opinion of Grammont's uncommon virtues; suffice it to say, that I
revered them in my heart, which could not withhold its most tender affection
from a man, who solicited, with timid modesty, that esteem he had a right to
claim, and implored my forgiveness for presuming to love me; a fault which my
own experience proved to be involuntary, my own feelings taught me to excuse.

For some time we were so intoxicated with the delightful indulgence of our
mutual tenderness, that we forgot the obstacles which opposed our union. I am
convinced, Louisa, the world affords not a happiness equal to that of indulging
a tender reciprocal affection, founded in virtue, approved by reason, endeared
by confidence, and secured by delicacy. There is even a peculiar charm
connected with the secret possession of joys, that are not common. -- Our
youth, want of fortune, and the life to which I was destined, were obstacles in
the eye of reason, which were altogether insurmountable; but, Love bids us
hope, where Reason bids despair: -- and either from a natural activity, or
conscious elevation of mind, we take pleasure in conquering difficulties in the
attainment of our favorite pursuits.

The time for joining his regiment drew near, Already the King's troops had
taken the field, and those of the Marshal invested the fortress of --. What a
separation for two hearts that so greatly loved and feared as ours did! The
evening before his departure, Grammont prevailed on me to meet him in the
garden, at an hour when the rest of the family were engaged with cards and
music, that our parting might be without witnesses. -- Oh Louisa! shall I ever
forget that hour? How often, when sitting in the arbor that borders the canal,
have you chid me for my pensive looks and wandering incoherent expressions! Ah,
my friend! you know not the tender recollections that then overpowered my soul.
Alas! at this moment I am almost tempted to wish I had never known him who
occasioned them.

After a thousand protestations of inviolable affection and fidelity, a
thousand adieus, interrupted by our sighs, and prolonged by our apprehensions,
Grammont, dropping on his knees, and holding both my hands, which he bathed
with his tears, pronounced this solemn farewell: "Almighty God! the protector of
virtue and innocence, protect and bless my Adelaide; and grant that the stroke
of death alone may divide two hearts, which from this moment are eternally
devoted to each other." He arose, clasped me to his bosom, which seemed
bursting with the violence of his emotions, and hastily withdrew.

There was no need for pretending indisposition, in order to account for my
retiring to my apartment; I was indeed violently ill for some hours. In the
morning, however, I arose, about the time I supposed Grammont would set out.
From the window of my dressing room there was a view of the courtyard. He had
once seen me there, on occasion of looking at a beautiful horse which my
brother had purchased, and was desirous to show me. I leaned my aching head
against the shutter, which I kept half closed for fear of observation: I had
not stood long, before the servant appeared with the horses; Grammont followed
slowly, pale and dejected, with his eyes fixed on the ground; when suddenly
recollecting himself, he stopped, and waving his hand for the servant to go on,
he turned toward the window. I ventured to open the shutter; he instantly
perceived me; a blush overspread his pale cheeks, and clasping his hands
together, he raised his fine eyes to heaven; then, turning them on me with a
look -- O, Louisa! that had something I fear of prophetic sadness in it; gave a
deep sigh, flew to the gate, mounted his horse, and disappeared in a moment.

Pardon, my friend, this minute detail of circumstances, the recollection of
which supports my weak spirits, and forms all my enjoyment.

For three months Grammont contrived to write to me almost every post. How
soothing, how delightful is that secret intercourse, to which an attachment
like ours gives birth! The whole creation, animate and inanimate, seems
subservient to the happiness of those whose hearts love has joined, but whose
hands fortune has put asunder.

Averse to entrust our secret with a third person, and resolved never to
require from any of my domestics, for my convenience, a violation of that duty
which they might plead my example for sacrificing to their own, I made Grammont
address his letters under cover to a young lady in the convent; from whence I
received them without incurring suspicion, as I corresponded with several of
the boarders.

Ah, my Louisa! how tender, how sensible, how pathetic is the language they
breathe! But you shall judge for yourself. The two last, which I received about
a month before leaving St. Germains, I have now in my pocket: Judge of the
happiness they afforded me; and oh! tell me, what am I to think of the dreadful
silence by which it has been succeeded?

To Adelaide de St. Croix.
How little, my charming Adelaide, do they know of the tender tie which binds
our very souls in one, who dread absence as injurious to the ardour and
delicacy of real love! Ours has been but short, yet it has proved, that the
right I derive from affection to the undivided heart of the most amiable of
women, is still stronger than I could have believed. It has convinced me more
than ever, that I love you -- O Adelaide! that I love you with a fondness, an
admiration, an unremitting constancy, which no words can express. Surely,
nothing should disturb me, whilst I read assurances of your happiness, and the
most enchanting expressions of your affection; yet, oh, my Adelaide! my heart
is a prey to numberless anxieties. The distance that divides us, my dangerous
situation, our circumstances -- yet let me not cruelly add my inquietudes to
those of my gentle love. Hope is the sweetest as well as the most salutary
ingredient in the cup of life. Let us cherish hope.

Let us trust, that the benificent Author of our being, who has conducted us
to each other, and blended our fates in that delightful union in which our
chief happiness consists, will continue our present felicity, till that period
arrive, when age shall ripen both of us for an unreluctant passage into that
world, where love, secure against all apprehension, is indulged without measure
and without fear.

The time I employ in reading your letters seems the only valuable portions of
my existence. Write to me then, my beloved Adelaide, every little plan you
form, and every incident that occurs in the execution of it. Think nothing that
regards you too trivial for me. It will gratify me in a thousand ways;
particularly by assisting that constant propensity of my imagination to
accompany you in every situation. The heavenly bodies are now the only objects
which we can behold at the same time; they are vehicles of a kind of silent
intercourse between those who sigh at a distance from each other. Look up, and
remember me at the hour of nine, the last we spent together. I will not fail,
at the same hour, to think of my Adelaide, and fervently commend her to the
protection of Heaven.

We have often agreed, that to us there are pleasures even in absence, more
exquisite, more refined than any of those which bear that name in the world.
What then, O Adelaide! will be our felicity when we meet? -- When, every
anxious care and apprehension banished from our hearts, they shall glow with
the constant aim, the delightful consciousness of rendering each other
completely happy?

If these expectations are romantic and extravagant, time alone can correct
them; for reason assures me, that there is no wish my heart can form, which the
merit and tenderness of the most excellent of women is not capable of
fulfilling.

Farewell! Let us support each other with reflecting, that every hour is
lessening the period that divides us, whilst it is adding strength to that
delightful tenderness which shall bind us to each other for ever.

J. GRAMMONT.


To the same.
At length, most beloved of women! your fond lover, your faithful friend tastes
of real transport, by being able to communicate it to you. -- A few moments are
all I can at present command, to express to you an affection which occupies my
whole soul, and shall be as lasting as my life. On occasion yesterday of a
sally from the fort, I obtained permission to head a small party. We were
successful beyond my hopes: The Mareshal applauded my conduct, in terms better
suited to his generosity than my merit; and promised to advance me to the rank
of major on the very first vacancy.

See, my best love! does not fortune already relent, and cease to oppose our
wishes? Or rather, does not Heaven itself smile on an affection, which at once
it inspires and approves? Cherish those hopes which now wholly possess my
delighted bosom; beguile the tedious lingering hours of absence, by constantly
writing to me: Your letters animate me with the love of virtue, as well as of
fame. -- What would the latter avail toward that felicity to which we aspire,
if not deserved by the former?

Adieu, dear sharer of all my joys; soon may they be redoubled by
participation; soon may my eyes and my throbbing heart tell you, how tenderly,
how constantly, you are beloved! Your own will best convince you, how
unspeakably dear you are to

Your ever faithful devoted, --.


"I purposely avoid subscribing this, as it goes by a courier, and I know not
into whose hands it may fall."

While Louisa was perusing this letter, a lay-sister entered hastily, and
acquainted Adelaide, that a young man, in the habit of a domestic, demanded to
see her alone, and was waiting in the parlour.

Louisa put the letter in her pocket, and was about to retire, but Adelaide
entreated her to accompany her to the grate, as she found herself seized with
so universal a tremour, that she could hardly walk, and was afraid of fainting.
Miss Seymour supported her friend into the parlour; on entering which, they
perceived a genteel young man, in a suit of plain clothes, with whose face,
though concealed in part by a handkerchief, Adelaide thought she was not
entirely unacquainted.

On seeing Louisa, he paused, as if averse to communicate his message before
any witness. Adelaide guessed the cause of his silence: This is my friend, sir,
said she, you may acquaint me with your commands without hesitation.

He moved toward the grate; and presenting a letter to Adelaide, with
inimitable grace, "I am sorry, Madam," said he, in a low voice, "to be the
bearer of this: I wish the contents could have been for ever concealed from
you; but that cannot be. May this be the last pang that shall wound your gentle
bosom; and in this asylum, if you cannot hope for happiness, may you at least
attain resignation!"

The young man retired; but the astonishment into which his words and manner
had plunged the two friends, left them neither power to detain, nor resolution
to interrogate him concerning their mysterious meaning. Adelaide unfolded the
letter, from which something dropped on the ground, which her agitation prevented
her from observing. The hand was unknown to her, but the name of Rochelle at
the bottom was not so; she instantly recollected that the young Count who bore
that name, had accompanied Grammont on his first visit to St. Germains, and she
had heard him lavish in his praise.

A thousand confused and terrible images crowded into her mind; and she
trembled so violently, that it was with the utmost difficulty she perused these
lines:

To Adelaide de St. Croix.
Unable to witness the affliction of the beauteous Adelaide, which can only be
equalled by my own, I take this method of conveying to her the last adieu of
the noblest, best of men.

O! may Heaven support you here, and unite you hereafter to him you loved! Of
all the world, ye were alone worthy of each other.

RAYMOND DE ROCHELLE.


The letter dropped from the hand of Adelaide, and she fell without life into the
arms of her friend.

After a few moments she opened her eyes, and fixing them on Louisa, with a
look that pierced her to the soul: "At length," said she, "my fears are
confirmed, my happiness is no more. O God! why was I permitted to enjoy supreme
felicity, that I might feel the whole misery of being deprived of it! But I
will not murmur. I know I am blind and ignorant; thou art ever just and good:"

Afraid of being observed in this distressing situation, Louisa raised her
friend from the ground, in order to convey her to her cell. At that moment she
observed the billet which had dropped out of the letter, and which she
immediately slipped into her pocket. Having given orders that nobody should enter
till called, she put Adelaide to bed; and throwing herself down by her side,
gave free course to those tears which served to relieve her bursting heart.
Adelaide remained a long time without sense or motion. Her eyes were open, but
neither sighs nor tears escaped her. A coldness, like that of death, seized her
trembling limbs, and Louisa became so terrified with her danger, that she had
recourse to the bell for assistance. Having procured some cordials, which
Adelaide swallowed without opposition or remonstrance, she became somewhat
easier; and at last so far recollected herself, as to inquire about the billet,
whose contents she at once dreaded and longed to peruse.

Louisa knew it would be in vain to deny her request, and hoped by granting it,
she might procure her friend the relief of tears. Besides, she was not ignorant
of the danger Adelaide would incur, if nature, thus wholly overpowered and
insensible, should not be awakened, to feel and to deplore its own
wretchedness. What a mournful proof of human imbecility does such a situation
exhibit, when to a total suspension of its powers, the mind is indebted for
their preservation; and when our boasted reason, restored to its seat, instead
of combating our sorrows, only supplies new excuses for indulging them. She
presented her with the billet, which Adelaide requested her to read aloud, but
the task was impracticable. Almost suffocated with the violence of her
emotions, she returned it to Adelaide, who, on perusing its melancholy
contents, caught the infectious tenderness of sorrow from her friend, and
dissolved in a flood of tears.

To Adelaide de St. Croix.
A few moments are granted me by Heaven, to take a long, a last farewell. Oh,
Adelaide! Oh, my adored mistress! -- my fondly expected wife! -- where are now
our dreams of happiness? They are fled for ever; and have left me equally
unable to tear myself from this world, or to prepare for another. Even whilst I
write, my vital current stops; a wound in my side has almost drained its
sources. The hope of soon returning to you, inspired me with a courage too
ardent and impetuous. Forgive me, Adelaide! I have ruined your peace by my
rashness.

Strive to moderate your sorrow; the thought of it distracts me. Make now a
voluntary sacrifice of yourself to Heaven, to which the zeal of your friends
was impelling you. I trust it will be accepted. -- The pen drops from my
trembling hand. -- Yet a few years, Adelaide, and we shall meet, never to fear
separation more! Let this console you. -- My soul! my Adelaide, farewell! Oh,
farewell for ever! Love, pity, and forgive me; but never, O never forget

--!


Language can but faintly express the mingled emotions of grief, admiration,
and despair, which alternately agitated the bosom of the unhappy Adelaide.
Louisa was not ignorant, that to attempt by reasoning to moderate a sorrow so
just, was only to add to its violence. In truth, she knew not to reason, though
exquisitely to feel; and the silence of her sympathy produced that effect on
the heart of Adelaide, which neither religion nor philosophy for some time
could have wrought. The passions exhaust themselves with their own violence;
and where so many contend for dominion in the human soul, the powers of each
are weakened.

God is to the moral and intellectual, what the sun is to the natural world, --
the source of light, life, and joy. And man can no more be happy without
intercourse with his Maker, than plants can thrive and vegetate without the
benign influences of that glorious luminary. Cold and darkness are felt by the
heavenly bodies in proportion to their distance from the sun; just so does it
fare with the soul of man. In prosperity, the bountiful Giver is obscured by
the multiplicity of his gifts. These, like vapors from the heated earth, rise
and interpose between man and his Maker. But no sooner does the tempest of
adversity descend, than the cloud is dispersed, and, desolate and forlorn, he
feels all the necessities of his nature; his weakness and dependence, his
hopelessness and need of Divine aid; and returns, repentant, to duty, to
happiness, and God.

A few weeks saw Adelaide restored to that calm and settled melancholy, which
arises from the hopelessness of enjoyment, but is often mistaken by the world
for a species of it. One yet remained to her, that of pouring her sorrows
without restraint into the faithful bosom of friendship, and indulging
continually those tender recollections, which were so soothing to her mind,
that at times they made her almost forget the fatal event which gave them birth.

During the remaining months of her noviciate, which was shortened at her
request, Adelaide strove to prepare her mind for the solemn dedication of
herself to Heaven. It required but little resolution to abandon a world, where
her peace had been wrecked, and from which she neither expected nor wished to
receive happiness.

As the spring was now advanced, and Mrs. Seymour felt her strength rather
decreasing, she became extremely anxious to return to England.

Her young fellow-traveller had experienced much happier effects from change of
climate; the pain in his side, occasioned by the fall, had entirely left him,
and his impatience to return seemed to equal Mrs. Seymour's.

It originated, however, from a secret and very different cause. The humane
attentions bestowed on him by her charming daughter, at a time when the
dejected spirits and softened heart are particularly sensible to kindness, had
made a lasting impression on Mr. Stanhope's; and esteem and admiration combined
with gratitude to inspire him with a passion, which he was at no pains to
suppress, because he was conscious of nothing which should have opposed his
indulging it.

At length the day was fixed, on which the unfortunate and afflicted Adelaide
was to enter those sacred walls, which, like the grave, were for ever to
conceal her sorrows; Happy, if like the grave they could have banished the
remembrance of them.

The travelers hastened their departure from Montpellier, that they might
witness the awful ceremony; Louisa found this a severe trial to her weak
spirits, as the concourse of nobility assembled for that purpose was very
great. Madame Maintenon, as abbess, had a seat placed near the altar, round
which the young princesses attended. Miss Seymour was allowed to support her
affectionate friend during the whole ceremony. She alone knew what need she had
of support. The solemn service began: -- The pealing organ, responsive to the
enchanting voices of the choristers, alternately dissolved the soul in
tenderness, elevated it with hope, or rapt it in adoration and praise. -- The
music ceased: The prayers of all present were requested to aid those of the
young saint; and the grace of the Most High implored to animate her faith, and
confirm her resolutions.

The priest arose an conducted her to the door of the (...) where she was to be
stripped of all those ornaments with which, as is customary, her friends had
richly adorned her for the occasion. A solemn and affecting silence ensued. The
lovely victim returned, clad in her dismal habit, and walking steadily up to
the altar, kneeled before it to receive the veil.

One proof only remained to show her fixed resolution of renouncing the
vanities of the world, and to complete the ceremony of her dedication; -- that
of parting with her fine hair, which flowed in abundance over her neck and
shoulders, and shaded a face, whose beauty the traces of recent affliction had
rendered unspeakably touching. As she bent her head forward for this purpose,
with a look of patient and peaceful resignation, she was startled by a heavy
groan, which proceeded from the gallery appointed for those who were only
spectators of this solemnity.

A bustle ensued, which directed the eyes of all toward the gallery. Here Is
instantly recognized there the face of the Count de Rochelle, who, yielding to
his extreme curiosity to behold this affecting scene, felt himself so violently
agitated with the sight of Adelaide, and recollection of her misfortunes, that
he fainted in the arms of young Stanhope, whom chance had placed next him.

Various were the conjectures occasioned by this accident: The effect produced
by it on the mind of Adelaide, is not to be described. She alone knew the
nature of those sentiments which occasioned it, and her grateful, though
oppressed heart, sighed in sympathy with that of the generous and compassionate
Rochelle. The interruption to the ceremony caused by this affair, gave her time
a little to recover herself, and she went through the remaining part of it with
tolerable composure.

As nothing is so irksome to a mind in deep affliction, as the exertion
necessary for mixing with an unfeeling world, Adelaide found the solitude of a
convent not only agreeable but salutary. The consolations of religion operated
there with full force, and knowing how prone the mind is, after being violently
agitated with passion, to sink into listlessness, she endeavored to occupy her
time with such employments and amusements as recommended themselves at once by
their novelty and importance. By degrees, the gloom of misfortune was exchanged
for the serenity of hope; and though she seldom tasted of pleasure, peace
became the constant inmate of her bosom.

A few days after seeing her friend pro^est, Miss Seymour took a last affecting
farewell of St. Cire, and its beloved inhabitants. We feel a sort of sacred
enthusiasm for the place, where first our tender passions have been awakened.
The anguish she felt on bidding Adelaide adieu, was extreme; but it was soon in
great measure obliterated, by fear and anxiety about her mother, whose worst
symptoms now recurred with redoubled violence.

During their journey to Calais, young Stanhope had an opportunity of repaying
the former attentions of Miss Seymour, and of showing the goodness of his own
heart, whilst every day increased his admiration of here is.

The absence of her friend was now severely felt by Louisa; and as they were
obliged to remain some days at Calais to recruit Mrs. Seymour, she employed
every spare moment in communicating to her the distress with which she was
overwhelmed.

To Adelaide de St. Croix.
I am divided from you, my beloved friend, at the very instant when I most
required your pious instructions and tender sympathy. My mother's complaints
daily increase, and fear and suspense are now added to the affliction with
which your misfortunes almost overwhelmed me. Oh? why am I not permitted to
dwell with you at a distance from the world, or armed with more courage to
encounter its dangers? Without parents -- without fortune -- almost without
friends, -- what, my Adelaide, will become of me? -- Strive to inspire me with
a portion of your heavenly resignation, to arm me with the fortitude necessary
for my present trying situation; and Oh! if possible, teach me to check those
evil forebodings of a disturbed imagination, which are a thousand times more
insupportable than real calamity.

Write to me constantly, my beloved friend; the tenderness of your sympathy
will at least alleviate my sorrow, if the influence of your example does not
entirely regulate my conduct. Adieu.

LOUISA SEYMOUR.


To Miss Seymour.
My heart shares tenderly in the distress of my friend; but alas! I am neither
qualified by years nor experience to be her conductress through the difficult
mazes of life. I am not yet arrived at that blissful tranquillity on which you
congratulate me. Officious memory still awakens such dear, yet dangerous
recollections, as convey to my soul all the bitterness of disappointed hope.
Oh, Louisa! there is a charm in loving and being beloved, in feeling one's self
the continual source of joy and happiness to the object of one's best and most
tender affections, that takes such hold of the imagination, as none of the
subsequent evils of life have power to obliterate. Experience has taught me
too, that the heart will continue to sigh, even after the soul is resigned. Ah,
my friend! what arrow pierces so deep, what wound bleeds so often, what anguish
lasts so long, as that occasioned by the death of those we love? With what a
tender mixture of pleasure and regret do we dwell on their virtues; with what
eagerness listen to their praise; whilst fame does justice to their merit, and
envy is silent, for there is no competition in the grave? Grammont! tears are
the only tribute I can pay to thy merit; tears, due to youth, virtue, and
bravery! Common laurels wither and decay, but that which is supplied and
watered by such a stream shall never fade; it towers above the skies, and
flourishes to immortality.

Do not, my Louisa, covet a life of seclusion from the world; we ought ever to
be contented with the station allotted us by Providence. In retirement, we
possess at best a kind of negative virtue: There our affections languish for
want of proper objects to excite them; and our goodness consists rather in the
absence of evil, than in any positive habits of rectitude or exertions of
benevolence. It is in society alone that the genuine character can be
ascertained. There, our virtue is tried; and if it stands the test, from that
trial results our highest intellectual enjoyment, -- the pleasing consciousness
of superior worth, and the lasting meed of self-approbation.

Philosophy, my dear Louisa, may enable us to talk of fortitude, but religion
empowers us to exercise it. Think often, my afflicted friend, on that glorious
period, when freed from the mist of error, the perplexity of doubt, and the
sophistry of passion, we shall contemplate with astonishment, and acquiesce
with rapture, in the unerring decrees of eternal Providence.

Adieu, dear and amiable friend. You have the prayers, the best wishes, and
most lasting affection, of your

ADELAIDE DE ST. CROIX.


We shall now leave the travelers to pursue their journey, which they did by
very slow stages, and return to give some account of what passed at the Castle
of Hastings during their absence.

The frequent letters Lady Granville received from Louisa, and which she
generally communicated to Lord Granville, served agreeably to amuse their
winter evenings, and to increase their esteem and affection for the amiable
writer. The admirable descriptions they contained, of the curiosities of Paris
and its environs, and the reflections blended with them, showed, that while
Miss Seymour suffered nothing worthy of curiosity to escape her notice, she
made objects of sentiment her chief study, and from them derived her highest
enjoyment.

The Marquis of Winchester, who had a fine seat in that neighborhood, came
with his daughter, Lady Charlotte Villiers, to reside there during the autumn,
about the time Mrs. Seymour and her daughter set out for France. Lord and Lady
Granville waited on the Marquis and Lady Charlotte, and requested the favor of
their company at the Castle. As they did not propose returning to London till
after Christmas, they spent most of their time there. The Marquis's fortune was
inadequate to his rank, which induced him to spend much of his time in the
country; as his strict notions of honor forbade his plunging into expense,
which he knew must either ruin his family or injure society.

Lady Charlotte possessed so many advantages from nature, that she seemed in no
want of those of fortune. To a fine person, and a good understanding, she added
such a share of vivacity and polished manners, as rendered her one of the most
agreeable companions in the world. Lord Granville beheld in Lady Charlotte the
very woman he wished for a daughter-in-law; and entertained little doubt of
obtaining the approbation of the Marquis to a marriage, which, in respect of
fortune, was all he could desire for his daughter. Conscious, however, of the
waywardness of the human heart, he deferred communicating his plan to his son,
till he should see the young people on such a footing of intimacy, as should
give room to hope for their concurrence with it.

In consequence of the following letter from his father, Lord Hastings returned
to the Castle, about a month before the arrival of the travelers.

"Though I wished my dear Henry to have made a longer stay at Cambridge, an
accident has happened which obliges me to request his immediate return home.
Dr. Melville, who has been lately threatened with a decline, has, at my desire,
agreed to give up his academy, and attend you on your tour. As he fears risking
next winter in our northern climate, I propose that you shall set out in a few
months hence, and wish to enjoy your society during the summer. Besides, I
would wish to introduce you to some of the neighboring families, many of whom
are highly respectable; and to inspire you with that preference for your own
country that will dispose you to return to it with pleasure."

On his arrival, Lord Hastings found the Marquis and his daughter at the
Castle. Wholly ignorant of his father's views, and free from that embarrassing
consciousness which the presence of Miss Seymour had occasioned, he appeared
with all the advantages of a fine person, a cultivated mind, elegant manners,
and a most engaging address.

Lady Charlotte was perfectly qualified to judge of his merit. Notwithstanding
of her early introduction into the gay world, her good sense had preserved her
from adopting its follies; whilst, by mixing with it, she had acquired a degree
of frankness and ease peculiarly agreeable to a temper like that of Lord
Hastings. Her constant good humor and vivacity made him find a thousand charms
in her society; and as she excelled in music, an art in which he had made
considerable progress, and of which he was greatly enamoured, their time passed
most agreeably.

One morning, when Lord Granville and his son were together in his study,
concerting the plan of his future travels, he addressed him in the following
manner: -- My dear Henry, I will not deny you the pleasure of knowing, that
hitherto your conduct has been such, as affords me the most real satisfaction.
To complete it, one object only remains, that of seeing you marry, and form
such an alliance as will do credit both to your judgment and your heart. I
know, by experience, that the whole happiness of life depends on this
connection. I do not consider my self as authorized to constrain your choice,
but, as your friend, would wish to direct it. Lady Charlotte Villiers appears
to me both worthy and agreeable; her birth is suitable to your own; and if I am
not mistaken, your merit has not been beheld by her with indifference.

Lord Hastings expressed the most lively sense of his father's goodness, and
joined very cordially in praise of Lady Charlotte, who, together with the
Marquis, was that very moment announced by a servant. He flew to hand her from
her carriage; but the conversation which had just passed, gave an awkward
consciousness to his manner, which did not escape the penetrating eyes of Lady
Charlotte, who felt herself too deeply interested in all his feelings, to
permit the slightest of them to pass unobserved.

She rallied him with much spirit and good humor on the visible change in his
manner. And after a variety of sprightly sallies, Come, come, said she, I will
not question you any farther on this subject, for I suppose your father has
been catechizing you sufficiently already, as I saw you come out of his study
just now. The face of Lord Hastings was crimsoned over by this speech, which
^^^ed at once to increase his embarrassment and Lady Charlotte's curiosity. She
was too well bred, however, to persist in her raillery, which she saw produce
such visible emotion in Lord Hastings. But though several topics were started,
the conversation grew languid; and on returning home, Lady Charlotte bewildered
herself in vainly striving to unravel the mystery of his behavior. As we are
prone to believe what we wish, and as Lord Hastings had been uncommonly
assiduous about this Lady, she hardly doubted of having made an impression on a
heart whose affections she sincerely wished to engage. But though his visits
were as frequent as ever, the ease of his manner was exchanged for a caution
which was unnatural at his time of life, and foreign to his character, and
which threw a constraint into all their conversations, highly prejudicial to
those sentiments which Lady Charlotte felt and wished to inspire.

Things were in this train when Mrs. Seymour and her daughter arrived at
Springwood.

Lady Granville flew to welcome her friend, but, alas! she knew not in what
terms to speak that welcome, when she beheld in her pale face and emaciated
figure, every symptom of approaching dissolution.

Tears of mingled tenderness and grief bedewed the bosom of Louisa, as Lady
Granville pressed her to her affectionate heart. She did not attempt to deceive
her with vain hopes, but to arm her with fortitude and resignation.

As Louisa never quitted her mother's apartment, Lord Hastings had no
opportunity of gratifying his curiosity, which was become painfully ardent, by
the daily encomiums bestowed by his mother, both on the mind and person of Miss
Seymour; the latter of which, she said, had acquired inexpressible graces,
whilst at the same time she had lost nothing of that amiable ingenuity and
simplicity of manners which was her greatest charm.

The anxious mind of Louisa was soothed, soon after her arrival, by the
following letter from her friend:

To Miss Seymour.
How many are the sources of elegant delight which memory opens to a mind
fraught with sensibility! Who would forego the tenderness of melancholy for the
tumults of pleasure, or the meltings of sympathy for the noise of applause?

Deprived of your dear society, Louisa, I have recourse to the past. I wander
through those solemn scenes which witnessed the reciprocations of our mutual
confidence and friendship. I strive to recollect not only your-words, but your
looks and placid smiles. I listen to the soothing language of heavenly hope and
pious resignation; I still hear you breathe the sigh of sympathetic tenderness;
I still see your mild eyes bedimmed with the tear of sincere compassion. Ah,
Louisa! it is still due to the secret sorrows of your friend! Nor is the
present forgotten in the recollection of the past. I follow you in imagination
through every stage of your painful journey. I strive to support and assist you
in the melancholy duties of soothing and comforting a dying parent.

O! may the Father of the afflicted himself vouchsafe to strengthen you for
every duty, and support you under every trial!

Let me entreat my Louisa to strive against melancholy; it will un^it you for
the offices of social life. The cause of your present depression is an amiable
one, and for this reason you ought to be on your guard with respect to its
effects. We are apt to contemn ourselves when any personal affliction depresses
our spirits; but when we languish by a sympathetic pang, a ray of
self-approbation beams through the soul; we are flattered by our own
sensibility, and cherish the sadly pleasing sensations, till they acquire a
dangerous strength.

Let us reflect, my love! that the beneficent Parent of the universe can, in no
sense, be the author of evil; that the more wisdom which is displayed in his
moral government, the less can we possibly comprehend it; and what we, from
ignorance or blindness, perhaps too from perverseness, denominate evil, must
certainly be good in his sight, who shall cause all the seeming disorders of
the present scene to issue in the final perfection and felicity of his
intelligent creation.

As one earthly prop is withdrawn, the heart of man fondly clings to another,
till insensibly they drop one by one, and he is left desolate and solitary to
encounter the storms of life. What were then the anguish of his soul, could he
rest on no firmer stay than a mortal like himself, -- could he look toward no
more stable inheritance than this land of shadows, which even to his corporeal
sight is fast passing away? Yes, my Louisa, though the streams of happiness
flow here in narrow channels, are interrupted by accident, and embittered by
misfortune, to the pious it is matter of everlasting consolation, that the
great Fountain of existence and felicity is immutable, inexhaustible, and
eternal. Farewell!


Mrs. Seymour's illness increased so quickly, that a few weeks brought her to
the verge of the grave. One day, whilst Lady Granville was sitting by her
bedside, having desired Louisa to take a turn in the garden for the benefit of
fresh air, she grasped her hand, and with a voice enfeebled by sickness and
interrupted by sorrow, thus addressed her: -- I am persuaded, my beloved
friend, this scene is by no means unexpected to you; to me, be assured, it is
welcome: One only tie binds me to earth -- that dear, that amiable child! But I
know, whilst Lady Granville lives, Louisa will never want a mother. The
Almighty has given me many gracious warnings of that fate which is fast
approaching; -- I trust I am prepared to meet it. -- You know I have had but
little satisfaction in reviewing some part of my past life; perhaps I have
scanned my errors with too severe an eye -- that of Omniscience is now upon me!
I presume not to repose on the rectitude of my intentions or regularity of my
conduct; my hope is that of a Christian, and it will never deceive me.

Lady Granville said every thing that piety, friendship, and good sense could
dictate, to calm the anxieties of Mrs. Seymour; she even ventured to assure
her, that while she lived she would never suffer Louisa to have any other home
than her house.

Mrs. Seymour only survived a week after this conversation, during which she
strove to recon^^^e Louisa to a separation, which would confessedly be for her
happiness.

"Do not, my dearest child," said she, O do not embitter my last moments by
indulging excessive sorrow for my death! Consider it in the light of a short
absence; -- look on me as having gone a little before in a journey in which you
are soon to follow me. Perhaps our separation will neither be so real nor
entire, as that occasioned by absence while on earth: Perhaps I may still be
permitted to watch over my child; at least I will not long be disjoined from
her.

There was something unspeakably soothing in the idea suggested by the last
part of this discourse: Louisa dwelt on it with peculiar delight; but, in the
midst of the extreme dejection occasioned by the solemnity of a deathbed, her
drooping heart required a firmer support than a pleasing dream or a doubtful
hope. Her mother perceived this; and in directing her to the light of
revelation and the prospect of immortality, gave patience to her sufferings,
and mingled consolation with her sorrows.

"I leave you, my beloved child," said she, a few hours before her death; but I
leave you under the protection of that God who sees it good for us to part; who
is in a peculiar manner the Father of the fatherless, and shield of the orphan.

Earthly friends fail us at our greatest need; but this heavenly Friend will
never forsake us. Earthly friends can only pity our misfortunes; but God is
able to avert them. Fear God, then, my dearest child, and you need have no
other fear.

Though the first transports of grief on the death of her mother prevented
Louisa from deriving all that consolation from these discourses which they were
calculated to inspire, they returned to her thoughts in the calmer hours, when
passion began to subside, and carried the sweetest consolation to her heart.

Lady Granville was very desirous that Miss Seymour should return with her to
the Castle the evening her mother expired; but she would by no means consent to
leave Springwood, till she had fulfilled the last duties to her respected
parent. That humane friend did not urge her, but, revering her pious sorrows,
left her a while in quiet to indulge them; and sending for her own maid, a
prudent sensible woman, to attend her, returned to the Castle to give orders
for the funeral, which Louisa entreated might be as private as possible.
Accordingly in three days afterward, the corpse was interred early in the
morning, in a burial-place erected by his lady on the death of Colonel Seymour.

Nothing could be more soothing to the afflicted Louisa, than the frequent
letters she received from Adelaide during her distress. When the dark clouds of
adversity surround us, they exclude every ray of pleasure, but that which
reaches and cheers the soul from tender and sincere sympathy.

The following was brought her the evening of that day which deprived her of
the best of mothers.

To Miss Seymour.
The stillness and quiet of my present situation grows every day more
agreeable. Methinks, Louisa, at the age of twenty-two, I feel a strong
conviction, that all is vanity, as Solomon did after a long life, in which all
the wishes of his heart and powers of his imagination were exhausted, in
pursuit of a felicity, which, alas! these shadows of real good could never
yield.

Affliction, I trust, has taught me true wisdom. It has brought upon me a sort
of premature old age, which serves instead of experience. Though neither
satiated with the pleasures of the world, nor disgusted by its disappointments,
I shall rise satisfied from life's feast, and leave the banquet to those for
whom it has the charm of novelty, and whose ignorance of its dangers makes them
behold it with desire.

With what calm indifference, Louisa! do I mark the silent lapse of time, and
behold its several periods come to a close! Why should we indulge immoderate
sorrow for the loss of those who are gone before us, when every day, every
hour, every moment, is accelerating the blissful period of our reunion?

Books are now my chief amusement: Some of these represent life as bright and
cheerful; others teach me to despise its storms, or inform me that they are
salutary; whilst experience adds, that they are transient too. Methinks this
consideration ought to silence both our peevish discontents and fantastic
wishes.

Sometimes I direct my solitary walks to the silent mansions of the dead; and,
forgetful of the world, and all its vexing inquietudes, seem to share for a
while their blissful repose. But I advance a step farther, my Louisa, and find,
even among the dominions of death, proofs of the soul's immortality.

Here is evinced, the amazing truth, that it is the same matter, variously
modified, which constitutes both the earth and its inhabitants. Animals derive
their subsistence from plants, which are nourished by the common mould; at the
appointed season all these return to this their first principle. But since, in
the visible creation, there exists nothing analogous to mind, let us not
imagine that the soul can ever be reduced to a state like that of beings which
are altogether different from it. -- Themes like these, my Louisa, cannot fail
to be in harmony with your present feelings, since your last letters assure me
that your dear deserving parent is past all hope of recovery. Let reflections
like these support your soul in view of that afflicting event which either
awaits you, or is already arrived. Oh, my Louisa! how much need have I to dwell
on them myself! This day completes my twenty-second year, the most eventful of
my life. How little did I dream, at its commencement, that the fabric my fond
hopes had reared was so soon to tumble into ruins! That he, for whose sake
alone I welcomed its arrival, and wished its continuance, should, ere its
close, be torn from my bosom, and hidden for ever from my eyes! But though
these bodily organs no more behold thee, best and dearest of men! thou art ever
present to my mind's eye, in thy exalted virtues, thy spotless manners, and thy
fair fame: These shall justify the tears with which I embalm thy memory, and
convert my sorrows into virtue.

Write constantly to me, my amiable, afflicted friend! You know how tenderly I
partake in your sorrows. Believe me, Louisa, to soften one pang of yours, even
at the expense of sharing it, will be preferable, in my estimation, to all that
the world calls pleasure.


To Adelaide de St. Croix.
Your letter has reached me, my friend, and conveyed to my soul the only
consolation of which at present it is capable. Yesterday, all my cares for the
best of women ended; -- she is happy: -- Shall I not then be resigned? -- I
trust I am so. Yet, oh, my Adelaide! it is difficult, it is impossible, to
restrain the tears of nature, when the long endeared sacred tie of kindred and
of friendship is rudely broken by death! Till that cruel moment, when the grave
closes over those we love, we cannot sufficiently admire the excellence of that
religion which teaches us to look beyond it. Ah, my friend, do they act
agreeably to their own principles, who contend for the dignity of human nature,
and yet believe that the soul of man -- advancing daily in virtue and knowledge
-- aspiring after perfection -- longing for immortality -- cut off in the midst
of its pursuits and wishes, -- shall share the same fate with the meanest
reptile that crawls on the face of the earth?

Alas! how dismal, how hopeless, must be the sorrow of such gloomy, such
benighted minds!

Books, you say, supply your favorite amusement. Our opinion, both of books
and characters, is influenced by the tone of our mind at the time we become
acquainted with them. Perhaps it is owing to this circumstance that I have
perused the following fable with peculiar satisfaction this morning; and in the
hope of its producing the same effect on you, I shall here transcribe it.

In ancient times, says the fabulist, when the Creator of the world placed our
first parents in Paradise, to p^^vent them from growing weary of each other, he
appointed Happiness, the fairest of his offspring, to reside with them.

For some time her charms were beheld with admiration, and her merit treated
with respect. But beauty, by growing familiar, ceased to excite pleasure; and
merit, from want of novelty, soon incurred neglect. The favorite, even of
celestial beings, Happiness, could ill brook so unkind a reception from
mortals; and one day, on occasion of a quarrel between her associates, in which
they both betrayed marks of altered dispositions, she was so disgusted, that
she hastily bade them adieu; and ascending to her former abode, entreated the
great Ruler of the Universe that she might never more be sent to dwell with
those who knew so ill to value her society.

The moment she was gone, her companions became sensible of their error. They
deplored her absence, and conjured her to return, in terms of the most earnest
supplication. But Happiness was inexorable; and the utmost they could obtain
from her, was a promise, that, provided they were never again heard to quarrel,
she would depute her younger sister, Contentment, to reside with them, and even
occasionally visit them herself.

How far our primogenitors complied with these terms, we are still ignorant;
but it would appear that Happiness, like other injured females, not only
continued to resent former ill-usage, but even entertained constant suspicions
of future maltreatment. For it is universally known, that whenever she deigns
to visit these lower regions, she never stays longer than, just like those
mortals who pretend to emulate her perfections, to receive the homage of her
admirers, to make a display of her charms, and by bestowing some slight favors
on each, to heighten the desires and secure the admiration of all her votaries.


Immediately after the funeral, Lady Granville prepared to go to Springwood, in
order to bring her young charge to the Castle. But the agitating scenes she had
lately witnessed, and the loss of a friend she dearly loved, had so sensibly
affected her health, that, just as she was stepping into the coach, she was
seized with such a faintness, that it was with difficulty Lord Hastings could
get her supported back to her apartment. Unwilling to add affliction to the
oppressed heart of Louisa, and flattering herself this indisposition would
quickly go off, she sent a note to acquaint her, that she was prevented from
coming for her at that hour, as she intended, but would certainly call for her
in the evening, when she expected to find every thing in readiness to be moved
to her apartment at the Castle, where she should still find a tender indulgent
mother, ready with open arms to receive her.

The last sentence dissolved the whole soul of Louisa in gratitude and
tenderness, and gave birth to a thousand ideas, which, though confused and
indistinct, left no traces but such as were pleasing. She hastened to prepare
for her removal; and expecting Lady Granville every minute, took out her
mother's picture, bathed it with her tears, and implored the Almighty to enable
her to tread in the steps of his departed servant!

It was now the beginning of May; the air was perfectly mild, and the beautiful
woods and meadows were gilded with the last trembling rays of the sun. It
disappeared; and was succeeded by that serene glowing sky which marks the
evenings of that enchanting season with peculiar beauty.

Louisa, from the window of her mother's apartment, had long contemplated this
scene; if it did not banish her sorrows, at least it becalmed and soothed them.
She had marked the brightly setting sun, and traced in her mind a pleasing
resemblance between the progress of that heavenly orb and that of a good life.
The departure of that bright luminary inspired feelings perfectly congenial
with those impressed on her mind by the scenes she had lately witnessed. After
cheering this world with his beams, said she, and diffusing health and beauty
around him, this glorious image of his Maker retires, perhaps, to renew his
strength, and bless other regions. But the comparison would extend no farther.
A few hours would restore to the eyes of men the cheering light of the world;
but, with a pang almost insupportable, she recollected, that her eyes must no
more behold the parent she so fondly loved.

Resolved, before quitting Springwood, to visit her lowly dwelling, she passed,
unnoticed, through the garden, and opening a door which led into the park,
walked slowly toward the burial-place. The silence which prevailed around, the
deepening shades of evening, and the sudden rising of the moon from behind a
cloud, which gave an indistinct appearance to almost every object, affected her
weak spirits so much, that she stopped, and for some moments hesitated about
going forward; but, recollecting how seldom she might find so favorable an
opportunity of indulging her solemn meditations, she entered the little
enclosure, and, kneeling at the side of the grave, strove to raise her thoughts
from the gloomy object before her, and to fix them on those which she felt
convey peace and even joy to her soul.

She continued some moments in this attitude when, starting at the rustling of
a bush behind her, she hastly arose, and, turning toward the door, exclaimed,
-- "All gracious Heaven! Lord Hastings!"

Terrified beyond expression with his sudden and unexpected appearance, she
fell liveless on the grave of her mother. Reduced almost to the same condition,
the astonished Hastings, kneeling by her side, endeavored to raise her up, and
recall her to life. Several minutes elapsed before his cares had the desired
effect. He attempted in vain to offer some excuse for this intrusion; his words
were so incoherent, and Louisa appeared so incapable of attending to them, that
he forbore talking. His looks, however, sufficiently expressed the perturbation
of his mind, whilst he strove to prevail on her to accept of his arm; by the
help of which, with a staggering pace, she walked slowly toward the house.

Whilst the maid was employed in putting Louisa's little wardrobe into the
coach, she recollected herself so far as to inquire after Lady Granville. Lord
Hastings replied, that being a little indisposed, she had desired him to wait
on her, and attend her to the Castle. "I greatly fear, Miss Seymour," added he,
that my visit at this time has proved an unwelcome one. Louisa attempted a
reply, but the words died on her lips.

They entered the coach; and a silence ensued, which would have been painfully
embarrassing, had not the presence of the maid seemed to authorize it. -- When
they alighted, Lord Hastings again pressed Louisa to accept of his arm, that he
might conduct her to his mother's apartment; but she declined it, saying, with
a tone of the sweetest acknowledgement, that she thanked his Lordship, but was
now, she believed, able to walk by herself.

Afraid to witness a meeting so tender, he retired to his apartment, and took
up his pen to indulge the feelings of his heart, by pouring out to his friend.

To Mr. Beaufort, Cambridge.
Beaufort, I am most unhappy. -- Your suspicions are justified: -- I love; --
but spare your friend, and let the acknowledgment of my weakness obtain for me
your pity, as well as indulgence. Believe me, the knowledge of this secret is
new to myself. -- My thoughts are all confusion, else would I describe to you
the scene of this evening; till death shall expunge every trace from my memory,
even that which it shall lose the latest -- the image of Louisa, I will never,
never forget it.

At eight this morning, I witnessed the interment of poor Mrs. Seymour; but,
though my desire to see her charming daughter was inexpressibly great, I could
not intrude on her at a moment so solemn. In the evening, my mother being
indisposed, she desired me to go and attend Miss Seymour to the Castle

On arriving at Springwood, and enquiring for her young lady, the maid told me,
that she believed she was walking in the garden. I followed; but not seeing her
in any of the walks, I pursued that which leads to the park; in a retired part
of which stands the family burial-place, surrounded with high trees and a wall,
which concealed her from sight.

The evening was delightfully still; I stopped and listened to the sound of a
distant cascade, which alone interrupted the awful silence. Having looked in
vain for Miss Seymour, I was just about to return, when I observed the door of
the burial-place open. My heart throbbed with strange emotions: I approached
without noise, and beheld -- O Beaufort! an object that almost deprived me of
my senses. It was Louisa herself, clothed in her mourning habit, and kneeling
at the foot of her mother's grave. At her side lay the picture of her revered
parent: Her hands were folded over her bosom, in an attitude of devotion, and
her mild eyes, streaming with tears, were ^ixed on Heaven -- Beaufort! think
what I felt at that moment! The lovely saint was startled by the suddenness of
my appearance, and occasioned me dreadful alarms, by fainting at a distance
from all help. She is now, thank Heaven, in he^lth and safety, in the next
apartment with my mother, to whose care she was entrusted by her own, on her
deathbed.

Oh, Beaufort! what will become of your friend? I recall to mind my father's
^onversation -- his views -- my attentions to Lady Charlotte -- perhaps her
partiality! -- Oh! can I offend against honor, duty, gratitude! Yet what do I
say? I have never deceived Lady Charlotte; my father only wishes to direct, not
constrain my choice. But I bewilder myself in a variety of reflections, and
dare not trust to the decisions of my own mind in its present distracted state.
Write to me, Beaufort, without a moment's delay. Calm the agonies of my mind --
a^^ure me I have not acted dishonourably -- and oh! say, if you can, that I may
yet hope for Louisa's love; -- without that hope I am miserable! Farewell.

HASTINGS.


On enquiring after his mother, Lord Hastings was informed that she was still
greatly indisposed, and wished to see him. His agitation was not lessened,
when, on entering the room, he beheld Louisa sitting by her bedside, and
holding a hand of Lady Granville in here is, which she bathed with her tears.
Lord Hastings approached the bed, and enquiring anxiously about her complaints,
took hold of the other hand, which he was surprised to feel very hot and
feverish. "Henry," said she, this dear child has been too much accustomed of
late to scenes of distress. Try to amuse her. Go, my dear, continued she,
Hastings will attend you to the drawing room, and show you some beautiful
prints I have just purchased. Those of your favorite Salvator I intend for
your apartment: Choose out the landscapes you admire most; and flatter me, by
discovering that your taste agrees with my own.

Louisa arose, and walked with Lord Hastings into the drawing room; but thought
not of the prints. She read his apprehensions in his dejected countenance; and
instantly catching the alarm, entreated him to tell her what he thought of Lady
Granville's situation?

Perhaps, Miss Seymour, said he, my fears magnify her danger; but at present,
she certainly has every symptom of a fever. Louisa's affliction was
inexpressible; and she could not help sighing in a low voice, -- How unhappy am
I! -- will Heaven deprive me of every friend? -- No, Miss Seymour, replied Lord
Hastings, with much emotion, you will never want friends: -- Virtues like
yours secure the friendship of Heaven itself.

This affecting conversation was interrupted by the arrival of Lord Granville,
who had spent the day at the house of a neighboring gentleman. -- He was
extremely shocked, at his return, to hear of his Lady's illness; gave orders,
that Dr. Lewis should instantly be sent for; and never quitted her room till he
came. The Doctor pronounced Lady Granville's disorder to be a fever, probably
occasioned by the late agitation of her spirits; but, the cause being now
removed, he hoped the complaint would neither be formidable nor lasting.

Louisa implored her permission to watch by her during the night; but this Lady
Granville absolutely refused. She retired to her apartment, but not to bed.

Just as the clock struck one, she ventured to slip softly down, and listen at
the door of Lady Granville's apartment. Having to pass that of Lord Hastings,
which he had left open with the same intention, he saw her go down stairs, and
supposing his mother grown worse, followed her in the greatest agitation. All
being quiet, Louisa was returning softly, when she met Lord Hastings in the
passage. At sight of him she started with surprise. -- The eagerness of his
enquiries after his mother, the fears he expressed for her own health, in a
tone of peculiar tenderness, and the earnest manner in which he urged her to go
immediately to rest, affected the weak spirits of Louisa in such a degree, that
she could not restrain her tears. She pulled out her handkerchief to conceal
them, and hastily retired. By an involuntary movement, he followed her some
steps; as he was slowly returning toward his apartment, he saw a slip of paper
lying in the passage, which he picked up without knowing what he did, and laid
on his dressing-table. He sat down, and, revolving in his mind the various
scenes of the past day, found his admiration of Louisa increase, with every new
light in which her exalted character was placed.

He was about to undress, when the paper caught his eye; he unfolded it, and
perceived that it was written in a female hand; and instantly knew from the
contents that it must be that of Miss Seymour. In reality she had dropped it, by
pulling her handkerchief quickly out of her pocket.

It was dated midnight; contained the last words of her mother; and concluded
with this solemn address: Almighty God! shield of the orphan, be thou my guide
and protector through the dangerous paths of life: And having removed from me
the best of parents, spare in mercy the kindest of friends!

The piety of Louisa, and tenderness of her attachment to his mother, melted
the soul of Lord Hastings in love and gratitude; nor did her late proofs of his
filial piety and solicitude for her safety less sensibly affect here is. Unable
wholly to restrain his emotions, he enclosed the paper in a billet, which
contained these words: -- This paper, which I found a few hours ago, can belong
only to Miss Seymour. Pardon a curiosity which I found it impossible to
restrain: I knew not the hand when I presumed to read it, but could be at no
loss with regard to the writer. -- O Miss Seymour! may your prayer be accepted!
May you, indeed, be the care of Heaven; and may peace for ever inhabit that
gentle bosom, where such singular piety resides!

This letter he presented to her unobserved, as she retired from the
breakfasting parlour. The air of secresy with which it was delivered, alarmed
her conscious heart with a variety of confused emotions, and it throbbed with
such violence, that it was some minutes, after she reached her apartment,
before she found courage to open and read it. When she did so, her eye
impatiently sought for somewhat there, which it could not discover; and she
sighed at the close of it, without knowing the cause of her disappointment.

Lady Granville's fever was violent, and her recovery long doubtful. During
that tedious languor which usually suc^^eds severe illness, her son and Louisa
scarcely ever left her apartment. For them it had a thousand sweet and secret
attractions; -- united in the same tender cares, their hearts sympathised in
the same delightful emotions. The bitterness of grief had yielded to the
softness of m^lancholy, in the gentle bosom of Louisa, and she experienced a
calm so delicious, that she would not have exchanged it for the tumult of
pleasure.

This serenity, however, was not of long duration: The following letter from
Adelaide, in answer to that one which acquainted her with Mrs. Seymour's death,
revived in the affectionate heart of Louisa those anxious solicitudes to which
it had long been subjected.

To Miss Seymour.
Though the heart of my dearest gentle friend shared tenderly in all my
sorrows, yet perfectly to sympathise with the afflicted, we must ourselves have
experienced affliction. Now my Louisa will know what it is to shed the tear of
hopeless unutterable grief over the grave of her best friend. Thank God! many
yet remain to you; may Heaven increase their number! But let not the merits of
any, however deserving, blot from your memory the image of your fond and
faithful Adelaide.

I know your sorrow, my dearest Louisa, must be extreme; but allow me at least
to endeavor to console you. Suffer me to remind you, that the traveller who
has a long journey to accomplish, must not allow himself to be too much
engrossed by any object, however pleasing, that he may meet with on his way.
Friends, fortune, health, are blessings which a bountiful Providence supplies,
to beguile the length of this weary pilgrimage, not to betray us in a
forgetfulness of that better country to which we are hastening.

We are ever selfish in our sorrows: Were it not so, would we repine when the
truly good are taken from a world unhealthful to their virtues? especially when
in advanced life, and approaching to a second childhood.

If it requires our utmost fortitude to behold this beauteous fabric dissolving
into dust, ought we not to rejoice, when we are spared the humbling spectacle
of the soul also, as it were, in ruins?

It Is true, amidst the decays of her uncomfortable mansion, we know that the
heavenly inhabitant remains unhurt; but as her powers all lie dormant, when
proper agents are wanting to execute her will, she appears to us to partake in
the ruin of her earthly habitation.

My health is very infirm, but my spirits calm, and my soul resigned. From this
quiet harbor, Louisa, I look back with pity on those who still toil on the
ocean of life, and felicitate myself, that my little bark will be so soon
ashore. In the soothing recollection of past happiness, and the hope that it
will ere long be restored, I acquire a peace which resembles the repose of the
blessed. -- Yes, my Louisa! the prayer of the amiable and compassionate
Rochelle is granted. -- Yes, though I can never expect happiness, I have at
least attained resignation.


To the same.
I have always considered it as a greater proof of heroism, to submit to live
for a friend, than to die for one. -- A few hours after dispatching my last
letter, I was relieved from an illness that threatened my life; and the first
sentiment of which I was conscious after my recovery, was gratitude, not on my
own account, but yours. Yes, my gentle friend, I know that at present my death
would have greatly added to your affliction, and therefore I am thankful that
life is lent me a little longer.

The quiet of a cloister, my Louisa, where there are few objects to engage
attention, forces the mind to seek employment at home. In the words of your
admired English Poet, I strive to find Friends in the trees, books in the
running brooks,
Sermons in stones, and good in every thing.


There is something peculiarly delightful to the mind in tracing such analogies
between the natural and moral world, as tend to throw light on many important
subjects, and to confirm our says in the sublime doctrines of our holy
religion.

The origin and progressive stages of the butterfly's existence are beautifully
illustrative of the nature, changes, and future destination of man. The
butterfly is produced from a caterpillar, which devours garden plants, and
which, having moved for a season in its lowly, narrow sphere, falls into a
state of torpid insensibility. Thus it continues during the gloom of winter;
but when the gladsome beam of spring appears, it is re-animated, -- bursts its
confinement, soars aloft, acquires new beauty, power, and vigor. Its scene of
action, its relishes, its exercises are changed; the substance is retained, but
the modification is totally altered: -- It is at once another and the same. --
Have recourse then, ye infidels, to the demonstrations of annual experience,
and then say, -- Why should it be thought incredible that God should raise the
dead?

Themes like these, my Louisa, cannot be supposed frequently to employ your
thoughts, in the midst of company and amusements. Let me from the quiet of a
cloister, sometimes obtrude them upon you. Though my Louisa cannot expect
amusement from the walls of a convent, yet that situation, as it inspires the
most solemn reflections, will plead my excuse, if mine should at any time seem
officious and impertinent.

Deprived of your beloved society, I naturally seek for that of the gentle
Constance. Though her conversation cannot console me for the loss of yours,
her a^^^^ble dispositions bring you continually to my remembrance. In her good
sense and sweetness of temper do more than compensate for the absence of those
shining talents, -- which dazzle, but do not warm, -- which awaken envy, but
rarely conciliate affection.

Adieu, my dearest friend! May the cup of prosperity long be yours,
unimbittered by any mixture of peculiar affliction; -- may those that are
necessary prove healthful; -- and may its flavor be heightened, and its relish
endeared, by the cordial friendship of your

ADELAIDE.


Before Lady Granville was able to take an airing in the coach, she was advised
by Dr. Lewis to be carried into the garden for the benefit of fresh (...) where
there was an elegant little pavillion, fitted up in the most exquisite taste,
and which commanded one of the finest prospects in the world. There, whilst
Louisa sat at work with Lady Granville, or amused herself with training the
honeysuckle and jessamine round the windows, Lord Hastings usually read aloud.
One day he took up a volume of Shakespeare, and chance directing him to the
Twelfth Night, he began to read.

It was impossible for Louisa not to perceive that there was something
particular in the whole manner of Lord Hastings toward her; and the various
incidents of the last month had left her in no doubt with respect to the nature
of her own sentiments. As his expressions, however, might be all justified on
the score of friendship and gratitude, she did not dare to encourage hope,
though she often felt the torment of suspense, and suffered extreme uneasiness
from the dread of Lord Hastings entertaining the slightest suspicion of the
truth.

As he advanced in the play, she felt herself greatly affected. When he came to
that pathetic description, "She never told her love," etc. the color forsook
her cheeks, and her heart palpitated with the most painful apprehensions. It
instantly occurred to her, that Lord Hastings had artfully contrived this
method of discovering ^er real sentiments; -- the thought was agony.

On pronouncing this sentence, -- "A murderous guilt shows not itself more
soon, than love that would seem hid," -- he stopped, he sighed; and venturing to
steal a look at Louisa, saw her pale and breathless, just sinking from her
chair. He flew to her, and catching her in his arms, prevented her from
falling. Lady Granville, who was not an unconcerned spectator of this scene,
assisted her son in carrying her out to the air. -- "My love," said she, your
long confinement in a sick-room, has, I fear, injured your health. Indeed,
Louisa, the journey to Bath, which Dr. Lewis urges, is not less necessary for
you than myself.

From that moment Louisa resolved to keep the strictest watch over herself; and
conscious of her inability to dissemble, to avoid for the future the company of
Lord Hastings, with as much earnestness as she had formerly wished for it. He
perceived the coldness and alteration in her manner; but far from suspecting
the real cause, with that diffidence which often accompanies true merit, and
always genuine love, he sought for it in his own conduct; some part of which,
though unknown to himself, he feared had offended her.

The consciousness that haunted Louisa, when in company with him, gave her a
feeling so exquisitely painful, that it even threw an air of peevishness into
her conversation. When he inquired anxiously about her health, it increased her
anguish and perplexity, by making her suspect that her secret distress was
beco^^ apparent; and every attempt to sooth her inquietude, carried in it, to
her disordered imagination, the air of an insult.

Lord Hastings sought in vain to unravel the mystery of her behavior; he was
convinced of her indifference; he felt dissatisfied and unhappy; but though he
knew too well the cause of his inquietude, he was utterly unconscious of having
done any thing to merit the anguish he suffered.

To Adelaide de St. Croix.
Your tender solicitude to spare my anxiety, and reconcile me to my loss,
merits my unfeigned acknowledgment. Oh, Adelaide! I have indeed wept over the
grave of my best friend; but I have not, like you, buried there my hopes,
wishes, and inquietudes. My bosom is not formed for the restless passions and
pursuits of the world; it relishes peace even more than pleasure. In a few days
we set out for Bath; and I confess to you, the prospect of mixing with the gay
world, loads me with a dejection I cannot shake off. But, like the be, I must
strive to improve my little hour of life, and to extract honey from weeds as
well as flowers.

Happily, my Adelaide, the eyes of imagination are not fettered by the laws
that limit the corporeal sense. Though many hundred miles now divide us, still
I behold the friend of my heart, still do I partake with you the delightful
solitude of St. Cire. I tread in fancy the same path we have often trod
together; the same trees which have witnessed our mutual expressions of
friendship, seem to shade me; and I still stop to listen to the same profound
silence, which used to inspire us with a pleasing dread, whilst wandering
through the cloisters by the pale lamp of evening. I look back with regret on
those hours, Adelaide, which shall never, never return! -- Hours, which we
often suffered to elapse in vain regrets for their short duration. -- Such is
the weakness, the inconsistency of human nature! -- You would be equally unjust
to your own merit and my friendship, did you believe that I could ever suffer
your image to be banished from my heart. No, Adelaide; others may engage my
attention, or engross my time, but you will ever possess the confirmed esteem,
and tender affection of

Your faithful friend, LOUISA SEYMOUR.


As Bath waters were thought necessary for reestablishing Lady Granville's
health, she prepared to set out with her family, all of whom wished to attend
her.

About a week before their departure, the Marquis of Winchester and his
daughter came to congratulate Lady Granville on her recovery, and spend a few
days at the Castle. Lady Charlotte, who had never seen Miss Seymour before, was
so struck with her beauty, that she could not help expressing her admiration of
it. Her admiration indeed was sincere, and unmixed with envy; but would
probably have been attended with a feeling equally painful, had she not
instantly perceived the coldness with which Louisa treated Lord Hastings, and
recollected that ^he change in his manner took place before her return from
France.

Nothing is more common than to see people of opposite tempers become fond of
each other. In all connections of the heart, there must be a similarity in
taste and sentiment between the parties; but diversity of tempers, like
diversity of musical tones, serve, when properly combined, to make the harmony
more complete. The timid and reserved are relieved from the necessity of any
painful exertions, by the frank and complacent, who derive a generous pleasure
from the consciousness of bringing forth the merit of others to view, and of
removing that veil which excessive modesty throw^ over their good qualities.
These two Ladies derived mutual pleasure and advantage from each other's
society; and before they parted, Lady Charlotte entreated Louisa to write to
her, in such pressing terms, as left her no pretense for declining a
correspondence, which she by no means thought herself qualified to support.

One day, when the two young ladies and Lord Hastings were walking in the
garden, Lady Charlotte, with her usual vivacity, began to rally Miss Seymour on
the number of conquests she would make at Bath. The conversation happening to
turn on the marriage of a young lady there to a rich, disagreeable old miser,
Louisa expressed her detestation of a conduct so interested, in the strongest
terms. "Very well," replied her lively friend, all this is mighty pretty
talking: Nay, I doubt not but you will carry your romantic folly so far, as to
marry some gentle generous youth, who believes himself as capable of living on
love, and hope, and vows, and nonsense, as you do. But indeed, my dear girl, we
mortals require some grosser aliment; and I Will venture to wager, you shall be
of my opinion before ten years are expired: Nay, perhaps, as many weeks at Bath
will be sufficient to effect this mavelous change. Consider, child, you have
never yet seen the world. Oh! you know not the dear delight of being followed,
admired, and flattered! Don't you think, my Lord, that Miss Seymour will soon
be of my opinion? -- I should rather hope, madam, replied he gravely, that the
empty adulation of mere admirers, would serve to give Miss Seymour a juster
value for the esteem and admiration of her real friends.

Though Lady Charlotte paid little attention to this speech, Louisa perfectly
comprehended the meaning of it. Indeed, the whole of this conversation
introduced into the minds of Lord Hastings and Miss Seymour a train of ideas so
unpleasing, that they were glad to put an end to it, by returning to the Castle.

A few hours after the Marquis and his daughter went away, a genteel young
woman demanded to see Miss Seymour alone, and was accordingly conducted to her
apartment. It being then the dusk, Louisa could not see the face of the person
who waited for her; and was not a little alarmed on seeing her bolt the door,
and then, falling on her knees, burst into a flood of tears, accompanied with
such violent agitation, as for a while robbed her of the power of utterance.
Louisa begged to know what she wanted. "Oh, Miss Seymour," cried she, with a
feeble voice, interrupted with sighs, have you forgotten your once virtuous,
once happy Sally Vernon? "Good Heavens! Sally," exclaimed Louisa, is it you?
But how came you here at this late hour? -- Why have you left Cambridge? --
What is the cause of your distress? -- "O!" continued the afflicted mourner,
why did you send me from you? You know, dear Miss Seymour, I was not a vain or
giddy creature. Had I still been at Springwood, I would have been the happiest,
as I am now the most miserable, of the human race. -- She then proceeded, with
much difficulty, to give Miss Seymour the melancholy relation contained in the
following letter, which Louisa dispatched to her friend early next morning,
before setting out for Bath;

To Lady Charlotte Villiers.
Our correspondence, my dear Lady Charlotte, is about to commence in a manner I
little thought of. I will make no apology for engaging you in an act of
humanity, because I am persuaded I cannot give you a higher proof of my esteem,
than soliciting a favor; or confer a greater obligation on you, than by
putting it in your power to do good.

The affair in which I am requesting your assistance, has given me
inexpressible affliction. Perhaps you may remember to have seen at the Castle a
beautiful young girl, named Sally Vernon, who staid there some days at Lady
Granville's desire, waiting my mother's return from France. She was the only
child of a favorite servant, who dying, bequeathed her to my mother's care.
Sally waited on me, till the loss of my father's fortune obliged us to dismiss
all our supernumerary domestics. My worthy parent, unwilling to expose this
innocent girl to the dangers of the world, placed her with a chamber milliner
at Cambridge. There she has continued for several years past, and behaved in a
manner which gained her the affection of the whole family.

Some time ago, a young gentleman, of the name of Talbot, called to look at
some ruffles: He saw the unfortunate Sally, wrote several letters to her,
pretending he was the son of a wealthy farmer in the next county; and by
various arts, prevailed on the unsuspecting girl to correspond with him, and
listen to his addresses.

I cannot pretend to give you all the particulars of this shocking affair; I
had them from her own lips, and spared her the painful relation. Suffice it to
say, that in return for the most tender and confiding affection, he has
betrayed her to ruin, and loaded her with shame.

Oh, my dear Lady Charlotte! how my heart swells with indignation against the
perpetrator of this most cruel, this premeditated villainy! -- What will become
of this wretched orphan I know not. He set off a few days ago for France,
without saying farewell, or leaving one guinea for her support, notwithstanding
her present deplorable situation. -- How mean, how despicable does vice render
the human character!

She asked to see me alone yesterday; and after throwing herself at my feet,
and ingenuously acknowledging her fault, which indeed would admit of many
palliations, she conjured me, by the memory of my revered parent, to save her
from infamy and want. Her words were few, but the eloquence of her distress was
irresistible. I dismissed her with a promise of soon finding an asylum proper
for her, and desired her to say to the milliner, that having heard of something
greatly to her advantage, I was about to remove her from Cambridge.

It immediately occurred to me, that your good old nurse whom we visited
together, would be a proper person for such a charge, especially as she has no
family, and her cottage stands remote from any other. -- If Sally's ill-fated
infant sees the light, I can easily find a nurse for it in this neighborhood.
-- Let me know if this plan meets with your approbation.

Whatever line Society is obliged to draw between the strict^^ virtuous of our
sex and such as err, O let not us, my dear Lady Charlotte! by too rigid a
regard to its laws, debar unhappy wanderers from again returning to the
peaceful path from which they have unfortunately strayed.

"Your letter, which I shall impatiently expect, must be addressed to me at
Bath.

Adieu. LOUISA SEYMOUR.


To Miss Seymour.
I am shocked beyond expression, my dear Miss Seymour, at your account of the
credulous and unfortunate Sally. Poor girl! we must at least try to preserve
her from public shame, if we cannot save her from self-reproach. Your plan
meets my highest approbation, and shall have every assistance in my power. I
shall willingly take her home hereafter to wait on myself.

Ah, Louisa! should the gallows be erected for the thief and robber, whom
necessity, perhaps, has impelled to deprive the rich of what they can easily
spare, and ought voluntarily to bestow; -- and shall no punishment be inflicted
on him, who steals the affection of the gentle unsuspecting heart, robs it of
its innocence, and ruins its peace? -- Yes, my friend! for such, punishment is
prepared -- a tribunal erected, -- Conscience is the accuser, and God himself
the judge: -- From his power and justice there is no escaping, -- from his
righteous sentence, there lies no appeal!

Whence comes it, my friend, that men, who pride themselves on their integrity
in their transactions with each other, should nevertheless hold themselves
excusable for practicing perpetual impositions on the whole race of females? --
There must certainly be some physical cause of this, for in morals there is
none. -- I would apply to philosophers for a solution of this enigma -- but,
alas! are not philosophers men? and will not they then impose some fallacy upon
us? -- Indubitably they will. Upon a little reflection, however, I cease to
wonder at it: "That power confers right," is a favorite maxim with that
tender-conscienced sex; and from hence they derive their title, to enslave one
part of their species, and cheat the other.

"I cannot express my admiration of your noble sentiments, and generous
conduct, so superior to vulgar prejudice, and to the weakness of our sex in
particular. May your humanity be its own reward, and your examplary goodness
lead others to emulate your conduct. -- Adieu! -- try to shake off a little of
your monastic gravity; it is unnatural at your early age. I shall dispense with
your tasting the waters at Bath; but I insist on your taking a Lethean draught
of its pleasures, that, like those who frequent it, you may forget, or seem to
forget, all your cares! Impress your memory, however, at all times, with the
assurance that I love you; and never forget

Your admiring friend, CHARLOTTE VILLIERS.


To Lady Charlotte Villiers.
In what terms shall I thank my dear Lady Charlotte, for her ready concurrence
with my plan for poor Sally! I have written, to acquaint her with your intended
goodness, of taking her hereafter into your own service: I dare answer for her
gratitude, and will trust to you for having her conveyed privately to -- as
soon as possible.

I fear my conduct in this affair has not been so disinterested as you suppose:
Your approbation I have looked to as part of my reward; and, perhaps, even the
indulgence of benevolence has selfgratification in view. -- Were we at due
pains, my dear friend, to examine the motives of our actions, we would often
have cause to blush for those, on account of which we proudly arrogate to
ourselves the praise due to superior merit.

Though I wish to obey you in all things, I shall find it impossible to forget
my cares in the midst of a scene so full of them. Here, care takes possession
of all ranks and denominations: The young care for amusement, and the old for
money -- the gay care for dress, and the serious for cards -- the handsome care
for admirers, and the ugly for want of them -- the coquetts care for coxcombs,
and the coxcombs for coquetts -- the women care for every thing, and the men
for nothing -- but themselves. For my part, instead of casting away care, I
have got a huge addition to my former stock -- the care of pleasing you; which
I am so anxious to do, that, knowing affection to be of an assimilating nature,
I am striving to imitate you; and, in hope of making you what you have never
appeared to be -- fond of yourself -- am encroaching on your province, and
affecting your style. Do not be afraid, however, that I shall rival you in it:
I am so awkward an impostor, that every child might detect the cheat.

The only thing of which every person here seems careless, is that health,
which they profess to make the sole object of their care. -- One, I shall ever
anxiously preserve -- that of endeavoring to merit your friendship, and to
justify to the world your kind partiality for me. Perhaps, in this instance
alone, your judgment could ever be called in question: Be it my constant care
to vindicate it. Adieu.


To Adelaide de St. Croix.
I now address my beloved friend, from the very center of fashion and folly. Is
this then the world, so much desired, so eagerly pursued, at the expense of
health, peace -- nay, even virtue itself? -- Ah, my Adelaide! it has no charms
for me; it never will have.

I am alarmed and disconcerted at every step: I am disgusted with the
extravagant levity of the women, and the fulsome adulation of the men; who, in
praising others, seem to be wholly engrossed by the care of displaying their
own talents, and placing their superficial accomplishments in the most
advantageous light. -- That indiscriminating politeness, which the courtesy of
the world dignifies with the title of good-breeding, appears to me to be
nothing better than a refined species of hypocrisy. I shrink from the view of
those harsh and unamiable qualities, which the generality of our species are
neither at pains to correct nor conceal; and seek in vain for the beloved
circle of friends, with whom I am accustomed to converse with freedom and
delight, in the quiet of the country. My heart is ever ready to speak, but
there are none to hear or answer it: All here seem to have but one care, one
object, one idol -- and that is self -- to whom they pay unceasing homage.

How thankful to Providence ought we to be, my Adelaide, who has preserved our
hearts from being corrupted by the world! -- who has endowed them with
feelings too exalted, too refined, to be comprehended by those who are enslaved
by fashion, and whose taste is depraved by vice and luxury! -- How thankful,
that the view of the sublime, the useful, and the beautiful, both in the
natural and moral world, excites in our souls the most pure pleasure, the most
devout gratitude, the most lively adoration and praise! -- These are emotions
at once exquisite and ennobling! Emotions which, alas! are but little known to
the bulk of our species! -- Pleasures which escape the regards even of those
who profess no other pursuit but pleasure! Reserved by God himself for those
who love him -- by rightly loving themselves; who fear him -- by fearing to
commit what is offensive to him; and who obey him -- by following the best
instincts of nature, the clearest deductions of reason; all which coincide with
our only unerring guide, the divine light of revelation.

Your friendship for me, Adelaide, gives me a jealousy of myself, to which I
was formerly a stranger. She who hopes to maintain a place in that heart, where
such noble candor, generosity, and friendship inhabit, ought to possess no
vulgar share of these virtues. I fear to be unjust to a friendship like yours,
by admitting another candidate for mine; yet, after all, my Adelaide, I feet,
that though I may esteem and admire others for various good qualities, you, and
you alone, are the friend of my heart.

About a week before we set out for Bath, the Marquis of Winchester, who has a
fine seat in this neighborhood, came with his daughter, to spend some days
with Lord and Lady Granville. -- I have never seen more dignity and grace
united, than in Lady Charlotte Villiers: She is extremely handsome, and
possesses a ready wit, which, as it is never displayed either to attract
admiration, or give unnecessary pain, has the effect of rendering her
conversation in the highest degree entertaining. She distinguishes me by her
notice; and, when we parted, solicited my friendship and correspondence, in a
manner truly pleasing, and which did me much honor. But shall I confess to my
Adelaide, I feel more admiration than complacency for Lady Charlotte? I cannot
shake off the restraint which difference of rank imposes; and, through the
nobleness of her sentiments, I can yet perceive that she values herself on the
superiority of her birth. Besides, though highly accomplished, and extremely
agreeable, Lady Charlotte wants that irresistible charm which sensibility adds
to the female character. She sometimes amuses herself with laughing at the
guiltless weaknesses of her species, but never exposes them to public view. She
despises popularity, and testifies her friendship, by placing your foibles in a
light at once so striking and ridiculous, that, being neither able to excuse
nor deny, you have no way left but to abjure them.

"I often draw a comparison between my beloved friend, and this admired beauty:
Her perfections, like the meridian sun, dazzle and fatigue the sight -- Yours,
my Adelaide, resemble the soft mild luster of the queen of Heaven, whose
charming aspect we used to contemplate together, with such ineffable delight,
in the gardens of St. Cire. -- Oh! with what pleasing melancholy, what tender
regret, do I recall the hours spent there! -- Is there not, my beloved friend,
something inexplicable in these sadly soothing frames of mind, when it pleases
us to be pained, and when sorrow is mingled with satisfaction?

LOUISA SEYMOUR.


Soon after the arrival of the Granville family at Bath, they went to visit the
rooms. Whilst they were walking there, a lady entered, leaning on a genteel
young man, both in deep mourning; whom Louisa instantly discovered to be her
traveling companions, Mrs. Stanhope, and her son. They mutually expressed
their satisfaction on occasion of this unexpected meeting; and Mr. Stanhope,
with marks of the tenderest sensibility, condoled with Louisa on the loss she
had sustained, acquainting her at the same time with the death of his father,
which had likewise happened since they parted at Dover.

As Miss Seymour looked very pale and dejected, he could not help expressing
great solicitude about her health, the loss of which he feared had induced her
to visit Bath at that unfashionable season. Louisa, after proper
acknowledgments, and informing him of the cause of her journey, turning to Lady
Granville, "Permit me, Madam," said she, to introduce Mrs. Stanhope and her son
to your acquaintance; their merit claims your esteem, and my obligations to
their kindness will secure them your friendship.

Lord Hastings, from the opposite side of the room, had observed with attention
the pleasing surprise Louisa expressed on seeing Mr. Stanhope. He came up to
them at the moment she uttered the last sentence, and was lost in amazement at
her speech, the import of which he could not possibly comprehend, as he had not
heard the name of Stanhope, and knew of no friends whith whom Miss Seymour
could be on so familiar a footing.

He soon observed the constant and pointed attention paid her by Mr. Stanhope,
which she received with the sweetest complacency; and jealousy was now added to
the other restless passions that distracted his soul. But, though divided by
turns between fear, suspense, and jealousy, love maintained its empire there.
Louisa appeared with superior advantages in every new point of light. Modesty,
humility, and ingenuity, were the constant inmates of her gentle bosom; and she
appeared with the same unconscious sweetness, and dignified composure, in
public crowds of the gay and the dissipated, as when seated in the private
circle of her chosen friends.

As soon as they returned home, Lord Hastings enquired eagerly after the name
and quality of the strangers. Louisa readily informed him; and at the same time
mentioned the kindness shown by them to her mother, in terms of such lively
gratitude, as excited his envy, and confirmed his suspicions.

Louisa observed, with extreme pain, the uneasiness of his mind, and depression
of his spirits. -- The diffidence of his manner, whenever he addressed her, and
the respectful attention with which he treated her, convinced her, that she had
injured him by her former suspicions. No sooner did her judgment make this
concession, than her heart eagerly seized it, to justify a thousand little
kindnesses, which she thought were due to a passion so tender and disinterested
as that of Lord Hastings.

To Miss Seymour.
There is a tender pleasure, my Louisa, in reflecting, that, perhaps at the
same instant, though divided by many hundred miles, the same glowing affection
is animating our hearts, the same pleasing task employing our hands.

Believe me, it is with real satisfaction I hear of your forming new
intimacies: Do not be afraid, my amiable, my ingenuous friend, to admit Lady
Charlotte to a share of your affection: I am confident I shall not be a loser
on that account. You cannot be unjust; and the unequalled fondness I bear you,
is my security for the strength and constancy of your attachment. -- Long
accustomed to the study of those valuable characters who compose our favorite
circle, and who are all the world to us, we come at length to believe, that
within this circle is comprised all that is valuable in the world. Friendship
annihilates their foibles and magnifies their virtues: Others lose greatly by
comparison; and hence the social and benevolent affections come at length to be
confined to a sphere far too narrow and limited for their healthful exercise.
Intimacy with a viriety of characters gives the mind more enlarged ideas, and a
more liberal turn; and by discovering various great and good qualities in
individuals, we are induced to give credit to our species for many more which
we want opportunity to develop.

Let me warn my beloved friend against cherishing that false delicacy and
excessive refinement which would wholly unfit her for commerce with the world,
and that station which Providence has assigned her there. Philanthropy, in
some measure, conforms the human to the divine nature: Though there are harsh
features in some characters, there are good qualities in all; and though the
vices of individuals excite a virtuous indignation for our species, as a
collective body, let us ever cherish the sweet glow of benevolence.

Though sensibility adds grace to virtue, if it becomes so exquisite as to
occasion more pain and disgust than pleasure to its possessor, it can no longer
be regarded as a blessing. Approbation is a pleasant sentiment; but it is a
real misfortune to have acquired that degree of refinement, which gives us a
disrelish for the ordinary pursuits and satisfactions of life. -- When we enter
the great theater of the world, we find two representations of human life: One,
the work of imagination, a young giddy enthusiast, -- the other, that of
experience, a sober skilful artist. The first presents you only with
exaggerated features, deceitful proportions, and random strokes, which confound
and mislead the judgment. In the work of the other, light and shade are
judiciously blended; and through the whole you may trace beauty, symmetry, and
design: Every feature is mellowed by time; and if you are not dazzled with its
luster, neither will you be disgusted with its faults.

To view this picture in the fairest l^^ht; in other words, to make the best of
every thing, is the great art of life.


To Miss Seymour.
Professions of esteem and affection, are among those truths which we find so
agreeable to the interests of self-love, that we seldom incline to question
their sincerity. Yours I receive with implicit faith, and hold them as sacred
as my creed, in spite of surly conscience, who cavils at the foundation on
which they are built. -- I wish, Louisa, you would get rid of that antiquated,
useless virtue, modesty, which every body admires, and nobody rewards. How
often shall I assure you, that your letters give me pleasure; -- that I peruse
them with eagerness; -- that I sigh when I come to their close? Oh! I
anticipate your malicious inference; but I assure you, it is the shortness, not
length, of your letters which occasions my sighing. Perhaps, I ought rather to
applaud, than blame your generous caution; you know sweet morsels are apt to
pall, and tremble lest you should give me a surfeit.

With that dissidence which always accompanies genuine merit, you disclaim the
praise due to your late conduct to poor Sally, and allege that your generosity
proceeded from a desire to indulge yourself. You wrong yourself, my Louisa;
pleasure has been the reward, whilst virtue was the source of your conduct.

I know there are some who arrogate to themselves the title of Philosophers,
but who in fact are no lovers of wisdom, but mere lovers of paradox, that
derive all our actions from the selfish principle. Let us detect the fallacy.
No man could rightly estimate the pleasure of goodness, till he had himself
been good. From what motive then arose the first benevolent action?

Again, you affirm, that your charity was not disinterested, because you hoped
by it to obtain my approbation. Our actions, my dear Miss Seymour, are seldom
the result of a single principle, but flow from a complex variety of motives.
To wish for the approbation of the good, is at least innocent, and cannot
therefore contaminate the action to which it gives rise. And, although your
charity may have looked to this as a part of its reward, yet a deed which in
part was prompted by compassion, is not therefore to be stripped quite naked of
merit. Let us guard against pride, by an impartial examination of the hidden
springs of our conduct; but let us shun also too severe a scrutiny, lest
deprived of the support of self-approbation, the vigor of our minds fail, for
want of that reviving cordial which our benignant Creator has provided as an
encouragement to perseverance in virtue.

You tell me, you are surprised that a person with my advantages, and living so
much in the gay world, should have nothing of the coquette in her disposition.
-- To my father, Louisa, I am indebted for this. Deprived in infancy of my
mother, his whole attention has been bestowed on me, and I have been his
constant companion from a child.

He knows human nature; and having made my temper his peculiar study, took
advantage of my high spirit, to inspire me early with the laudable ambition of
excelling in mental, rather than personal qualifications. He opposed one
passion to another, and taught the pride of superior intelligence to combat the
rage for admiration.

Perhaps you will think he has still much to conquer, when, in the course of
one letter, I can betray two foibles, vanity and loquacity. -- See the
confidence I have in your friendship!

Though your last very flattering letter would not perhaps have gratified the
very learned and curious Athenians, who delighted chiefly in hearing something
new, yet it contained some old truths which one never tires of hearing. Repeat
them often, my dear Louisa; and be assured, that to obtain your affection and
esteem, will gratify the highest ambition of

Your sincere, though aspiring friend, CHARLOTTE VILLIERS.


To Lady Charlotte Villiers.
You rally me, my dear Lady Charlotte, on my seriousness and love of
retirement, which you term unnatural at my age. Truth is, though we may live in
the world without adopting its prejudices, or being corrupted by its vices, we
can hardly avoid being conformed to its customs and manners, which are utterly
repugnant both to my principles and taste.

The absurdity of these will not strike your mind, because they have long been
familiar to you; but permit me to ask, what can be more unnatural, ridiculous,
disingenuous, and even criminal, than the whole life and conduct of a fine
Lady! -- Let me attempt the picture: At the expense of health and duty, she
wastes in sleep or sloth those still, serene, delightful hours, which ought to
be devoted to the improvement of her mind and regulation of her family. She
gets up with uneasy reflections on the losses, disappointments, and
mortifications of the preceding day; or else with no reflections at all. Her
temper is fretted during the tedious duties of the toilette, by discovering in
her face the sure, though silent, ravages of time and dissipation. Chagrined
with herself, she vents her ill-humour indiscriminately on all who approach
her; and her caprice and injustice teach even her children and domestics to
despise her. Utterly ignorant of happiness, she wastes the precious hours of
life in vainly contriving the means of rendering them happy. To dissipate that
time, which she knows not to enjoy, yet whose silent lapse she marks with
terror, and deplores with anguish, she sets out on a round of visits, in full
confidence of being denied admittance by all who call themselves her friends,
and whom she would indeed rank as enemies, did they consent to see her. But if,
by some unfortunate mistake, their doors are opened to receive her, she
execrates the fault; and with consummate art, and heroic dissimulation,
instantly converts her frowns into smiles, and flies with open arms to meet the
very person, whom in her heart she hates, despises, envies, and defames. --
Company joins her at her superb, but joyless and inhospitable meal. There, want
of confidence and esteem throws restraint and coldness into conversation; for
where there is no mutual desire to please and be pleased, disgust and
indifference must take place of social intercourse, harmony, and cheerfulness.
-- Public amusements fill up the tedious night; -- amusements! grown not only
tasteless but burdensome by repetition. Frivolous conversation, unmeanning
gallantry, insipid pleasures, and ruinous gaming, sum up the joys of a fine
lady. -- She may, indeed, be said to walk in a vain show; for her life is a
train of unsuccessful deceit, which cannot impose upon the world, and which
neither promotes her interest nor comfort. Her rankling passions increase with
her years; her heart is the receptacle of pride, envy, malevolence, and
disgust: -- Her youth is wasted in folly, her age has no friends: She lives
without enjoyment, she dies without hope!

Perhaps, my dear Lady Charlotte, you think me too severe. Believe me, it was
Truth that guided the pencil, and Experience that finished the piece. The
glowing colors of imagination had no place there.

I confess I am shocked and disgusted beyond expression with the levity, and
even rudeness, of those, who call themselves the polite world. Would you
believe it, I have been frequently ridiculed here, for my present mourning
habit? The only outward testimony I can give, of that reverence I shall ever
feel, for the memory of the best of mothers!

Two young ladies of fashion stood near me last night; when, after
disconcerting me extremely, by scanning me from head to foot, with looks of
ineffable contempt, This deep mourning for a mother, said one of them, who has
already been dead two months, is absurd affectation. -- Ah, my dear, replied
the other, this mushroom beauty, whom nobody knows, is not so ignorant as not
to perceive the effect black has, in heightening the delicacy of such a skin
and complexion.

I am not conscious of being vain or conceited, Lady Charlotte; but if I am,
this is not the proper way of correcting me. -- I will not allow myself,
however, to feel lasting resentment, where, perhaps, no insult was intended.
These young ladies were not conscious of the pain they were inflicting, and,
besides -- they had not lost a mother! -- With respect to changing my dress, I
shall not regulate my conduct by their opinion. I can never regard the practice
of wearing mourning solely in the light of compliance with custom: It seems
intended as a security against those wounds, which a heart, yet sore from
recent distress, would feel, from witnessing the extravagance of mirth, or
thoughtlessness of levity. -- Intemperate must that mind be, which the presence
of a person, whose countenance and habit express the real mourner, will not awe
for a little into something like seriousness. -- Another custom, too, prevails
in the world, which I think both cruel and unnecessary -- That of admitting
into the presence of one in deep affliction, all those who, under the pretense
of sympathy, seek only to gratify an impertinent and most disgusting curiosity.
Non^ but those who intimately know the heart, are qualified deeply to
sympathise in its sorrows; and the sorrows of the heart are of too sacred a
nature to be laid open to the inspection of every superficial acquaintance and
idle visitor.

Adieu, my dear Lady Charlotte; the friendship with which you honor me, gives
me a right to share in both the pains and pleasures of yours. To alleviate the
one, and augment the other, will ever add to the enjoyment of

Your sincere friend, LOUISA SEYMOUR.


To Miss Seymour.
You tell me, my amiable friend, that my letters at once amuse and delight you:
I can easily believe that a heart so tender, will find sensible pleasure in
sympathising in the feelings of mine; -- but indeed, Louisa, the quiet and
uniform tenor of the conventual life, furnishes but very few topics of
amusement. -- There is nothing, however, from which a contemplative mind may
not derive instruction. Whether we confine our views to earth, or raise them to
Heaven, we shall find new cause to admire the wisdom and extol the goodness of
the Creator, God!

Like you, I am a passionate, admirer of the simple beauties of nature. Artless
expressions are ever the most pethetic; and therefore those objects which owe
their charms to nature alone, are most in harmony with my present feelings. --
But whilst we, my friend, felicitate ourselves on possessing a taste which can
derive pleasure from so many sources, ought we not to adore that Being, who,
attentive not only to the necessities, but enjoyment of his creatures, has
adjusted these to their various capacities of happiness?

The scenes, my Louisa, which contribute to my instruction, as well as
pleasure, are those to which I most frequently resort. The weak state of my
health making change of air necessary, my mother, with permission of the
Abbess, has brought me once more to the scenes of my earliest, happiest years.
With what mournful pleasure, what tender regret, do I look back on those years?
-- Happy! healthful! and innocent! -- Ah! my friend, how ignorant are we then
of the value of these blessings? It is not till the streams of prosperity are
dried up, that we are sensible how plenteously they have flowed: Mine, Louisa,
are cut off for ever!

Nothing presents a more striking emblem of Time, than a silent and
smooth-flowing river; such as that I have just been contemplating. To the
careless and inattentive eye, it seems always the ^ame; but the various
portions of which it is composed, are gliding imperceptibly away, whilst the
little flowerets that enamel its banks, and which it matures in its course, are
likewise secretly undermined by its current.

But a few months are passed, since we traced together the course of this
river: Its waters were then pure and transparent; -- we admired its beauty, and
were refreshed with its coolness. How is the scene changed? Swollen by a
torrent of descending rains, it has burst its bounds; and, dark, troubled,
impetuous, it rolls along, involving, in its wasteful progress, every herb and
flower which it formerly nourished! -- So fares it with the human soul --
There, whilst the affections flow in their smooth and natural course, the seeds
of virtue spring, and its flowers blossom. But no sooner does the storm of
passion arise, than every noble thought, and generous wish, and useful aim, are
violently swept away into the gulf of oblivion!

Be it our care, my Louisa, to preserve the stream of our affections pure from
every stain; and to cherish those virtues which Heaven has committed to our
care, till they shall grow up to beauty and perfection, and be transplanted to
a milder clime, where they shall imbibe the rays of a neversetting sun, and
flourish, with increasing strength, beauty and vigor, for ever!

Adieu, my amiable friend -- Let us think oftener of the blessings which
remain, than of those which are taken away from us; and of the calamities we
escape, than on the slight evils we are obliged a little while to endure. --
Adieu.


To Miss Seymour.
-- Well, Louisa, I shall positively become a convert to modern philosophy, if
I continue long in this world; and, disclaiming all confidence in the testimony
of my senses, believe that there is nothing real in the universe, but that all
we see, and hear, and act, is nothing more than a bundle of fallacious
impressions, inconceivable ideas, unperceivable perceptions, and I know not
what.

Do you know I have for ever offended Miss --, by my reserved behavior
yesterday. You may remember, when she left the country, she was a little, thin,
red-haired, puny girl; -- but mark what metamorphoses one winter in London
produces! -- Not Ovid, nay, nor Circe herself, could effect what lead-combs,
paint, and powder atchieve in that mart of vanity and school of deceit. -- I
was surprised to be addressed yesterday, on coming out of church, by a
stranger, in a manner so vulgarly familiar, as quite shocked me. It was a tall,
rosy, brisk, bourgeois figure, with dark eyebrows and chestnut hair; and whom I
should just as soon have taken for the Cham of Tartary as Miss --.

Pray, my dear, do you think in your conscience, that one is obliged to know
one's friends under such disguises? Who shall hereafter pretend to determine on
identity of person, when it is in the power of the milliner, mantua-maker,
persumer, and friseur, to new-model and make us just what they please?

You have drawn such a true, but shocking picture of fashionable life, that I
am terrified with the view of it; -- and now, being heartily sick of this
world, and not quite ready for a better, you must positively reconcile me to my
allotted station here, by giving me, in opposition to the "unnatural,
ridiculous, disingenuous, and criminal character of a woman of fashion," a just
representation of what you deem a natural, proper, agreeable, and virtuous
tenor of conduct; -- in other words, the picture of an unfashionable ^^^^an.

Having succeeded so happily in your portrait of a fine lady, I must insist on
immediately seeing her counterpart -- a lifeless, sober, insipid dowdy, I
suppose, commonly called 'a good sort of woman;' but, in my opinion, the worst
woman in the world -- who tires one to death with relating facts which every
body knows -- affirming truths which nobody disputes -- descanting on
characters which nobody cares for -- and proving herself beyond dispute a woman
good for nothing but plain work, cookery, and breeding.

Like your fine lady, and every body who is displeased with themselves, I can
be pleased with nothing besides. Hasten then to restore me to temper, by a more
agreeable picture than that you have set before me. Ah! Louisa, though Bath
doubtless contains many such caricatures as you represent, it is at Bath at
present I would look for virtue in her fairest form. -- You need not take that
trouble; for in some cases you are so obstinately blind, that I know you will
never discover her, under the veil which modesty throws over every perfection
of that object, who is often present to the thoughts, and always dear to the
heart of her

CHARLOTTE VILLIERS.


To Lady Charlotte Villiers.
You are resolved to punish me for my presumption, my dear Lady Charlotte, by
imposing on me a task, to which I am by no means equal. Your approbation
flatters me exceedingly; but beware how you nourish my self-conceit. I may
dispute my own merit, but cannot question your judgment; and your influence
over mine, renders you in some measure responsible for my conduct. Though my
power to amuse you is very limited, my inclination to oblige you is boundless:
As a proof of it, at your desire, I resume my pen, in order to delineate, in
the best manner I can, my idea of a reasonable woman.

Your model of a good sort of woman is every where to be found; but where are
we to look for a reasonable one? Perhaps you will allege it has no existence
but in my own imagination. Let us try at least, my admired friend, by our
conduct, to realize it.

After a night of healthful repose, the reasonable woman rises in that happy
tranquil frame of mind, which results from pleasant reflection on the past day,
and anticipating the temperate pleasures and important duties of the commencing
one. Its first moments are devoted as due to that Being whom she regards with
filial love, gratitude, and reverence; and whom she approaches, not with the
lifeless prostrations of fear, but with the devout and cheerful homage of the
heart. Before engaging in domestic cares, she prepares her mind for meeting
with firmness, or bearing with patience, the little rubs and vexations of (...)
day^* She plans a thousand schemes of benevolence and (...); and the good she
cannot perform, but generously intends, is (...) in Heaven as virtue -- The
time necessarily spent at her toilette, is short; it is, however, rendered
pleasing by the delightful hope of becoming, by means of its adventitious (...)
more agreeable in the eyes of a husband* ^^om she loves too tenderly to omit a
single opportunity of complying with his taste, or confirming his esteem. --
Books, work, and above all, the important duty of impressing the infant minds
of her children with that love of goodness which insensibly leads to the
practice of it, fill up the rest of the morning. -- Through the day, she checks
the little sallies of her own temper, and, unobserved, steals from others, by
the influence of her good humor, every disquieting care. To them her time, her
taste, are often sacrificed; but conscious benevolence does more than repay
her. -- Her conversation, equally remote from chilling reserve and petulant
loquacity, has no aim, but to instruct or amuse; and in her care to please
others, she seems wholly to forget herself. -- Her elegant, yet frugal board,
presents a striking emblem of her mind. There, plenty is seen without
profusion, and neatness without ostentation. Good-taste, good-breeding,
good-sense, and mild complacency, teach her guests to forget they are
strangers, and to feel they are friends. -- Her husband beholds her with
mingled pride and pleasure; and his approbation, though silent, diffuses joy
through her heart, and cheerfulness through her conversation. -- The evening is
passed amidst the chosen circle, with whom she knows no reserves, and whose
accumulated happiness becomes her own. Conversation, if useful or agreeable, is
encouraged; if dull, relieved by the aids which the fine arts supply to those
who cultivate them. Music, dancing, cards, are occasionally called in; and even
those amusements for which she has no relish herself, she cheerfully adopts, in
the hope of contributing to the enjoyment of others. -- Public diversions are
sometimes visited, but always tend with the reasonable woman to increase her
love of social and domestic pleasures. -- When in public, she appears with
propriety and modesty. She envies not beauty, -- she covets not grandeur, --
she seeks not to engage attention; for, in the pleasing consciousness of
discharging her duty, in the love of her husband, and esteem of her friends,
she finds complete happiness. Such is a reasonable woman! The very opposite of
a fashionable one. If we hesitate to which to give the preference, we may,
perhaps, with much propriety, deserve to be ranked in the latter class; but we
certainly can form no pretensions to the name or character of the former.

After all, my dear Lady Charlotte, is it not astonishing that we are at so
little pains to become reasonable women? We whose limited and domestic
situation renders the cultivation of the lesser morals, the mild and gentle
virtues, essential to our comfort. There are few people who are not capable of
great and generous actions, when they know by them they will excite admiration
and obtain applause; but in private life, where our virtues pass unheeded, we
are at little pains to become disinterested, benevolent, or self-denied. It is
in private life, however, that opportunities are constantly occurring for the
exercise of these virtues, and where we can at once witness and profit by their
effects: But mankind, in general, prefer the unmeaning voice of the multitude
to the soothing approbation of their own minds.

Adieu, my friend! If I continue to moralize any longer, you will with justice
pronounce me, a most UNREASONABLE WOMAN.

LOUISA SEYMOUR.


About this time, Mr. Valois, a very eminent (...) painter, (...) at Bath, Lady
Granville felt the strongest desire to have a picture of her son, as the time
fixed for his going abroad fast approached.

When she made this request to Lord Hastings, he expressed the greatest
reluctance to having his likeness taken at that time; conscious, perhaps, that
the state of his mind was not such as would give an agreeable expression to his
features. Miss Seymour was not present when this subject was mentioned. On
entering the room, Come hither, my dear Louisa, said Lady Granville, and help
me to persuade this perverse son of mine to do his duty: Sure I am he can never
have a fitter pattern or more able instructor. This is the first time he ever
opposed my will; and as he can form no reasonable pretext for his
noncompliance, I am resolved to assert the prerogative of a mother, and insist
on his immediate performance of his duty; or else I shall certainly punish him
as a rebel.

Louisa's color went and came during this speech, the meaning of which it was
impossible for her to divine. Looking first at Lady Granville, and then at Lord
Hastings, her timid eyes seemed to demand an explanation of it. My mother is
very desirous, Miss Seymour, said he, of having my picture; but there is only
one condition that will prevail on me to submit to this tiresome operation. You
must set the example of my duty, and reward me for performing it, by having
your own done at the same time.

Lady Granville was not aware of the consequence of her request, else her
prudence would have prevented her from making it. Several circumstances
combined to persuade her, that Lord Hastings took a more lively interest in her
young favorite, than she thought consistent, either with his present ease or
future prospects. She could not avoid, however, seconding her son's proposal,
and added, with equal prudence and politeness, I shall envy nobody when I shall
have two such pleasant friends in my possession. -- Lord Hastings urged his
request with a warmth and importunity that exceedingly disconcerted Louisa.
Ever fearful of betraying her secret sentiments, though she knew not how to
refuse, she greatly dreaded complying; but in this instance her prudence was
overborne, by her strong inclination to oblige him. Though Lord Hastings
remarked her hesitation and embarrassment, without knowing the cause, he was
sensibly gratified by her obliging compliance.

The coach was immediately ordered, and they drove to the lodging of Mr.
Valoi^; who being then disengaged, begged leave to take the outlines of the two
pictures, as his time at Bath was very uncertain.

A little dispute now arose between Miss Seymour and Lord Hastings, with
respect to who should sit first. Louisa said, that as Mr. Valois's time was
uncertain, it was undoubtedly proper, that the picture of Lord Hastings should
be first finished; but he, recurring to his mother's speech, insisted on her
setting the example. This little altercation gave an agreeable heightening to
the delicate complexion of Louisa. As she was dressed in a large morning cap,
the painter found it necessary to have it removed, in order to obtain a full
view of her cheek, as she was to be drawn in profile. This trifling
circumstance exceedingly disconcerted the modest and gentle Louisa, whose
elegant mind was exquisitely sensible to every feeling of propriety. She looked
abashed, her color increased; Lady Granville saw her embarrassment; and in
order to relieve it, "Come, my love," said she, we will retire a a moment, and
I will myself try to perform the office of friseur: Mr. Valois will excuse me,
though I should not prove very dexterous in my new profession.

During their short absence, the scene in the park at Springwood occurred to
the memory of Lord Hastings. He was seized with the most passionate desire to
have Louisa drawn in the very attitude in which he had beheld her at the grave
of her mother. Afraid of the penetrating eyes of his own, he had not courage to
propose it; and not having a moment to lose, -- "As this Lady, Sir," said he,
"is in the habit of a mourner, I should imagine the attitude most favorable
for the character of her face would be that of devotion." The painter being
perfectly of his opinion, he proposed on return of the ladies, that Miss
Seymour should take a seat near the window, and fix her eyes on the ceiling for
a few minutes.

What were the agitating emotions which Lord Hastings experienced during their
progress! An association of ideas, altogether delightful, occupied, his mind,
and his eyes were rivetted to a face, whos^^whole loveliness he had never till
that time had a^" opportunity of observing. -- Her fine chestnut ha^^er
contrasted with the whiteness and delicacy of ^^mskin, and the glow of
exquisite sensibility, occasioned by the novelty of her situation, rendered her
so inimitably beautiful, that the artist, as well as the lover, was rapt in
silent admiration.

She arose, and Lord Hastings unwillingly took her place. -- Some difficulty
now occurred about the attitude in which he should be drawn; the painter having
remarked the uncommon and animated expression of his fine eyes, requested
permission to take his full face.

No time could have been more favorable to do justice both to the excellency
of the subject and skill of the artist. The countenance of Lord Hastings was
lighted up by a variety of the sweetest and most tender sensations; and the
object on whom his eyes were chiefly fixed was not likely to dissipate them.

The pictures were finished, and met with universal approbation. But as they
were confessedly the most beautiful and highly finished pieces in his
collection, Mr. Valois begged permission to detain them a little while in his
possession, as they did him much credit by being shown. One morning when Mrs.
Stanhope called to take Miss Seymour out an airing, she expressed the greatest
curiosity to see the pictures, on which, she said, she heard the highest
encomiums lavished wherever she went. Accordingly they drove to the painter's,
who appeared to be extremely hurried. -- I have just received accounts, Madam,
said he, to Miss Seymour, of the death of a relation, which obliges (...) me to
set out this very night for London. I was about to send the pictures, but
perhaps you will take the trouble of carrying them home yourself. Louisa took
out her purse; but Mr. Valois prevented her, by saying they were already paid
for. Then stepping to the table, and taking out of the drawer a little sealed
packet, he said, in a low voice, May I beg, Madam, that you will have the
goodness to present this to Lord Hastings, when nobody is present. -- The
astonished Louisa hesitated a moment, not knowing what answer to make, but
afraid of being observed by her companion, she put it hastily into her pocket.
Her desire to know the contents of this little parcel was extreme, but it
proceeded not from curiosity alone; a sentiment a thousand times more powerful,
more irresistible, excited it. She shuddered at the bare idea of doing a mean
or dishonorable action; she determined to conquer her present temptation to
it; but an accident instantly occurred, that left her no time for hesitating
about what conduct she ought to pursue. Having set down Mrs. Stanhope at her
own lodgings, she proceeded in her coach to those of Lord Granville; on
stepping out, the foot-board being much lower than that to which she was
accustomed, her foot slipped, and she fell to the ground with violence. The
bustle this accident occasioned in the hall reached Lord Hastings, who, on
hearing Louisa's voice, flew to her assistance. On seeing her pale and
trembling, "Good Heaven, Miss Seymour," cried he, eagerly, "what is the
matter?" Nothing at all, my Lord, answered she, smiling, but with a voice still
faultering with fear and agitation; "Indeed, I shall be quite well presently."
He supported her into the parlour, and spoke to her in a manner, and with a
tone so softened with compassion, that she was tempted to regret she had so
little excuse for exciting it. As Lady Granville was abroad, he contrived,
under pretense of giving her time to recover from the shock she had got by her
fall, to detain her in the parlour for half an hour; during which, an
interesting conversation took place; and he found opportunity of testifying to
her those watchful and quiet attentions that flow directly from the heart, and
of which the heart knows the full value.

Though there never could have been a more favorable opportunity than the
present for complying with the request of the painter, Louisa could not find
courage to give Lord Hastings the packet herself; but delayed fixing on the
proper means of conveying it to him till she should reach her own apartment. As
soon as she did so, she took it out of her pocket; and discovered, with great
emotion, that the seal had been broken by her fall. Her curiosity now became
irresistible. -- "Surely," whispered she to herself, there can be nothing in a
parcel from Mr. Valois to Lord Hastings that I may not see! -- In any other
instance but this, Miss Seymour would have argued in a different manner. Too
well do we know how reason will weigh and judgment determine, when inclination
holds the balance. -- She unfolded a paper, in which was a picture sealed up,
and an open billet containing these words:

I have strictly observed your Lordship's injunctions; -- no eye but my own has
seen this picture. I have folded the hands in the form of adoration, as you
directed, and think the whole piece improved by this circumstance. Your
Lordship's generous present I accept with gratitude, as a proof that my labors
have obtained your approbation.

I am, my Lord, with respect and esteem, Your Lordship's Obliged humble
servant, J. VALOIS.


Whilst Louisa perused this billet, she was seized with such a faintish
sickness, and her hand trembled so violently, that for some minutes she was
unable to unclasp the picture. At last she did so; and with a feeling of
mingled delight and astonishment, perceived that it was a copy of her own.

The pure and animated pleasure with which this discovery inspired the gentle
bosom of Louisa, is not to be described. She now indulged, without restraint,
the enchanting conviction, that she was beloved; and the soothing hope of being
one day at liberty to avow to the deserving object of her tenderness, those
sentiments which at present she so carefully concealed. She grudged every
moment till the picture should be in the possession of Lord Hastings; yet knew
not how to convey it to him, without incurring suspicion of having herself been
the bearer. Consciousness made her cowardly; and in her eagerness to contrive
the means of executing her purpose and avoiding suspicion, she overlooked the
one least liable to it. -- At length it occurred to her thoughts. -- "O!"
whispered she, as she wrapped up the picture, may this lifeless image often
recall me to his memory, and preserve me a place in his heart, during the long,
long hours of absence! Would it could convey to that heart the tender gratitude
of mine!

Recollecting that there could be no danger of any ecclaircissement between
Lord Hastings and Mr. Valois, she enclosed the letter and picture in a blank
cover; and ringing for her maid, desired her to give the parcel to Lord
Hastings's servant, and to bid him acquaint his master, that it came from Mr.
Valois, who was gone out of town. -- The maid returned, and informed her, that
she had obeyed her orders; and at the same time presented her with the
following letter from Lady Charlotte, which, being in perfect unison with the
present cheerful tone of her mind, tended not a little to heighten the charms
of her animated countenance.

To Miss Seymour.
How happy, Louisa, should I be, if, in loving you, I durst believe I was
loving myself! But you are an artful little sophist; and by imposing this
fallacy upon me, are slily pilfering away the little remains of that heart, of
which you had almost entirely robbed me. --

But why do I talk of love? -- Envy and jealousy now wholly possess me! -- You
not only successfully intimate, you excel me at my own weapons! What mortal
could bear to be thus outshone? -- Not even your reasonable woman, Louisa; --
how much less a fashionable one?

I verily believe the word love will be expunged from the English vocabulary,
and pride, vanity, and interest placed in its stead. You know I hate to be
pitied; but how can you withhold your pity, when you behold your poor friend,
rivalled, at once in genius, love, fortune, and fame? I do not wish to kill you
with surprise; but whatever is the consequence, I must inform you, that Miss
Nelson, the young -- the gay -- the beautiful -- the ALL FOR LOVE! is married
to the old -- the gouty -- the peevish -- the good-for-nothing Lord Westdale.
She has wedded wealth and grandeur: -- May she taste all the happiness they are
calculated to bestow! -- Is not this wish, Louisa, like a REASONABLE WOMAN?

But I must tell you all in due order. I went to dine today at -- A bustle on
the street drew me to the window: I threw up the fash; but, Heavens! what was
my astonishment, my mortification, when I beheld my quondam lover, Lord
Westdale, setting out with his bride, with all the charming apparatus of
marriage sinery -- carriages -- liveries -- favors! My heart died within me,
and my pangs were increased by the bitter reflection, that all this happiness
might have been my own. In the midst of my affliction, however, I have derived
some consolation from the prudent suggestions of good aunt Gertrude. She is of
opinion, that there is still room for hope, since he has already buried three
wives; and kindly adds, that if I am fortunate enough to be successor to the
present incumbent, I shall probably see him out, and remain mistress of the
field.

I shall be with you in a few days, that I may be able to judge of the effects
of Bath. I doubt not it has produced a total revolution in your opinions, and
fitted you for living in that world where you are so well qualified to shine.
May your reformation become every day more complete; may I see you spend the
whole morning at your toilette, the whole evening at cards, the whole night in
dancing, and the whole day in sleep. -- Nay, not contented with seeing you
become exemplary in fashion, and eminent in folly, may I live to hear you
transmitting your precepts and improvements to posterity; and instructing your
favorite granddaughter in the manner following:

You ask me, my dear child, the name and history of that pretty boy with a bow
and quiver, whom you see in the arras? -- You must know, that long, long ago,
this roguish archer was a mighty favorite, especially among the little misses.
But, in process of time, their wise parents began to discover, that he taught
them a thousand mischievous tricks, by means of these very arrows; which they
used to steal from him, and shoot at the poor harmless boys, who were minding
not one earthly thing but their book and exercises. To say truth, I believe he
had no ill intention; but being forbid the house, whenever he ventured to
revisit his old companions, they were obliged to conceal him with the utmost
care. Unluckily, some of them, who had been expressly ordered to dismiss him
(and you know good children always do as they are bid) were discovered
harboring him in a secret corner, where they thought no one could see him. --
Upon which it was agreed by their papas and mammas, to bring a great tall
fellow, called Interest, to chase him out of the world. -- The poor boy, in
terror for his life, fled with the utmost precipitation, till he was met by
Poverty, who took him along with her into her hovel: His innocent prattle used
to sweeten her toil, and he assisted her in her labor, in reward for the
shelter she afforded him. It is greatly doubted whether he still exists; and as
he has not been seen in the world these many years, if he does live, it must
certainly be in some remote corner, with this poor ragged companion. --
'Indeed, Grandmamma,' says Louisa the third, with tears in her eyes, I am very
sorrow for poor little Master Cupid; and if I knew where to find him, I would
feed him with my own victuals, and carry him in my bosom like my doll. -- 'No,
no, my good child,' answers grandy, your doll is a much more harmless toy;
besides, you will soon grow up, and become a fine lady, and get acquainted with
Interest, who, to say truth, since he has been universally received into
genteel company, is grown a very handsome and agreeable fellow.

Now, my dear Louisa, to complete the sum of my pious wishes, may both your
instructions and example have their full effect in the world; and, for the good
of others, I pray Heaven that your children, and grandchildren, and latest
posterity, may in all things exactly resemble yourself.

CHARLOTTE VILLIERS.


On coming down to dinner, Miss Seymour found Mrs. Stanhope and her son in the
parlour, whom Lady Granville had met in her morning excursion. The moment Lord
Hastings entered the room, he enquired after Louisa's health, with marks of the
most tender solicitude. -- "How," demanded Lady Granville, "has Miss Seymour
been indisposed?" "Indeed, Madam," replied Lord Hastings, "though Miss Seymour is
always averse to give pain, I am confident she must have suffered by the
violence of her fall this morning." He then proceeded to give his mother an
account of it; but was interrupted by Louisa, who, seeing Lady Granville look
anxious and uneasy, rose, and taking hold of her hand, "I am quite ashamed,"
said she, "that Lord Hastings should make this so serious an affair: I assure
you, my dear Madam, I do not feel the slightest uneasiness -- I am perfectly
well." -- "I confess I am disposed to credit Miss Seymour, Madam," said Mrs.
Stanhope, turning to Lady Granville, "for in spite of his Lordship's
apprehensions, I really think I never saw her look so well in my life." A
conscious blush overspread the fine features of Louisa, which tended not a
little to render all the company of Mrs. Stanhope's opinion.

After dinner, the subject of the pictures was introduced, and occasioned, in
the hearts both of Lord Hastings and Miss Seymour, a variety of the sweetest
emotions. The former could not resist the pleasure of talking on it: "I know no
art," said he, "which furnishes the mind with so many pleasing ideas as
painting." -- "I should certainly except that of writing, my Lord," said Mr.
Stanhope. -- "Writing, indeed," replied his Lordship, "presents us with an
image of the soul, as painting does of the person of our friend: But the former
is not always open for our inspection; besides, a letter is liable to a
thousand accidents, and may never reach the person for whom it is designed; --
a picture accompanies us at all times, and in all places; -- a letter does not
always accord with our sentiments -- we can make a picture speak the very
language of our wishes." -- "I have heard so many encomiums bestowed on those
of Miss Seymour and your Lordship," said Mr. Stanhope, "that I confess I am
become very desirous of seeing them." -- "You must apply to me for that
favor," said Lady Granville, "for I value them too highly ever to trust them
out of my possession." -- She gave him the pictures: On looking at Miss
Seymour's, "Your Ladyship surely cannot be so unconscionable," said he, "as to
keep possession both of this copy and the charming original?" -- "Indeed, Mr.
Stanhope," she replied, "I shall find very great difficulty in parting with
either; but as a time will probably arrive when I must resign my right in Miss
Seymour, I am resolved at least to retain her image in my possession." -- "That
image, Madam," rejoined he, "is so dear to her friends, that I am persuaded you
will not refuse them a share in your pleasure, by permitting them to have
copies taken of this admirable picture. -- You know Miss Seymour," continued
he, addressing himself to Louisa, "it is long since you allowed my claim to the
title of friend: I flatter myself you will not be so unkind as to dispute it on
this occasion." -- "Indeed, Sir," answered she, with unaffected sweetness and
modesty, "my friends and I think very differently, I believe, on this subject;
and, to prevent any dispute about the matter, I must beg Lady Granville, from
whose partiality to the original the picture derives its chief merit, to take
it again into her possession:" So saying, she returned the picture to Lady
Granville, with a look and manner which convinced her, that she wished the
subject to be dropped. Lady Granville accordingly put the pictures into her
pocket.

Lord Hastings felt all the pleasure of a successful rival on this occasion. To
be possessed, even though by stealth, of that picture which Miss Seymour had
refused to Mr. Stanhope, gave him a joy so sincere, that it brightened his
countenance, and enlivened his conversation during the whole evening. -- Mr.
Stanhope, on the contrary, appeared absent, thoughtful, and uneasy. The
coldness of Louisa's manner to Lord Hastings, on their coming to Bath, had
removed from his mind all fear of his being a favored rival; but he could not
help remarking the mutual complacency they now showed for each other, and his
jealousy and apprehension gave weight to a thousand circumstances, which, to an
unconcerned spectator, would have appeared as nothing. He had long sought in
vain for an opportunity of speaking to Miss Seymour alone; and hearing that the
day was fixed for her leaving Bath, he resolved to be relieved from the torment
of suspense, and to convey to her, by means of a letter, those sentiments which
he found it impossible any longer to conceal.

Afraid of this letter being delivered to her before company, he contrived to
convey it to her himself, when coming out of the rooms; yet not so privately as
not to be observed by Lord Hastings, whose watchful eyes were continually fixed
on Louisa, and who instantly perceived the agitation produced in her mind by
this circumstance.

Miss Seymour had indeed begun to suspect, that Mr. Stanhope's sentiments for
her were of a nature still more tender than friendship; and was so sincerely
his friend, that she was greatly afflicted a^ the thought of giving him pain.
She therefore resolved, by constantly avoiding any private conversation with
him, to show him the improbability of succeeding in his suit; to prevent his
urging it, and, if possible, to save him the mortification of a refusal.

This generous conduct, however, had not the desired effect. The following
letter at once confirmed her suspicions, and showed her the inefficacy of her
measures:

To Miss Seymour.
MADAM,
With judgment and penetration like yours, I cannot suppose that you are
ignorant of the sentiments which have long taken possession of my heart: With
such constant opportunities of discovering the excellence of yours, how could
I remain insensible to your merit? -- Conscious, however, of the presumption of
cherishing those hopes it inspired, I have long struggled to conceal a passion,
which was painful to me, only because I feared it would be displeasing to you.
A certain coldness and restraint, but too visible of late in your manner,
leaves me no room to doubt either of your knowledge or disapprobation of the
most respectful, sincere, and constant, though, I fear, unfortunate attachment.

Think not, dear Miss Seymour, that hope has dictated this confession -- Ah!
no; it is fear -- it is apprehension alone, which has forced it from me: It is
the dread of losing your esteem, which is impelling me to a measure that may,
perhaps, for ever forfeit it. I hardly know what I write -- Oh! Miss Seymour,
pity the distraction of my mind; say, you forgive my presumption: If possible,
allow me to hope, from time, assiduity, and, above all, the exalted generosity
of your heart, that it will one day reply to the sentiments of mine. If you
cannot do this, teach me to abandon the only hope which could make life
desirable! -- Ah! Miss Seymour, rather teach me to forget it, in the enjoyment
of that peace, which I possessed before I rashly aspired to a dearer name than
that of friend! -- Alas! I fear, you never can restore my lost tranquillity;
yet do not, I beseech you, by your chilling indifference, add the bitterness of
felt contempt to the anguish of disappointment.

I will not offend you with my complaints -- only do not banish me from your
sight -- do not deprive me of my only consolation, that of justifying to myself
the indulgence of a passion I cannot conquer, by daily beholding new proofs of
those virtues which first inspired it.


Louisa's distress, on perusing this letter, was extreme; nor was it lessened
on being told next morning, by Lady Granville, that she had just been to wait
on Mrs. Stanhope, to request she and her son would accompany them to
Castle-Hastings, and spend a few weeks there. -- She was perplexed beyond
measure, with respect to the conduct she ought to hold; and, with a degree of
injustice, of which love often makes us guilty, felt resentment against Mr.
Stanhope, on account of the uneasiness she then suffered, from a passion which
too well she knew to excuse in herself; and which merited compassion in
proportion to its hopelessness; and actually disliked him, on account of that
preference, for which her reason told her, both esteem and gratitude were due.

Though no occasion of speaking to Miss Seymour in private, occurred before
leaving Bath, it was easy for Mr. Stanhope to discover how unwelcome the
contents of his letter had been to her: But though, from her studiousness to
avoid him, he was convinced of her indifference, and even apprehensive of her
dislike, he could not resist the desire he felt to accompany her; the pleasure
of beholding her, and the hope with which he flattered himself that the ardour
and constancy of his attachment would at length make a favorable impression,
on a mind so generous, and a heart so susceptible, as that of Miss Seymour.

Accordingly, the too families set off for the Castle; and, after making
several agreeable excursions in their way, arrived there in safety.

The first employment in which Louisa engaged, was that of writing to Adelaide;
accustomed to share with her every thought of her soul, she felt as if guilty
of treasonable concealment, till she should discover to that faithful friend,
the various sentiments with which here is was agitated.

END OF THE FIRST VOLUME.
INTERESTING MEMOIRS.

BY A LADY.

IN TWO VOLUMES.

VOL. II.

THE FOURTH EDITION.

NEW YORK: PRINTED BY T. ALLEN, BOOKSELLER AND STATIONER, NO. 12, QUEEN STREET.

1792.

INTERESTING MEMOIRS.
To Adelaide de St. Croix.
IT is with inexpressible satisfaction I learn, that the friend of my soul has
in some measure regained the tranquillity of here is. This, more than any other
circumstance, will contribute to the recovery of your health. Oh! may Heaven
perfect it, and spare you for the friend, the guide, the comfortress of your
Louisa!

Trust me, Adelaide, I almost envy you the repose you so feelingly describe,
and which, I fear, I have lost for ever! I cannot be so unjust to your tender
and generous friendship, as to hide from you the anxieties that prey upon my
heart. -- Hastings, the son of my benefactress -- the noble, generous,
accomplished Hastings, has, I fear, made too deep an impression there!

I will not conceal from you, that I believe I am beloved; but small is the
consolation that thought should afford me! Birth, fortune, every thing forbids
my aspiring wishes; -- gratitude alone ought for ever to repress them. But my
Adelaide will pity me; she knows that all these obstacles seem nothing to love.

In the midst of a thousand tormenting inquietudes, your friendship is a
never-failing source of pleasure and consolation. When fatigued with company,
or sick of my own reflections, I retire to a sweet apartment in the garden,
which is elegantly fitted up, and adorned with one ornament more valuable than
all the rest -- it is your picture, Adelaide, with which a thousand, thousand
tender ideas are connected: This little idol hallows the place in my
imagination, and I regard it as the temple of friendship -- I look up to it
with a mournful attention -- I gaze on it till it almost seems animated -- I
try to make it speak the language of my wishes, and your heart! It is silent --
I unfold your letters, and there find a faithful transcript of both.

Write to me constantly, my revered friend; Remind me of what I owe to Lady
Granville -- to Lord Hastings -- to myself* -- Your letters will inspire me
with resolution to perform my duty, which I too plainly see, but, alas! am
unable to follow.

LOUISA SEYMOUR.


To Miss Seymour.
Help me to rail, Louisa! I am out of all patience. -- This morning I got up
earlier than usual; I dispatched all my domestications; and ordered the coach
the moment breakfast was over, that I might fly to my beloved friend, and spend
the whole day with her. Armed at all points, -- ready alike for flirting with
Hastings, philosophising with his father, or moralizing with you, I was just in
the very act of stepping into the coach, when that of Mr. Alderman Sagely, and
a whole squad of his city sons and daughters, arrived, not for a flying visit
of a how-do-ye, as they instantly told me, but for a "kind neighbourly visit of
a week." -- Insupportable! Had you seen my countenance at that moment, Louisa,
it would have given the lie to my education, which, though confessedly that of
a fashionable woman, has not taught me to become a disingenuous one. Principle,
however, got the better for once of feeling. It is surely immoral, Louisa, to
make a fellow creature suffer any species of uneasiness that you can prevent.

I ought to do justice to my own patience and meekness, by attempting a
description of this city invasion, -- but the thing is impossible! -- I really
do not think there ever was collected together in one family such a
miscellaneous set of disagreeables. I shall find as much difficulty to arrange
them on paper, as in my drawing room.

The Alderman, though first in course, yet last in command, having no character
at all, we shall set aside. His wife aspires to that of a fine lady, which she
mistakes for that of an invalid; and talks of nothing but spleen, nerves,
vapors, green tea, and assa-foetida. -- His daughters aspire to be wits, and
become maimed registers of low witticisms, dull jests, stale puns, and murdered
sense. His son aspires with better reason to be a jockey; and descants, for
aught I know, very learnedly, on the betts at Newmarket, the victories of the
turf, and the merits of a chestnut filly, whom he would not exchange for the
Trojan horse of heroic memory, nay, nor for Pegasus himself. But however
ill-founded the pretensions of some of the family, in one thing they all
succeed, that of rendering themselves supremely ridiculous. -- After tea, I
dispatched the young fry on a fishing party: seated the Alderman in my father's
study (who was fortunately out of the scrape being gone to Lord Ashbury) with
"the four last acts of parliament" for his companion; and was preparing to
enjoy all that was left me, the fresh air, and the delightful evening, when
Madam arrested me with -- "La! Lady Charlotte! sure your La'ship would not be
so rash as to walk in the garden after sunset? I remember, last May -- no, it
was June, -- no, no, I am right again, it was May, -- when Mr. Sagely carried
me out to see our neighbor Sir Josiah Olive's improvements, at his sweet
little box at Newington Butts -- "But as it might not improve your patience,
Louisa, to hear a description of the beauties of Newington Butts, and an
enumeration of all the evils attending this ill-fated walk, I shall pass them
over in silence, as Mrs. Sagely did not do.

Can you figure a restraint more irksome and intolerable, than that of being
obliged to wear an air of sadness for half a day, when all the while you feel
the strongest propensity to laughter? -- Who can help it, when one sees a
woman, with the appearance of health, imagine herself afflicted with every
distemper under Heaven? Sure I am, I may now be qualified to prescribe for all
of them; for, not contented with tiring me to death with the history of her
complaints, I really believe there is not an alterative, an anodyne, or a
cathartic, in the whole materia medica, with whose various qualities,
operations, and effects, I have not been made acquainted. -- This querulous
humor is the very bane of society. What satisfaction, can this poor wretch
possess, whilst groaning under a load of fancied, still worse than real
distress? -- Yes, Heaven is ever just; and has surely compensated for her
imaginary evils, by making complaint an exquisite gratification to her.

I went yesterday to visit your poor Sally in her new habitation, which is very
comfortable. She prayed for blessings on us both, and thanked me with her
tears. She says, she is in tolerable health, but seems very weak and low; and
wears that look of quiet uncomplaining sorrow, that makes its way to the heart,
without asking leave of the judgment. The distress of those in higher station
meets with general sympathy: -- But who shall pity the obscurely miserable,
especially when they become so by their own misconduct? -- Ah, my friend! does
this circumstance lessen their claim to compassion? -- does it not greatly
enhance it?

Adieu! Since I cannot hope to get to the Castle for some days, have pity on
me, and render them less irksome by your presence. If I can neither promise you
pleasure nor instruction from my present associates, I can at least assure you
of petulance, pertness, and officious politeness from them, and a most grateful
and cordial reception from your

CHARLOTTE VILLIERS.


To Adelaide de St. Croix.
A new cause of perplexity and distress, my Adelaide, engages me at present to
write to you. Were I not assured that no state of mind is so irksome as that of
listless indifference, too often the companion of a convent, I would not so
soon make fresh demands on the patience and sympathy of my friend.

I have long suspected that the attentive kindness of Mr. Stanhope proceeded
from a sentiment still more tender than that of friendship. Fear rendered me
but too quick-sighted on this occasion. Before leaving Bath, he wrote to me,
making a declaration of a passion, which does me honor, but never can be
productive of any thing but distress to us both. -- I strove to spare him the
mortification attending an unsuccessful suit, by shunning every opportunity of
seeing him alone; but on meeting me this morning in the garden, I was obliged
to hear him on the painful subject. What answer I made to his earnest
solicitation, I know not; but being greatly agitated, and dreading to pain a
mind of such sensibility and delicacy as his, I fear I have not been
sufficiently explicit: I resolve, therefore, to write to Mr. Stanhope, and
convince him, that the only way to secure both my peace and his own, is to
renounce a pursuit which can never be attended with success.

His presence here, I plainly discover, gives pain to a heart in whose every
uneasiness mine too tenderly sympathises. O, Adelaide! what can I do to soften
that pain? I am shocked at my own injustice and inconsistency. I pity in
Hastings, what I disapprove of in Stanhope; I condemn in him, what I indulge
myself; and urge him, on account of its hopelessness, to abandon a passion,
whilst I, in opposition to honor, gratitude, nay hope itself, cherish it in my
inmost soul. Oh, my Adelaide! are all the votaries of love thus unreasonable
and inconsistent?

The cheerful and healthful serenity, which I had just begun to recover, is
already clouded with care, anxiety, and solicitude. What a mixed and
ever-shifting scene is this of human life! What a variety of vain and restless
inquietudes sum up the term of our transient existence here! -- Ah! could I,
like you, keep my thoughts fixed on Heaven, how trivial would appear all the
sorrows of earth!

Pity me, advise me; and never, oh! never cease to love me, my friend! my
monitress -- my counselor -- my best and dearest Adelaide!


To Mr. Stanhope.
SIR,
It is impossible to express the concern and agitation into which your letter
and conversation have thrown me. My former ignorance of your sentiments was
real, not affected. Would to Heaven I could have continued ignorant of them for
ever!

The real esteem and friendship I have always professed and felt for you,
demands from me, on this occasion, a confidence, which I should not have though it
it incumbent on me to repose in any other man. Be assured, Sir, that I am
grateful for the preference you have shown me; and wish your happiness so
ardently, that I would gladly purchase it at any expense, but that of my own
honor, which I should certainly forfeit, could I consent to give you my hand,
when my heart is in the possession of another.

Let this singular proof of my esteem, and reliance on your honor, at once
confirm your friendship, and convince you of the impossibility of any other
connection ever subsisting between us. It is with this view alone I have
prevailed with myself to discover to you a secret, which I know will for ever
remain concealed within your friendly bosom.

If you have courage to conquer a passion, whose strength and delicacy will
suggest to your ingenuous mind new motives for attempting it; if you can behave
to me with the same ease and freedom, which formerly made us both happy, and
bury all that has passed on this subject in oblivion: in short, if you can
cease to be my lover, you shall always find a sincere, faithful, and
affectionate friend, in

LOUISA SEYMOUR.


To Adelaide de St. Croix.
At length the die is cast, and my misfortunes are without remedy. Lady
Granville, my dear second mother, from a motive which I am at no loss to
divine, and the generosity of which claims my utmost gratitude, has
communicated to me in the strictest confidence, a plan of Lord Granville's,
which has long been a favorite one, -- (...) ^f uniting the families of
Winchester and Granville, by a marriage between Lord Hastings and Lady
Charlotte.

My heart is so sick, and my thoughts in such confusion, that I cannot pretend
at present to give you the particulars of this conversation. I do not even know
whether Lord Hastings is acquainted with his father's designs -- whether he
approves of them. Ah, my Adelaide! can he indeed approve of them? But let me no
longer deceive myself with fallacious hopes; too long have they deceived me. In
what a delirium have my senses been lost! It is time to return to reason and
duty. Oh, my friend! I dare not promise that I will cease to love Lord
Hastings; but surely I must, I ought to make the attempt. Happy Lady Charlotte!
what wonder that your spirits are unbroken? A little time will banish Louisa
from the thoughts of your destined husband, and he will return to you and his
duty -- What then will become of your wretched friend, Adelaide? Though the
difference of our religion forbids my assuming the veil, there is no difference
in our sentiments: Our hearts have long been united, and misfortune will rivet
the ties of friendship! -- I will come to you, my Adelaide! I will repose my
sorrows in your bosom. Your tender sympathy will pour consolation into mine.
You will teach me to ^ive contented, to die resigned, and with yours shall my
dust be mingled!


To the same.
I am certainly right, my friend. Through the thin disguises of a heart that
abhors deceit, and is unaccustomed to practice it, Lady Granville, the humane
Lady Granville, has discovered my sentiments, and took the step I mentioned in
my last to prevent the fatal effects of their indulgence. A thousand little
circumstances have occurred lately to persuade me that it must be so; and that,
although her gentle heart pities my weakness, her duty and interest combine
with her reason to condemn it. Of this truth the following incident will serve
to convince you.

One day, when walking with my benefactress in the garden, the conversation
happened to turn on poetry. -- You know Lady Granville had the misfortune to
lose, in early life, a daughter, who, though no more than six years, was every
thing her sond parents could desire. Among her other excellencies, she showed a
remarkable genius for poetry, which her indulgent mother encouraged, as it was
a source of much amusement to her during the frequent confinement occasioned by
a delicate constitution; -- the usual concomitant of exalted genius. Striving
to recollect a few stanzas written by her daughter during her last illness: and
being unable distinctly to repeat them, she gave me her keys, and told me, I
would find them in one of the drawers of her cabinet. The first I opened
contained the picture of Lord Hastings. I was instantly seized with such a
desire to obtain a copy of it, that I slipped it into my pocket; and next
morning, on pretense of purchasing some things at --, a town about six miles
from the Castle, I ordered the horses to be put to the carriage; and driving
directly to my milliner's asked if she knew whether there was any painter of
eminence in the town? She directed me to one who was said to have same merit; I
left the carriage and wal^ (...) to his Louse. -- After giving him (...)
charges to keep the picture concealed, and finish the copy wi^^ (...) ^elay, I
paid for it; and des^red it to be s^aled up, and sent to the milliner's, who
promised to have it conveyed in safety to me. There is something inexpressibly
painful to an honest and ingenuous mind, in the little arts and subterfuges
necessary in the management of all clandestine affairs. The mean evasions to
which they lead, wound our delicacy, and do violence to all our feelings. In
vain, my friend, would we chicane with conscience on these occasions. Her
decisions are clear, and this is her language: "In whatever words you express
your meaning, if they convey not to others that sense in which you understand
them yourself, you are a deceiver, and speak not the truth from your heart."

I was questioned on my return by my unsuspecting friend, about the business on
which I had gone; and having neglected to purchase any thing at the milliner's,
felt myself confused and embarrassed by her question, in such a degree, as
obliged me to shift the discourse; and, by my awkward manner of doing so,
probably called Lady Granville's attention to a circumstance, which would have
otherwise passed unheeded.

A few days after I had restored the picture to its place, which, in order to
obtain Lady Granville's keys, again forced me to have recourse to an artifice I
detested, we received a visit from a lady in the neighborhood; one of those
good sort of gossiping people, who think it incumbent on them to talk, whatever
be the subject. -- "I hear, Madam," said she, "Lord Hastings is just going
abroad; and sincerely congratulate your Ladyship on having obtained so fine a
picture of your son, which will certainly be mighty agreeable to you when he is
at a distance." -- "I do think myself fortunate on that account," answered Lady
Granville; but pray, Madam, may I ask how came you to know of this
circumstance?" -- "O," replied Mrs. Rawlinson, with a shrug and a significant
look, "I saw it last week; but I suspect there is a secret in the case, and
that it is intended for a mistress rather than a mother," -- "How so, Madam?"
demanded Lady Granville. -- "Why, because, on my opening the drawer which
contains the unfinished pictures, to see what additions were making to his
collection, Mr. -- entered the room, and seemed in great vexation, on
perceiving me hold your son's in my hand; telling me, that nobody was permitted
to examine any of the pictures, except such as were placed in the glazed box,
for the inspection of the public. But trust me, Madam, if you wish this affair
to be concealed, I will be the very last person in the world to divulge it.
Nobody detests the idea of betraying a secret more than I do." -- "Indeed,
Madam," replied Lady Granville gravely, and fixing her penetrating eyes on my
face (the first time I ever thought them unpleasing) "if there is any secret in
the case, I am entirely ignorant of it."

The perturbation I suffered during this discourse, is not to be described --
Unable to support the presence of Lady Granville, I rose and left the room. I
saw, with anguish, that she entertained suspicions, which every attempt to
remove would only serve to corroborate, and involve me in fresh perplexity and
listress. I resolved, therefore, to take no notice of what had passed, and
rather to hazard the displeasure of Lady Granville, than deviate from the
straight path of sincerity.

The day following, she sent for me into her dressing room. -- I entered it
with the horror of a self-condemned criminal. -- Oh, Adelaide! what must be the
anguish of guilty remorse, when an error like mine could awaken such painful
consciousness? -- Lady Granville took hold of my hand, and, with a look of
earnest solicitude and compassion, "My dear child," said she, "yours is a
noble soul -- I am going to give you a proof that I know how to admire, how to
value your merit -- Would it were mine to reward it!" She then communicated to
me the earnest wishes of Lord Granville to accomplish an union between his son
and Lady Charlotte; enumerated the various circumstances that combined to make
this union proper and desirable for both families; and concluded with saying,
"To you, my Louisa, I confide the important trust of my son's honor and
happiness: Strive, my generous Louisa, during his absence, to impress Lady
Charlotte with a favorable opinion of his character; as I shall, to give him a
just idea of here is."

Ah, Adelaide! is not this too much to demand from me? -- Is it not enough to
be forced to abandon hope? -- Must I be driven to absolute despair? -- Yes,
Hastings! I will strive, in obedience to rigid duty, to banish thee from my
heart; but never will I be so disingenuous as to recommend thee to that of a
rival.

Stanhope continues to solicit my friendship -- my pity -- since he can no
longer hope to convert it into a more tender sentiment. Heaven knows, I both
pity and esteem, but never, never can love him.

Lord Hastings sets out in a few days for the Continent; he will be the bearer
of a letter to my friend. I long anxiously that you should see and converse
with him; -- perhaps you will then be disposed to excuse, as well as pity, the
weakness of your afflicted

LOUISA SEYMOUR.


To Miss Seymour.
Ah! Louisa, is it necessary that I should see -- that I should converse with
Lord Hastings, in order to pity and excuse what you term your weakness? Alas! I
need but to recollect my own. But shall I indeed bestow that name on the
sweetest, most ennobling affection of the soul? -- Oh! Grammont, was it
weakness to love thee? Is it criminal to deplore thee? -- My offense then will
end but with my life! -- The walls of a convent may conceal our sorrows from
the world, but it will not banish them from our thoughts; its solitude and
silence are but too favorable to their indulgence.

This day, my Louisa -- this memorable day -- was the last of my earthly
happiness! -- It was that on which Grammont informed me of his success, and
added to all my pleasing hopes, that of his speedy return. -- Alas! how soon
were they blasted for ever!

Yet think not, Louisa, that I always indulge these melancholy reflections. --
No; I do not, in bewailing the loss of my dearest blessing, ungratefully
overlook those which still remain. I even at times look back on past pleasures
with more real satisfaction than half the world experience in the enjoyment of
those that are present. There is a conscious dignity as well as tenderness in
virtuous sorrow; -- and far rather would I recall to mind the virtues of
Grammont, and weep for his loss, than have lived to witness either the
frailties or faults of a character so loved and revered: And who can hope, in
this mortal state, to be entirely exempted from either? -- Though he shall
never return to me, I shall soon go to him; and then what will all the sorrows,
sufferings, and vexing inquietudes of this life appear, but as the confused
shadows of a troubled dream, from which we awake to real and substantial
felicity!

Let reflections like these carry peace and consolation to the gentle bosom of
my friend; and let us not dwell on evils that are past, and which never would
have been present, had not some important purpose rendered them necessary.

Do not regret interesting me in your sorrows, Louisa. A dead calm is the worst
state of the human mind. Some agitation is necessary to maintain its proper
temperament; and it is best when this is the effect, rather of the social than
the selfish principle. The one is like the breath of Heaven on the peaceful
lake, whose gentle motion purifies and clears; -- the other resembles a vortex
in a troubled pool, which absorbs every thing of worth, and sends its
feculencies to the surface.

You tell me, that "tears of mingled admiration and gratitude interrupt your
perusal of my letters." How soothing, how flattering is such praise? How
preferable to the applause of a giddy and capricious world? The applause of
that world is too often obtained by the mere display of those talents, in the
possession of which there can be no merit; it lies solely, my friend, in the
just application of them.

Adieu, my Louisa -- I pity, I sympathise in your sorrows; would I could
relieve them! -- You have my prayers, my wishes, my constant tender affection.
O! may no restless passion long disturb the tranquillity of that bosom, which
Heaven has formed to be the residence of every amiable and gentle virtue! --
Adieu.


The modest and engaging manners of Mr. Stanhope conciliated the esteem of all
with whom he conversed. Even Lord Hastings, though he regarded him in the light
of a rival, with that greatness of mind which suppresses the malevolent, and
conquers the selfish passions, joined on all occasions in doing justice to his
merit. -- With respect to Louisa's sentiments of this gentleman, he was still
in painful suspense. She often spoke of him in high terms; but she spoke of him
without any marks of that hesitating caution, which betrays that tenderness it
is meant to conceal. She professed herself his friend with such unaffected
ease, that Lord Hastings flattered himself she would never become his wife.

In spite of every attempt to conceal the distress and perturbation of her
mind, the dejection of Louisa became every day more apparent. It did not escape
Lord Hastings; who, ignorant of the real cause, and judging of here is by his own
feelings, sometimes ventured to hope, that regret for his approaching departure
had a share in her uneasiness. The singular ingenuity and nobleness of her
conduct to Mr. Stanhope, did not tend to lessen a passion, which was inspired
by her merit, and whose chief object was her happiness. But the confidence she
had reposed in him, added such gratitude and tenderness to his other
sentiments, that she often felt real pleasure in his conversation.

Matters were in this train, when Lady Charlotte joined the agreeable party at
Castle Hastings. -- The frequent visits she made there, had furnished her with
opportunities of becoming pretty well acquainted with the sentiments of all
parties. Her charming spirits were a cordial, of which they stood in great
need. -- She plainly perceived the passion of Lord Hastings for Miss Seymour;
and though she had once hoped to have become the object of it herself, she was
too generous now to harbor such a wish, since she was convinced, that any
preference for her, on the part of Lord Hastings, would be destructive of the
peace of her amiable young friend. She remarked the uncommon dejection of
Louisa, which she attributed solely to the prospect of being divided from the
object of her secret attachment; being entirely ignorant of Lord Granville's
views, and the conversation that had passed on that subject between Lady
Granville and Miss Seymour. She possessed too much goodness of heart, as well
as delicacy, to rally her friend on so tender a point; and generously strove to
divert her thoughts from it, by such lively sallies and amusing conversations,
as she supposed most likely to produce that effect.

On coming into the parlour one morning, where Louisa sat at work, whilst the
two gentlemen amused themselves with making some chemical experiments --
"Well," demanded she, how have you three been employed these four hours? -- Not
so usefully as I, I dare swear." -- "We have been most agreeably employed,
Madam," answered Mr. Stanhope, "in hearing Miss Seymour perform on the
harpsichord; and usefully too, I ^latter myself, in giving her some lessons of
natural philosophy in return." -- "Ah," replied Lady Charlotte ^lily, "you will
perhaps find, that the useful and agreeable is not always the expedient -- Your
scholar will soon excel her masters, and, with all her simplicity, teach them
some arts they little think of." -- "I Am sure, Lady Charlotte," said Lord
Hastings, "you generally contrive to unite all the three: But pray, in return
to your query, How has your Ladyship spent this morning?" -- "I have spent this
morning," replied she, in a formal and serious tone, "in fabricating a
catechism for Louisa." -- "For me! Lady Charlotte?" interrupted Louisa, smiling
-- "Have you then so bad an opinion of my principles, as to think I am still
ignorant of my catechism?" -- "I know not what your principles may be,"
returned she, "but your practice is intolerable: All my good instructions go
for nothing -- Bath itself has been thrown away upon you; and you continue
obstinately attached to prejudices and opinions that will for ever prevent you
from making a figure in the world." -- "For pity's sake," said Miss Seymour,
"do not abandon me in such deplorable circumstances! Perhaps my reformation is
not quite so hopeless as you suppose." -- "There is only one chance remains for
you," rejoined Lady Charlotte: "My father returns to town about Christmas; if
you will consent to accompany us, the air of London may yet do much." -- Louisa
shook her head, but made no reply.

The possibility of Miss Seymour spending the winter in London, where her
beauty could not fail to attract a crowd of admirers, had never once entered
the thoughts of Lord Hastings. It now shot like lightning through his soul, and
tortured his imagination with a thousand apprehensions, to which he had
hitherto been a stranger.

Without perceiving his uneasiness, Lady Charlotte thus proceeded: -- "Don't
you think, my Lord, there is some little chance, that a trip to London might
still make away with these strange antiquated notions of Miss Seymour's?" --
"Perhaps, Madam," answered he gravely, "London might alter many of Miss
Seymour's present opinions; but I doubt much whether those she would receive
there in return, would prove either agreeable or advantageous. There is more
hazard, Lady Charlotte, than you are aware of, in the manners of the great
world. Too often, in clearing away the rust, it robs the precious metal of its
intrinsic worth, and mixes with it the basest alloy." -- "I see, Louisa" said
Lady Charlotte, "I shall receive very little aid from Lord Hastings: I am
therefore resolved to instruct you properly in your duty myself -- Nay, don't
look so serious; I will not tire you with a "tedious homily." The whole duty of
woman is comprehended in much fewer pages than "the whole duty of man." We know
ours intuitively; they have much to learn, and somewhat to unlearn too, Louisa.
-- Come, be attentive."

She then took out her pocketbook, and holding it up, composed her features
into a look of arch gravity, whilst she thus proceeded; -- " Question. For what
end did you come into the world? Answer. To get a husband. -- Q. What is the
way to get a husband? A. To dress, dance, chat, play, and go to all manner of
public places, except church, for fear of being called a fanatic. -- Q. What is
the duty of a husband? A. To please his wife. -- Q. What is the duty of a wife?
A. To please herself. -- Q. Are there no more duties incumbent on you as a ^ine
lady? A. Yes; I must be deaf, dumb, and blind, as occasions require: Deaf to
the voice of duns, and all such poor relations as most easily beset me; dumb
when my husband remonstrates, and blind to the whole race of city-acquaintances
or country-cousins. -- Q. Are you not to have some regard to a future state? A.
Yes; after having maintained a good reputation as long as I can, I am to
exchange it for a separate maintenance, unless I wish to marry my gallant; and
then I must accuse my husband, obtain a divorce, and bidding a long farewell to
this cold climate, court the mild breezes, and taste the lasting pleasures of
the Continent."

Lady Charlotte arose, and taking hold of Louisa's hand -- "Now, my good
child," said she, "let us go and con over this first lesson in the garden
together; and when I see it has made a due impression, I will then instruct you
in the hundred and fifty articles of a fine lady's religion."

"Whilst they were walking in the garden, a servant from the Marquis informed
Lady Charlotte of the arrival of some company, that made it necessary for her
to return home immediately. Miss Seymour never parted from Lady Charlotte
without regret till now. But the gaiety of her spirits was at present so
discordant with the pensive tone of Louisa's mind, that she longed to be left
at liberty to indulge her melancholy reflections without interruption. -- She
daily discovered, however, new charms in the character of Lady Charlotte; and
having once been somewhat prejudiced against her, on account of her supposed
insensibility, she was now disposed to make atonement for her injustice, by
giving her credit for perfections to which in reality she had no claim.

That evening, the weather being extremely hot, Louisa left the company, which
were numerous, and retired into the garden for the benefit of fresh air. -- The
door of the pavilion being open, she entered; and throwing herself down on a
sopha, began to revolve in her mind all the circumstances of the last affecting
interview she had there, with Lady Granville and Lord Hastings.

Mr. Stanhope, whose eyes were attentive to every movement of here is, having
observed her change color, and presently after leave the room, felt the most
restless uneasiness on her account. Happening to cast his eyes toward the
window which overlooked the garden, he saw her enter the pavilion, and felt a
sudden irresistible inclination to follow her. -- He did so: On approaching
her, she started from her reverie, and looked dissatisfied on account of its
being interrupted. "Pardon this intrusion, Miss Seymour," said he, with
emotion; "I would not for the world offend you; but seeing you quit the
drawing room, and fearing, from your paleness, that some sudden indisposition
was the cause, I could not be easy till I knew you was so." -- "I am indebted
to you, Sir," answered she, with a deep sigh, "for taking such a share in my
uneasiness; it will soon be removed." -- "Ah, Miss Seymour!" continued he,
"would it were in my power to remove it! but I greatly fear I only add to your
distress. Permit me, amiable Louisa, to enquire, whether it is my presence, the
presence of an unhappy, or the absence of a more fortunate lover, that
occasions your constant dejection? Be assured, if I am the wretched cause of
your distress, I will tear myself from you, and every thought connected with
happiness. -- Your peace is dearer to me than life, which I would cheerfully
sacrifice to promote it."

The softened heart of Louisa was unequal to this trial. Repeated sighs burst
from her agitated bosom; her tears flowed in abundance; and she did not even
attempt to interrupt Mr. Stanhope. -- "If I am lost to happiness myself,"
continued he, "tell me, dearest Miss Seymour," (taking hold of her hand) "is
there any way left by which I can promote yours? Fortune, perhaps, opposes
your wishes: Some ^ovoured rival! -- A Rochelle, perhaps? I well remember his
uncommon agitation, on seeing you attend Adelaide's admission." -- "Oh! ask me
nothing more," interrupted Louisa, hastily withdrawing her hand, and rising
from her seat, "you already know too much. But leave me, Sir, I conjure you,
and bury all that has passed in your own bosom."

Mr Stanhope withdraw; and Louisa turning down a path that led into a fine
field, continued her walk, till she reached a bench shaded with a large chestnut
tree, on which she sat down, and gave way to the sorrows that oppressed her
heart.

A few minutes after Miss Seymour quitted the drawing room, Lord Hastings, on
retiring to the window for air, saw Mr. Stanhope enter the pavilion. He was
instantly seized with a fit of jealousy; and supporting that it was the scene
of an appointment between them, could not resist the desire, which that envious
passion inspired, of at least interrupting their happiness, since he could not
prevent their meeting. As he approached the pavilion, his heart throbbed so
violently, that he was obliged to stop to recover himself. The windows being
all thrown open, and shaded with honeysuckle, gave him an opportunity of
witnessing this affecting interview, without being observed.

The tears of Louisa wrung his heart; and, utterly at a loss of guess the cause
which excited them, he drew nearer the window, at the very instant Mr. Stanhope
pronounced this sentence, -- "If I am lost to happiness myself," etc. In a
moment the whole truth seemed to ^lash on his mind; the frequent changes in
Louisa's manner, her continual melancholy, her rejection of Mr. Stanhope's
addresses, all convinced the unhappy Hastings, that there was a favored rival
in the heart of Miss Seymour, whose absence occasioned her distress, and whom
it would be equally vain and dishonorable to endeavor to supplant.

To meet with coldness and indifference from a heart which has inspired us with
the most tender sentiments, is afflicting in the highest degree: But what can
equal the anguish of knowing that the heart we ardently covet is actually in
possession of another?

Lord Hastings stood still, till Miss Seymour and Mr. Stanhope were both out of
sight; and then, entering the pavilion, threw himself on the sopha she had just
quitted. He reviewed the happy hours he had spent with her during Lady
Granville's con^inement, when he almost believed he was beloved; and execrated
that rash curiosity, which had for ever robbed him of the sweet delusion.

Louisa, after having recourse to the soothing letters of Adelaide, some of
which she always carried in her pocket, and which, by their pious and solemn
reflections, never failed to calm the disturbed soul of her friend, being now
tolerably composed, ventured to return to the drawing room.

Unable to bear the restraint of company, and wholly engrossed by his own
reflections, Lord Hastings took the same road Miss Seymour had quitted, and
wandered down the field.

As he approached the bench, his attention was roused, by seeing a paper lying
on the ground. He picked it up; it was without seal or superscription; but as
he had no doubt of its having been dropped by Miss Seymour, he resolved to
restore it unopened. At that instant, recollecting the delight he had
experienced on a former occasion, from the perusal of what she had written, and
supposing this might contain such another transcript of her heart, he could not
deny himself the satisfaction of discovering at this crisis what were its
inmost thoughts. -- Perhaps it is safer, on some occasions, to commit a slight
offense with one's eyes open, than by seeking for reasons to excuse the
commission of it, to endanger our mental sight, and blind our understanding
with the mist of false argument. -- He opened the letter, which proved to be
that from Grammont to Adelaide; which Louisa, in the agitation of her mind
immediately after reading it, had forgotten to restore. He saw that it was not
the hand of a female. -- What was his amazement, when he read these words? "At
length, most beloved of women, your fond lover, your faithful friend, tastes of
real transport, by being able to convey it to you," etc.

Having finished the letter, a deep sigh burst from his bosom: -- "There is
then no hope under Heaven remaining for me!" cried he, in a tone of desponding
sorrow. Then after a pause -- "Yes; that of seeing Louisa happy. Fortune seems
to oppose the union of two hearts formed for each other; -- would I too oppose
it? Is not the happiness of Louisa dearer to me than life? Thank Heaven! though
I am wretched myself, it may still be in my power to render her happy; and to
restore peace to the bosom of the gentlest, most amiable of human kind." -- --
Full of these sentiments, so worthy of himself, he sought for an opportunity of
conversing with Miss Seymour in private, which she as studiously avoided.

The evening before his departure, observing her walking alone in the garden,
he followed her; and on her entering the pavilion, stopped to reflect in what
manner he ought to address her. She appeared lost in thought; a heavy sigh
betrayed the deep distress which occasioned it; and after remaining some time
in a reverie, which Lord Hastings was unwilling to interrupt, she arose, and
retiring to the opposite window, from whence she could see any person that
entered the garden, she drew out of her bosom his picture, which hung from her
neck by a small string of pearls. The agitation of Lord Hastings on this
occasion was extreme: What would it have been, could he have discovered that it
was his own features she was then contemplating! -- After looking on it for
some time in silence, she kissed and bathed it with her tears: Then, in a low
and mournful tone, -- "Yes," said she, "fortune and duty oppose our happiness:
-- Absence may blot my image from thy heart; but no power on earth can rob me
of the dear delight of loving thee tenderly, -- loving thee only, -- loving
thee for ever!"

Lord Hastings could support this scene no longer. He came round to the door of
the pavilion; at sight of him Louisa started back with surprise, and in great
confusion, hastily returning the picture into her bosom, prepared to retire. --
Taking hold of her hand, he led her gently back to the sopha, and seating
himself by her, -- "O Louisa!" said he, "why do you avoid me? What have I done
to incur your hatred." -- "My hatred, my Lord!" said she, -- and again was
silent. -- "Yes, Miss Seymour, it is too plain you hate, you fly me! -- I am
not conscious of having merited your displeasure, but you cannot be unjust. Ah,
Louisa!" continued he, fixing his mournful eyes on here is, which were streaming
with tears, "where are all those happy moments fled that we once enjoyed
together, when I cherished for you sentiments that I dared not discover, that I
must for ever hold sacred; that I once -- O forgive me! -- thought you beheld
without contempt. But I deceived myself, and am now punished for my
presumption." -- Louisa was now forced to have recourse to her salts; he
perceived the agony of her mind, and hastened to put an end to the conversation.

"I am no stranger, Miss Seymour," continued he, "to the cause of my
misfortune. Permit me, ere I go, to bestow on you the means of happiness, which
are now useless in my hands: -- Think sometimes on the absent Hastings, who
will never cease to think of you; and who, though he cannot be the sharer of
your heart, must for ever be the friend of your virtues. -- Deign to accept of
this trinket; and let it remind you of a man who prefers your felicity to his
own."

During this speech, great part of which she could not then comprehend, Louisa
was in a state to be conceived, not described. The trinket with which Lord
Hastings presented her, was a locket enclosing his hair, enamelled with the
initials of his name, and richly set with brilliants. She received it with a
look of acknowledgment; and at length found composure sufficient to add, in a
tone of inexpressible tenderness, -- "Be assured, my Lord, I have no need of
this remembrancer. I shall never forget you; and wherever you go, my prayers
and best wishes shall attend you." -- She rose; -- "I have only one other
request to make, Miss Seymour," said he; "it is, that you will take charge of
this packet till after Iam gone; you may then break the seal, and dispose of
the contents as directed."

He retired, leaving Miss Seymour distracted with the variety, as well as
violence of her emotions. She repeated every word he had uttered a thousand
times; and every time found herself less able to unravel their meaning. The
packet too furnished her with many conjectures; but she resolved to obey his
injunctions with the strictest fidelity.

She returned to her apartment with so violent a headache, and in such
agitation of spirits, that it was late before she joined the company; but
though she wished above all things to avoid a formal parting with Lord
Hastings, she dreaded the suspicion^ she might incur by appearing to shun it.

After a dull and silent supper, she rose to retire. "Miss Seymour," said Lord
Granville, "do you remember, Hastings sets out tomorrow, will not you wish him a
good journey?" -- "I do, with all my heart, my Lord," answered she. Lord
Hastings saluted her; and following her to the door, he seized her trembling
hand, which he pressed to his bosom -- "O, Louisa!" said he, "may Heaven's best
blessings surround you, and may you be completely happy, whatever become of the
ill-fated Hastings."

Louisa retired to bed, but not to sleep. Of all the passions which warred in
her bosom, and banished sleep from her eyes, curiosity was the most violent, as
well as painful. She arose by daybreak; and the moment she heard the carriage
of Lord Hastings drive from the door, she broke the seal, with a trembling hand
and beating heart. How great was her astonishment when she read these words! --

The enclosed letter leaves me no room to doubt of my misfortune, and
sufficiently explains to me the cause of your late dejection. If you generously
permit me to be the means of removing it, I shall still taste happiness in
yours, and learn to put a just value on the goods of fortune. May these, and
every blessing, be your portion, and that of the deserving partner of your
heart! In possessing yours, he will possess the only treasure which in this
world could excite the whole hopes, wishes, and desires, of

Your devoted, Though most unfortunate, HASTINGS.


The letter to which Lord Hastings alluded, was that from Grammont to Adelaide.
Under the same cover were two bank bills for a thousand pounds each, and a
promissory note for three more, to be p^^^ at Lord Granville's death.

It is difficult to say, whether admiration, gratitude, sorrow, or love, at
this moment predominated in the agitated soul of Louisa; but though they
alternately strove for dominion there, they at last yielded to that melancholy
regret, that exquisite sympathy in the affliction of Lord Hastings, which
excited the most ardent, though unavailing, wishes to relieve it.

The nobleness of her soul, as well as integrity of her heart, left her not a
moment in doubt about the conduct she ought to pursue. But sensible that, to
her duty and honor, she must now sacrifice the dearest interests of that
heart, she feared to trust its suggestions to her pen. Conscious, that his
mistaken belief of her preference for another, would prove the most likely
means of prevailing with him to banish her from his thoughts; convinced that it
was his duty to do so; soothed perhaps with the secret hope, that time, by
discovering his error, might revive his tenderness, she resolved, agreeably
both to her ingenuity and affection, to write and thank him; but neither to
mi^lead nor to undeceive him.

To Lord Hastings.
My Lord,
Your noble, your generous intentions, I accept with all that gratitude and
admiration they justly claim. Could they have availed to my happiness, I would
not have returned these proofs of a friendship, which it shall be my study and
ambition to deserve; but other obstacles oppose my felicity; perhaps will for
ever oppose it.

In the exercise of those exalted virtues, which form your character, and
conciliate universal esteem, may you, my Lord, find that happiness they are
calculated to bestow, and which none can better deserve.

LOUISA SEYMOUR.


Though it is painful to lie under unmerited censure, there is a pride
attending conscious virtue, which makes her disdain to solicit a hearing, in
order to vindicate a conduct which she is sensible merits praise. -- Miss
Seymour either saw, or thought she saw, an alteration in Lady Granville's
manner toward her, ever since the unlucky affair of the picture: This gave her
extreme pain; but pride and modesty both opposed at that time a confession of
her weakness. Unaccustomed to restraint or concealment, it grew every day more
painful to her; and she resolved, as soon as Lord Hastings should leave the
Castle, to communicate all that had passed between them to his mother.

On going into Lady Granville's dressing room, she found her spirits extremely
depressed on account of her son's departure. She mingled her tears with here is,
and suggested every thing most likely to support her spirits. "If I cannot
console your heart, my dear Madam," said she, "for the absence of your son, let
me at least prove myself worthy the name of daughter, with which you honor me,
by laying open mine to your view. -- I am persuaded you are not ignorant of the
sentiments he has long entertained for me; but however flattering to me, in
justice to you and to myself, I wish to convince you, that I have never given
encouragement to them."

She then succinctly related all that had passed between her and Lord Hastings
at their last interview; and taking out the packet, and at the same time
presenting her with her answer to the letter from Lord Hastings, -- "Read this,
Madam," said she, "and instruct me, if you wish me to make any alterations in
it."

Lady Granville perused the letters with visible emotion. Then rising and
throwing her arms round Louisa's neck, which she bathed with tears of mingled
admiration and tenderness, -- "No, my amiable, my exalted child!" said she,
"your uncorrupted heart stands in no need of instruction. You have acted nobly*
and besides the conscious approbation of your own mind, your conduct, so
honorable, so disinterested, will, (...) trust, one day meet its reward."

Lord Hastings wrote to his mother almost every post; but though he never
omitted enquiring after Miss Seymour's health, he carefully avoided mentioning
her in any other terms than those dictated by politeness.

As he did not entertain a doubt concerning the object of her tenderness, he
was not a little astonished to learn, on his arrival at Paris, that the Count
de Rochelle had been married for several months. This at once accounted to him
for Louisa's melancholy, and inspired a fond hope, that it yet might be in his
power, by a tender, constant, assiduous passion, to remove it. He knew too well
the bitter anguish of disappointment, not to feel most exquisite sorrow for
Miss Seymour, on account of this supposed misfortune -- of all others, surely
the most insupportable -- that of the cruelty and perfidy of a person in whom
we have reposed unbounded confidence, and from whom we have expected all our
felicity.

Some weeks after Lord Hastings arrived at Paris, Louisa received the following
letter from Adelaide, in answer to the introductory one, of which he was the
bearer: --

To Miss Seymour.
I wonder not, my friend, that you wished me to see and converse with Lord
Hastings; it is impossible to do either without pleasure and admiration. He has
paid me several visits, each of which has served to confirm my opinion of his
noble and generous character. -- He spoke but little of my Louisa; when he did,
it was the language of unfeigned praise. He asked a thousand questions about
Rochelle; every one of which betrayed the interest his heart took in the
subject; but instructed by your letter, I purposely avoided it: This he saw,
and I doubt not his suspicions were confirmed by it. The Count de Rochelle was
married some time ago to Mademoiselle St. Hermoine; and I plainly perceive, is
suspected by Lord Hastings of having acted dishonourably by you. I told him I
had the highest opinion of Rochelle; at which he seemed much astonished: But I
presently changed the subject, as I wished not to come to an ecclaircissement
on that head. -- He quits Paris tomorrow, and promises to visit me on his
return from Italy, where he proposes to spend the winter.

I still write to my friend from the Ville de St. Croix, the scene of my
earliest, happiest days: But though this scene has proved favorable to my
health, I fear, Louisa, it is not so to my peace!

It is impossible to describe to you that variety of painfully pleasing
emotions I experience, whilst wandering alone amidst these delightful shades --
once the habitation of love, and hope, and joy -- now the asylum of grief,
inquietude, and even despondent melancholy! Not a tree, not a shrub appears
around me, that is not hallowed by memory, as having witnessed the tenderness
of love, the enthusiasm of friendship, or the fervor of devotion. -- However
whimsical such a sentiment may appear to those who are ignorant of the tender
associations from which it takes its rise, I confess, that my attachment to
these inanimate objects strongly resembles that we retain for those friends who
have watched over us in infancy -- who have sustained our weakness, absolved
our errors, and cherished the seeds of every amiable virtue.

On entering a little arbor today, in a retired part of the wood, to which
Grammont knew I often resorted, I beheld the initials of my name, cut on the
smooth bark of a beech, by that hand which is now mouldering in the dust. -- To
you, Louisa, I need not describe the feelings of that moment! -- O, Grammont!
if they are known to thee -- if thou art an invisible witness of my secret, my
hopeless, my unceasing sorrows -- behold them with pity, and compassionate the
weakness thou can not approve!

Perhaps, he thought a period might arrive, when, divided from the partner of
his heart, these proofs of his constant affection might serve to awaken in
here is the remembrance of a passion which neither time nor absence could in the
slightest degree impair. -- How unnecessary such a remembrancer! Shall that day
ever awaken me to life and consciousness, that shall not also witness the
admiration of thy virtues, the love of thy goodness, the grateful recollection
of thy unequalled tenderness, cherished in my afflicted heart? -- No, Grammont!
best and dearest of men -- till that heart, like thine, shall for ever be
congealed by the cold hand of death, thy loved image shall never be erased from
it! -- Meantime, the soothing recollections of the past, shall maintain a
sweet, though silent intercourse between us -- till that solemn welcome hour
arrive, when the veil that now divides us shall be rent, the burden of
mortality shaken off, and we shall meet, first and only object of my vows, in
perfect, secure, and immortal felicity!

It is this prospect, my Louisa, that becalms the griefs, and supports the soul
of your friend. Much, much does she need every support.

I return to St. Cire tomorrow, on account of Constance, who is very ill, and
begs to see me: Secure in the sympathy of a friend, whose misfortunes have
qualified her to feel, and whose weakness to absolve the frailty of others, she
seeks to repose her sorrows in my bosom. Like a tender flower, blighted by an
untimely frost, she is drooping space -- nor will every feel the reviving
influence of another spring! -- Adieu, dearest Louisa! adieu.

ADELAIDE DE ST. CROIX.


To Lord Hastings.
By this time my dear Henry will have reached Paris, and mingled with the
promiscuous crowd that forms the society of that large and licentious
metropolis.

Amidst a people learned in the arts of seduction, and ardent in the pursuit of
pleasure, how much will it behove you to maintain that manly firmness of
character, for which I have so often applauded you. -- I apprehend no danger to
you from the grossly vicious, or openly profane: Such inspire a mind like
yours, with horror and disgust. But I confess, my son, I am not without fear,
from the insidious arts of the reasoning skeptic, and systematic libertine. The
ridicule thrown on every thing serious, by the polite circles of our sex, is
severely mortifying to the delicate sensibility of youth, and highly
discouraging to virtuous conduct. And the cruel refinements of a mistaken
philosophy, have of late years given double weight to opinions, over which
passion and appetite had ever too powerful an influence. -- The sole
preservative of popular morality, is religion. Whenever the vulgar are taught
to scorn her restraints, they soon despise those of virtue. Vice rushes in like
an impetuous torrent, which has overwhelmed its bounds, and carried all before
it. -- The dim-sighted multitude are unable to perceive the nice
discriminations between real and apparent interest. Religion held forth a
faithful glass, to aid their imperfect sense: Infidelity dashes this to earth,
and in its stead, presents the rabble with a delusive mirror, which magnifies
contiguous objects, and shows them in alluring colors, whilst it imbibes the
rays which would delineate the back ground.

You know I have always been of opinion, that piety is the only sure foundation
of moral conduct. -- What ingenuous motive can affect that mind, which is
regardless of its obligations to infinite beneficence? -- Sophists may argue
and refine as they will, but there can be no genuine virtue, independent of
true piety.

We daily see proofs of the inefficacy of speculative opinions, to regulate the
actions of men. The understanding often assents to truths which never reach the
heart. A feeling and habitual sense of Deity -- a love of those divine precepts
-- a belief of those sublime doctrines -- a hope of those eternal rewards he
has revealed, will be found absolutely necessary to counterbalance the
suddenness of temptation, the force of example, and the constant solicitations
to criminal indulgence.

One consideration will have much weight with a mind possessed of sensibility
like yours: the influence of your example may extend much farther than you are
aware of. To a generous soul, how ennobling, how elevating is the thought, that
by a truly amiable and virtuous conduct, we may induce the wicked and unhappy
to quit the paths of vice and destruction, and pursue those that are
pleasantness and peace; not only in their termination, but in their tenor also.
-- A corrupt society is to the world, what a corrupt member is to a society.
The whole seems in a great measure dependent, even on its smallest parts. What
solid value should this idea give us in our own estimation; and how cautious
ought we to be, lest our errors prove inductive of evil, where our goodness may
never reach.

Should you continue, my dear Henry, to persevere in the practice of virtue and
goodness, my utmost ambition in this world will be gratified; and the heart of
a father, to whom you are unspeakably dear, will triumph in the conscious pride
and joy of paternal affection.

GRANVILLE.


Though the obstacles to her happiness still remained, Louisa tasted the
sweetest satisfaction, in the consciousness of being beloved. The perfect ^ase
with which Lady Charlotte talked of Lord Hastings on all occasions, convinced
her that he had made no very tender impression on her heart. In cherishing the
secret sentiments of her own, she was sensible she did no injustice to her
friend; and though honor and gratitude determined her never to deviate from
the line of conduct she had hitherto so nobly pursued, a sweet hope would often
steal into her bosom, that a time might come when her duty and happiness would
no longer be incompatible with each other.

In the conversation of her revered friend, Lady Granville, and the peaceful
and rational pleasures of the country, for which she had an exquisite relish,
Louisa once more began to taste that sweet and equal serenity, which seemed
better suited to her temper, than more animated, but often less sincere
pleasures.

This calm, however, was suddenly and violently interrupted, by a very
melancholy and unexpected event; of which the following letter from Lady
Charlotte, conveyed the account:

To Miss Seymour.
I am so greatly agitated at present, my dear Louisa, with the affecting scene
I have just witnessed, and which your weak spirits could never have supported,
that I am very unequal to the task of writing.

Alas! our poor afflicted Sally is no more! -- I received a note this morning
from nurse, begging to see me immediately: I set out for her cottage without a
moment's delay. On my arrival, the worthy creature met me at the door, and,
with eyes swimming in tears, told me that poor Sally was delivered last night
of a ^ine girl, who was stout and healthy, but she feared the mother was in
great danger.

Though she bore her sufferings with much patience and resolution, the moment
she heard the child cry, she burst into a violent flood of tears, which greatly
agitated her weak frame. She asked to see it as soon as it was dressed; on its
being brought, she took it in her arms, gazed on it, kissed and bathed it with
her tears; then taking a little locket from her own neck, containing its
father's hair, she tied it round that of the infant, saying, "Unfortunate
innocent! -- Alas! this, and the name of Sally, is all I have to bequeath thee!
-- Thou must not presume to claim that of thy unkind father!

This exertion was too much for her feeble body and exhausted spirits: She was
seized with faintings, which threatened to put an instant period to her life.
The physician ordered her to be kept perfectly quiet, and begged nurse to have
the child removed as soon as possible, as the sound of its voice always threw
her into agonies. She had sometimes dropped asleep through the night, but
constantly waked starting, with some exc^^mation of terror; she complained of
violent sickness and palpitation at her heart, and had been delirious for
several hours.

On hearing her talking to herself in a low voice, I slipped softly to the
bedside: Her eyes were shut, but I heard her distinctly pronounce the
following sentences: "Cruel deceiver! -- faithless Talbot! why did you leave
me? -- Did I not give you my whole heart? -- I never did any thing to offend
you, but loving you too fondly. If Heaven forgives my offenses, oh, Talbot! you
might have pardoned this! -- Shall these eyes never again behold thee? --
Unkind Talbot! will thou never, never, never return? But I shall soon be at
peace." -- Then hearing her infant cry -- "Pitying God!" she exclaimed, "defend
this helpless, desolate babe! It is guiltless of its mother's crime! -- Oh,
Talbot! had thou heard this voice, unkind as thou art, thou could not have
left me? -- Yet, do not return; it would grieve thee to see my grave -- I would
die rather than grieve thee! -- I shall soon go to Heaven -- Ah, Talbot! could
I but hope to meet thee there!

She fell into a slumber for a few minutes. I sat down by her bedside. -- Oh,
my Louisa! who could behold unmoved such a scene of woe?

Again starting up, and hastily drawing back the curtain, she exclaimed,
looking wildly round her, "Where, oh! where is he? -- Did I not see him here?
-- Gone again! Gone for ever!" -- Then sinking down on her pillow, pale and
exhausted, she slowly repeated, in a solemn tone -- "Trouble and anguish are
come upon me! -- My purposes are broken off, even the thoughts of my heart! --
As for my hope, who shall see it?" -- Here she paused, as if to recover breath;
and then proceeded: -- "My kinsfolk have failed, and my familiar friends have
forgotten me: They whom I loved are turned against me! -- Have pity upon me,
have pity upon me, O ye my friends; for the hand of God has touched me! --
There is hope of a tree, if it be cut down, that it will sprout again, and that
the tender branch thereof will not cease: But man gives up the ghost, and
where is he? He lies down, and rises not, till the Heavens be no more!" --
After again pausing a few minutes, she clasped her hands together, and, raising
her dim eyes to Heaven, prayed, in a low and feeble voice, interrupted with
sighs: "Impute not, gracious God! who knows our frame -- O, impute not guilt!
-- Pity the errors of youth, not perverseness. -- Father of the afflicted!
protect my child -- save from ruin him I loved -- Receive, oh! receive thy
humble penitent to the arms of thy everlasting mercy!" -- Here her faintings
succeeded each other so rapidly, that nature, unable longer to support so
unequal a struggle, sunk altogether; and in a few minutes she expired in my
arms.

Just Heaven! wilt not thou avenge the cause of innocence like here is?

O, my Louisa! come to me, and let us mingle our tears together! Tears of
exquisite sorrow, and virtuous indignation, over the breathless corpse of her
who has fallen a victim to perfidious cruelty, and who has neither kindred nor
friends to bewail her!

Yesterday, when she felt her labor approaching, she sat down and wrote the
enclosed to you; and having sealed it, delivered it to nurse, desiring her to
keep it in a safe place, till she should get well.

"Again let me entreat you to come to me immediately, that we may concert
together proper measures, both for the private interment of the mother, and
removal of the child. Ill-fated innocent! I almost regret its having survived
her!

Your CHARLOTTE VILLIERS.


To Miss Seymour.
Forgive, dear and honored Madam, forgive the boldness of your unhappy Sally,
who presumes once more to address you -- it will be the last time.

My hour of trial fast approaches; and, in spite of all your goodness and
compassion to me, I am persuaded, it will put a period to my short and
unfortunate life. -- My heart is broken with unkindness. All are humane and
compassionate to me; but that one from whom I deserve the most, will show me no
pity!

My dear Miss Seymour, though you are all goodness, I know you dare not come to
me. I have none to comfort and encourage me, at the time I shall most need
comfort: Even a living child, that gives joy to the heart of a mother, will
only increase the bitter anguish of mine! -- No father waits to receive my
helpless babe, and bless her who bore it! -- If I live, I have no example to
propose for its imitation; -- if I die, I have no portion to bequeath it but
poverty -- no inheritance but shame!

Though I have forgotten your lessons of virtue, O my dear, kind mistress! do
not abandon my desolate child, if that merciful Being who beholds the penitence
of its mother, permits it to see the light! -- Oh! do not suffer the infant of
your once favored Sally, to become an object of public charity -- perhaps, of
public scorn: It may then learn to wander from the path of innocence, like its
wretched mother! -- Alas! she had not that excuse for wandering!

I can write no more. -- Do not accuse any one of my death; nor reproach any
one with unkindness to me. My own credulity has undone me -- the fondness of my
weak heart betrayed and ruined me!

Farewell, my loved, revered mistress! You must be happy, because you are
virtuous. -- O! may Heaven's best blessings ever surround my dear Miss Seymour;
and may that sweet peace be here is, which will never again in this world visit

Her unfortunate and afflicted, But ever grateful SALLY VERNON.


This letter, and the melancholy and unexpected fate of the unfortunate Sally,
pierced the soul of Louisa with the most exquisite sorrow. But though her
sensibility was extreme, it never unfitted her for the discharge of any active
or social duty. By the care of the best of mothers, she had early learned to
repress those feelings, whose over-indulgence would have been ruinous to her
own peace, and injurious to society, by depriving them of those good offices
which are the offspring of genuine and well-regulated sympathy.

She set out immediately for the Marquis of Winchester's; from whence the two
ladies walked to the nurse's house. At the sight of the little infant, Miss
Seymour was greatly affected; nor would she be denied the mournful pleasure of
beholding for the last time the associate of her earliest years. On uncovering
the corpse, and seeing the pale and emaciated, but placid countenance of her
youthful companion, she clasped her hands together in an agony of grief, and
turning to Lady Charlotte, who stood by her side in silent sorrow -- "Behold,
my friend," said she, "the fatal effects of cruel and headstrong passion!
Behold the sad remains of youth, beauty, sweetness, innocence! Almighty God!
shall the creatures of thy power, the monuments of thy mercy, the daily sharers
of thy bounty, for the sake of indulging a criminal impulse, thus inhumanly,
thus deliberately destroy each other? -- Is it possible, is it really
possible," she continued, "that she whom, but a few months ago, I beheld so
blooming, healthful, and innocent, whose graceful form, endearing modesty, and
ineffable sweetness, excited my admiration, is now a pale, breathless, cold,
insensible corpse?" -- Then stooping down and kissing her lifeless cheek, --
"Farewell! farewell for ever!" said she, "dear, unfortunate, but too credulous
Sally: May thy virtues live in my faithful heart, and may thy errors for ever
be buried in thy grave."

Having appointed a hired carriage to meet them at the nurse's house, they bid
her adieu; and having carefully wrapped up their infant-charge, proceeded to
Castle Hastings: in the neighborhood of which lived a woman, who having just
lost a child whom she suckled, was glad to have its place supplied by a foster.

Having dismissed the chaise, Lady Charlotte walked slowly toward the Castle,
to avoid observation, whilst Miss Seymour conveyed the little baby in her arms
to the cottage.

The aversion she felt for every species of duplicity, joined to her desire of
concealing the weakness of Sally for ever from the world, induced her to be
very silent on the subject of the child. She told the good woman, however, that
though the child had few friends to care for it, she should have every thing
provided for it, and be amply rewarded for the proper discharge of her duty.

Though this melancholy affair made a deep and lasting impression on the heart
of Louisa, her humane attention to this poor babe served both to sooth her
sorrow, and fill up that joyless void which the absence of Lord Hastings
occasioned in her mind. -- Prudence obliged her to restrict the number of her
visits to the cottage; but as it stood at a very small distance from the
Castle, she frequently directed her walks that way, without hazard of incurring
suspicion.

In one of her solitary rambles, which she had extended to a considerable
length, her thoughts being occupied with those tender reflections which wrap
the pensive mind in a sweet delirium, recollecting that she was within a few
paces of the field in which stood the nurse's cottage, she directed her steps
that way, in order to visit her little charge whom she had not seen for some
time.

She was met at the door by the good woman, who expressed the utmost
satisfaction on seeing her: -- "I was just agoing, Madam," said she, "to fetch
little Sally to visit your La'ship to day at the Castle, that you might see
what a charming little puppet it grows, and how smart and tidy she looks in the
new cap your La'ship gave her." -- "I am very happy, nurse," answered Louisa,
"that you are likely to have such credit by your foster; but you must never
bring her to the Castle, as I will often call here to see her, and always take
care that you shall want for nothing."

As she was caressing this beautiful child with much fondness, a sigh escaped
her, on recollection of his birth and unfortunate circumstances. -- "I hope,
Madam," said the simple cottager, "your La'ship does not see any cause to find
fault with my care of the child? I am sure she sucks all night long, and gets
as much victuals as she can eat, and my husband never has a rasher, without
giving her a bit of it; for he loves my little puppet, and our bacon is pure
good, an' please your La'ship, and sucking a bit makes the child hearty." --
"Indeed, good nurse," replied Louisa, whith a complacent smile, "I am quite
satisfied that you do your duty to the sweet babe; but I sigh to think what a
cruel father she has." -- "Lack-a-day, Ma'am," replied nurse, "there be too
many such fathers in the world; but, mayhap, if your La'ship would send and
tell him what a fine child he has here, he might return again."

Miss Seymour, on looking at her watch, perceived that it was very late; she
therefore repeated her injunctions to nurse never to bring Sally near the
Castle; and bidding her a good-morning, returned home.

She found there the Marquis and his daughter, whose company became dearer to
her every day: It was with real concern, therefore, she learned, that business
of importance required that the Marquis should immediately set off for London.
The two ladies took leave of each other, with sincere expressions of tender
regret, on account of this unexpected separation; and with mutual promises of
beguiling the length of winter, which was already begun, by a constant
epistolary intercourse.

As nothing material to this history occurred during the six following months,
I shall insert the letters which passed between the several parties during that
period.

To Adelaide de St. Croix.
I am persuaded, my loved Adelaide, that it is not from agitation of mind, but
vacancy of heart, our forest sufferings arise. Lord Hastings is gone -- Lady
Charlotte has left me -- the gloomy winter is commenced, and corresponds but
too well with my present feelings. How painful now do I feel ^^y absence from
my best and dearest friend! That friend, who alone, of all the human race,
could enter into every sentiment of my soul; and, without the aid of language,
comprehend its every motion, sooth, its every inquietude, look compassion, sigh
relief, and smile approbation.

Whilst the presence of Lord Hastings kept my mind in continual fear and
agitation, though my spirits were sometimes depressed, they were never so
perfectly overwhelmed as since these fears have lost their object.

My present dejection, which I struggle in vain to conceal, has not escaped the
observation of the humane Lady Granville. She is apprehensive on account of my
health, though too delicate to express these apprehensions, and, under pretense
of improving her own, has proposed that we shall spend Christmas with Lord
Salisbury, and make a round of visits before returning to the Castle. -- I am
grateful for her kind intentions, but fear I shall not profit by them! -- My
mind of late seems sunk into a kind of lethargic insensibility, from which no
exertion, however vigorous, can rouse it. Though innumerable sources of
enjoyment are in my possession, I can enjoy nothing: The very aspect of nature
is changed to me; the sun has lost its cheerfulness, and the fresh air no
longer revives me. Surrounded with friends, kind and attentive, I seem at times
to myself the most desolate being on the face of the earth. The disingenuity
and ingratitude of this rebellious spirit, adds remorse to the weight of my
affliction! -- What can I do, my Adelaide? -- O! pity, console, and, if
possible, reconcile me to myself!

I am just returned from church, where I have regained that heavenly calm, and
felt that sweet elevation of soul which we experience, whilst, with ^ixedness
of thought, we contemplate the sublime of existence, and rejoice in the
perfection of benevolence! An employment, how noble, how delightful, how
suitable to a rational, immortal, accountable being!

There is no situation, my Adelaide, in which the sorrowful and dejected heart
may not derive consolation from the exercise of ardent, unfeigned piety. But
ah! to descend from these exalted heights -- to feel the tide of frailty and
passion return again -- to sink again into dejecting melancholy -- to be again
overwhelmed with suspense, fear, and inquietude: This, oh this, my Adelaide, is
painful, is distracting to the soul of

Your LOUISA SEYMOUR.


To Lord Hastings.
It is now, my dear Henry, that, laying aside that standard by which you judged
of mankind, and which you found in your own uncorrupted heart, you begin to
open your eyes, and to see them is they really are, instead of what you wished
them to be. It is with pain we first make this discovery; for the errors of the
judgment are always more mortifying to our self-love, than those of the heart.
On entering the world, the delicacy of our taste, as well as the foundness of
our principles, receive so rude a shock, that, for a while, we become absolute
misanthropes. Time, however, and a more intimate acquaintance with ourselves,
change our sentiments, and correct the severity of our strictures on others.

In reality, mankind are more deserving of pity than contempt. Want of
reflection, not malevolence of intention, is their ruin. And when one considers
how difficult it is, especially in early life, to resist the allurements of
pleasure, and combat the pleas of indolence, it seems rather surprising, that
they are not always the slaves of vice, than that they are not always the
slaves of vice, than that they should sometimes become the dupes of folly.

I would not have you enter the world with an unkind and indiscriminating
jealousy of your species. But as I know, in youth, the heart generally decides
before the understanding, and the imagination often, leads them both astray, I
would have you cautious in forming opinions of characters, and modest in
delivering your own; and whilst you behave with affability to all, reserve your
confidence for those, of whom long acquaintance has discovered the sterling
merit.

One's heart swells with honest indignation, to see the great, the venerable,
the respectable virtues, passing unheeded through the vale of obscurity, whilst
the mean, selfish, servile arts of cunning and hypocrisy, engage public notice,
and even advance the possessor to shining and elevated stations. Let us, my
son, despising the vile craft of the sycophant, whilst we remain obstinate in
virtue, cultivate that universal complacency and good will, which is the
offspring of good sense, principle, and humanity.

You tell me, "you are shocked to find every thing serious treated with
contempt and ridicule, by those who arrogate to themselves the name of fine
gentlemen; though neither their talents nor manners seem to qualify them for
that sphere." -- Contempt and ridicule, my dear Henry, are the last wretched
resource of hardened vice and determined libertinism; and for what do they thus
wantonly make a jest of things sacred? -- To raise a laugh -- to gain the empty
and momentary applause of fools and coxcombs -- to eradicate entirely from the
minds of youth the last sad remains of a virtuous education? -- How wretched
the purpose! how mean the triumph!

May Heaven preserve my son from the contagious manners of that gay and busy
world, by mixing with which, I fondly flatter myself, he will return with
double relish to the rational and elegant pleasures of a domestic life, and the
embraces of his ever affectionate

GRANVILLE.


To Miss Seymour.
Well, Louisa, here I am, in a vortex of delight, in cash, in health, and in
spirits. How long they may last, I know not, but am resolved they shall not lie
a dead stock on my hands.

You are very unkind; -- you, who have not one earthly thing to do, but rise
and go to bed, and go to bed and rise -- to be a whole week without writing!
Intolerable. -- I, whose every moment is precious, can affirm, that I have
thought of you at least once every day since we parted. What a noble, what a
singular instance of modern friendship!

I hear you have been visiting at Hawthornhill. -- Pray, my dear, what is
become of poor Sir William? Is that woe-fraught heart of his still unbroken?
Surely i^ must be made of harder materials than even the flint and adamant, of
which he alleges mine is formed. -- If no birchen inhabitant of the adjacent
wood yet bows under the weight of him and his sorrows, or if there are no
hempen cords in the neighborhood, I will myself remove this obstacle to his
release, rather than suffer the poor wretch to pine away, and wither in his
bloom. But you need not declare my intentions to the world, as, in the case of
such donations, I would hate to appear oftentatious; besides, if he hangs
himself at once, he will be deprived of a thousand opportunities of convincing
me of the violence of his passion, by being tortured with doubt, racked with
fear, drowned in despair, and overwhelmed with apprehension.

A-propos, of this same disease called Love: Do you know, it is actually become
epidemical here! and I am not without some apprehension of sharing the general
fate.

The symptoms of this malady are so various, I cannot pretend to enumerate
them; but, in order to put you on your guard, I shall mention those that are
most frequent.

Some are seized with silence and stupor; others are inspired with sudden
phrenzy. Some feel an insatiable thirst for gold; others are sensible of a
violent longing after -- the goods and chattels of their neighbors.

What the ancients thought of this disorder, I cannot say; but they and the
moderns differ widely in their manner of treating it. The former recommended
absence, change of objects, and, in extremity, death itself. The latter only
prescribe a bitter potion called Matrimony, which is found efficacious, even in
the most desperate cases. It is, indeed, a severe remedy, and gives the patient
such a loathing, that, in case of a relapse, he hardly ever has recourse to it
a second time.

I cannot bear to think of your spending the whole winter in the country. -- I
protest, Louisa, before the end of it, you will be fit for no other society
than that of bats, owls, Thomas-a-Kempis, and dowagers of quality. -- What
would thousands here give, for a pair of such bright eyes as you rivet a whole
day to your book or embroidery? Turn them at least sometimes toward your pen,
ink, and paper, and give more heartfelt pleasure than any which London can
afford, to

Your affectionate CHARLOTTE VILLIERS.


To the same.
I sit down to scold you, Louisa; and if you tell me it is an improper
occupation for a lady, I can answer, that my propensity is not to be
controuled. This, you know, is the language of that sex, who pretend to be our
superiors in understanding, yet scruple not to plead irresistible impulse,
whenever they violate its dictates: Now, as we are allowed to be the weaker
vessels, our impulses must confessedly be still more irresistible than their's.

How can you load me so unmercifully with praise? -- When undeserved, as in my
case, it becomes the most humiliating censure. But as I am not ignorant of the
magical powers of self-love, who, with the same optics, can magnify natural
talents to the size of cardinal virtues, and diminish real faults to that of
amiable weaknesses, I must warn you not so lavishly to bestow that sweet potion
on me, lest the cunning sorceress convert the balm into aconite. -- You should
reflect too, my dear girl, that in praising your friend you are lavishing
encomiums on yourself; for our sentiments are alike on most subjects, and every
talent with which nature has endowed me, you possess in a much superior degree.

Here I anticipate a lecture on the part of Humility; but let that scrupulous
virgin consult with her sister Truth, before she enter her caveat against this
last sentence. I will then trust my cause to be plead by Friendship, against
your advocate, Modesty, whom, in spite of having wronged you a thousand times,
you still retain in your service; and, farther, you may be pleased to inform
her, that if she cites me to answer for partiality at the bar of Opinion, I
will instantly appeal to Judgment, whose secretary, Common-sense, has assured
me, that I shall come off with credit and reputation.

Is it not humiliating, Louisa, to the boastful pride of man, to feel how much
this etherial spirit of his is affected by mechanical causes? -- A cold day
damps his hopes, a dark one clouds his prospects, and a week of rain drowns him
in the depths of despondent melancholy! But no sooner does the sky clear, the
clouds disperse, and the sun shine, than his hopes revive, his prospects
brighten, his dejection vanishes, and the aspect of every object is changed to
the eye of his enlivened imagination.

Perhaps you will allege, that mine has directed the pencil, in the piece I
have just been drawing. Alas! no; Experience traced the outline, and Truth
finished the picture.

Three days of thick fog have so altered my temper, that I am persuaded the ill
success of Sir William's suit has been occasioned by his making love to me in
the month of November. -- Mine for you, Louisa, is fixed beyond the reach of
every thing, except the chilling frost of indifference; and I date venture to
affirm, will know no change from times or seasons, but glow with as equal and
fervent a heat amidst the snows of December, as in the sultry dog days. --
Adieu.

CHARLOTTE VILLIERS.


To Lady Charlotte Villiers.
Our conviction, my dear friend, insensibly coincides with our inclination. You
have taught me to believe that my letters give you pleasure: I am too happy in
being able to do so, not to embrace every occasion of addressing you. The
praises I bestow on you, my dear Lady Charlotte, are from the heart; -- you are
sufficiently acquainted with its genuine language, to give credit to this
assertion; and surely would not wish me either to disguise or suppress its
dictates, when writing to you.

I cannot agree with you, "that in praising you, I am lavishing encomiums on
myself." You forget that we always incline to contemn what we already enjoy,
and admire what we do not possess. -- I must not, however, be perverse, or
attempt to impose on you by my sophistry. However this may hold with respect to
the goods of fortune, it does not apply to the gifts of nature. It is
confessed, we are all sufficiently disposed to overvalue our mental
qualifications.

Do not be afraid to scold me, whenever you think I require such discipline.
Though you have heard me confess, that I would suffer extreme pain on being
told my faults by a person I loved, from the dread of forfeiting their esteem,
this is unpardonable weakness. What friend expects to find us perfect? -- and
who is so proper to correct, so likely to reform us, as those we love? -- Let
me conjure you then, my dear Lady Charlotte, to tell me heartily whenever you
see me fall into any error, that I may prove, by my eagerness to amend it, how
desirous I am of becoming all you wish me to be.

Nothing, I am persuaded, is so fatal, either to the interests of love or
friendship, as those little disgusts which take their rise from trifles, but
which, by alarming the delicacy, and wounding the pride of affection, by being
often ren^wed, increase insensibly to coldness, indifference, dislike -- nay,
aversion itself. We ought not to expect perfection; but in all connections of
the heart we ought carefully to avoid giving pain, by discovering our own
imperfections.

I entirely agree with my friend, in thinking the observance of the lesser
morals highly requisite in such connections. But if a very nice attention to
these become necessary, will not this occasion restraint? and does not
restraint, like a secret poison, impair the very vitals of friendship? --
Methinks, along with that fearfulness of offending, which flows from goodness
of heart, there should be an equal aversion to taking offense. Indeed, if we
are at pains to examine our own minds, we shall find, that security of meeting
with indulgence, is the first thing that prompts to unbounded confidence.

We are at present on a visit at Lord Salisbury's; one of the noblest and most
extensive estates in this country. But there is an air of sullen and solitary
grandeur about it, that depresses the spirits, and dissatisfies the heart. --
How unlike the cheerful, hospitable Castle of Hastings!

The houses of five gentlemen in this neighborhood are desolate and
tenantless, and their estates swallowed up in that of Lord Salisbury. This
cruel depopulation deprives him and his family of the most essential blessing
of life -- an agreeable society. -- Ah! if to be feared, disliked, deserted --
if to possess a palace whose apartments are uninhabited, a territory where one
can never hope to meet "the human face divine" -- if this is to be rich and
great, may Heaven preserve from wealth and grandeur

Your LOUISA SEYMOUR.


To Lord Hastings.
I have often thought, my dear Henry, that there is not a more surprising
principle in the mind of man, than that by which he is led on from day to day,
in pursuit of a felicity, which, in the calm hour of reflection, he will
acknowledge to be unattainable whilst on earth. -- Despising the blessings
which the present offers to his enjoyment, he rests all his hopes upon the
future. Yet, alas! what more can he know of the future, than that it will
resemble the past, which has already deceived, and grievously disappointed him?

Mankind, in their eager pursuit after happiness, overlook the means of
obtaining it; for this eagerness, leaving them no leisure to form just notions
concerning the nature of their chief good, hurries them into a thousand wild
and extravagant schemes, absolutely destructive of it. By such men, happiness
is believed to consist in a quick succession of rapturous enjoyments, where
every desire obtains its completion, and every pursuit is crowned with success.

Now, it is evident, that such felicity is absolutely incompatible with our
present state of discipline, where plenty is the fruit of toil, health the
effect of temperance, rest the reward of labor, and pleasure the concomitant
of pain; where virtue must be tried by adversity, and the character formed by
frequent acts of fortitude and self-denial.

But, further, mankind err, in affixing to particular situations and
circumstances, the idea of a quality which results from the exercise of worthy
and generous affections, and the harmony of a pious and well-regulated mind.

The same objects do not affect any two of the human species exactly in the
same manner. -- The serious and contemplative find their chief enjoyment in the
retired walks of life, in exploring the treasures of science, and contemplating
the beautiful and sublime of nature. -- To the young and gay, society affords
variety of pleasures; the indolent find their's in ease, and the active in
business. -- How vain is it then to affirm, that happiness results from a
fortunate combination of external circumstances, when we see, that it must vary
with every different mode of situation, constitution, and taste.

Let us try then, by forming just notions of our present state, to determine
what must constitute our greatest happiness: Let us consider ourselves as
placed here, not long to suffer, or exquisitely to enjoy; but by properly
maintaining our allotted part, to prepare ourselves for future enjoyment.

Objects of high gratification are rare, and difficult to be acquired; and our
anguish, when deprived of them, must ever be proportionable to the transport
they have afforded us. Objects of complacency and satisfaction are always
within reach of a benevolent heart and well-regulated mind; and when Providence
demands them from us, we can resign them, without that poignant regret which
incapacitates the soul for the enjoyment of such as remain.

Let us then endeavor, by habituating ourselves to be satisfied with such
temperate pleasures as are easily attained, and suited to our present
circumstances, to cultivate that healthful cheerfulness and equality of temper
which disposes us to view the best side of life, which gives a zest to all its
innocent pleasures, and which we can never know, whilst, restless and
unsatisfied, we grasp at an imaginary bliss, and forfeit substantial peace, in
vainly striving for exquisite enjoyment.

You tell me, that "bad health has at times an influence, even on the gentle
temper of Dr. Melville." Remember, my dear Hastings, it is the peculiar
privilege, as well as province of friendship, not only to bear with the little
sallies of passion and peevishness, to which all of human kind are liable, but,
with superior delicacy, to steal from us our vexations and inquietudes, without
^eeming to perceive that they exist.

We are all pretty well, except Miss Seymour, who looks very thin and pale, but
assures me she has no complaint. We have been going a round of visits, which, I
hope, will amuse her; she is too thoughtful and studious, but always amiable.
She joins your mother and me, in wishes for your safety, and regrets for your
absence, which seems to be felt by all, but by none more than

Your fondly affectionate father, GRANVILLE.


To Miss Seymour.
-- The clock strikes eleven -- one hour yet remains of this departing year;
let it be an hour of solemn reflection; let it be devoted to my friend!

How like a confused and troubled dream, do the last twelve months appear? --
Ah, Louisa! would to Heaven they would bear away with them our vain inquietudes
and sinful sorrows! -- Who can look back on the past, without self-reproach, or
anticipate the eventful future, without timid apprehension?

May perfect confidence in the divine goodness, which we have so often
experienced, and in the divine wisdom, which we profess to venerate, quiet
every anxious wish and turbulent emotion of our souls, and preserve them in
that state of cheerful serenity, which philosophy vainly labored to introduce
into the restless heart of man.

It was with much reason, my Louisa, that I urged you, whilst young, to extend
the circle of your amicable connections. When any of these are dissolved in
afte^ life, the soul revolts from the idea of entering into new alliances, or
of suffering the tender enthusiastic attachments of youth to be succeeded by
the dull, frigid, cautious connections of interest or prudence.

The fate of the gentle Constance, is a melancholy proof of the danger of
resting all our hopes on one object, and deriving all our pleasures from one
source. -- You know, some time before your arrival in France, she lost her
amiable and only friend. Accustomed from childhood to a daily interchange of
kind offices, and boundless affection, the death of Agnes not only robbed her
of all her enjoyment, but even deprived her of power to enjoy. After vainly
struggling, in obedience to duty, to recover the vigor of her exhausted mind,
in the tumult of the world, she was permitted to retire from it, and to follow
her inclination, in striving to moderate, in the quiet of retirement, that
deep-rooted sorrow, which death alone could cure.

I well remember, the first time you saw the silent dejected mourner, you
remarked, that there was something in her very look and manner, which strongly
indicated her nearness to Heaven -- a purity, a sensibility, an abstraction,
which convinced one she would not long be a sojourner in this vale of tears. --
Accordingly, she has bidden an eternal adieu to it, and, I trust, is again
associated with her kindred spirit, in the realms of light, and truth, and
love, where their services shall know no interruption, and their felicity no
end.

The wonderful affection which united the very souls of these friends, was
allowed, I fear, to exceed the bounds prescribed by reason and duty. It was
such a copious and overflowing tide, as laid waste, or swallowed up in its
course, many of those kind and lesser benevolences due to society; whose
sources, perhaps, remained in their hearts, but whose streams were not
sufficiently diffused through their lives.

The gentle Constance has fallen a victim to the indulgence of that exquisite
sensibility, so soothing and flattering to young minds, and which a thousand
circumstances, in this region of sorrows, are ever at hand to cherish. From the
natural delicacy of her constitution, on which her mind has doubtless had a
powerful influence, her peace, her health, even her life, has been sacrificed
to this delightful, but fatal tenderness. With this nervousness of soul, it was
impossible for her to taste of happiness in a world where vice is so prevalent,
and misfortune so irremediable. -- The miseries of human life were to her an
insurmountable obstacle to the enjoyment of its blessings: And unless her
friends could have borne to see her become less amiable and interesting, they
never could hope to behold her more happy. -- Joined to this endearing
weakness, Constance possessed a temper so reserved, that many ^^^stook for
pride what was the effect of diffidence alone. Hence she was less generally
beloved than many who were her inferiors in every quality, but that
unreservedness which is as often the effect of a weak and intemperate mind, as
of a warm and generous heart.

Such was Constance! So ill fitted for this world, so desirous of another,
should those who loved her, regret her early escape from this dark region of
shadows? And whilst Time, like a silent thief, is daily pilfering from our
little hoard of comfort, should we, my Louisa, wish to linger here, till he has
robbed us of all?

It is the natural effect of grief, to unhinge the mind, and render us
superstitious: Were I to indulge the present suggestions of mine, I would
believe, that I was not long to survive my friend. -- This, my Louisa, is a
soothing, but a very selfish idea. When I know that my life is the object of
your prayers and wishes, ought not this consideration to give it value in my
eyes? -- It shall, my love; and if Heaven is pleased to prolong it, I will yet
indulge the pleasing hope of once more embracing my friend.

ADELAIDE DE ST. CROIX.


To Miss Seymour.
I think I told you lately, Louisa, that matrimony was become epidemical here.
They are resolved not only to have me married, but in love too! -- Was ever any
thing so unreasonable? -- My father dined yesterday at the French ambassador's,
where he was introduced to the young earl of Leister, who is just returned from
the grand tour; elegant, polite, handsome, rich; and, if I may credit the
Marquis, he has collected all the improvements, graces, and accomplishments,
that ever were acquired by traveling, and brought them home in a bundle, for
the good of his countrymen. I hope he will have the charity to bestow some of
them on his fellowpeers, who, if want forms a claim, may surely make large
demands on his bounty. Perhaps, in return, they may teach him one science, of
which, with all his acquirements, he may be still ignorant; I mean -- cookery.
I have heard a member of parliament descant more learnedly on a receipt for a
pasty, than he could have done on the bill of rights; and lately ate a
beef-steak dressed by a peer, which the Grand Monarque's cook needed not to be
ashamed of. Considering the shortness of human life, if a man arrive at
perfection in one art, it is all that can reasonably be expected. It would
really be unconscionable to suppose that Lord Dale must be both a first-rate
cook and a pillar of the state.

Tell me, Louisa, my dear serious girl, how is all going on at the Castle?
Doubtless in the same dull, unvarying round of rational enjoyment and domestic
duty. Ah! my friend, to mind like yours, these may be satisfactory; but my
pleasures must have a higher flavor, a more poignant relish, the exquisite
zest of dear variety. Tell me honestly, Louisa, do you never envy me the
possession of such?

My father is gone to the play: I had devoted this whole evening to you; was in
the very humor for addressing you in the style you love, serious, sententious,
and sentimental; when a servant came to inform me, that Mr. Danvers, a
gentleman my father had invited to supper, was in the parlour.

It was but just eight -- strangers to each other, the prospect was dismal. We
canvassed the affairs of state, and amusements of the season, till we found we
had worn both subjects threadbare: We yawned, we sidgeted, we spoke, we were
silent, and my chagrin and vexation increased every moment; -- some sulky hints
were dropped of letters to write -- of the tedious length of the play, etc.
etc. Ah, Louisa! was this like your friend? -- I felt that it was not!

This is a stranger, whispered Hospitality. -- What injury has he done you?
demanded Justice. -- He knows not that he has offended, said Conscience. -- He
would not have treated you unkindly, sighed that Charity which suffers long,
and is patient. -- There was no resisting this plea: My blood took a "moral
flow," and covered my cheek with blushes; I summoned every perverse particle
that had soured the milk of human kindness in my breast, and ex^rcised them
with such fury, as, I trust, will for ever prevent these diabolians from
returning.

The pure spirit of benevolence now took possession of my heart, and rendered
me so docile, that I accompanied the stranger to Grand Cairo, without one
symptom of fatigue or inattention; -- which I fancy is more than you can say,
after reading this long letter: -- Therefore adieu.

CHARLOTTE VILLIERS.


To Lady Charlotte Villiers.
I participate sincerely, my dear Lady Charlotte, in every thing which
contributes to your enjoyment; but cannot envy you the possession of pleasures
which I never could relish. Surely Heaven has annexed to those that are simple
and natural, a charm unknown to the votaries of luxury and fal^e refinement.

Friendship, reflection, devotion, and retirement, supply real enjoyment to a
temperate mind; but the manners, and, far more, the vices of the world, wear
off the keen edge of that delicate sensibility which is the general organ by
which all exquisite pleasure is conveyed to the soul.

It is the misfortune of young women in particular, who are trained in the gay
world, to have their native abhorrence of vice insensibly lessened, by being
familiarised to it, and hearing many things talked of there with ease, which
they ought never to think of, but with horror. In particular, they should be
left in ignorance, both of the licentious manners of men, and the pernicious
and libertine principles on which they pretend to vindicate them. To make girls
acquainted with such, is like placing edge-tools in the hands of a child, with
which, unable to use them, it will certainly destroy itself.

Such, in my opinion, ought to be the purity of the female mind, that a
virtuous woman would feel herself criminal, in thinking of what a vicious man
will not scruple to act.

But, my dear Lady Charlotte, though I do not share in your turbulent
pleasures, think not that I am without your loved variety. In the course of
eight weeks, we have visited as many neighboring families, some of whom would
afford subjects suited exactly to your lively pen. We are at present at Squire
Randall's, who, to all his other practices, adds that of physic: He compounds
an eye-water, in particular, which was never once known to fail, though its
qualities are directly opposite to Lethe's, as it smarts the patient too
severely to let him forget his care. -- It grieves me to see so many caresses
and so much white meat, bestowed by the good lady on a parcel of senseless,
sorry cats. Heaven seems to have endowed all its creatures with a certain
portion of affection, which must be expended: Some lavish it on deserving, some
on unworthy objects. A dog, a cat, a man, or a monkey, usually engrosses the
hearts of our sex; -- pleasure, interest, ambition, are the idols to which the
other sacrifice. Which of us makes the wisest choice, I leave you to determine.

You tell me, "you can have no conception of a heaven, without the society of
your friends." Perhaps, by the time you have known some of them ten years, you
may alter your opinion. Meantime, as we are left in ignorance of celestial
enjoyments, I think you have as good a right as your neighbors, to form an
elys^um to your mind; and, perhaps, may be as near the truth, as those sublime
theo^ogists, who give us as minute a description of paradise as if they had
just returned from thence.

My dear Lady Charlotte, I have asked you twenty times, without receiving an
answer, When do you think of returning to the country? -- I begin to have no
small jealousy of Lord Leister. -- Would my heart were as light as your head,
and your absence as short as your memory! -- Adieu. -- In all situations and
humors, continue to remember your truly affectionate

LOUISA SEYMOUR.


To Lord Hastings.
I share in your pleasures, my dear Henry, whilst wandering with a tender and
reverential melancholy, through scenes for ever hallowed by the efforts of
genius, valor, and virtue. To tread those paths where every foot is classic
ground, cannot fail to inspire a mind like yours with those sublime ideas, and
solemn reflections, which are akin to those exalted spirits we then admire; and
which by freely communicating, you give pride, as well as joy, to the heart of
your father.

What you tell me of the miserable fate of Talbot, shocks me beyond measure.
How short, how shameful has been his career! how guilty, how dreadful its
close! -- What a melancholy proof does he exhibit of the fatal effects of early
and vicious habits.

Though passion is a violent and insolent master, it will sometimes relax of
its severity; but habit is an obdurate and relentless tyrant, that holds the
mind enslaved in cruel and perpetual bondage.

Besides the unbounded indulgence of criminal propensities, another cause has
contributed to the ruin of the wretched Talbot. You know his mind, naturally
active and inquiring, was early poisoned by the maxims of modern philosophy and
skepticism. Surely men are not aware of the consequences, when they publish
their libertine opinions to the world. They usually claim the title of moral
men; but what can be more immoral than such conduct? Their metaphysical
subterfuges, and sophistical arguments, are only calculated to lull the voice
of conscience, and give scope to every lawless appetite to tyrannise with
impunity. Meanwhile, the unhappy vulgar, deprived alike of ability and leisure
for reflection, and prone to indulge to the same excesses, implicitly acquiesce
in the opinions, and eagerly follow the example of their superiors. What should
we think of the man, who could snatch from the sinking mariner, the plank on
which his last hope depended? -- Inhuman, far more inhuman is he, who, in midst
of the dangers which continually surround us, can rob us of that hope which is
the anchor of the soul, and plunge us in the perplexity of doubt and horror of
despair.

The bulk of our species, my dear Henry, employ themselves not in abstract
speculation, but in concerting schemes of pleasure and emolument: they affix
the idea of happiness to the possession of certain favorite objects, and
expect, with impatience, the hour that shall ensure their felicity, by the
completion of their wishes: that hour arrives; but alas! it brings only
heaviness and disappointment. Again they indulge the same fond hopes, again
renew the unsuccessful cha^e, till, tired at length of their vain pursuits,
they resign themselves, in old age, to peevish discontent, and, without hope or
comfort, drop unlamented in the grave.

How different is the course of that man, whose conduct is regulated by true
wisdom -- who considers this life in connection with the next -- who moderates
his desires, and preserves the powers of his mind in equal balance! -- His
wishes can never be disappointed, because the object of them is immutable; his
schemes can never be frustrated, because they are built on the foundation of
truth; and time, which accelerates the destruction of all things mortal, speeds
on the hour of his safety, his triumph, his everlasting joy!

We are once more returned to the Castle, with that sweet satisfaction which
home affords to those who are happy in their domestic connections, and endowed
by Heaven with the true relish for happiness.

We have found all your favorites in health, and wanting you, bestow on them
the kindness due to their master. I ride Sorrel with much pleasure during the
^ine weather. Old Cato, in imperial state and ease, rests on a cushion, by the
side of the fire, in your mother's dressing room; -- and little Phyllis is fed
every day by the fair hand of Miss Seymour, whom she gratefully caresses, and
attends in all her solitary rambles.

Farewell, my beloved son; -- may the Supreme Disposer of all events render the
journey of life both pleasant and prosperous, as far as may be safe for you! So
prays sincerely

Your affectionate father, GRANVILLE.


To Miss Seymour.
All is over, Louisa! -- my fate is determined -- Lord Leister is the man. --
But to proceed in order.

I have been in the most delightful hurry these eight days past, making
preparations for my first appearance at court. Accordingly I was presented
yesterday, and just as I was returning to the bottom of the circle, to avoid
those scrutinizing eyes that were turned on me from every quarter, mine
encountered the most striking figure I ever beheld. -- I could be at no loss
with regard to the person, who was no other than the Earl of Leister himself.
-- He had waited a few minutes at the lower end of the room, till the ceremony
of my introduction was over, and then went through the same himself, with a
grace and dignity that drew upon him a number of encomiums, and showed that he
was familiar in the courts of princes.

He was received very graciously by the sovereign, who conversed with him for
several minutes; -- he then paid his compliments in the politest manner to my
father, who brought him round, and presented him to me. -- I kn^w not what was
the matter, Louisa; but I felt myself far more embarrassed with his notice,
than that of his Majesty.

We are to sup together this evening at the Duke of Marlborough's: I shall then
be able to tell you a little more of my mind. If his intellects bear any
proportion to his form and manners, I am undone! -- But as I cannot be in love
with a fool, and he is an earl, I have two chances in favor of my freedom.

So our sage philosophical friend has got a son! -- Poor little urchin, it has
made its appearance too soon in the world, and I fear will hardly have fair
play for continuing in it. I suppose, by this time, its learned father, in the
sublimity of metaphysical madness, is busied in investigating the cause of its
first squall, exploring the number of its in^ate ideas, analising the milk with
which it is nourished, correcting its propensities, thwarting its desires, and,
by grieving its nurse, provoking its aunts, and perplexing its mother, is
converting the joyful gratulations of the wholefemale gossips, into sullen
murmurs, discontent, and disappointment. -- Were I his wife, I should consent
to his amusing himself in his study with plans of education, as absurd and
impracticable as any of those with which vanity and ignorance have pestered
mankind; -- but would surely contend for the exclusive possession of my little
treasure during the first year, when an infant is confessedly the most improper
of all subjects for whim to try experiments upon.

After experiencing the warmth of June in the end of February, the cold of last
week has been intolerably severe, and has occasioned universal murmurs. --
Thus, when the cold blasts of misfortune assail us, we forget the days of
sunshine we have enjoyed, and convert the past bounty of Heaven into means of
increasing our present discontents.

You see, Louisa, it is possible for a fine lady sometimes to be serious.

Be assured, in every situation, circumstance, and humor, you are remembered,
esteemed, and beloved, by

Your CHARLOTTE VILLIERS.


To Lady Charlotte Villiers.
"Indeed, my dear Lady Charlotte, I am inclined to echo your opinion. -- Yes,
your fate is determined, and Lord Leister is the man." -- A friend of Lord
Granville's, who met with him abroad, has given me his character in terms that
might sooth even the partial ear of a mistress. -- I long to hear yours; as I
do not think you are yet so much in love, as to make me distrust the evidence
either of your judgment or senses.

Lord Granville came into the room some days ago, with a letter from his son in
his hand, containing an account of the shocking fate of Sally's seducer,
Talbot, with whom Lord Hastings had been acquainted at college. -- Having
involved himself so much by every species of extravagance, that he could not
any longer continue in England, he borrowed a considerable sum from his young
friends, on pretense of going to take possession of an estate in Wales, left
him by a relation; and embarking at Dover, made the best of his way to Paris.
-- As his rage for gaming was unconquerable, he soon was discovered to have
money, by a company of sharpers, who fleeced him of every guinea. That evening
he lost his last stake, he went home and wrote a letter to his unhappy father,
attempting to justify his conduct on the principles of modern infidelity. He
then, with his own hand, put an end to that life, which guilt had rendered
obnoxious to others, and a burden to himself. -- Ah! my friend, what a dismal,
what a shocking exit.

Ye, whom the love of fame, or pride of singularity, conducts into the dismal
labyrinths of error, in pity to mankind, remain contented with your fancied
superiority, your boasted discoveries. But leave them, O leave them, in happy
ignorance! Expose them not to the perplexity of doubt, or the anguish of
suspense; deprive them not of those consolatory hopes, obscure not to them
those glorious prospects, which alone can render life supportable. Consider,
that with one half of your species, the hope of the future is all of good the
present affords. -- Alas! would you then wish to deprive them of their all?

My dear Lady Charlotte, ought we to speak of distress, with whose sorrow
neither guilt nor shame is mingled? -- When we shed the tear of nature or
friendship over those we love, we feel our virtues increased, our sentiments
ennobled by the generous sorrow; -- but who dare mention the name of Talbot to
his afflicted father, or renew his shame, and redouble his anguish, by
expressing compassion?

Happy are they, who, amidst the darkness and perplexity of this toilsome
journey, keep their eyes fixed on that land of rest to which it conducts them.
-- Who neither annoy their fellow-travellers by unkindness nor injustice; but,
by a thousand gentle and quiet attentions, strive to lighten their burdens, and
beguile the length of the way -- and who, by every new discovery of human error
and frailty, learn to be more watchful over themselves, and more indulgent to
the weakness of others. -- Adieu.

LOUISA SEYMOUR.


To Lord Hastings.
On going into the library this morning, I found your friend, Miss Seymour,
seated there, with her favorite Shakespeare, whose Twelfth Night she was
reading; and whose touching portrait of Viola she at present resembles more
nearly than we could wish. -- She has lost much of her usual blooming healthy
aspect, which gives us much concern. She is truly a most amiable and
intelligent young creature, and almost tempts me to dispute our sex's claim to
superior judgment and abilities.

For my part, the more I know of the world, the more equality I discover
between the sexes; and it must be allowed the other have this in their favor,
that with hearts more susceptible, and judgments less informed, they are often
able, through the strength of principle alone, to resist and conquer those
passions, to which we give unbounded license, in spite of that superior
strength of mind, by which we pretend to be distinguished.

The characteristics of the two sexes are widely different: -- to ours belong
the bold, hardy active virtues; to theirs the patient, gentle, amiable graces.
-- How absurd is it then to draw comparisons between the two, when the
comparative excellence of each must depend on their di^s^militude?

The female heart, my dear Henry, is naturally tender and unsuspicious; and
before mixing with the world, ignorance of its manners, vanity, or selflove,
often leads young women to construe into marks of a particular preference,
those little attentions and gallantries, which result from complacency and good
breeding alone. -- Let me advise you, when in company with the other sex, to
avoid too minute complaisance -- to wrap yourself up in your natural reserve,
and rather to appear less amiable, that you may prove more truly estimable. --
Wonder not at this advice; it ^lows from observation and long acquaintance with
life. You can hardly conceive the distress in which many women have been
involved by the vanity and inconsiderateness of men -- of men too, who would
shrink with h^rror from the idea of cruelty, at the very instant, when, by
their misleading and too pointed attentions, they are laying the foundation of
misery in those gentle bosoms, whose most ardent wish is their happiness.

Your observation is certainly just; -- our passions are always superficial in
their inquiries, and impetuous in their sallies. Reason, on the contrary, is
accurate and slow. Hence the former often mislead the mind, before the latter
arrives to direct it in the right path. -- Miserable state of man! exclaims the
caviller: How useless that boasted faculty! -- too tardy to oppose our
impulses, it comes but to upbraid us for yielding to them.

Such complaints, however, are as ill-founded as they are peevish. --
Omniscience has assigned us another co-adjutor in the task of self-government
-- conscience -- which remonstrates against every vicious tendency, with a
promptitude which equals thought in quickness. Let us submit, then, to the
tuition of this faithful instructor. He is the Almighty's delegate, and
therefore his dictates must be right. Mankind may indeed wrest his language to
guilty purposes; but this does not disparage him; on the contrary, it is an
evidence of his integrity; for if his obvious meaning were not reprehensive of
their vices, they would hardly be at so much pains to misinterpret his speech.

May we, my son, ever listen attentively to his gentlest remonstrances; and act
such a part now as shall secure his future approbation. -- Adieu.

GRANVILLE.


To Miss Seymour.
My Louisa will undoubtedly be anxious to know something more than common
report, of a man who already interests the heart of her friend, and who
distinguishes me by a preference equally obvious and flattering.

Lord Leister discovers, on every occasion, a sound judgment and a correct
taste; -- a delicate sense of propriety, a constant, not too eager desire to
oblige, arising from a wish to make others happy, rather than to be
distinguished himself; a refined humanity, a just discernment, and, above all,
a modesty so engaging and unassuming, as adds a luster to his other good
qualities. -- These I have already had opportunity to discriminate; and, you
may believe, am inclined to give him credit for at least a hundred more.

Whilst we were sitting yesterday on one of the benches in the Park, a genteel
young woman, whose countenance expressed the deepest sorrow, approached, with a
little child in her hand, who seemed extremely fatigued; but on seeing the
bench occupied, was about to retire. -- To the unfortunate, more than ordinary
attention is due. -- I begged her to sit down, and Lord Leister, with great
humanity, took the sweet little boy on his knee. Good-manners prevented me from
asking any questions of the afflicted lady, whose spirits seemed so depressed,
that it was with difficulty she could restrain her tears. In a few minutes the
child got up, and, taking hold of her hand, Come, mama, said he, in a cheerful
tone, I am able to walk now -- let us go home to poor papa. She rose to thank
me; but on attempting to speak, the anguish of her heart denied her utterance,
and she burst into a flood of tears. -- I begged to know the cause of her
extreme agitation, and assured her I should feel myself happy in the power
either to assist or relieve her.

She told me, that she was niece to Lord --;whom, by marrying an officer of
family, but no fortune, she had for ever disobliged: That her husband, whose
name was Williams, having received a wound in his breast, which entirely ruined
his health, was obliged to return to England, where he had languished in all
the misery which neglect, poverty, and disease can inflict on a noble and
ingenuous spirit: That she had made many applications to her uncle, and their
other great friends, or rather relations, who had not only refused them
assistance, but, by insolence and contempt, had embittered all their sufferings!

Gracious Heaven! is it not enough to make the noble mind feel the whole weight
of dependence, by being forced, with shame, to implore that relief which ought
to be voluntarily bestowed? Must the breaking heart be torn with unkindness?
Must unmerited contempt and reproach render the cup of grief, and the bread of
misery, still more bitter? -- Is it really then, in the eyes of this
generation, a crime to be poor? -- Surely, to revile the unfortunate, is to
reproach that Being by whom the lot of every creature is disposed!

We accompanied Mrs. Williams to the entry of Spring-garden, where my carriage
waited. On handing me in, Lord Leister begged me to stop a few minutes, whilst,
with an attentive humanity worthy of himself, he carried Mrs. Williams and her
son into the neighboring coffee-house, and procured them some refreshment. We
then set them down near Golden-square, where Lord Leister assured her, he would
soon wait on Captain Williams.

It is alleged, that prosperity renders us careless of the happiness of our
fellow creatures. For my part, Louisa, I have ever felt my concern for the
welfare of others, bear a proportion to my own felicity. Nor is this wonderful:
Conscious that, for wise ends, Heaven has so constituted mankind, that they
cannot so cordially sympathise in our joys as our sorrows, we are afraid to
forfeit the benevolent regards of our species, by appearing to triumph in that
prosperity, which places us beyond the reach of their good offices. Hence the
strong propensity we feel, to aggravate the account of our distresses, and to
touch lightly on those peculiar marks of good fortune, by which we may be
distinguished.

You once told me, that to receive obligations, gave you pain; which you
attributed to the pride of your heart. Favors and obligations, my dear Louisa,
are terms unknown to real friendship. To bestow a favor on a friend, is to
confer happiness on one's self; and to receive an obligation, is in some
measure to repay it, by supplying one's friend with an opportunity of tasting
the most refined pleasure.

But though I respect too highly every feeling of your heart, ever willingly to
do violence to any of them, it surely cannot give you pain to accept of a very
small gift from one, who is ambitious of a very large share of your esteem; and
who means not this trifle as expressive of her regard, but of her earnest
desire of being sometimes remembered by you while at a distance -- But should I
indeed off^nd you by my present, in your indulgence I will trust for my pardon.
I flatter myself too, that your justice is equal to your elemency; and,
therefore, that you will believe me unfeignedly your loving, admiring, devoted
friend,

CHARLOTTE VILLIERS.


To the same.
You date your last letter eight o'clock, Sunday evening, and maliciously
inquire, "how I am employed at that hour?" -- Fie, fie, Louisa; was this done
in the spirit of Christian charity? -- Can you have any doubt about the matter?
But lest you should, I will honestly inform you.

Know then, that at eight o'clock on Sunday evening, I was employed -- not like
you, in saying my prayers, or reading dull sermons, for that I had dispatched
already -- not in supplying the want of cards, by want of compassion and
principle, and, under pretense of harmless conversation, tearing to pieces the
reputation of my neighbors -- not very like a saint, nor yet like a sinner --
not quite like an angel, nor just like a devil; but like a being who is a
compound of all the four -- A WOMAN: In short, I was employed in trying on a
charming new cap at the glass, in which I was to meet Lord Leister next
morning, to take our accustomed walk in the Park.

Do not think, however, I am altogether neglectful of my duties and devotions:
I have just been reading over the service for matrimony, and considering the
matter in a more serious light than I have ever done before. To love and
honor, seem very easy terms in the matrimonial compact, but our sex boggle at
the fearful word obey. Now, for my part, Louisa, I think the whole difficulty
lies in the two first articles: Obedience is the natural effect of respect and
affection; and if we cannot obey from love, we must from fear; -- but how few
are there among the other sex, whom we can swear through life to love?

You accuse me of indolence in not writing; and that which you condemn as a
fault, comprehends I know not how many virtues: Patience, mortification, and
self-denial. -- Indeed, my dear, the continual interruptions I meet with, call
forth all these into exercise, when they force me to forego one of my chief
enjoyments.

For once, however, I can resign my pen with pleasure, even though employed in
writing to you. Would you were here, to share in the pleasure which this
agreeable intruder conveys to the heart of

CHARLOTTE VILLIERS.


To Miss Seymour.
It is long since I addressed my friend -- that friend who takes so tender an
interest in all my sorrows!

Bad health gives a depressing languor to the mind, which indisposes it for
every exertion.

This season, Louisa, this enchanting season awakens the remembrance of the
past, and renews all my poignant and deep-rooted sorrows! -- It was the season
Grammont admired -- it witnessed the commencement of the tenderest, truest
affection that ever warmed two human hearts.

I see all nature reviving around me; but to me the soul of nature seems ^led.
I stri^^ to speak the delight I used to feel -- but (...) to hear me! -- I
wander where we (...) together -- I listen for the voice of (...) -- (...) mark
the flowers he planted, but the (...) tended them, and the tongue which blessed
me, are silent in the dust!

I fear, Louisa, I greatly fear this idol of my affections has been to me that
ALL IN ALL, which the blessed source of existence and perfection should alone
be to his rational offspring.

All nature revives, but soon shall it reach its prime, and hasten to decay. --
Louisa, the renovation which awaits us, will tend equally to our duration and
felicity. O happy, happy state! when we shall be no more liable to error,
exposed to danger, nor subject to death! When we shall be perfect in virtue,
incorruptible in substance, immortal in felicity!

Oh, Grammont! pure and exalted spirit! art thou stin conscious to the
sentiments of that heart thou lovedst, and which ever, ever must love thee? --
Do thou witness the generous joy of my soul, which exults in the reflection,
that thou art for ever exempted from the bitter sorrows which overwhelm mine?
Do thou behold me checking every selfish regret, striving to support with
courage that life I can no longer enjoy, confiding in the divine goodness, and
acquiescing in the divine will? -- Surely, if thou art conscious of these
sentiment^, thou must approve of them, as worthy of her thou lovedst; and to
know that she merits thy approbation, must enhance to thee even the joys of
Heaven. -- Did thou, even in the hour of death, strive to restore my peace,
and shall I do nothing to regain it? -- Is it by my tears alone that I am to
preserve and consecrate thy memory? -- Oh, no; I will strive, by imitating thy
virtues, to show that I have profited by thy example; that I hope ere long to
be admitted to thy beloved society.

My heart speaks to my friend, and will not be restrained. This dangerous
subject too much engrosses it. At present I can write on no other -- therefore
adieu.

ADELAIDE DE ST. CROIX.


To the same.
The disordered and agitated state in which I last wrote, was but too apparent
to my friend. But be not disquieted on my account -- I have once more regained
my usual tranquillity; and if I am not happy, I am at least serene.

When any terrestrial object is suffered to usurp the whole dominion of the
heart, the intellectual economy is utterly deranged, and the balance of the
mind destroyed: Passion prevails over reason; prejudice obscures judgment, and
inclination is substituted in the place of conscience. Ought I then to consider
as a misfortune, the only event which could restore me to my God and my duty,
without giving me a severe idea of his government?

We fondly flatter ourselves that we have overcome the world, because, in times
of deep distress, we feel a perfect indifference to its pleasures and pursuits.
But, alas! though our deceitful passions may a while be lulled to rest, they
will again be awakened by their proper objects, and, like a man swimming
against a stream, we must either struggle hard to overcome its violence, or be
borne back by its current.

To ^ly in time of danger to a superior Being, is not the result of reasoning
alone, but the immediate impulse of nature. How ought I to bless that kind and
pitying Father, who, by making me feel the emptiness of earthly enjoyment, is
bringing me gently back to himself; and who has placed me here in
circumstances so comfortable, as to exclude that solicitude about the future,
which might prevent me from improving the present? Blessed be God, though to
all the enjoyment of the present is not permitted, yet, by all, the hope of the
future may be indulged.

Thus it is, my Louisa, that the lots of mankind, however various, are in some
degree equal. The beneficent Parent of the universe has allotted to all his
creatures a portion of good; has sweetened with health the cup of poverty,
made plenty the reward of industry, and hope the companion of toil; and, by
withholding the pleasures of taste and science, has precluded from the heart
of the labourer many of those restless desires, disgusts, and inquietudes,
which poison the enjoyment of his morce refined, but less happy lord.

Adieu, my Louisa. I have now no friend to listen to my complaints; to suggest
excuses for a passion too fondly indulged, a sorrow too long protracted. Day
after day insensibly comes to a close; one year steals upon another; yet a
little while, and time itself shall be swallowed up in the vast ocean of
eternity! -- Let us reflect on the shortness of life, and resignation will
scarce seem a virtue. -- Adieu.

ADELAIDE DE ST. CROIX.


To Lady Charlotte Villiers.
The agreeable method you take to correct the errors of your friend, cannot
fail to insure my reformation. -- I accept your elegant present with sincere
pleasure, and abjure my former heterodox opinions; convinced, that if they were
to become general, there would be no room in the world for two most exalted
virtues, generosity and gratitude.

I am charmed with the active benevolence of Lord Leister; which, in procuring
a pension for Captain Williams, will probably excite some of his relations to
exert themselves in behalf of his numerous young family: Shame often acts more
powerfully on mankind than principle.

Why, oh why do the men of the world, the professed votaries of pleasure, deny
themselves the exquisite delight arising from the indulgence of benevolence?
Why destroy, by their excesses, their native relish of the tender and elegant
pleasures which ^low from the exercise of the generous and social affections?
-- To a feeling heart, benevolence is a spring of pure and constant
satisfaction; nor do I know any scene so proper for its indulgence as the
country. In towns and cities, the distresses of our fellow creatures are so
often the consequence of their vices, that, though principle and humanity may
induce us to relieve them, we cannot feel for them that tender complacency and
good will which constitutes my idea of benevolence. In the country, we can both
judge of the desert of those who claim our pity, adjust our relief to their
circumstances, and enjoy the refined and exquisite pleasure of seeing the happy
fruits of our beneficence.

Were I inclined to indulge that indolence of which you accuse me, I might use
the common plea of having nothing to say; for at present I am as much a
recluse, as if immured within the walls of a convent. But whatever arts
conscience may acquire, from residing with the gay and polite in town (if ever
he resides there) we cannot teach him to be silent, when we wish, here in the
country. He stares me rudely in the face, whenever I attempt forming such
frivolous excuses for laziness; and at this moment is so impertinent as to
remind me, that the plea of having nothing to say, could never be admitted on
the part of a woman, unless when in church, or asleep. -- To say truth, Lady
Charlotte, I and conscience are of the same mind for once. It is affirmed of
some bodies, that, by their extreme velocity, they expend their force in a
short time; but I have never heard that a woman's tongue was of that number --
and, from my own observation, I should incline to think, that, in this
instance, activity and heat increase motion.

I smile, my dear friend, to think on the different manner in which you and I
spend our time: Whilst you are arranging the economy of your toilet, I am
visiting my dairy, or feeding my poultry; -- whilst you are hurried in
preparing for an assembly, I am carelessly wandering toward nurse's cottage;
-- whilst you are listening with rapture to the warbling voice, or delicate
concerto, I am hearkening to the tremendous roar of the wind, through the high
trees that surround Castle Hastings; -- whilst your eyes sparkle at the sight
of beaux, belles, and radiant lustres, my eyes are fixed on the pale lamp of
evening; -- whilst you are plunging into the gaieties of this world, I am
almost sighing after the peaceful repose of the next.

Think not, by this comparison, I mean to depreciate your merit and advance my
own; neither of us can claim praise on account of following our inclination.
Let us admire, however, the wisdom of Providence, which, by diversifying our
tastes, prevents many dangerous competitions.

Adieu; and judge of the extent of my affection by the length of my letter.

Your LOUISA SEYMOUR.


To Miss Seymour.
-- Well, Louisa, all things go on swimmingly. -- I really never saw so
sensible and agreeable a man as Lord Leister: His choice is sufficient to prove
the first, and his eyes tell me every moment that he thinks the very same of
me. How fortunate is it, Louisa, when two such people are of one mind!

The world has already determined the match, and, though without consent of the
parties, you know one must pay a due regard to the opinion of the world -- when
it happens to be one's own; though, in affairs of this nature, it generally
decides, before the parties themselves know any thing of the matter.

For my part, Lord Leister shall have my yea and amen, to take Lady Charlotte
Villiers, for better, for worse, as soon as he pleases. She has long been a
troublesome and vexatious companion to me; and that I have not sooner got rid
of her, has been none of my fault, as all the world can witness. -- As I never
yet could make her what I wished, and have little hopes of a change from time,
I have advised her to turn all her thoughts toward a future state -- (N. B. I
do not mean Heaven -- you cannot mistake me so far; neither do I at present
think of purgatory.) -- And I flatter myself, that, when all connection between
her and I shall cease, Lord Leister will find in his wife, a more agreeable
companion, a more docile pupil, a more sincere friend, and a more amiable
woman, than I have hitherto found in Lady Charlotte Villiers.

Heavens, Louisa! is it really possible that the gay, young, beautiful Miss
Stanley is married to Lord Anson? -- I must have more than newspaper authority,
before I can credit so monstrous, so preposterous an event. -- Assuredly,
Louisa, our sex hold it as part of their creed, that marriage is essential to
salvation, and that there is no place in Heaven for old maids.

That I may not be behind-hand with the world in congratulations, I send you a
billet, fabricated in such a manner as will neither do violence to my
friendship nor ingenuity; and beg you will convey it to her without delay.

MADAM,

On this joyful and singular occasion, permit me to join the circle of your
friends, in wishing that your happiness may be greater than your merit, and
exceed even your most sanguine expectation.

I have long entertained a high opinion of your sense and prudence -- an
opinion in which the whole world will readily acquiesce, now that you have
preferred your interest to every other consideration. You judged rightly that
you was past fifteen, the age of romance, and therefore love would have been
superfluous in your list of marriage articles. If there be any virtue in
self-denial and mortification, you have laid in a stock that will last for
life; and if the consciousness of virtue be its reward, yours must be a rich
one. -- If it can add to happiness like yours, to reign unrivalled, I will
venture to presage, that you will have no competitor for the possession of your
empire: Your lot will indeed be singular, for your felicity will be unenvied;
nor will even the most covetous or malicious seek to deprive you of it.

I am, Madam, with all that respect and esteem due to merit, courage, and
fortitude like yours,

Your very humble admirer, CHARLOTTE VILLIERS.


Whilst Miss Seymour was amusing herself with her friend's letter in the
pavilion, a servant hastily entered, and informed her, that Lord Granville was
suddenly taken ill, and his lady begged to see her immediately in his
apartment. -- Louisa entered the room in great agitation, and was dreadfully
alarmed, on seeing Lord Granville, pale and faint, supported in the arms of his
afflicted wife, whose countenance sufficiently expressed the terror and anguish
of her mind. He had complained of sickness, whilst reading to her in the
library, and immediately on reaching his apartment, fainted away. After being
put to bed, Lady Granville retired a few minutes to give vent to those tears
which she could no longer restrain, and left Louisa sitting by the bedside. No
sooner was she gone, than Lord Granville, opening the curtain, made a motion
for Louisa to approach: She did so; when, taking hold of her hand, which he
tenderly pressed between his, "My dear Miss Seymour," said he, this is no time
for ceremony or disguise -- Lady Granville's distress overwhelms me; I cannot
bear to add to her affliction, by telling her the truth. You must be to her a
daughter; -- believe me, amiable Louisa, I have long loved you as such. -- I
have seen the growing tenderness of Hastings, and I have seen it with pleasure;
-- you are worthy of each other. When he returns to solicit your hand, let him
be assured, that his choice met with my warmest approbation."

The variety of strong and conflicting passions which this discourse awakened
in the bosom of Louisa, deprived her for some time of the power of utterance.
She knelt by the bed, and, taking Lord Granville's hand, which she kissed and
bathed with her tears, "Live, oh live, my Lord," cried she, "to witness and
confirm that happiness you have so generously bestowed!"

This tender scene was interrupted by the entrance of Lady Granville, which
left Louisa at liberty to retire, and compose the perturbation of her mind.

The anguish of suspense was not added to the exquisite sorrow of Lady
Granville: Her husband was seized with another fit; from which he only
recovered so far, as to pray for blessings on her and his son, and take a last
tender farewell. He then, with equal fortitude and resignation, prepared to meet
his fate; which soon succeeded, and deprived his family and society of a life
unspeakably dear to the one, and highly valuable to the other.

Providence has wisely constituted us in such a manner, that the necessary
exertion of the mind, in times of distress, seems to support the feebleness of
the body; -- but when the attention of the former is no longer engaged, the
powers of the latter feel utterly exhausted. -- Thus it fared with Lady
Granville. All the compassionate tenderness and sympathy of Louisa, were unable
to support her under the weight of this unexpected and dreadful blow. She sunk
for a while into the most deplorable melancholy; from which she was only roused
by the most painful apprehensions on account of her son, whom disordered
imagination represented as involved in dangers, languishing in sickness, or
sinking under the stroke of death.

To a mind thus debilitated, it was in vain to offer either the suggestions of
reason, or the consolations of religion. Louisa contented herself with
testifying the silent sorrow and kind unremitting attentions of friendship. --
Alas! how feeble is reason, opposed to feeling? Neither the conviction of the
understanding, nor the assent of the will to the wisdom and rectitude of the
Divine dispensations, can, for some time, calm the restless desires of the
heart, secure its peace, or restore it when lost.

Harassed perpetually with images of horror, and disposed to lean for support
on her last remaining prop, Lady Granville felt, that without the presence of
her son, she could never enjoy one moment's quiet. She therefore wrote, to
acquaint him with his misfortune, and entreated his immediate return, that his
tenderness might at least alleviate the affliction which his presence alone
could enable her to support.

The letter found him at Rome. He hesitated not a moment about complying with
her request; but, in the mean time, dispatched the following billet, to inform
her of his health and safety, and assure her of that respect and affection
which, he was conscious, became doubly due to a parent in her situation.

To Lady Granville.
-- I will not attempt painting, to my tenderly beloved parent, that grief, of
which her own heart will give her but too just an image: I even fear to add to
your extreme affliction, by the expressions of my own. -- The pleasures of
memory, the tenderness of friendship; above all, the consolations of religion,
are yours. Let them, dearest Madam, have their full influence.

In the attentions and sympathy of Miss Seymour, you will doubtless find all
the comfort on this occasion, which the balm of pity can pour into the wounds
of grief. Soon shall my duteous cares be joined with here is, to sooth and
support you, at this most afflicting period -- Soon shall you be convinced,
that it is the most ardent desire of my heart, and shall be the unremitting
study of my life, to make you happy.

May God long preserve my dear mother, and restore to her affectionate bosom,
her dutiful, affectionate, and sympathising son,

HASTINGS.


Lord Hastings (so we shall continue to call him) the moment he arrived in
Paris, flew directly to the convent of St. Cire. In the midst of the gloom
which grief for the loss of his revered father occasioned, he saw certain
gleams of hope and joy appearing, which were too intimately connected with his
happiness, not to divide his feelings, and influence his conduct.

Louisa received the following letter from Adelaide, the day before he reached
England:

To Miss Seymour.
At length, my beloved, my admirable friend, your singular and superior virtues
are going to meet with their just reward: The amiable Hastings has this moment
left me. He acquainted me with the death of his father; and, whilst he
expatiated on his worth and tender affection, the tear of filial piety and
sorrow trembled in his eye, and forced its way down his manly cheek.

Why, my friend, should men blush to betray marks of that sensibility they so
greatly admire in our sex? -- However modelled by education, or restrained by
custom, are not the leading features of the human mind the same in all the
human species? -- Let others applaud that stoical firmness, for which men are
more frequently indebted to constitution than philosophy; I shall always think
his character the most perfect, who unites sensibility with fortitude, and
whose heart is ever ready to correct the severe strictures which his judgment
is forced to make on the conduct of others.

He again introduced the subject of Rochelle^ "I know, Madam," said he, "you
have long been the bosom friend of Miss Seymour. May I presume to ask whether
there did not once subsist a very tender attachment between her and the Count?"
-- "Indeed, my Lord," said I, "they are almost entire strangers to each other."
-- "Good Heavens!" exclaimed he, passionately, "what am I to think?" -- Then,
after a pause, "It is in vain, Madam," continued he, "to attempt concealing
from you the tender interest my heart takes in every thing that concerns Miss
Seymour. -- Oh! might I, consistently with honor, with delicacy, entreat to
know, whether that gentle heart is still disengaged?" -- "My Lord," interrupted
I, "this subject is too tender to be longer insisted upon." -- "I confess it,"
replied he; "I implore your forgiveness; but surely the gentle Adelaide will
pity the torment I suffer from suspense, and the dreadful distraction and
confusion of my thoughts; surely she may say, consistently even with that
sacred friendship I revere, whether there be any other attachment? -- My whole
earthly happiness depends -- " I rose; and, retiring from the grate to hide my
emotion, which almost equalled his, "If Miss Seymour, Sir," said I, "has formed
any attachment, Lord Hastings cannot doubt that the object of her preference
must be such a one as will justify her both to the world and her own heart." --
After again conjuring me to forgive a fault, which he seemed every moment in
hazard of repeating, he took his leave, telling me, that he hoped from my
generosity a share of that friendship, which his behavior would convince me he
could not claim from my justice.

Whilst you read this letter, my dearest Louisa, I see your delicacies all in
arms, and your heart throbbing with apprehension; but what, my friend, had you
to fear from your Adelaide? Does not this heart respect every tender emotion of
yours? Am not I capable of guarding the most sacred of all deposits, the
honor, the delicacy of a friend? Believe me, yours is not more safe in your
own possession than in mine.

All the happiness I can now enjoy must be derived from that of my friends:
yours, I trust will soon be complete: I would pray that it might be lasting,
but correct the vain presumptuous wish, and resign the disposal of your lot and
my own, to that wisdom which cannot err.

What consolation would it afford me, could I once more behold and converse
with you! Perhaps, even in this region of sorrow and disappointment, this
happiness may yet await me; at least I will encourage the pleasing hope. Hope,
my Louisa, is the refreshing cordial of life. Ah! how insupportable without it!
-- Hope animates us in every pursuit, sustains us under every trial; is our
first guide, and latest friend.

Amidst all the vicissitudes of this perplexing scene, may that hope be ours
which will never deceive! Adieu, best and dearest of friends.

ADELAIDE DE ST. CROIX.


The day after receiving this letter, Louisa arose very early, and strove to
attain sufficient composure to meet Lord Hastings, without betraying any of
those violent emotions, with which her heart throbbed the moment she thought of
seeing him. Though she sat in the same room with Lady Granville, absent and
silent, she started at every little noise, and seemed perplexed how to answer
the simplest question. The moment she heard a chaise drive into the yard, her
heart took the alarm, and she grew so faint, that she was obliged to retire
into Lady Granville's dressing room. She heard Lord Hastings enter the
apartment she had just quitted, and forgot her own feelings, to sympathise in
those of the friends she loved.

Though Lady Granville had summoned her utmost fortitude to her aid, she could
not again behold her son, without sinking almost under the violence of the
different passions with which she was agitated. -- His soothing tenderness at
length composed her spirits; and, after the first violence of their grief was
abated, Lady Granville desired her son to go and fetch Louisa. "To the care and
affection of the most amiable of women," said she, "you owe the preservation of
your surviving parent; go, my Henry, and acknowledge the obligation."

He entered the dressing room, where Louisa was sitting more dead than alive;
but his own perturbation prevented him from discovering here is. He approached,
and taking hold of her hand, which he pressed to his lips, "How, Miss Seymour,"
said he, "O, how can I express my sense of your friendship and tenderness to
the best of women? May Heaven repay you a thousand fold!" -- "Indeed, my Lord,"
replied she, "I must be lost to gratitude, when I feel any pleasure equal to
that of giving comfort to Lady Granville!" -- His eyes sufficiently spoke the
grateful sensibility of his heart for Louisa's kindness. He led her into his
mother's apartment; and through the veil of modest reserve, could not help
flattering himself, that Louisa, at times, betrayed a joy on his return, and a
sympathy in his sorrows, more animated than even that to which friendship gives
birth.

The evening after Lord Hastings arrived, she received the following letter
from Lady Charlotte;

To Miss Seymour.
The very unexpected death of the estimable Lord Granville gave my father and
me unspeakable concern; assure his afflicted Lady of our most cordial sympathy
with her in her distress. How happy is she in the cares of my amiable friend!
-- Ah, Louisa! if I mistake not, she will soon have a title to claim them, on
the score of duty.

Heavens, Louisa! what have I done? -- I am so terrified and breathless, I can
hardly tell you; Lord Leister has just been here -- popt upon me whilst
finishing the last sentence -- laid violent hands on all my scrupulosities --
urged the necessity of his setting off immediately for -- shire; -- vowed he
would not go without me; -- ungenerously took advantage of my good humor; --
made me swear -- no, I never swear, but think and say just what he pleased. --
And, tomorrow! -- yes, Louisa, tomorrow, wind, tide, and my mind serving, I
quit the bleak and barren shore of Maidenland, and embark on the sea of
Uncertainty, for the continent of Matrimony. As our course lies by the Cape of
Good Hope, we have no certain compass to steer by; especially as its variations
of late have been many. We must therefore trust to the strength of our vessel.

The prosperous fate of former adventurers has induced us to explore foreign
climes, in search, perhaps, of imaginary treasures. I confess I have many
fears; I know Terra Incognita is a dangerous region to wander in; and we have
seen many settlements made there at great expense, that have proved hardly
worth keeping. No more the soothing breezes of flattery shall waft my barge and
swell my sails!

Pray for me, Louisa, that I may be preserved from that shelves and quicksands
of pride and jealousy, that I may neither split on the rocks of imprudence, be
lashed by the waves of censure, nor chilled with the cold blasts of
indifference; that I may never be tempted by my enemies to traffic in
contraband goods; but exchanging largely in the article affection, in lieu of
gentle offices, I may have frequent returns of gratitude and love; that without
crowding my sails, or expecting to reach the Happy Islands, while tossed on the
waves of Time, I may suffer its tide to convey me gently into the quiet haven
of Content.

You have long suspected a change in my sentiments, and a rival in my heart. I
will not pretend to deny the fact: they have, indeed undergone a total
revolution, as you must suppose, when, after so many professions of
never-ending friendship, I am going, for the sake of a newer favorite, to bid
you forever adieu; and assure you, that this is the very last letter you will
receive from

CHARLOTTE VILLIERS.


To Lady Charlotte Villiers.
Madam,
Had I been disposed to doubt the report of your marriage, and loss of my late
amiable friend, Lady Charlotte Villiers, in the gulf of matrimony, the altered
style of your last letter would have furnished incontestible proof of both; and
of your resolution, agreeably to the practice of all ladies, of squeezing every
amicable attachment to death in your wedding-ring.

Permit me, Madam, in regard of our former friendship, to wish you all that
happiness which a state of subjection can admit of. You have formed fetters for
yourself; and, however irksome or intolerable the bondage, must now for life
submit to wear them: That they may sit easier on you than on many of your
cotemporaries, is my sincere wish; and that, however galled by them, you may
never imprudently attempt to shake them off, my serious advice. But to change
the metaphor -- tired of the future limited sphere of your activity (but ill
calculated for a belle of your magnitude) impelled by the centrifugal force of
matrimonial authority, and attracted by the influences of gaiety and splendor,
should you at length incline to fly off at a tangent, then Heaven pity you! --
for, however fond of liberty, you must absolutely submit to be ruled, impelled,
and directed by superior power, else you will infallibly be swallowed up by the
vortex of law, and at last suffer a total eclipse. Then, though you may
continue to exist, you can no longer hope to shine, nor be, as now, the
brightest star of all our lower hemisphere.

As my learning has not seen the light these ten years, no wonder if it
requires rubbing up.

Let me quit this unnatural jargon, the labor of the head, and address you as
usual in the flowing language of the heart. I hope soon to offer Lord Leister
the same good wishes. Assure yourself then, my dear Lady Charlotte, that among
all the numerous circle of your friends, you have not one more sincere and
affectionate, or who more cordially shares in your present happiness, and
ardently prays for its continuance, than

Yours With inviolable attachment, LOUISA SEYMOUR.


During a week that Lord Hastings and Miss Seymour hardly ever quitted Lady
Granville's apartment, in spite of sincere regret for one parent, and anxious
solicitude about the other, Lord Hastings tasted a satisfaction so pleasant, as
often banished every inquietude from his mind. The placid hours they now spent
together, recalled the memory of those which he esteemed the most valuable of
his life; and though unable to account for Grammont's letter, which first made
him unhappy, he saw, with real pleasure, that Louisa was no longer so, and
shared in her restored tranquillity. She often seemed pensive, but never gloomy;
and though her manner to him was reserved, it was the reserve of good-br^^ding,
rather than indifference.

To Mr. Beaufort.
My heart feels, and gratefully acknowledges, the share you take in my sorrow,
on account of the loss of the worthiest of friends, and most indulgent of
fathers. I have hardly yet had leisure to feel the weight of my misfortune: My
affectionate and afflicted mother demands my constant care. But oh, Beaufort!
when I retire to my apartment, and recall the idea of my revered parent, a
crowd of tender recollections press on my soul, and almost overwhelm it with
sorrow! -- Be it our care who survive, by treading in his steps, to repair, in
some measure, the injury society has sustained, by the loss of so respectable
and valuable a member.

I found my mother in a very weak state of health and spirits. Louisa, the
amiable, the enchanting Louisa, is, if possible, more beautiful, more engaging
than ever. That air of sober sadness which the late melancholy incident has
impressed on her features, gives them an expression of tenderness which melts
the very soul. Mine is still held in painful suspense; still am I tortured with
those perplexing doubts and fears, to which it gives rise.

Sometimes I fondly flatter myself, that through the timid and modest reserve
of the most amiable of women, I can see some sparks of that peculiar
tenderness, with which I ardently wish to inspire her. O, Beaufort! at these
moments, my heart throbs with unutterable transport! -- At other times there is
a caution, a timidity, a restraint in her manner, that blasts every bud of
hope, and overwhelms me with dejecting melancholy!

A thousand times a day, I resolve to speak my sentiments to Louisa, and, if
possible, discover here is. But the fear of offending, the dread of disgusting,
the apprehension of losing her friendship by soliciting her love, still
withholds me.

I met with an incident today which has strangely perplexed me. On riding
slowly down the lane that leads to the Castle, I saw a clean, decent looking
woman, standing at the door of a cottage, with an infant in her arms, whose
features so strongly resembled the unhappy Talbot, that I had the curiosity to
stop my horse, and inquire to whom the child belonged. The woman looked
surprised at the question, and, upon my repeating it, "Indeed, please your
honor," said she, "that is more than I can tell; but I Am sure, whoever my
little Sally belongs to, need not be ashamed to own her, for your honor will
not see a stouter child in a summer's day; but for that matter, she is cared
for by the best gentry in all the country, though I say it that should not." --
My first suspicion was now confirmed; but what was my astonishment, when she
thus proceeded: "Mayhap, your honor is going to the Castle? -- If so, you will
see there the best friend my poor baby has in this world." -- "How, nurse,"
demanded I, "is it Lady Granville that befriends your child so much?" -- "No,
no, Sir," replied she; "I believe as how Lady Granville is a very good lady,
and very kind to the poor; but it is young Miss Seymour, an' please you, that
is so kind to me and my sweet little poppet." -- The arrival of her husband,
and some gossips, put an end to this curious dialogue.

To find a child of Talbot's here, deserted and disowned, is by no means
surprising; but how Miss Seymour should be particularly interested in the care
of such a child, is an enigma I cannot unriddle. -- I fancy, however, upon
further acquaintance, I may prevail on honest nurse to speak out. If she is
enjoined secrecy, I should detest myself, could I bribe her to betray her
trust; but if prudence alone occasions her caution, that watchful dame may be
caught napping, and nurse open her lips at the sight of all-prevailing gold. --
Adieu.

I am, in much sincerity, Yours, GRANVILLE.


To Miss Seymour.
It is with much truth I have formerly affirmed, that when we consider the
shortness of human life, Louisa, resignation scarce seems a virtue. Instead of
looking back with criminal and unavailing sorrow, on account of those gone
before us, we ought to look forward and rejoice, because we are so soon to
follow. -- Yet a few years, and the sorrowful shall rest in silence with them
they deplore; -- yet a few years, and all the griefs, and cares, and
inquietudes, that disturb the short hour of life, and poison its enjoyments,
shall be as nothing!

Again they have brought me here, to try the effects of my native air, in
restoring an exhausted and feeble constitution. But my disease is seated in my
heart, and is without remedy!

Let not this afflict my gentle friend; let it rather bring her comfort to
hear, that the hour of my release is fast approaching, and that I am about to
receive my reward, before bearing the burden and heat of the day. -- We have
been long separated from each other: Where is the difference, Louisa, whether
we are divided by seas and mountains -- or by the grave? -- Yes, my loved
friend, there is a great, an essential difference -- Whilst separated by
distance, we are continually harassed with fear and anxiety, on account of each
other; but no sooner does the grave receive those we love, than all our
restless inquietudes end.

In proportion as earth and its concerns recede from view, the grand, the
solemn scenes on which we are about to enter, come forward to cheer and support
the mind under the decays of nature. Let these have due influence on yours,
should Heaven see good to remove from you the friend you have long loved; and
having improved to our advancement in piety and virtue on earth, the most
tender and lasting attachment, let us confide in our beneficent Creator, that
he will admit us to perfect, in the society of the blessed, a friendship which
here is liable to be impaired, may be interrupted, and must one day suffer
dissolution.

We are all prone, Louisa, to forget our present is a state of discipline, and
regard the blessings we possess, not as the gifts of a bountiful Benefactor,
which he is at liberty to resume at pleasure, but as an inheritance to which we
have an indefeasible right. It is necessary that we should frequently be
reminded of our absolute dependence on God, and be brought back to him, by
feeling that all besides is vain, unsatisfying, and evanescent.

No one can properly assent to this truth, that has never lost a friend. That
stroke, which loosens our dearest tie to earth, forms also, as it were, new
attractions for us in Heaven. Thither, my beloved friend, let us direct the
current of our heart's best affections: There alone, the immortal desires of
the soul will find suitable and permanent objects.

Adieu, dearest Louisa, adieu. If we meet no more here, we shall hereafter.

ADELAIDE DE ST. CROIX.


The grief this letter occasioned in the gentle heart of Louisa was too great
not to make a correspondent impression on her features. This was immediately
discovered by Lord Hastings, who anxiously inquired the cause; and, by the
lively interest he took in her sorrow, insensibly lessened its violence. It
supplied him also with many pretenses for conversing with Louisa alone (who
wished to conceal every depressing circumstance from Lady Granville) and gave
room for such melting expressions of pity, as bore a near resemblance to
expressions of love.

One morning, after a very restless night, Lady Granville, feeling herself
drowsy, desired Lord Hastings to ride out, as the weather was remarkably ^ine,
and leave her to the care of Louisa, "who, I know," said she, with a look of
complacency, "prefers my ease to her own, and will kindly read me to sleep."
This proposal was readily embraced by Miss Seymour; but Lord Hastings expressed
great reluctance to leaving his mother. In reality, though there never was a
more attentive or affectionate son, the presence and conversation of Miss
Seymour were now become so essential to his enjoyment, that he could find no
pleasure in any amusement in which she did not partake.

He was scarcely gone, when Lady Granville expressed great anxiety to know what
horse he rode; and on being informed that it was one he had lately purchased,
grew extremely uneasy, telling Louisa, that though he had carefully concealed
it from her, she had learnt, by accident, that this new favorite was very
easily startled, and had actually thrown Lord Hastings some time ago. Louisa
said every thing to quiet the fears of his anxious mother, and continued to
read, till she perceived she had dropped asleep. Her apprehensions were not so
easily lulled: She stole softly down to the garden, and, crossing a small
paddock adjoining to it, walked slowly up the lane, from whence she had a view
of the high road. She had not continued her walk many minutes, when she
discovered two men on horseback at a distance; and supposing them to be Lord
Hastings and his servant, turned hastily back, to regain the paddock before he
should observe her. It was too late, however, to effect her purpose; -- on
entering the lane, Lord Hastings instantly discovered her; and alarmed on
seeing her there alone, without her hat and cloak, clapped spurs to his horse,
and reached the paddock at the very moment she arrived there. The flutter of
her spirits gave such a tremor to her hand, that she made a considerable noise
in opening the gate; which startling the horse, made him spring to the opposite
side of the road -- and, in attempting to save himself from falling, Lord
Hastings sprained his arm in so violent a manner, that it was with difficulty
he could dismount.

After charging the servant to take no notice of this accident at the Castle,
and sending him away with the horses, he followed Louisa into the paddock, who
stood pale and trembling, supporting herself against a tree. -- She eagerly
inquired after his arm, and expressed the sincerest regret, on account of
having been the cause of his accident: -- "For Heaven's sake, my Lord," said
she, "let me entreat you never again to mount that horse, which has already
almost cost you your life." -- Taking hold of her hand, which he kissed with a
look of grateful acknowledgment, he expressed much surprise at her knowledge of
the circumstance of his former danger, as well as at her walking in the lane in
that dress, without any attendant. In a moment, her face and neck were covered
with blushes: The impropriety of this circumstance, which strongly betrayed the
anxious and disturbed state of her mind, had never once occurred to her. She
paused -- she hesitated -- and was utterly at a loss how to reply. Lord
Hastings perceived her embarrassment; and, pressing her hand to his throbbing
bosom, -- "Why -- why, dearest Miss Seymour," said he, with a look that pierced
her to the soul, "should you be so concerned about preserving a life which is
of so little value to the possessor?" -- "Surely, my Lord," replied she, "you
cannot mean what you say? You must know that your life is of value to all who
-- " The earnestness with which Lord Hastings gazed on Louisa whilst she spoke,
so greatly disconcerted her, that she stopped short, afraid that she had
already said too much. "Ah, Miss Seymour," said he, in a tender and softened
voice, "could I ^latter myself that my life was of consequence to one, I would
then know how much to value it." -- Louisa's perplexity and confusion increased
so much, that she turned toward the house, and muttering something about Lady
Granville being alone, left Lord Hastings, without knowing what she did.

He stood some minutes, fixed to the spot: He repeated every word Louisa had
uttered -- he reflected on the circumstance of her walking out alone toward
the road, after having heard of his danger -- and above all, on the tender
solicitude she showed for his safety; and then wondered at his own blindness to
so many proofs of her preference -- and presently reflecting on her former
insensibility to so many marks of his, on the letter of Grammont, and
consequent depression of her spirits, with that diffidence which ever
accompanies genuine and respectful love -- he attributed all that had passed,
to the gentle and compassionate temper of Louisa, whose heart, he still feared,
was insensible to the ardent affection of his.

He had bewildered himself so long with these various conjectures, that he
appeared quite absent on entering Lady Granville's apartment; who, without
knowing what had passed, conjured him never again to ride the horse
abovementioned, and added, "though you kindly concealed the accident from me,
I was telling Louisa, just after you left us, that I was not ignorant of the
danger you had incurred, by riding this unruly favorite of yours." Lord
Hastings turned his eyes on Louisa, who was overwhelmed with confusion at this
unexpected piece of information; and which was rather increased by his
replying, "I should indeed be the most ungrateful of human beings, could I
knowingly give one moment's pain to those who so kindly interest themselves in
my safety."

As it was evident Miss Seymour had made no mention of his late accident, he
chose likewise to be silent on the subject. A thousand little attentive cares
on the part of Louisa, showed that it had made a deep impression on her mind.
The pain he felt from the arm, which, for several days, he could not use, it
was not always in his power to conceal; and the restraint imposed on Louisa, by
the presence of Lady Granville, only redoubled the earnestness of her
inquiries, and tenderness of her sympathy, when, for a moment, she found an
opportunity of seeing him alone.

The conversation of two amiable young people, in whom her heart took the most
tender interest, insensibly dissipated the gloom, with which the death of Lord
Granville at first overwhelmed his affectionate wife: And thought Lord Hastings
received, with exquisite delight, the unguarded expressions of compassion,
under which were concealed the tender, artless effusions of love, he did not
choose, by too animated returns of gratitude for her kindness, to alarm the
delicacy of Louisa, or increase her caution with respect to those enchanting
proofs of her tenderness, of which his glowing heart felt the full value.

One day Lady Granville proposed trying to walk in the garden, for the benefit
of air and exercise. This, with the help of Louisa and her son, she
accomplished with tolerable ease; and, after having rested some time in the
pavilion, felt her spirits so revived with the beautiful scene around her, that
she wandered down the field at the bottom of the guard. Just as they had seated
themselves on the bench, they observed a woman, with a lovely infant in her
arms, both remarkably clean, passing through the field; who, on seeing them,
quickened her pace, as if afraid of being challenged. Lady Granville, who was
extremely fond of children, called her: The poor woman approached; and, on
seeing Miss Seymour, looked extremely disconcerted. "I humbly beg your
La'ship's pardon," said she (addressing herself to Louisa, without minding Lady
Granville, who was wholly engaged admiring the beauty of the child;) I confess
I ought not to have presumed for to come so near the Castle, after your
La'ship's express orders to the contrary; but this being a holiday at Farmer
Gibbon's, we were all gossipping there, and I waited to try and bring my
husband along with me; for John, poor man, does like Farmer Gibbon's ale with
all his heart, that he does. An' so, please your La'ship, being rather late
abroad with my little Sally, I was taking the nearest way home; but if your
La'ship is angry with me, I will never do so no more."

During this harangue, the little infant, casting its eyes on Louisa, screamed
with joy, and stretched out its arms to embrace her, which greatly increased
her confusion. "I protest, Madam," said nurse, with tears of joy in her eyes,
"the little hussy knows your La'ship; but no wonder." -- Lord Hastings took
the child from her, to reach it to Louisa, and, kissing it, placed it on his
knee: I fear, nurse," said he, "I shall make but an awkward figure; but if I am
not mistaken, here is a lady," turning to Louisa, "better accustomed to the
office." -- The infant clasped her round the neck; and though its innocent
caresses, at any other time, would have given her delight, at present they only
heightened her blushes, and increased her embarrassment. -- "Why, nurse," said
Lady Granville, "you and Miss Seymour seem to be old acquaintance?" -- "Ah,
Madam," replied the simple cottager, "if I durst speak, I could tell your
La'ship such stories about her goodness! She is the very best friend I have in
the world, God bless her!" -- "Pray is this your own child?" demanded Lady
Granville -- "No, please your La'ship; but," with a very significant shrug,
"your La'ship must ask me no more questions."

Here Louisa arose, and, under pretense of care about the child's health,
dismissed nurse and her little charge. -- It is impossible to describe the
confusion and agitation into which she was thrown, by this unexpected
rencounter. No sooner was she seated, than Lady Granville said, with a smile,
"My dear Louisa, you did not use to conceal any of your pleasures from me; --
pray, when did you come possessed of this little treasure?" -- "Indeed Madam,"
answered Louisa, with a deep sigh, "if the knowledge of this child could have
yielded you any satisfaction, you should long since have been made acquainted
with it. But it is a poor unfortunate babe, who has no one to care for it." --
"Whatever may have been its misfortunes," said Lord Hastings, "it surely may
now be accounted happy, in having so kind, so compassionate a protectress."

By this time they reached the Castle, and Lady Granville perceiving, from the
embarrassment of Louisa's manner, that there was something mysterious in the
history of the child, which she did not wish to communicate, allowed the
subject to drop.

Next day, however, on their being left alone, she gave Lady Granville a full
account of the affair, and ended her narrative with saying, "I should certainly
have entreated your Ladyship's protection for this helpless innocent, had I not
known, that by becoming an object of your attention, people would have been led
to inquire into the circumstances of her birth, which both honor and humanity
prompted me to conceal; besides, obscurity is surely the most proper situation
for one born under such unfortunate circumstances. I was often tempted to
reveal the story of its unhappy mother, at a time when your Ladyship's humanity
might have afforded her relief; but the earnestness with which she conjured me
to conceal her error from the world, withheld me, together with my being
persuaded, that the best security for the future good conduct of such an
unfortunate wanderer, is the conviction that it is still in their power, not
only to return to virtue, but to preserve reputation."

Lady Granville highly applauded Louisa's conduct in this whole affair; and
could not help expressing her admiration of so much prudence, displayed at so
early an age.

Lord Hastings now felt his curiosity to known the history of the child,
redoubled by the scene of the preceding evening; accordingly he walked out
early in the morning, and, on reaching the cottage, began to repeat the same
questions he had formerly put to the nurse: "You tell me," says he, "that this
child is none of your own; but surely, nurse, you must know to whom it
belongs?" -- "Indeed, that I don't," answered she, "and if I did, I durst not
tell your honor, because the sweet young lady at the Castle brought it me nine
months ago, and told me that its father was gone in foreign parts, and it had
not one soul of living to care for it: -- but sure I am, the mother that bore
her, could not love my little Sally better than she does; for, if your honor
will believe me, when the little poppet crows and laughs in her arms, she weeps
salt tears when she looks at it." -- "But why don't you bring this sweet child
to visit Miss Seymour at the Castle?" demanded Lord Hastings. -- "Why, it does
seem a little strange, to be sure, that so humble, and sweet, and good-natured
a young lady should forbid (...) to bring the child to the Castle, when good
Lady Granville seems so fond of her; and she is so handsome, that she might
appear before the best lady in Christendom." -- "Pray, when did you become
acquainted with Miss Seymour?" said Lord Hastings. -- "Oh, I shall remember the
time as long as I live, and longer too, if I could," answered she: "It was,
please your honor, when my poor dear Nancy, who is now in Heaven, died, that
Miss Seymour first met me, when I was walking in the field, and weeping beside
a hut the child had raised with a few stones, and called it her drawing room:
The wind had thrown it down, and it was lying a heap of rubbish, and put me so
in mind of my poor Nancy, that it had almost broke my heart. When I returned
home, I was taken with the same fever; and, would your honor believe it, that
good angel -- for if there is one in Heaven, she is -- came twice every day to
see me, and gave me all the stuff the 'potecary sent me with her own hand, and
brought me fruit, and gave me money to pay his bill, and every thing I wanted,
till I got pure well again."

The countenance of Lord Hastings underwent many changes during the course of
this conversation. Having given the good woman a guinea, and charged her to be
kind to the child, he returned to the Castle; but his curiosity was rather
increased than piminished by his interview with the nurse.

The moment he entered his mother's apartment, finding her alone, he introduced
the subject of the child. She gave him a minute detail of all the circumstances
Miss Seymour had related concerning the unfortunate Sally; and he felt his
admiration of her increased, by every new light in which they placed her
exalted character. -- His mother, who watched every look and word which
expressed a passion she wished to confirm, joined cordially in the praises he a
thousand times repeated, of the singular prudence and delicacy of the generous
and noble-minded Louisa.

That evening Lady Granville remarked that Louisa looked very pale; and the
weather being remarkably ^ine, desired Lord Hastings to take her out to walk:
"You forget your own health, Louisa," said she, "in your concern about me; but
remember, my love," she added, with a look of the most tender solicitude,
"that, next to that of Hastings, on your safety my future comfort depends."

They passed through the garden, and wandered down the field, which was
fragrant with the newmown hay. The stillness of the air, the serene face of the
sky, and the wild notes of a thrush from the neighboring wood, were perfectly
in harmony with their feelings. -- When they reached the bench, the sun being
very hot, and Louisa looking tired, Lord Hastings requested her to sit down.
They did so; when suddenly recollecting the circumstance of finding the letter
there, he became silent and thoughtful -- he sighed heavily, cast his eyes on
the ground, and seemed buried in his own reflections. Louisa, whose soul
vibrated to every emotion of his, soon caught the infectious melancholy. --
Their mutual silence became every moment more embarrassing. -- At last, looking
up, and fixing his eyes on Louisa, with a respectful and timid air, "O Miss
Seymour," said he, "may I presume to hope, from the present serenity of your
mind, that all obstacles to your felicity are at last removed?"

The conscious heart of Louisa took alarm at the first word of this speech; she
became pale as death, and trembled so violently, that Lord Hastings was obliged
to support her in his arms. Afraid of her fainting, he hastily endeavored to
unloose her cloak, to give her air; but, in his agitation, caught hold at the
same time of the string of pearls by which his picture was hung, and pulling
the cloak away, the string broke, and the picture, together with the locket,
fell to the ground. He stooped to take it up; but how inexpressible was his
astonishment, on discovering that it was his own! -- "Powerful Heaven!" cried
he, "can I credit my senses! -- Louisa, my adored Louisa! is it possible? Was
it on this lifeless image I saw thee bestow thy precious tears?" -- He had time
for no more. -- During a few moments the face and neck of Miss Seymour were
covered with blushes; again her countenance became pale, her head dropped on
his shoulder, and she continued for several minutes without sense or motion.

The situation of Lord Hastings almost equalled her own; but far other were his
feelings, when he saw her return to life. He pressed her to his bosom, which
throbbed with unutterable transport; and again ^ixing his eyes on her averted
face, -- "Tell me, Louisa," said he, "O tell me, do I not dream? Dare I hope --
can I believe that I am beloved?" -- "Oh, Hastings!" she replied, "how can you
doubt it?"

The most tender, delightful, interesting conversation now ensued. The letter
of Grammont, the schemes of Lord Granville, the embarrassing situation of
Louisa, and the ill-grounded jealousies of Lord Hastings, led to such a variety
of tender and affecting explanations, that these happy lovers forgot the hours;
nor knew that they had spent more than two together, till they saw a servant
coming down the field in search of them.

With the assistance of Lord Hastings's arm, Louisa reached the Castle; but her
emotion was still so visible, that Lady Granville instantly observed it:
"Henry," said she, "you have certainly walked too far; Louisa looks quite
exhausted -- I will never again entrust you with my daughter." -- "Indeed, my
dearest mother," said he, taking hold of her hand, which he pressed between
his, "you must bestow her on me yourself -- you must entrust her to me for
ever."

Louisa was still so greatly agitated, that she was unable to listen to this
explanation: She retired, therefore, into Lady Granville's dressing room,
whilst Lord Hastings repeated to her all that had passed. Could his happiness
have admitted of any increase, it would have been augmented by the warmth and
tenderness of his mother's approbation.

She arose, and, on entering the dressing room, "Now, now, my Louisa," cried
she, clasping her to her bosom, you are indeed my daughter!" Then joining her
hand with that of Lord Hastings, who had followed her, "May Heaven for ever
bless my children," said she, "and that God who made them virtuous, make them
completely happy!"

The happiness of this amiable pair was now, indeed, as exquisite and unmixed
as any which the most glowing imagination could represent. The late agitated
state of their minds rendered the calm, which now succeeded it, peculiarly
delightful. -- Their felicity, however, was chastened at times by their anxiety
about Lady Granville, whose health had not yet recovered the dreadful shock it
sustained by the death of her husband.

None more sincerely partook in their transport than the generous Lady Leister,
who was then at the Earl's seat in -- shire; and whom Louisa immediately
informed of the happy ecclaircissement abovementioned.

The day following, on Louisa's being longer absent from the dining room than
usual, Lord Hastings went in search of her to the garden; and, on entering the
pavilion, which had been the scene of so many interesting interviews, was not a
little startled on seeing Louisa sitting there, with a letter in her hand,
almost drowned in tears. He inquired the cause of her sorrow, with tender and
earnest solicitude: She gave him the letter; it was from Adelaide, and
contained these words:

To Miss Seymour.
-- At length, beloved friend of my heart, the solemn, awful hour approaches!
This is the last letter you shall ever receive from your Adelaide! Already my
hand is so feeble, it can hardly direct my pen.

I know how this will afflict my gentle Louisa; I feel for the anguish my death
will occasion you; yet something whispers me, your heart shall be soothed, your
sorrows divided -- and this hope gives consolation to mine.

Waste not, dearest Louisa, those precious moments which shall never return,
and which so many important duties demand, in excessive and unavailing sorrow.
Too, too many of them have we spent, in fond, presumptuous schemes of unmingled
felicity, which falls not to the lot of mortals. -- Oh, my friend, vain alike
are the pleasures that engross, and the cares that disquiet, he transient
moments of our present existence! -- At this awful crisis, what do all the
concerns of time appear, in comparison with the hopes of eternity!

My heart would say much, but my dim eyes and trembling hand refuse their aid.
-- To the God of love and goodness I fervently commend you; to that God who
will not leave the soul of his servant, desolate and forlorn, to wander in the
unseen world -- nor the body to remain for ever a prisoner in the loathsome
grave.

Farewell, friend of my soul -- best loved and latest remembered! -- My Louisa,
oh, farewell for ever!

ADELAIDE DE ST. CROIX.


Lord Hastings was greatly affected with this letter. It touched some strings
in his heart, that accorded to its pathetic language with a sadness and
sensibility almost too exquisite to be borne. The sorrows of such hearts,
however, are delightful; and whilst these fond lovers, these faithful friends,
mingled their sighs together, the bitterness of grief was insensibly converted
into that sweet and tender sympathy, which gently agitates, without
overwhelming the soul.

Lord Hastings pressed the hand of Louisa to his bosom, wiped away her tears,
soothed her with love and tenderness, and encouraged her to hope, that from
change of air, time, and other remedies, Adelaide might still recover.
Reflecting, that the respect due to the memory of a revered parent must a while
delay that event to which all his wishes were directed, he prevailed on Louisa,
by the hope of once more beholding her friend, to join with him in requesting
Lady Granville to make trial for a few months of the air of the Continent. He
knew that the novelty and variety of the objects she would meet with in this
little tour, would necessarily divert her thoughts from the melancholy subject
which constantly occupied them; and likewise serve to relieve Louisa from that
awkward conciousness attending her present situation.

With much difficulty, Lady Granville was prevailed on to enter into a scheme,
which called for an exertion to which her spirits were very unequal; but
conscious of its propriety, and accustomed, from the singular benevolence of
her heart, ever willingly to sacrifice her own feelings to the comfort or
advantage of others, she strove at last to comply with the solicitations of her
children, and, in gratitude for their duteous care of her health, to do so with
cheerfulness: "There is only one condition, Louisa," said she, "that can
prevail on me to become a traveller at my age; and that is, that as soon as I
am weary of France, you shall stand engaged to find me a daughter ready to
love, honor, and obey, the moment I return to England." -- Louisa blushed; and
Lord Hastings, clasping his mother's hand, thanked her with his fine
intelligent eyes, for this kind hint.

To avoid observation, they set out with very few attendants, and reached Paris
by slow and easy journies. Being properly accommodated in lodgings, in a
retired village in the neighborhood of Versailles, the very day after their
arrival, leaving Lady Granville behind, Lord Hastings conducted the anxiously
impatient Louisa to the Convent of St. Cire. She could not again enter these
sacred walls, without feeling her heart swell with a confused variety of
emotions. These were not lessened on hearing, that, a few hours after sending
her last letter to her friend, the gentle Adelaide peacefully ended her
innocent life.

Lord Hastings partook in her virtuous sorrow; but whilst he did not venture to
condemn, he gently endeavored to calm and moderate her affliction. -- How
exquisitely soothing is that sympathy, which unites at once the ardour and
delicacy of friendship with the matchless tenderness of love!

Whilst she sat down in the parlour, to compose her mind, and recover her
scattered spirits, she received a message from the abbess, requesting to see
her.

On entering her apartment, she presented her with a small box, which Adelaide
bequeathed to her with her dying breath. Louisa received it with every mark of
reverence for the beloved donor. She requested to be shown the spot where she
was buried; and having paid the tribute of gratitude and friendship to a friend
endeared to her heart by every virtue, she returned to Lord Hastings, who
impatiently waited for her, and immediately conducted her back to Versailles.

Louisa retired to her apartment, to indulge, without witnesses, those tears
which served to relieve her heart. She then addressed the following letter to
Lady Leister, whom she had promised to inform of the fate of Adelaide, as soon
as she should be made acquainted with it.

To Lady Leister.
-- Already, my dear friend, that singular happiness, on the possession of
which you so warmly congratulate me, has suffered a cruel interruption; already
tears mingle with my joy! -- Ah, with humility and moderation does it become
man to enjoy that prosperity, which a thousand accidents are ever at hand to
embitter -- which, however great, cannot be lasting -- and which must, in this
state of trial, be one day succeeded by that adversity, which, by contrast, it
renders more severe.

The kind, the generous Hastings, who prevents or indulges every wish of my
heart, carried me to St. Cire the very day after our arrival. -- How shall I
describe the variety of feelings, with which I once more entered that sacred
abode of piety and peace! -- My trembling apprehensions were soon exchanged for
fatal certainty!

I had a long conversation with the venerable abbess, who informed me, after
expatiating on the exemplary virtues of the dear deceased, that she not only
quitted life with cheerful resignation, but triumph and joy! -- With her dying
lips she blessed me, bequeathed a little casket to me, as a memorial of her
friendship, and bade those around tell me, "that though divided for a little,
we should surely meet again."

I cannot help regretting my absence from this solemn, affecting scene. Yet,
alas! why should I regret it? My affliction would only have rendered death more
formidable -- might have disturbed her heavenly composure, and clogged her
ascending spirit.

I resolved to visit all that now remained of the beauteous, amiable, admired
Adelaide. -- As I approached the lowly dwelling, "I go to meet my friend," said
I; "but where are now the open arms, the smiling countenance, and throbbing
heart that were wont to welcome me?" -- The lay-sister pointed out the humble,
undistinguished spot, where the first of women reposes, and retired: "That
faithful heart shall beat no more! -- No more shall sorrow heave that clay-cold
bosom! -- The shower of spring shall return -- but no leaf of here is shall
arise! -- She is gone, she is gone for ever, and the place that once knew her,
shall know her no more!"

As I uttered this sentence, I was startled by something which moved the sod
with which the grave was covered: It was her little dog Fidelle, the last gift
of Grammont, on which she doated, and who had made itself a bed under the sod
at the foot of her grave, which nothing could induce it to quit since the hour
of her interment. The affectionate little animal knew me, and looked piteously
in my face; but immediately on perceiving its mistress was not with me, laid
down its head, and resumed its former posture.

This little affecting circumstance quite overcame me. -- My ever watchful
attentive Hastings, afraid that this scene might prove too severe a trial for
my weak spirits, approached; and giving me his arm, led me back in silence to
the convent.

I then retired, to visit her cell, that I might be more composed before
returning to the parlour: -- Her chair, her bed, her books, surrounded me! The
very pen with which she had last addressed me, lay on her table! -- How
pathetic was the silent language in which they spoke to my sad soul! -- There
was a becoming stillness in the desolate dwelling, that gently harmonized my
feelings and composed my mind. -- I reflected with gratitude on the happiness
our mutual friendship had supplied; and blessed God, that from the hour of its
commencement, we had never given each other a momentary pain, nor wounded the
delicacy of each other's affection, by careless neglect or culpable ingratitude.

And now, having recovered tolerable composure, I came back to the parlour,
where Hastings impatiently waited for me; and taking a last look, and breathing
a last sigh to St. Cire, and the memory of its tranquil pleasures, returned to
Lady Granville.

On opening the little casket, I found it contained the picture of Grammont; a
beautiful landscape, supposed to be the scenery round the fort of --, where he
died; her crucisix and rosary; and, what I hold as invaluable, a small
manuscript, entitled, "Reflections of Adelaide de St. Croix, in the Convent of
St. Cire."

These, my dear Lady Leister, were all the treasures she possessed; and these
will be inestimable to me. I will keep from every eye this little hoard of
grief; and when (...) I am in danger of forgetting myself, in too secure and
presumpt^^^^ prosperity, I will contemplate these sacred relics; and the
virtues of Adelaide will reform her friend. -- Adieu -- adieu.

LOUISA SEYMOUR.


To the same.
-- You reproach me with being unkind to my beloved Hastings, and even
ungrateful to Heaven, for suffering the death of Adelaide to cloud the very
dawn of our happiness. -- Ah, Lady Leister, how little do you know of this
heart, when you accuse it of coldness and ingratitude! Believe me, I tremble to
feel how strongly every affection of my soul is rivetted to one dear,
deserving, engrossing object!

The situation in which we now find ourselves, is perhaps the most delightful
which the human imagination could paint. The late distressing events have
mingled all the softness of pity with the ardour of passion, and brought us
insensibly to a degree of confidence and intimacy, which would scarce appear
credible to any person acquainted with the situation of our minds a short month
ago. But what need is there of caution or reserve, with a man who can read
every sentiment of my soul; who would die, sooner than give me the ^^^ghtest
pain, and whose refined manners, exalted honor, and glowing affection, are a
source of ever increasing delight!

Oh, my friend, will it always be so? Will the heart of Hastings be ever and
only mine? -- Secure now in my boundless affection, will he not ^^spise or
neglect a conquest, which no more ob^^^cles oppose, and of which ^e knows no
power ^n earth will deprive him. -- Ah, Lady Leister, should he ever be less
kind, ^ess gentle, less respectful! -- I might support his neglect; but his
contempt -- O, Heaven, defend me from deserving it! -- I must lay down my pen.

-- How differently, my dear Lady Leister, do we view the same object, whilst
under the influence of passion and of reason? -- I am so ashamed of the above,
that I will do penance for my folly, by disclosing it without reserve to my
friend.

Just as I had finished the last sentence, Hastings sent to request me to walk,
as his mother had retired to take a little rest in her own apartment: I really
was unable to quit mine; and, for the first time in my life, begged to be
excused. On inquiring of Patty how I was employed, the simple girl informed
him, and added, out of her great affection, "I Am afraid, Sir, my mistress has
received some bad news, for she is writing of letters, and seems in great
affliction. I really wish your honor would step up stairs, and talk to her;
for she forbade me to return, and I Am sure, Sir, none can comfort her if you
cannot." -- He entered the room, which greatly increased my agitation. He
earnestly inquired the cause: I was silent; but on his urging to know, I tried
to force a smile, and told him, that he must not so soon begin to exercise his
authority. He clasped my hand; "Ah, Louisa," said he, "this is my time; let me
then enjoy my short-lived power -- hereafter, it will be yours to reign."

To av^^d the subject, I asked him to read to me (...). He (...) u^^^ volume of
Shakespeare, which lay on the table, and read the mournful sol^^oq^^ of the
melancholy Jacques. -- My spirits, exhaust^^ by the little exertion I had just
made, forsook me altogether. Regardless of the play, my thoughts retraced the
sad fate of Grammont and Adelaide. -- I fixed my eyes on Hastings -- I
recollected that ere long his would be closed by the inexorable hand of death
-- I even fancied he looked more languid and pale than usual.

On looking up, he beheld me motionless as a statue, my head resting on my
bosom, and my eyes streaming with tears: He ^lew to my assistance, pressed me
to his bosom, and conjured me, as I valued his peace, to tell him the cause of
this inexplicable distress. Unable to speak, I pointed to the letter I had been
writing. He read it, and returning to me, strove to calm my agitated spirits
with the most soothing, the most endearing tenderness: "Why, O why, my dearest
Louisa," said he, "would you embitter our exquisite enjoyment, by anticipating
melancholy events, and even impossible evils; for such I deem any change in our
present sentiments for each other. We are not, my love, to expect either
lasting or unmixed happiness on earth; but let us not deal ungratefully and
disingenuously with Heaven, lest, by refusing to enjoy the blessings bestowed,
they should be withdrawn from us. We do not, my best Louisa, expect to find
each other perfect, or always the same: We cannot suppose that we shall meet,
after an absence of a day, with the same glowing transports we experience when
meeting, after many months have divided us; -- the human mind could not long
sustain such inpetuous sensations. -- But I am confident we shall ever feel for
each other that comfirmed esteem, that mild complacency, that animated
tenderness, that will ensure the highest enjoyment of which our natures are
capable."

"Ah, my friend, had you seen me at that moment, you would neither have thought
me unkind nor ungrateful. I took hold of his hand, and, forgetting that it was
not the soothing accents of Adelaide to which I then listened, reclined my head
on his bosom; then looking up to my best instructor, "Tell me, Hastings," said
I, "will not this intoxicating affection bind us to that world we must soon
leave, and render our separation altogether insupportable?" -- He looked at me
some moments: tears swelled into his eyes: then again folding me to his heart,
"No, best and dearest of human beings," replied he, "the sacred affection that
unites our souls, shall not bind us to the world, but teach us to rise above
both its pleasures and its pains; and when that God who united us, shall see
good a little while to divide us, he will enable the survivor patiently to
support that life which can be no longer enjoyed."

O, my friend! the recollection of this deeply interesting conversation swells
my heart almost to bursting! Never, never again shall your Louisa injure the
sacred affection of her Hastings, by one anxiety or apprehension so unworthy of
herself, so unjust to him. Never shall this breast harbor suspicion, or this
brow be clouded with care; but harmony and peace, and smiling approbation,
cheer every future hour of that life which shall be wholly devoted to make him
happy.

At your request, I send you a short extract from the manuscript of Adelaide.
If it affects you as tenderly as it does me, you shall have a longer one
hereafter.

Lady Granville, unable to mix with society, or relish pleasure, already begins
to talk of returning to England. -- Three months are elapsed since the death of
Lord Granville, and his son insists on the conditions stipulated for by his
mother, immediately after the conclusion of the fourth! -- My heart consents
with pleasure to every wish of his; and I long as much for home and quietness,
as my dear Lady Granville.

One of the most agreeable of my future prospects, is that of confirming my
esteem of Lord Leister's character, by intimate acquaintance. Assure him and
yourself of the respect and tender attachment of

LOUISA SEYMOUR.


REFLECTIONS of ADELAIDE DE ST. CROIX, in the Convent of St. Cire.
RETIRED to solitude and silence, I yield up my mind to reflection. Alas! what
pleasure can mine afford -- and to whom should I communicate them?

Grammont! thou no longer sharest in the sentiments of the heart that loves
thee! Thou know them not -- thou never more shall know them!

Oh, my disastered soul! too well have thou proved the vanity, not only of the
pride and pageantry of life, but even of its most blameless pleasures! -- By
forgetting the decree of Heaven, which determined this a state of discipline,
thou have opposed the will of the Most High; by confining all thy enjoyment to
the possession of one object, thou have lost, with that, the power to enjoy:
and by too eager a pursuit of happiness, have banished her from this mortal
habitation for ever!

Return then, oh my disastered soul! return again to thy quiet re^t: Seek no
more after lying vanities -- indulge not useless sorrow -- check vain and
impious regret. Let the shortness of life moderate thy affliction, and its
evils animate thy desires after a better.

Though I cannot always approve, neither ought I rashly to censure, the conduct
of those around me. Alas! should I condemn another, who know not that I am
right, unless by the as^^^tance of that very reason, which others possess in a
far superior degree, who yet seem bewildered in the mazes of error?

O thou, that art the pure fountain of truth, direct me in my (...) endeavors
to discover it! -- Impute not my errors to (...) but w^^kness: -- I look up to
thee for the supplies (...) for me; and I ^mplore thy ^avour, which is better
than life itself!

Thou only see the heart, and know that combination of circum^tances, by
which the judgment is mi^^ed and the w^^^ (...) -- Thou only can determine
(...) f^r the ^^^ors of thy (...) are voluntary; and to th^^, Omni^^cient, it
belongs to condemn or acquit:

O, let no the, strong as that thy (...) unloosed, again rivet my affections to
(...) of my earthly hopes may prove the (...) o^ my heavenly preparation!

Once more I begin to ta^^^ of (...) and (...) reconcile^ me to the absence of
pleasant. -- (...) o^ (...) ^^^^^ity. I strive to substitute present
resignation, in the room of past enjoyment.

I know that millions are born but to die. Alas! that many more exist, only to
abuse the privilege of existence! I am assured, that infinite wisdom cannot
err, nor infinite benevolence be unjust; I bow, therefore, before the Most
High, and adore that wisdom I cannot comprehend.

Are we better judges of our proper sphere than Him who appointed it; and will
we presumptuously grasp at the prize, before we have reached the goal? Is it
for us to complain of our insignificance among the creatures of his power,
whilst there breathes a human being whom we can assist by our advice, relieve
by our alms, or encourage with our approbation; to whom our pity can supply
comfort, and our affection pleasure? -- Let us ask our own hearts if there are
not many such, and blush for their ungrateful disingenuity.

O vain world! that still promises, and still deceives! -- O, most vain man,
who still relies, and is still disappointed! No more do I covet thy gay
prospects -- no more welcome thy deceitful hopes: They once looked bright and
alluring, but the veil of death has dropped, and hidden them from my view for
ever! -- Farewell -- a long farewell -- to thy pains and pleasures: -- Soon, oh
soon, Grammont, will I join thee! Then, though obscure, forgotten, unlamented,
a friend, perhaps, may visit my grave -- perhaps a Louisa weep over it!


To Lady Leister.
Tomorrow, my dear Lady Leister, we begin that journey, which, I trust, is to
bring us in health and happiness to our native land.

My time now is chiefly employed in concerting, with my dearest Hastings, that
future plan of conduct, by pursuing which we shall ensure self-approbation, if
we cannot uninterrupted felicity. I have the best model before my eyes, in the
character of Lady Granville; with whom you are yet but half acquainted.

You have formerly testified approbation of my portraits -- let me attempt that
of a person who unites that of a lady of fashion with a reasonable woman!

Unenslaved by the prejudices, and uncorrupted by the practices of the world,
Lady Granville maintains, in the midst of it, that rectitude of conduct, and
simplicity of manners, which accords with the spirit of those doctrines she
adorns, and the example of that Divine Master, whose steps she professes to
follow.

By maintaining an exemplary conduct in her family, and by her judicious choice
of books bestowed on her domestics, and even read to them on proper occasions,
she lays the best foundation for insuring their good conduct, by properly
informing their minds.

Her piety is without o^^entation, and her zeal without bigotry. The
complacency of her manners diffuses cheerfulness and good humor around her;
and from her, youth meets with indulgence, modesty with encouragement, and
merit with approbation.

How pleasing is it, my dear friend, to see people, possessed of rank and
fortune, uniting with them all those amiable and respectable qualities which
add lusture to titles, and dignity to birth?

Were I inclined to be revengeful for your former ill usage, I ^i^ht, perhaps,
with equal truth, assure you, "that a newer favorite has supplanted you in my
heart, and that this is the very last letter you will receive from

LOUISA SEYMOUR.


To Lord Hastings.
No longer shall I dispute the pre-eminence of your sex -- I see, I confess you
are our superiors in every thing.

Whilst women, weak and pusillanimous, are held enslaved by the prejudices of
education, the bonds of principle, and the terrors of conscience, with what
superior courage do men shake them off, and assert their native freedom!

If we venture even on a slight prevarication, how does the moral flow of our
blood cover our cheeks with blushes, and betray our offense? -- But men, with
exalted courage, break the bonds of confidence and good faith, and, nobly
superior to remorse and and shame, laugh at our credulity, and proclaim aloud
their triumph.

But not only must we yield to you, on account of your facility in making and
breaking promises, but in the superior and peculiar art you possess, of
forgetting them altogether. -- Your last words when we parted, were, "I will
write to you frequently." -- How you have fulfilled your engagement, let
Conscience answer. -- O, cry you mercy? I believe he is not of your
acquaintance, or else you lords indulge him with a perpetual vacation.

Tell me truly, is it that, in plighting your faith to one woman, you consider
yourselves as absolved from observing it with all besides? Or that you think
the marriage vow so large, that it should swallow up all the lesser promises
that preceded it?

But I will no longer argue with one I so heartily despise, or rather pity, for
his deplorable infatuation, in voluntarily renouncing what he once might have
enjoyed -- the inestimable privilege of my correspondence.

Assure Louisa, she shall have no good wishes from me, on account of her
approaching nuptials; she is possessed already of more happiness than she knows
how to use. As for yours, it is too complete to admit of any addition.

As we shall be with my father about the time of your arrival, I hope we shall
see you before the honey-moon expire. -- Take comfort, Hastings; -- we have
been married four months, and our's is not yet on the wane. Nay, from its mild
and gentle aspect, I flatter myself it may continue to enlighten our hemisphere
for life. -- Adieu, caro amico.

CHARLOTTE LEISTER.


After an easy and pleasant journey, the travelers returned to their
hospitable mansion; where Dr. Melville waited to receive them, and next
morning, in presence only of their principal domestics, joined the hands of
Miss Seymour and Lord Hastings.

If the loss which Lady Granville had sustained of the best of husbands, could
never be forgotten, it was at least alleviated by the duteous and tender cares
of her children; whose lasting happiness was strengthened and confirmed by
every tie which Heaven has annexed to the most sacred and endearing of all
connexions.

THE END.

