SERMONS PREACHED TO JOSHUA ABBOT; AT YORK, SEPTEMBER 3, 1792: PREPARATORY TO
THE SIXTH, THE DAY APPOINTED FOR HIS EXECUTION: WHEN HIS PARDON WAS PUBLICLY
READ BY THE MINISTER, AT THE DESIRE OF THE SHERIFF, IN THE MEETING HOUSE, TO A
NUMEROUS ASSEMBLY OF PEOPLE.

BY MATTHEW MERRIAM OF BERWICK, AND JOSEPH BUCKMINSTER OF PORTSMOUTH.

PRINTED AND SOLD BY JOHN MYCALL.

TO HIS EXCELLENCY JOHN HANCOCK, ESQUIRE, GOVERNOR; AND THE HONORABLE THE
COUNCIL OF THE COMMONWEALTH OF MASSACHUSETTS.
IN testimony of our gratitude to the Supreme Executive of this Commonwealth,
for their great clemency in pardoning JOSHUA ABBOT, who was sentenced to death
by the laws of his country, for the murder of MOSES GUPTAIL of Berwick, in the
County of York, in the Commonwealth of Massachusetts, the following Sermons are
inscribed by your Excellency's and Honors.'

most obedient, humble Servants, The AUTHORS.

A SERMON, PREACHED AT YORK, SEPTEMBER 3, 1792. TO JOSHUA ABBOT, Jun. WHO WAS
SENTENCED TO DIE, FOR THE MURDER of MOSES GUPTAIL; THE 6th OF FEBRUARY LAST;
BOTH OF BERWICK. BUT RECEIVED A PARDON ON THE MORNING OF THE SAID DAY. BY
MATTHEW MERRIAM, A. M. PASTOR OF A CHURCH IN BERWICK.

ADVERTISEMENT.
THE Author is inclined to think, that the truly affecting occasion on which
the following discourse was delivered, and the tender feelings of the bearers
thereby excited, more than any peculiar excellence in the Sermon, caused them
to request its publication: But a hope, that the great, the plain and important
truths it contains, may be the means of doing good, together with a disposition
to oblige them, prevails with him to comply with it. -- The address at the
close, in particular, he is sensible may expose him to the censure of the
critic; but it claims the candor of the public, as it was necessarily spoken
without much premeditation or penning of the sentiments, the preacher expecting
to speak to the prisoner under a sentence of death,(it being the design of the
meeting) 'till the news of the pardon arrived about half an hour before the
meeting: For the same reason the reader is desired to excuse it, if it is not
exactly recollected as it was spoken: The substance, it is supposed, is here
given to the public.

So singular an instance of sovereignty in pardoning a criminal, condemned for
murder, shows the attention of the Supreme Executive of the State to justice,
as well as clemency. It was a free and generous act of grace; but a reason
exciting it, is supposed to be, some evidence appearing after the trial, in
favor of the criminal, which was judged material; and which the jury on the
trial certified, would, if it had been adduced, have altered the verdict, from
murder, to manslaughter.

A SERMON, etc.
LUKE, XXIV,46,47. THUS IT IS WRITTEN, AND THUS IT BEHOVED CHRIST TO SUFFER,
AND TO RISE FROM THE DEAD THE THIRD DAY: AND THAT REPENTANCE AND REMISSION OF
SINS SHOULD BE PREACHED IN HIS NAME, AMONG ALL NATIONS; BEGINNING AT JERUSALEM.
HE who made all things, is GOD. To whom do we owe our obedience, but to him
who gave us being? From whom must we derive happiness, but from him, who placed
Man in a holy and happy State? That Man, as he came out of the forming hands of
GOD, was holy, and consequently happy, the scriptures inform us. That the case
is now, with us, far otherwise, we may see by sad experience, as well as are
told in the word of GOD, The same revelation teaches us the fatal cause of so
generally calamitous a state. -- By the sin of man. By one man sin entered into
the world, and death by sin; and so death passed upon all men, for that all
have sinned.

ON this occasion, mercy triumphed, GOD, moved with pity toward us, to the
glory of his wisdom and grace, provided a way for our relief; and gave a
promise of a Savior, who should be "the seed of the woman," and being the
Wonderful Person, God with us, the SON of GOD in human nature, should open to
man a door of hope, the way of return to GOD and happiness.

HE was long foretold by the prophets. -- At length the promised Savior
appears: But in a very different manner from what was generally expected by the
Jews. They being in subjection to the Romans, and entertaining high notions of
"the Messiah" promised, looked for him as a temporal Prince and Savior, to
deliver them from that bondage; little considering their need of him as a
Savior from the worst of bondage, from sin, guilt, and its dreadful
consequence, eternal death. Too many, like them, would rejoice at the news of a
Savior and deliverer from the evils and sufferings of this life, and temporal
death; but see not their need of one, to rescue them from more fatal evils --
from the power of sin, and Satan, and from death eternal. But the angel gave
him the name of JESUS, for this reason, "because he should save his people from
their sins."

THIS mistaken notion, however, infected the nation in general. Even the chosen
disciples were not free from it. As "two of them walked" together on "the third
day" after his crucifixion, and JESUS joined their company, (he being risen)
"they were talking" of the melancholy event of his death, as it appeared to
them; and they said to him, "We trusted it had been he, who should have
"redeemed Israel." In the evening of the same day, when the disciples were
"assembled together," he came and "stood in the midst, and said, Peace be unto
you: But they were terrified and affrighted; and supposed they had seen a
spirit: But he showed them his hands and his feet, which were wounded on "the
cross;" yet they were hardly persuaded that it was he. And he said unto them,
These are the words which I spoke unto you while I was yet with you, that all
things must be fulfilled which were written in the law of Moses, and in the
prophets, and in the psalms concerning me: Then opened he their understanding
that they might understand the scriptures: And said unto them (as in our text)
Thus it is written, and thus it behaved CHRIST to suffer, and to rise from the
dead the third day: And that repentance and remission of sins should be
preached in his name, among all nations; beginning at Jerusalem.

HERE we find CHRIST himself explaining to them and to us the whole mystery and
necessity of his incarnation, death and resurrection; and preaching to sinners,
repentance and remission of sins, in his name -- that, in that very way by
which the disciples were so much stumbled, and which was so contrary to human
wisdom, and the general expectation of the favored people of Israel, he was to
bring Salvation and Redemption to men. The very mention of which, methinks, if
rightly considered, is enough to melt down the hardest heart, and to soften it
to compliance; Thus it behoved CHRIST to suffer, and to rise from the dead the
third day, with this express design, that repentance and remission of sins
should be preached in his name, and that so extensively, among all nations,
beginning at Jerusalem, the scene of his sufferings, and to them by whom he had
been so lately, so cruelly treated and murdered. Behold the extent and degree
of his compassion! And what relief is here for the sinner; guilty, undone and
helpless! Let the crowd of ideas of sin, guilt, ruin and the ample remedy
provided, deeply affect us, while we proceed to consider,

I. The foundation and encouragement for repentance, and forgiveness of sins,
from the death and resurrection of CHRIST.

II. The nature and necessity of repentance.

III. The connection of forgiveness in the name and for the sake of CHRIST, with
it.

I. Then, we are to consider the foundation and encouragement for repentance
and forgiveness of sins, from the death and resurrection of CHRIST.

THE first law, the law of nature, gave no intimation of it. -- That GOD should
require our obedience, he thought right and sit. The law which requires it,
expresses his will, and arises from his nature: It must therefore be holy, just
and good, as himself; and unchangeable, like himself -- That he should punish
man, if he disobeyed, he deemed but just: Justice, his perfections, and good
moral government required it: As in a good civil government, it is requisite
and necessary for the good of the whole, that transgressors be punished,
according to the good laws of the State. In either case, to be sorry, does not
make sufficient amends; even if the transgressor should really discover such a
disposition.

Now, the covenant which man was placed under, at his creation, required, as
was most sit and suitable for the holy GOD to require, a perfect obedience of
him personally as the condition of life. A threatening, to deter him, was
annexed to the transgression of the law, in which the promise of it was
implied; a threatening adapted to his situation, as living happy in GOD's
likeness and favor; even death, implying the loss of that happy life and a
sense of it, and together therewith, a sense of the displeasure of his Maker,
whom he offended. The threatening against disobedience was positive; as in the
prohibition of eating of the tree of knowledge of good and evil: In the day
that thou eatest thereof, thou shall surely die. As it related to an
intelligent being, as man, and there were no intimations of an escape from it,
there was implied an eternal sense of loss, and consequent suffering of the
anger of GOD, a sense of good, lost, and evil, procured, which is that death,
which "is the wages of sin:" For who can endure this, forever and ever, and not
be said to die eternally?

MAN disobeyed; and death was the consequence. It began to take place
immediately. It must have followed in the full extent, if mercy had not
interposed: We feel it in part: There is a foreboding of misery, in this world,
in the awakened conscience. This is but the beginning of sorrows, an
anticipation in part, or foretaste of that " death," which "is the wages of
sin." But yet there is no disposition of heart to repent, nor encouragement,
that, repenting, he may be forgiven; till the grace of the gospel is opened to
his view.

IN the covenant of works there was no room for repentance; no condition on
which pardon might be obtained, if man sinned; nor provision for any relief.
What then must be the consequence? Must the whole race of men perish for ever,
seeing we are told that "all have sinned?" The gospel brings us good news, glad
tidings of pardon for the rebellious, upon their repentance; that sinners may
repent, and repenting may be forgiven; and if forgiven, then received to the
favor of their offended Creator, and be happy in him, and with him for ever.
The new covenant, emphatically called the covenant of grace, provides for this.
Nothing but free and sovereign grace could provide relief, or give any ground
of hope.

THE text informs us of the way in which it is brought about, viz. by the death
and resurrection of JESUS CHRIST. The sinner, as he could see no room for
repentance, or way to escape, so he could have no power or disposition of heart
to repent or hope for forgiveness. Divine wisdom and grace contrived a plan,
viz. by the mediation and sacrifice of JESUS CHRIST. To "deliver us from going
down to the pit" of eternal death. GOD " has found a ransom:" The death of
CHRIST is the ransom; and his resurrection from the dead testifies its
sufficiency, and acceptableness with GOD on our behalf. This lays the
foundation of encouragement to repent, and hope for the forgiveness of sin.

THIS was necessary. GOD did not see it fit and suitable, though his mercy is
so great, to give his holy SPIRIT to work in sinners a disposition to repent,
and in a mere Sovereign way to pardon their sins, without a satisfaction; so
great is the evil of sin, and the dishonor it casts on him and his government;
as it strikes at the foundation of all moral obligation, and even aims to cast
GOD out of his throne. His law must be honored, which is thereby violated, and
justice satisfied.

THE covenant of redemption, which is to us the covenant of grace, provides
that this be done by a surety; and that the SON of GOD be the person; that in
order thereto, he take our nature and become man -- be made under the law which
we had broken, and be made a curse for us, by suffering the accursed death of
the cross; that we might be freed from the curse. As death was the positive
threatening to man, for sins so, the death of CHRIST on the cross, as our
surety, secures the honor of GOD's law, truth and justice, thereby to make an
atonement: As the Divine Nature was the altar on which he offered the
sacrifice, "which sanctifies the gift;" it was of infinite value in the sight
of GOD. As he is a Divine Person, GOD esteemed his death a sufficient
satisfaction to his justice, as a manifestation of his righteous displeasure
against sin. This he testified to all worlds, by raising him from the dead, as
he foretold, on the third day: For, as he died a victim to divine justice for
the sins of men, he could not otherwise have been released from the bands of
the grave, than by having made full satisfaction: By which, he established this
as the only way for sinners to entertain hope, as laying the foundation for the
honorable exercise of mercy, and of bestowment of the gift of the holy SPIRIT,
to work repentance in their hearts. In consequence of which, repentance and
pardon are proclaimed to a guilty world.

OF this atonement, the prophets foretold, and the law of Moses testified, by
the sacrifices therein instituted; this signifying, that without shedding of
blood there is no remission. To him gave all the prophets witness (says the
apostle Peter) that through his name whosoever believes in him shall receive
remission of sins. The GOD of our fathers raised up JESUS, whom ye slew (says
he to the Jews) and hanged on a tree. Him has GOD exalted with his right hand,
to be a Prince and a Savior, to give repentance to Israel, and forgiveness of
sins. The whole design and the necessity of his death, and resurrection to
accomplish it, are expressed by CHRIST in the text, Thus it is written, and
thus it behoved CHRIST to suffer, and to rise from the dead the third day: And
that repentance and remission of sins should be preached in his name, among all
nations, beginning at Jerusalem.

WHICH brings us to consider,

II. The nature and necessity of Repentance.

THIS is the work of a sinner. Before man sinned, he was required to obey the
law and keep all the commandments of GOD. But repentance was no part of his
religion. -- But since the fall, it is necessary; and no religion can be
accepted without it. It is the proper work of a sinner: His character calls for
it, and makes it necessary. If there were any without sin, they would have no
occasion for Repentance: But now, GOD commands all men every where to repent.
Sin gives cause for Repentance. It occasions sorrow of heart, when rightly
viewed, as well as brings the sorrow of suffering. When it is a godly sorrow,
it works Repentance, to Salvation; not to be repented of: but the sorrow of
the world, or that which is merely of a worldly nature, "works death."

A distinction therefore is necessary. Repentance implies in its nature
conviction of sin -- an afflictive sense and heart-aching for it. But not
merely a conviction, as having done evil, and distress of mind arising
therefrom: So, Judas that betrayed his Lord repented himself, saying, I have
sinned, in that I have betrayed the innocent blood: -- And he cast down the
pieces of silver in the temple, and departed and went and hanged himself: Such
was his torment and despair. But, this was not the Repentance to which there is
a promise of remission of sins.

"REPENTANCE is a saving grace, and a necessary mean of attaining life and
Salvation," wrought by the SPIRIT of GOD in the heart; which is a further
operation of the SPIRIT, beyond conviction of sin; imparting a sense of the
evil of it, as against GOD. The hearts of all persons, by nature, are hard and
insensible of sin; not only as to its moral evil, but its ill desert. -- The
SPIRIT of GOD, whose operations are the effect of CHRIST's purchase, assisting
natural conscience to do its office, "convinces of sin," and awakens to a
concern for their safety. This may be preparatory to true repentance. So that
he who has not had a real conviction of sin and guilt, and been awakened to a
deep concern "what he shall do to be saved," has not repented; he is yet blind
and hardened.

IN true repentance there is a clearer conviction of sin -- it discovers its
evil nature, as against GOD; and so sets the guilt of it in a juster light;
even the guilt of the least sin appears great. It appears so great an evil to
sin against GOD at all, as to deserve his wrath for ever: So that he would be
just to cast him off eternally; not only for the more open gross sins of his
life, which are justly detestable in the eyes of the civilized world; but for
secret sins, sins of heart, and its unlikeness and opposition to GOD, the sin
of nature as well as practice, sins of omission as well as commission: For he
sees that he has to deal with a heart-searching GOD, "who sees not as man
sees." -- Some particular gross act of sin, and transgression of the law of
GOD, may indeed be the leading cause or occasion of his exercise of mind: But,
in evangelical repentance, the sin of unbelief, and contempt of CHRIST, and his
gospel -- his ingratitude for and abuse of the goodness and love of GOD, in
providing a Savior, and of CHRIST, the compassionate Redeemer; and his
resisting, and stifling the motions of the SPIRIT of grace; -- his blindness of
mind, his stupidity and insensibility of the things of GOD, deeply affect his
heart. The hardness of his heart, and the corruption of his nature, considered
as the fountain of sin in the outward act, excite bitter groanings; and cause
him to feel the propriety of and adopt the complaint of the apostle Paul, O
wretched man that I am, who shall deliver me from the body of this death; this
deadly body or mass of sin!

INDEED the true penitent is grieved and mourns that he is a sinner, and that
by sin he has dishonored GOD, and polluted his own soul; whereby he is rendered
unclean and odious in the sight of a holy GOD. Being enlightened to some just
views of GOD, and of his sins against him, by the SPIRIT of the LORD, ( with
Job) he abhors himself* and repents in dust and ashes Remembering and
reflecting on his own evil ways, and his doings that were not good; ( as it was
foretold of Israel becoming penitent) he loathes himself, in his own sight, for
his iniquities, and for his abominations. Not barely the shame and punishment
before men, or even the divine vengeance, to which he is exposed for his
transgressions, do extort grief and sadness of heart; but sin in general, as
sin,, appearing exceeding sinful, excites genuine unaffected mourning,, as one
mourns for his only son, and bitterness of soul, as when one is in bitterness
for his firstborn. Whereas, before this, he was ready to palliate and excuse
his crimes, or plead innocence, and was disposed to set a high value on any
good deeds done by him; he now confesses his sins, with shame and abhorrence of
them: As the prophet Jeremiah speaks in behalf of Israel, so, true penitents
may say, "We lie down in our shame, and our confusion covers us:" as being
ashamed to lift up our heads before GOD, or look up, "for we have sinned
against the LORD our GOD."

CONFESSION of sin, is the part of a penitent; a duty encumbent upon him, as a
mark of the penitence of his heart, and a visible renunciation of sin. When
"John preached the baptism of repentance, for the remission of sins," they that
"were baptized of him" in token of their repentance, "confessed their sins."
Not that there is any propriety that people should lay open their secret sins
before the world: But three things may be implied, viz.. I. Confession of all
our sins, that we are conscious of, to GOD. -- Thus, the Psalmist professed
that he did and received forgiveness, Ps. 32, 5. I acknowledged my sin unto
thee, and mine iniquity have I not hid: I said, I will confess my
transgressions unto the LORD; and thou forgavest the iniquity of my sin. -- If
we attempt to hide our sins from GOD, or, if we do not confess them to him, we
cannot expect a pardon from him. It is made a condition of finding mercy,, in
Prove. xxiv, 13. He that covers his sins, shall not prosper; but whosoever
confesses and forsakes them, shall have mercy. 2. Confession, to injured
persons in particular, if opportunity can be had, is necessary, in token of
repentance, with desire of their forgiveness -- Although none but GOD can
forgive sins, or discharge from guilt and punishment; yet, where an offense is
committed against one or more of our fellow-men, the least we can do to repair
the injury, is, to acknowledge our fault with penitence, as we would hope for
forgiveness from GOD; against whom, all sin is ultimately committed. 3. There
ought to be public confession, where the offense is of a public nature; and
especially against the public. A great part of the evil of sin which is of a
public nature, lies in the evil example of it, to others; and the hurtful,
dangerous tendency of it, to the society; which makes it necessary that public
testimony be borne against it: And, when any person has openly transgressed, or
committed an overt act of offense against the State, or community, he ought to
do all in his power to hinder the bad tendency and prevent the pernicious
effects of his crime, to the public; by confessing it; and professing his sense
of the evil of it; and deep sorrow for it; which will be also to the glory of
GOD: As Joshua told Achan, My son, give I pray thee, glory to the LORD GOD of
Israel, and make confession unto him. i.e. before the people, Josh vii, 19.
This would be to the glory of his justice, and in a measure secure the honor of
his government.

SORROW of heart is an attendant of this grief, and mourning for sin and
confession of it. As the penitent is grieved and mourns, so he is sorry from
his heart for the dishonor that he has done to GOD, by his sins; and the
offense given him: For this reason, especially, he is ready to say, "O that I
never had committed them;" more than for any trouble brought on himself thereby.

HUMILIATION before GOD, and brokeness of heart for sin is another attendant of
true repentance. He is brought down from all high thoughts of himself, of his
own worthiness and goodness. His proud, stubborn spirit is broken; which before
was "as a bullock unaccustomed to the yoke," and he is brought to submit to
GOD's government, as just and right. He lies low, as it were at GOD's
footstool, sensible of his desert of his dreadful displeasure; and that he is
just in his threatenings, and would be so in his damnation; and therefore that
his only hope is in his mercy. However great distress and horror of conscience
the legal penitent may feel for sin, he is not humbled: He continues as
proudhearted and stubborn, as opposite to GOD in the temper of his mind as
ever, and as unwilling to submit to the divine government -- has no regard to
his glory, but only to his own ease and safety.

THE true penitent thus humbled, casts himself, at the feet of a Sovereign and
merciful GOD, as one deserving death and damnation, having nothing to plead but
free grace. In which case, the way is opened for his compliance with the
gospel; the scope and design of which are to abase the pride of man, and exalt
the glory of GOD: Wherein his justice is asserted, the honor of his government
secured, and mercy exercised to the sinner, penitent and believing in the
atonement and righteousness of JESUS CHRIST, which alone give relief and
comfort. Therefore,

TRUE gospel-repentance includes an apprebension of the mercy of GOD, in
CHRIST, and faith in this great Redeemer: This necessarily belongs to its
nature. While a sight of sin in its guilt and of the justice of GOD in
punishing it, shows the need of a Savior; of his atonement and righteousness,
and the necessity of repentance, some view of this provision of GOD's grace is
necessary ( as has already been shown) as the encouragement to repent, as the
motive and incitement to it, as the only barrier against despair, and
foundation of the hope of forgiveness. The free mercy of GOD in providing a
Savior, -- the mediation of CHRIST -- his perfect obedience to the Divine law,
and his sufferings and death upon the cross, afford the only encouragement to a
sinner to think of returning to GOD, to ask and hope for a pardon of his sins,
and for favor with his offended Creator, and a principal mean of softening the
heart of a rebel to a compliance with the offer of mercy. As the law of GOD
pronounces a curse in positive terms upon him that fails of fulfilling it, the
sinner must have so remained under the sentence, and in hardened opposition
against GOD, unless softened by the emollients of grace. The testimony of GOD
in his word, of CHRIST becoming our surety, bearing our sins on the cross,
paying our debt of suffering, and procuring a righteousness for our
justification, i.e. for all that embrace him, being received by faith, is this
blessed softening remedy, that draws, that wins, that gains the heart of a
sinner; that otherwise would dread and shun with aversion the presence of GOD
-- that cause him to relent, to repent of his sins and opposition against him,
and gladly, thankfully, and obediently to return to him, in the name of and
with faith in this glorious all-sufficient Savior, and with hope in the mercy
of GOD. Which faith, implies not only an assent of the mind, to the truth of
the gospel, but a consent of the heart and will, to this way of Salvation; and
a cordial receiving of and trusting in this great Redeemer, his atonement and
righteousness, for pardon, acceptance to the favor of GOD, grace for
sanctification and consolation, and eternal life. Thus, repentance and faith,
when either is true and genuine, are inseparably united; and "repentance," thus
connected with faith, is "unto Salvation," "and not to be repented of;" but is
followed with the joy of pardon.

I WOULD briefly add, as a mark of gospel-repentance, that it is accompanied
and followed with hatred of sin, resolution of heart against and forsaking it
in practice, and turning to the LORD in new obedience. The true penitent, it
appears from this view of the subject, experiences and essential change of
mind, and change of heart. All the powers of his mind are turned from their
former bias; sin is imbittered, a fixed hatred of all sin arises in the heart;
so that he becomes an irreconcilable enemy to it, in every from and degree;
even when his sensible grief, sorrow and mourning for it is assuaged and
abated, by the comforts of the holy GHOST, and sense of pardon: His hatred of
sin arises from a view of its evil nature, and contrariety to GOD and his law,
and continues and increases in proportion to his experiences of his grace and
manifestations of his love. The same view and sense of sin, will influence him
to turn from it; as it is natural to fly from that which we hate: He therefore
forsakes sin, and turns to the LORD; he is made willing to submit to his
government, and to give up himself to him in an everlasting covenant, never to
be forgotten; resigning himself to him and his disposal, in life, and death,
and to all eternity. As he before "walked contrary to GOD, after the
imagination of his own heart," he now "walks with GOD," in faith and love, with
purpose of heart cleaves to the LORD, and brings forth fruit meet for
repentance; being made free from sin," as to its dominion, and become a servant
to GOD, he has his fruit unto holiness, and his end everlasting life.

Now, we may observe, repentance is necessary in the nature of things, as it is
a laying down the weapons of rebellion against GOD, and a submission to his
government in CHRIST, the mediator and "king whom he has set in Zion:" and as
it is made the condition of the bestowment of pardon to the sinner, by the
constitution of the gospel; as will further appear. Though it does not merit
any favor from GOD, it is most fit and suitable, as a condition of pardon being
granted to the offender, and his being admitted as a meet subject of his
kingdom of grace, in this world, and an heir of the kingdom of glory: Without
which, it is impossible that he should relish the joys of heaven, or ever be
admitted there; for, "without holiness no man shall see the LORD." We proceed,

III. To observe the connection of forgiveness, in the name and for the sake of
CHRIST, with repentance.

WE have seen that there is provision made in the covenant of grace, for the
repentance of sinners; and that he that repents should be forgiven: CHRIST has
purchased this favor -- has prepared the way for the honorable exercise of
mercy to sinners, being set forth of GOD to be a propitiation, through faith in
his blood, to declare his righteousness for the remission of sins -- that he
might be just; just to himself, his law and government, and the justifier of
him which believes in JESUS.

THAT GOD has constituted a certain and unfailing connection between repentance
and remission of sins, appears from the text; when the Savior declares, that
for this end, CHRIST suffered, and rose from the dead the third day; that
repentance, as the condition, and remission of sins, as the happy consequence,
should, (or might) be preached in his name; and also, from the declaration of
his apostles, that in consequence of his sufferings on the cross, GOD has
exalted him with his right hand, to be a Prince and a Savior; to give both
repentance and forgiveness of sins. This is the gracious condition in the
covenant, which is sealed by the blood of CHRIST; that, the sinner that
repents, shall freely and fully forgiven all his sins. This connextion is
established, to encourage their return to GOD, and hope in his mercy. The
directions of the apostles to their awakened hearers, saying, Repent and be
baptized every one of you in the name of JESUS CHRIST, for the remission of
sins; and again, Repent ye and be converted that your sins may be blotted out,
plainly imply, an offer of forgiveness, upon their repentance; and an
assurance, that if they "repented," they should receive "remission of sins," --
their sins should "be blotted out." So that it appears to be the unalterable
decree of heaven, that, the sinner that repents, shall be forgiven; and, being
forgiven, shall be received to the favor of his Creator, and become an heir of
eternal life.

THIS mercy is granted to sinners in the name and for the sake of CHRIST, and
in no other way. This is the "foundation-stone, the chief cornerstone" of the
foundation of the sinner's hope of pardon and life eternal. Neither is there
Salvation in any other: for there is none other name under heaven given among
men, whereby we must be saved. As it was testified by the law of Moses, by the
sacrifices and rites of that dispensation, that without shedding of blood is no
remission; so, now, once in the end of the world, has CHRIST appeared to put
away sin, by the sacrifice of himself. And to him gave all the prophets
witness, that through his name, whosoever believes in him, shall receive
remission of sins. The true penitent, therefore, having a believing respect to
the atonement of CHRIST, receives the forgiveness of his sins in his name, and
for the sake of his sufferings and death on the cross, for the sins of men.
Repentance is not the meritorious cause of forgiveness, nor yet is any other
qualification in us: But it is wholly ascribed to the merit of the blood or
sufferings and death of the Son of GOD; which is sufficient for that purpose,
for any, and for all the human race; So that whoever of "all nations," ages and
conditions does truly repent, may be assured by the word of GOD, of the
remission of his sins, in the name and for the sake of CHRIST; it being
accompanied with faith in him, as, it implies, not merely asking for mercy and
forgiveness in his name, but receiving him, and relying on his infinite
atonement. For this end he suffered, that repentance and remission of sins
should be preached in his name, among all nations, beginning at Jerusalem, the
sense of his sufferings: -- to the very people and persons who had been
perpetrators of the horrid crime of the murder of the SON of GOD. By which is
held up the idea of the infinite merit of his death, and of the riches of GOD's
grace, with the freeness of pardon to the greatest offenders; as well as, that
it is his will, that pardon should be first offered to a covenanted people, who
have revolted from him, and that backsliders should be called to repentance,
and be assured of forgiveness, upon their repentance; though their sins be as
scarlet, and though they be red like crimson, ever so aggravated and heinous;
to show them that GOD is mindful of his covenant, however they act unworthy of
their's, and also, that GOD, in the bestowment of mercy to sinners, deals with
them in the way of a covenant of grace, by which they are brought nigh to him;
-- repentance and remission of sins was to be preached in his name, among all
nations, but beginning at Jerusalem. So that upon the whole it appears, that
how great soever, or numerous or aggravated his sins are, that can be no bar in
the way of forgiveness, to the person that repents, with faith in the divine
mercy, through CHRIST; they cannot exceed his merits, or the mercy of GOD in
him toward sinners.

THE reason why any despair, is not that their sins are too great to be
forgiven, nor yet that they have a greater sense of them, or of their
aggravations, than the true penitent that finds mercy, but, that they reject
the atonement of CHRIST, the only way to obtain mercy and forgiveness. The true
penitent, is ready to think himself to be the worst of sinners, because he sees
more of himself, and of his sins, than of any others; but yet he does not
despair. Indeed he does despair in any other way, but one -- but in the view
and belief of that which GOD has provided, the atonement of CHRIST; which is
the only foundation of his comfort and hope. The mercy of GOD, in him and his
all-perfect atonement and righteousness are all his support: Take this away,
and the least sin would shut him up under everlasting despair: But, while this
foundation which GOD has laid, remains, though he may at times, greatly doubt
and fear, yet, his faith and hope will not utterly fail him. One sin,
unrepented of, is enough to damn the soul, eternally: For, though every sin may
not particularly be recollected in repentance; yet, all sin, as sin, so far as
it is known, the opposition of nature and practice to GOD, must be repented of.
And, whoever truly repents, with apprehension of the mercy of GOD, as it is
exercised in and through the mediator need never despair; let his sins be ever
so great, or numerous, or aggravated; they cannot be too great to be forgiven,
in this way; they cannot be more than infinite: And therefore, cannot exceed
the merit of the atonement and satisfaction of CHRIST; which is infinite: and
must therefore be sufficient to cancel the guilt of all sin. Yea, it is not
only sufficient for that purpose, but infinitely free for the greatest sinners;
not only for some but for any for all, whosoever will with "the prodigal return
to the father" of all, and penitently ask for mercy: For there there is "joy in
heaven over one sinner that repents," so peculiarly is GOD pleased with it,
more than over ninety and nine just persons that need no repentance, if any
such there were; "because he delights in mercy." -- But, enough has been said
to show the unfailing connection of forgiveness, in the name and for the sake of
CHRIST, with repentance.

I SHALL now endeavor to assist your improvement of what has been said. -- And
let us remark,

1. WHAT a wonderful plan is that revealed in the gospel, for the relief of
sinners; ruined and helpless! When man, being under a righteous law of GOD,
requiring his obedience, had sinned, brought guilt and ruin on himself and his
posterity, and was shut up under a sentence of condemnation, to eternal death,
without a gleam of hope; the mercy of God appeared for the relief of the
helpless! his wisdom contrived the way; a plan, at which heaven and earth may
well stand astonished! -- that the SON of GOD should come down into our world,
take our nature, "being found in fashion as a man," yea, "make himself of no
reputation," but "take upon him the form of a servant" -- obey the law which we
had broken, and die the accursed and ignominious death of the cross, to satisfy
divine justice, for our sins -- that GOD might be just, and the justifier of
the sinner that will believe in him, with repentance of sins -- that the sinner
might repent, and repenting, might be forgiven: a plan, wherein mercy and truth
are met together, righteousness and peace have embraced each other. -- Well may
the "angels" intently "look into these things!" But, how much more, should we
be deeply affected with and admire the wonderful scheme of divine wisdom and
grace! For, though the preaching of CHRIST crucified, was, unto the Jews a
stumbling block, and unto the Greeks foolishness, and is so, to many, in the
present age; yet, unto them which are called, both Jews and Greeks, and of
whatever nation, CHRIST the power of GOD and the wisdom of GOD.

From what has been said, we may see the propriety, and necessity, that sinners
be deeply concerned what will become of them -- what they shall do to be saved.
A sinner, out of CHRIST, is an undone creature; and, in himself, helpless:
Guilt hands heavy upon him, and sin hinders his return to GOD; -- he is in the
road to final, remediless ruin, and nothing but sovereign mercy can prevent it.
-- If any situation, that can be imagined on this side of eternal misery calls
for concern, this does: That indeed, in those regions of despair, would be of
no avail; but this may; as they are yet within the limits of mercy; it is with
them a day of grace: The gospel opens to sinners a glorious door of hope; but,
it is only an hope that they may become the subjects of the special grace of
GOD, and obtain peace and reconciliation with him. -- For sinners, while within
the reach of mercy, to be concerned "what they shall do to be saved," may be
attended with the happiest consequences: As the direction of the prophet is
adapted to them, "Turn ye to the strong hold, ye prisoners of hope". For,

3. THE only consistent and satisfactory advice that can be given to such
enquirers, is that given by the apostles, Peter and Paul, upon like occasions,
" Repent -- Believe on the LORD JESUS CHRIST": Peter, added, to them who were
not baptized -- "And be baptized every one of you in the name of JESUS CHRIST,
for the remission of sins," which is of the same import with Paul's direction,
"Believe on the LORD JESUS CHRIST:" For, repentance and faith must go together
-- they cannot be separated, if true and real: And a promise is implied, or
expressed, of remission of sins and of Salvation. -- And, Blessed is he whose
transgression is forgiven, whose sin is covered: Blessed is the man unto whom
the LORD imputes not iniquity, and in whose spirit there is no guile.

4. To become a true penitent for sin, and so, to be entitled to the
forgiveness of it, implies, a great change in the person's state and condition,
both real and relative: It must come from the heart; there must be an awakening
out of security, conviction of sin -- a sense of the evil of it -- real grief,
mourning, self-loathing, with sorrow of heart for it, hatred of and resolution
to forsake it, and faith in the LORD JESUS CHRIST; a faith, that "purifieth the
heart;" and "works by love:" In short, there must be a change of nature,
producing, as there is opportunity, amendment of life. It is so great a change,
that it is expressed by the Savior, by being "born again:" without which, he
most positively declares, no person "can see" or enter into the kingdom of GOD.
The relative change, is equally great, in his being pardoned, and acquitted
from guilt; that he shall not come into condemnation; but is passed from death
unto life: become a favorite of GOD, and an heir of glory.

HENCE, we may see the necessity of the influences of the SPIRIT of GOD, which
are purchased by CHRIST, to enable a person to repent; -- to open his eyes, to
excite his concern, to give him to see the evil of sin, and an heart to repent.
Some, may think, that they can repent at any time; and so put it off for the
present: This is presumption. We may see, by melancholy observation, the
fallacy of such an opinion. Nothing but the grace of GOD will enable a person
to repent. A blind, secure, hard, impenitent heart, is natural to man; and,
nothing but the operations of the holy SPIRIT can awaken him, and give him a
sight of the evil of sin, and an heart to repent of it. -- It becomes sinners,
to endeavor to realize their dependence on divine grace, to enquire of GOD,
and seek him to open their eyes to see their condition, and to give them an
heart to repent. For,

SINCE repentance is so necessary, and remission of sins is so strictly
connected with it, it is an instance of unwarrantable presumption, to rest
without it. To entertain an expectation or hope of pardon of sin for CHRIST's
sake, without repentance, is the height of folly, and absurdity; and therefore,
exposes the person to the danger of perishing in his sins. It cost him death,
and the most amazing sufferings, to prepare the way for the repentance of
sinners; to take away their sins, and to procure a pardon. And can it be, that
a sinner can be pardoned without repentance? -- It is impossible, by the
constitution of the gospel. -- This would be to contradict the very design of
CHRIST's sufferings, and of the whole gospel-plan. -- And, without a pardon of
sin, guilt would sink the soul down to the regions of despair and woe: For, the
righteous law of GOD must be fulfilled; its sentence must be executed. Those
that have no interest in the surety, CHRIST JESUS, (by compliance with the
gospel) must bear it themselves. He must be madly bent on his own ruin, that
will flatter himself with the hope of an escape and safety, in any other way.
There is no pardon, no favor with GOD, no heaven for the sinner, without
repentance.

How great soever may be a person's fear and distress -- how dreadful soever
his situation, we have no warrant to declare any other way, any easier terms of
pardon and peace; even, if he was expecting, in a few hours or a few minutes to
appear before GOD, in the world of spirits: I repeat it, I could direct to no
other way, for pardon, and peace, and life. This is honorable for GOD, and safe
and happy for us, for the guilty creature. -- Wherefore, let the view of your
guilt, the sense of your danger, the necessity of your case, alarm the secure
and careless.

FROM what has been said, we may infer, the abundant encouragement and
animating motives there are, for sinners to repent, and hope for pardon,
through CHRIST; from the consideration of his death and resurrection. He died
for this end, even to prepare the way and, by his rising from the dead, the
third day, was most fully manifested GOD's acceptance of the atonement, and
that the way is prepared for sinners to repent, and obtain remission of sins.
What encouragement -- what powerful motives are suggested to induce sinners to
repentance, from hence! As also, from the love of GOD in the gift of his SON --
from the free offer of mercy through him, and of the grace of the holy SRIRIT,
the blessed effect of his purchase, the sum of all blessings: Every argument,
every motive thereto, centers in this; the death and resurrection of CHRIST.

LET me now address myself in particular to thee; my unhappy, but favored
parishioner; who so lately wast a condemned criminal, but art now pardoned and
liberated. -- I congratulate you on your release from your sad imprisonment,
and dismal apprehensions, from a sentence to an untimely and ignominious death;
so near to be executed. This was three days before the time appointed for his
execution.
You are now discharged; and restored to the liberties of a free citizen.

How happily is your condition changed! What pleasing, what greateful
reflections must arise in your mind, on so joyful so affecting an occasion!
Thank GOD for this mercy, in saving you from death; in whose hand our lives
are! Acknowledge his overruling providence, in bringing about so singular and
interesting an event: that, instead of an execution expected, you should now be
the subject of the grace of the Supreme Executive of the State. Be affected
with the clemency and goodness of our rulers at the head of government, (to
whom this matter belongs by our happy constitution) in attending so favorably
to your cause, and granting your petition; wherein justice and mercy have so
eminently appeared.

OH! think what returns you ought to make, for so great so remarkable an
instance of the goodness of GOD, to you. Extraordinary favors demand
extraordinary returns of gratitude. Consider how it becomes you to improve your
spared life; what obligations lie upon you to spend the remainder of your days
in his service, who has been so kind to you! "By the mercies of GOD" you ought
to be "led to repentance," and to be induced to present your body a living
sacrifice, holy and acceptable to GOD; for this, surely, is but your reasonable
service. It is expected, that you be concerned to return to GOD the most
grateful acknowledgements of your heart, and obedience of your life; and, that
you approve yourself a good subject of to mild and equitable a government.
Surely you ought -- you must be concerned to devote your spared life to the
honor of GOD, who has ransomed it from destruction: has rescued you from the
jaws of death! And, you ought to strive in return for so signal a mercy, to do
all the good in your power; but, particularly, to the unhappy family whom you
have been the instrument of bereaving: To the poor window and little fatherless
children you ought to be ready to every kind office, to afford all the help and
relief in your power. Perhaps, this is one end in the providence of GOD, for
which you are spared: Certainly it is one end which you should be careful to
have answered; Oh! let it be answered, by your attention to their welfare.

As your life is spared, you have a further opportunity of improving life, for
the most important purposes. -- You have received a pardon from man, from the
supreme authority of the State: -- But, my friend, think it not sufficient that
you are pardoned by man: But, consider well that you need a pardon from the
great GOD, whom you have offended by innumerable acts of sin; and by that rash
deed, by which you have been brought into the distressing situation, the
melancholy scene which you have passed. You will not -- you cannot excuse
yourself from guilt in the sight of GOD, in that unhappy affray. -- If you had
not an intention or thought of killing, yet, it was a hasty, rash, and
unwarrantable deed; and you have cause for deep humiliation, before GOD, that
you was the instrument of so suddenly putting an end to the life of your
neighbor. -- I fear you have not a proper sense of the evil of sin, and its
destructive consequences: For this, and all your sins you need the mercy of
GOD, to pardon you -- you need an interest in the great sacrifice of CHRIST, to
expiate and remove your guilt: Without this, you remain under a sentence of
death still, which, if executed upon you in the full extent, will not be a few
struggles of dissolving nature, but a state of suffering without end, which is
"the second death;" dreadful, beyond the power of thought, in the present state
to conceive! "for the wages of sin is death:" To this, you are exposed, without
a pardon from GOD. -- Oh! prepare to meet your judge: Remember you must yet
die; for it is appointed unto all: Be concerned to have your peace made with
GOD. Seek for the remission of your sins. Be concerned to exercise that
repentance which has been described; which is accompanied with faith in the
great Redeemer; and followed with an obedient life, which is "unto Salvation,"
and "not to be repented of." And see that you "bring forth fruits meet for
repentance." Carefully guard against the out-breakings of passion; watch
against hasty and rash anger, which is productive of so fatal effects!

CONSIDER, also, your need of the grace of GOD, to renew and sanctify you;
"giving you a new heart and putting a new spirit within you," thatyou may
perform such a service to him as in his sight will be accounted a religious
service,and through his grace, in CHRIST, be entitled to the rewards of eternal
life. Seek for this; attend diligently, to the means of his appointment; and
improve the dealings of his providence, for so desirable in end. Oh! seek
earnestly for the grace of GOD, which, alone, is able to effect in you this
great, this important change, that you may be safe and happy in life, and in
death, and to eternity. Wherefore, to conclude, I would only add the words of
the prophet to you, and to all whose character and condition call for the
exhortation; Seek ye the LORD while he may be found, call ye upon him while he
is near. Let the wicked forsake his way, and the unrighteous man his thoughts:
and let him return unto the LORD, and he will have mercy upon him, and to our
GOD, for he will abundantly pardon.

AMEN.
A DISCOURSE; THE SUBSTANCE OF WHICH, WAS DELIVERED AT YORK ON MONDAY,
SEPTEMBER 3, 1792: THE DAY, ON WHICH JOSHUA ABBOT, JUN. RECEIVED A PARDON, FROM
THE GOVERNOR AND COUNCIL OF THE COMMONWEALTH OF MASSACHUSETTS.

BY JOSEPH BUCKMINSTER, PASTOR OF THE FIRST CHURCH IN PORTSMOUTH.

ADVERTISEMENT.
TO those who heard this discourse, it is necessary to remark, that, as some
parts of it were delivered extempore, the author cannot be certain that he has
recovered the exact expressions, nor, in every instance, the precise ideas.

MY FELLOW CHRISTIANS, AND FELLOW-MEN.
SOLEMN, interesting, and affecting have been the scenes, which have passed
before you, within these sacred walls. You have seen the human judgment set,
and the books opened. You have seen a fellow-mortal arraigned at the Bar,
indicted for murder, the murder of his friend and neighbor, convicted upon the
indictment, by the judgment of his peers. You have heard the sentence of death
pronounced, in the most solemn and affecting manner, while every heart
shuddered, and every eye wept. You have seen the unhappy Prisoner, wearing the
badges of his guilt, from sabbath to sabbath presented to worship before GOD,
with the expectation that the sentence would soon be executed. But the prospect
of such woe has been too great for him to bear; it has deranged his
intellectual faculties, and presents him to us, in another view, an object of
pity and compassion. Assembled this morning to improve these Providence, and
to seek wisdom and grace from him, who gives liberally and upbraids not, our
ears have been saluted with the voice of pardon; we have seen the grace
reserved in the bosom of our Constitution called into exercise, the shackles
knocked off, and the Prisoner set at liberty. While we congratulate ourselves,
and one another, that the solemn event of this week is by this grace prevented,
let us direct our meditations to the judgment that is to come, and, from an
earthly tribunal, ascend to that which is above, where we must be arraigned,
and receive a decided sentence. The words that are chosen as a motto to this
discourse are in the Epistle of JUDE, the latter part of the sixth verse. THE
JUDGMENT OF THE GREAT DAY.

THERE is a spirit in man, and the inspiration of the Almighty gives him
understanding. We are made capable of reflecting upon events that are past, and
of reviewing the way in which we have walked. We are also capable of
anticipating events certainly future, of contemplating scenes in which we must
be actors, and of considering what manner of persons we ought to be. In the due
exercise of these faculties, consists much of our duty, our wisdom, and our
happiness.

AMONG events that are future, the most solemn and interesting, are DEATH and
JUDGMENT.

IN the found human mind, there is no doubt, I believe, of the futurition of
these events. We see that death passes upon all men. We feel the sentence in
ourselves; and we must be strangely inattentive, if we are not convinced, that
the days approach that we must die.

DEATH would not be so interestingly solemn and important, were it not for the
judgment that follows, and the eternity that succeeds. If death put a period to
our being, if all consciousness ceased with the last gasp of life, though,
constituted as we are, we could not but startle at this destruction, yet it
would be our duty to forget or brave the great event, and indulge our heart in
all its joys: But the stroke that returns the body to the dust, returns the
immortal spirit to GOD who gave it, from him to receive a decided sentence,
according to its true character, and the deeds done in the body.

DIVINE impressions cannot be wholly erased; There Is a divinity that stirs
within us,
That trembles at futurity,
And intimates eternity to man.


Conscience, the vicegerent of heaven in the human breast, though it may be
benumbed by infidelity, stupefied by sensuality, and have its ordinary voice
drowned in carnal pleasures, will sometimes assert its dignity, arrest the
sinner, and place him, trembling at the bar of GOD. There has been no nation so
barbarous as not to acknowledge the being of a GOD; neither has there been any
so inconsistent, as, with this acknowledgment, to deny him the right of
governing and judging the creatures he has made, according to their capacities
and deserts. But it is not my design to offer proofs of a day of Judgment, GOD
has written it upon every man's conscience, and given assurance unto all men in
that he has raised JESUS CHRIST from the dead.

My design is, to meditate a little upon the greatness of this day -- To
contemplate it with reference to our interest in it -- and endeavor to make
such an improvement as may be profitable to us.

WHILE I am speaking, may that GOD, at whose tribunal we must appear, solemnize
our minds, aid our meditations, and so realize to our view, the things we
contemplate, that they may have a powerful practical influence upon us, and
instrumentally prepare us to meet our JUDGE, "when he shall come to be gorified
in his saints, and to be admired in all them that believe."

THE soul, at death, returns to GOD who gave it, and there is, doubtless,
something like a sentence, upon every soul, immediately after its departure
from the body; or a secret consciousness determines it to the place for which
it is subjectively prepared. There is no intermediate state, or season of
insensibility, between death and the resurrection, which would be a chasm in
rational existence; GOD, who is still the GOD of Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob, is
not the GOD of the dead; but of the living. The expiring SAVIOR said to the
expiring thief -- This day shall thou be with me in Paradise. In the parable,
which is given us for instruction upon this subject, it is said -- The beggar
died, and was carried by Angels into Abraham's bosom. The rich man also died,
and was buried: and in hell lift up his eyes, being in torments.

THE state of happiness of misery, with every individual soul, commences at
death: but in the end of time, when all the purposes of infinite wisdom, as to
this world, are accomplished, and the present frame of things is dissolved,
there will then be a day of general Judgment. Then will be exhibited all that
is described in the sacred pages, GOD will erect his tribunal, appear in his
glory, and summon all his rational offspring to appear before him. This is,
emphatically, the day of Judgment, and is that intended tended in the text. It
may be thought, that the necessity of this day of general judgment is
superseded, if there is this particular prior judgment at the day of death.
Were the only object of the day of Judgment, to decide the fate of rational
creatures, the thought would be just. But the object of that day is to
vindicate the divine administration, and justify GOD in the decisions he has
made; disclosing, to the view of Angels and of men, what GOD has done, and
wherefore he has done it: That every mouth may be stopped, and the Majesty of
Heaven appear, in this most glorious character, the just GOD, the SAVIOR.

THIS will be, indeed, a great day. All its appendages conspire to make it
great.

1. The Being, who will then appear, is infinitely great. He is no other than
the LORD JESUS CHRIST; who is characterized, in the sacred page, as the
brightness of the Father's glory, the express image of his person, in whom
dwells the fullness of the godhead bodily. CHRIST, in himself, possesses every
divine perfection. It is the will of heaven that all men should honor the SON,
even as they honor the FATHER; He is over all GOD blessed for ever. Once has he
appeared in a state of humiliation. The WORD was made flesh and dwelt among us.
He, who thought it no robbery to be equal with GOD, took the form of a servant,
that he might finish the work which the mysterious counsels of heaven assigned
him to do but, in his second coming, he will exhibit all the majesty of his
character as the almighty GOD.

THE favored Exile of Patmos, had, in vision, a view of the glory of this
divine personage, and, it was so overwhelming, he fell at his feet as dead,
and, probably, never would have arisen again, had he not laid his creating and
supporting hand upon him, and raised him up, Rev. i, 13 -- Farther, CHRIST is
great with respect to the office which he sustains, and which he will then come
to execute. We call a fellow-mortal (...) clothed with judicial, or executive
(...) who has a right to decide upon our (...) interests, and in a sense holds
the power of life and death; and indeed there is a great degree of relative
greatness in such a character. He is a minister of GOD -- has the style and
title of a GOD, and perhaps approaches as near to deity, as mortal can, when
exercising the power of life and death. JESUS CHRIST is constituted the Judge
of quick and dead; The Judge of the Universe. "The Father judges no man, but
has committed all judgment to the Son, that all men should honor the Son, even
as they honor the Father." "GOD has appointed a day, in which he will judge
the world in righteousness, by that man whom he has ordained whereof be has
given assurance unto all men, in that he has raised him from the dead." This
judgment is not upon the property or lives of men, but upon their souls --
their everlasting interests; they, whom the Judge approves, are made for ever;
they, whom he condemns, are eternally undone: executing this office. CHRIST
will come in his own glory, and his Father's, and his holy Angels.

Young's last day.
" Here high enthrou'd the eternal Judge is placed
" With all the grandeur of his Godhead graced;
" Stars on his robes in beauteous order meet,
" And the sun burns beneath his (...) feet."
2. The greatness of (...) will be increased, by the circumstances that will
attend the appearance of the JUDGE.

How are these described in the sacred pages! "The heavens, being on fire,
shall be dissolved," they shall roll back before his triumphal Car, "they shall
pass away with a great noise," and reveal the incarnate GOD "descending from
heaven with a shout, with a voice of the archangel, and the trump of GOD;"
thousands, shall attend upon him, and ten thousand times ten thousand shall
minister unto him. His voice, like the voice of many waters, and the mighty
waves of the sea, will echo through universal nature, will pierce the caverns
of the grave, open the repositories of the dead, and call forth the sleeping
dust to stand in Judgment. All our race shall be collected, from the four
winds, from the one end of heaven even unto the other. The Judgment shall be
set, and the books opened.

" This echoing voice now rends the yielding air,
" For judgment, judgment, sons of men! prepare!
" Earth shakes anew, I hear her groans profound;
" And hell through all her trembling realms resound.
So great will be the glory of this scene, that the sun, eclipsed, will lose
its brightness; So tremendous the concussion, in this last shock of nature,
that the stars shall fall from their orbits, the heavens curl like a scorching
parchment, and the earth, and the things that are therein, be burnt up.

3. THIS day will be great, with respect to the innumerable multitude that will
then be assembled.

THE hosts of heaven -- all the angels of light, will be in the retinue of the
Judge; for he will come in his own glory, and his Father's, and his holy
angels. The voice of the archangel, and the trump of GOD, will announce his
approach, and myriads on myriads will swell his train. The fallen angels,
reserved in chains under darkness, are reserved to the judgment of this great
day. They must appear, however reluctant, and meet, on a throne triumphant, the
eye of him against whom they have rebelled, whose servants they have seduced,
and whose pleasure they have, invariably, and unremittingly, opposed. But,
particularly, all the posterity of Adam, the individuals of our race, will then
be assembled. "When the Son of man shall come in his glory and all his holy
angels with him, then shall he sit upon the throne of his glory; and before him
shall be gathered all nations. And he shall separate them, one from another, as
a shepherd divides his sheep from the goats; and he shall set the sheep on his
right hand, and the goats on his left."

ALL the antediluvian world will then appear; the innumerable nations that have
peopled the earth, and unpeopled it, in the gratification of their ambition and
avarice, desolating and devouring one another: "All that are in their graves,
shall hear CHRIST's voice and shall come forth," The sea shall give up the dead
that are in her; and death and hell shall give up the dead that are in them:
All that shall then be alive, shall be changed, in a moment, in the twinkling
of an eye, that they may bear the luster of this appearance, and join the
gathering throng, around the tribunal of their Judge. What an amazing assembly!
Young's Last day.
How vast the concourse! not in number more
The waves that break on the resounding shore;
The leaves that tremble in the shady grove;
The lamps that gild the spangled vaults above*
Those overwhelming armies whose command
Said to one empire, sall; another, stand*
Whose rear lay wrapped in night; while breaking dawn
Roused the broad front, and called the battle on,
Immortal Blenheim; famed Ramillies' host
They all are here, and here they all are lost!
There millions swell, to be discerned in vain,
Lost as a billow in the unbounded main!


4. THIS day will be great, principally, with respect to the business that is
then to be transacted.

IT is the day of Judgment. The day for which all other days were made. -- The
period in which old time expires, and eternity commences. To prepare for this,
to usher in this, the sun has rolled its circuits, the earth has maintained its
seasons, and the patience of the DEITY has been lengthened out. Now the glory
of Divine Providence will be unfolded, the ways of the DEITY, in all his
administration, vindicated; and it will appear, that justice and Judgment are
the habitation of his throne.

SOMETIMES we are greatly perplexed with the changes that are passing over us;
"clouds and darkness are round about GOD." "His way is in the sea, his path in
the great waters; and his footsteps are not known." Carnal reason arraigns his
dispensations, and boldly says, How can these things be? sanctified reason
startles, is amazed, and, with David, its feet are almost gone, its steps do
well nigh slip, while it sees the afflictions of the righteous, and the
prosperity of the wicked* But in that day, it will appear, that the Judge of
all the earth, invariably, does right; and that mercy and truth go before his
face. More particularly -- There will be a judgment upon every one of our race.
-- "So then," says the apostle, "We must, every one of us, give an account of
himself to God," We must give an account of all the deeds done in the body. --
The apostle John, who had this august scene represented to him in vision, thus
describes it -- "I saw the dead, small and great, stand before GOD; and the
books were opened, and another book was opened, which was the book of life, and
the dead were judged out of the things that were written in the books,
according to their works."

IT has been a question, whether the sins of believers will be disclosed in the
day of Judgment; whether they are not so obliterated, by the forgiving love of
GOD, that, when sought for, they shall not be found: there are some scripture
expressions that favor this hypothesis; such as their being blotted out --
being cast behind GOD's back -- being sunk in the depths of the sea -- and
remembered no more: But these expressions may be reconciled with the
declarations that follow -- "There is nothing covered that shall not be
revealed; nor hid that shall not be known. If the christian, the believer in
Christ, is saved the painful disclosure, the impenitent and unbelieving will
have all things brought to light." " For GOD will bring every work into
judgment, with every secret thing; and will judge the secrets of all hearts
according to the gospel." Oh! what a revelation will that day exhibit! What
crimes will be brought to light! What unfinished purposes will be disclosed!
That which has been spoken in darkness, shall be heard in the light; and that
which has been spoken, in the ear, in closets, shall be proclaimed before the
assembled universe. How awakening ought this consideration to be, to the
hypocritical professor, and the secret sinner! How may the following passage
sound like thunder in his ears. "Be sure your sin will find you out." May GOD
awaken you before it is too late.

5. THE judgment of this day will be great, on account of the solemn and
interesting consequences of it.

THE judgment of the great day, there is no possibility of eluding, and from it
there lies no appeal. From some human tribunals there lie appeals, causes may
be subject to revision; and in some cases, as in that which has this day,
convened us, mercy may be extended, where the law has condemned. The sentence
may be reversed, pardon may be proclaimed, and the trembling expectant of
ignominious death may be restored to liberty and peace. Nothing like this is
(...) for after the final assize. The sentence, then pronounced will be
decisive; it will be eternal. He who is acquitted, will dread no more arrests.
He who is condemned, must expect no more favor. He that is holy, will be holy
still -- and he that is filthy, will be filthy still. They who are found
impenitent in sin, unbelievers in CHRIST, and unreformed transgressors of the
law of GOD, must receive a sentence of condemnation; they must be banished from
all hope, into blackness of darkness, where the worm dies not, and the fire is
not quenched: and, in the awful language of revelation, The smoke of their
torment ascends up for ever and ever. But they who are acquitted, and
declared righteous before GOD, shall enter into peace. They shall be addressed
in this transporting language, Come ye blessed of my father, inherit the
kingdom prepared for you, from the foundation of the world. They shall enter
the new Jerusalem, be crowned with a crown of glory, and be confirmed in an
inheritance that is incorruptible, undefiled, and that fades not away. They
shall hunger no more, neither shall they thirst any more, neither shall the sun
light on them, nor any beat. They shall sin no more -- The LAMB who is in the
midst of the throne, shall feed them, and shall lead them to living fountains
of waters, and GOD shall wipe away all tears from their eyes. Their happiness
begun shall not be interrupted; and shall never have an end; but shall be
constantly advancing, from glory to glory, as their capacities enlarge, and GOD
shall be all in all.

How great -- how solemn -- how interesting is this important day! what are all
other days, compared with this! In this day, my Brethren, must we all appear,
and in the transactions of it be deeply interested. Every thing important to us
will then be decided, and our state unalterably fixed for a never-ending
ETERNITY. Seeing we expect such things, what manner of persons ought we to be,
in all holy conversation and godliness.

To stand arraigned at a human tribunal -- to be surrounded with the guards and
appendages of courts -- to be the subject of criminal prosecution, and,
especially, to be tried for life -- to be condemned in the trial, and hear the
sentence of death -- how solemn! how affecting! -- Of this scene you have been
spectators -- Those walls have heard the awful sentence. For the accommodation
of spectators, and to add to the solemnity of the transaction, capital trials
are ordinarily held in Churches, Mr. Abbot had his trial in York-Church, and
there received sentence of death.
To have this sentence executed, the life cut off in the midst, and closed in
ignominy and reproach, is too dreadful for mortals to behold. This you had
expected soon to see, but the grace of Government, embosomed in your excellent
Constitution, has saved you the painful sight by pardoning the prisoner, and
rescuing him from untimely death. Let your recollection of what is past, aid
your imaginations as to what is future, and if an earthly tribunal is so
solemn, think what must be the solemnity of the great day! The sentence of
mortals can only kill the body; it cannot go beyond the present life; There may
be error in judgment, there is room for repentance, and the soul may be saved
in the day of the LORD JESUS. But the trial in which we must stand, in the
great day of Judgment, is upon the precious and immortal soul -- The sentence,
whether of acquittal or condenmnation, is for eternity -- There is no appeal --
There is no repentance. -- The condemned shall go away into everlasting
punishment, but the righteous into life eternal.

O how awfully solemn is this subject! How deeply ought it to interest our
affections, and impress our minds! How awakening should it be to all! How
alarming to those who cannot but be conscious that they are impenitent in sin!
Are there none of this description in this assembly? None who have committed
sin, open and secret, and have not repented and returned to give GOD glory.
Suffer me to address you, O impenitent unbelievers, and in the bowels of
compassion, entreat you to awake and consider your situation. You may be
putting far away this evil day, and boasting yourselves of tomorrow. You may be
flattering yourselves in the secrecy of your sins, or in their not having
equalled, in their aggravations, the sins of many others. -- You may be crying
peace and safety, and delighting yourselves in your delusions -- But, know,
assuredly, the day of the LORD comes, the Judgment of the great day. It is no
evidence of your safety, and will be no mean of your security, that you are
unconcerned. It comes as a thief in the night, in which the heavens, being on
fire, shall be dissolved, the elements shall melt with servent heat, the earth,
and the works that are therein, shall be burnt up. The LORD, the JUDGE, will be
revealed from heaven with his mighty angels -- The thrones will be set, and the
books opened. O how will your hearts endure, or your hands be strong, when GOD
rises up -- when the black catalogues of your sins are disclosed to view? For
every thing, with every secret thing shall be brought into Judgment. Be not
offended, but let conscience make the application; while I, more particularly,
ask -- How you will face the disclosure of your fornications, your thefts, your
malicious and revengeful purposes, your speculative impurities, and your
unnatural lusts? What will you do when the exercises of your hearts, and the
actions of your lives are compared with the spiritual nature and demands of the
divine law? When he, who has looked upon a woman to lust after her, will be
styled an Adulterer. He who has hated his brother in his heart, will be
convicted of murder, and he who has said, thou fool, will be in danger of
hellfire? Think, O thou, who have held the balances of deceit, who have
defrauded and oppressed, embezzled and concealed, what thou will do in this
revealing day! However you may walk concealed from men, these things committed,
and unrepented of, will appear in the day of visitation. What will you answer?
What plea will you make? Will you stand upon your defense, and strike hands
with GOD? Your own consciences will be instead of a thousand witnesses and
accusers. You must be speechless -- You can have nothing to answer. -- And what
must be your expectations? What may be the language of your hopes, I know not:
but this is the language of the sacred scriptures. The wicked shall be turned
into Hell, and all the nations that forget GOD. Upon the wicked HE shall rain
snares, fire and brimstone, and an horrible tempest: this shall be the portion
of their cup. When the LORD JESUS shall be revealed from heaven, with his
mighty Angels, in flaming fire, He will take vengeance on those who know not
GOD and obey not his gospel; whom he will destroy, with everlasting
destruction, from the presence of the LORD, and the glory of his power. And he
will render indignation and wrath, tribulation and anguish, to every soul of
man, that does evil, to the Jew first and also to the Gentile. Say I these
things, as a man? both law and gopel say the same. The words which I have
uttered are contained in that book by which we must all be judged. And can you
expect to endure this sentence? -- Oh! what an expectation! or do you hope to
obtain a deliverance from it? such a hope is built on the sand, it will be as
the spider's web. The whole appearance of revelation, in its plain and obvious
import, is, that as it is a solemn, so it will be a final, a decisive sentence,
and if you are so unhappy, as to be condemned in the Judgment, you are undone
forever: ETERNITY is written on your awsul state.

KNOWING these terrors of the LORD, knowing more of them than barely reading
them in the bible with the coldness of speculation, I would warn you of them: I
would faithfully declare them before you, and persuade you to flee from this
wrath to come; that you may be hid in the day of the LORD's anger; for yet
there is hope concerning you, if you will be aroused.

YOUR condition, my friends, is dangerous, but it is not desperate -- It is yet
an accepted time, and a day of Salvation -- You are on praying-ground -- You
have a space for repentance -- The throne of grace is accessible -- You have an
ADVOCATE with the FATHER -- You have the offers of mercy -- GOD, though not
slack concerning his promises, as some men count slackness, is long-suffering,
not willing that any should perish; but that all should come to repentance.

THE blood of CHRIST is sufficient to answer all your guilt, to cancel all your
crimes, and take out all your stains. It was sufficient to justify the humbled
Manassah, who had sold himself to work wickedness; and who had made the people
of Israel to do worse than the heathen -- to purge away the pollutions of a
Mary Magdalene, and the crimsoned guilt of the crucifying Jews. The blood of
JESUS CHRIST cleanses from all sin -- And he is able to save to the uttermost:
But there is salvation in no other: And they who will not that he should reign
over them, will be brought forth and slain before him.

BE entreated then, my friends, to attend to your situation. No longer continue
in sin -- No longer dissemble or conceal your sins -- Do not bless yourselves
in your heart, and say you shall have peace though you walk in the imagination
of your heart. The LORD will not spare -- Come to the feet of JESUS, and make a
sincere, frank, and penitent confession of your sins. See how your sins have
deceived you, and how they have slain you. Break off any in which you may be
conscious that you are now living, and yield yourselves up to the LORD JESUS
CHRIST, to be disposed of by him. Let the wicked fersake his way, and the
unrighteous man his thoughts; and let him return unto the LORD, and he will
have mercy upon him, and to our GOD, for he will abundantly pardon. Put forth
all the ardor of your souls, for spiritual blessings. Strive to enter in at the
strait gate -- to possess and exercise that repentance which we have heard so
largely described. Be satisfied with nothing short of vital union with the LORD
JESUS CHRIST by faith. See that you obtain the regenerating influences of the
HOLY SPIRIT -- a sealed pardon of all your sins, and that you secure an
inheritance, among them that are sanctified. Give not sleep to your eyes, nor
slumber to your eyelids, 'till you have made some serious effort to escape
from hell and fly to heaven. Let me address you, as the angel did Lot, and say,
Escape for thy life, look not behind thee, neither tarry thou in all the plain
-- escape to the mountains, lest thou be consumed.

WILL you say the Preacher is warm -- and is there not a cause? Can I address
you in the coldness of speculation, when viewing myself and you on the borders
of Eternity? It would be improper to preach my life away in a smooth moral
harangue and entertain you with pretty sentiments when your souls are at stake.
This would be indeed to fix pillows under arm-holes, and wrap your blood in my
skirts. You have seen this our fellow-mortal tried for his life: Did you think
his advocates too warm, when their souls were on fire, and they poured fourth
the tide of eloquence to obtain a favorable sentence? It was only his life for
which they plead; that which must be soon given up if now it were preserved.
But, my Brethren, your soul is the object of my concern, that precious immortal
principle which must exist forever, and unless you repent and believe in
CHRIST, must exist in misery. Is it possible to be too much engaged for such an
object, in such circumstances? Let me then urge and entreat you, by all that is
interesting and important in time and eternity, by the value you set upon your
own souls, by the mercies of GOD, and the blood of the Cross, to break off your
sins by repentance, and lay hold on eternal life. Fly to the SAVIOR, and yield
yourselves up as condemned malefactors, yet hoping in his mercy, that he will
forgive your sins, cancel all your guilt, and rescue you from condemnation. If
you do, truly, repent, and believe in CHRIST, the prospect of this day and its
interesting consequences, will be gloriously changed; for its terrors soften
into the most pleasing solemnity, in the view and expectation of the assured
christian. For though he is conscious that he has committed sin, and that he
merits nothing at the hands of GOD* yet being also conscious that he has sied
for refuge to the hope of the GOSPEL, that his taste and views are changed,
that he has come over into his Savior's interest, has judged and condemned
himself, and is united to CHRIST by a living faith -- being comfortably
persuaded of this mighty change, he knows, that there is no condemnation due
unto him. He sees an infinite fullness in CHRIST to secure and defend him, and
the prospect of the Judgment awakens sentiments in his breast similar to those
which the SAVIOR encouraged, when he said, When these things begin to come to
pass, then look up, and lift up your heads, for your redemption draws nigh.

THE assured believers in CHRIST look forward to this august season, as the
time of their complete deliverance; when their poor bodies of humiliation, that
have long been kept, by the care of heaven, in the bed of death, shall be
raised incorruptible, be fashioned like to CHRIST's glorious body and being
reunited with their already glorified spirits, they shall be confirmed in
happiness, suited to their natures, and eternal as their duration. -- Though it
does not yet appear what they shall be, they, nevertheless, know, that when he
who is their life shall appear, they shall be like him for they shall see him
as he is, and shall appear with him in glory. The trumpet of the Archangel,
which will be a terror to the wicked, will be music in their ears; With
transport they will echo to these accents from heaven, Awake and sing ye that
dwell in dust.

ESPECIALLY is the prospect of this glorious day, supportingly pleasant to the
persecuted saint, who suffers unjustly from the hands of men.

MANY of the faithful servants of GOD have had their judgment taken away, in
the present life. They have been loaded with reproach which they did not
deserve, and hissed from the stage where they ought to have been applauded: But
in that day GOD will bring forth their righteousness as the light, and their
judgment as the noon day. And having in this trying particular had fellowship
with CHRIST, in his sufferings, they will also have fellowship with him in his
glory. Farther,

As the glory of GOD is a dear object with the Saints, and their hearts are
pained with the reflections that are cast upon him, and his administration,
they rejoice in the prospect of that glorious season, when all these
reflections shall be wiped away, with transport will they hear, and with
rapture will they join, in this heavenly Allelujah, Salvation, and glory, and
honor, and power unto the LORD our GOD, for true and righteous are his
judgments.

O ye believers, ye friends of JESUS -- This will be to you a most glorious
day. The day of your complete triumph. You will reap the fruit of all your toil
and patience, and the sufferings you have endured will not appear worthy to be
compared with the glory that shall be revealed, when ye shall hear these
enrapturing accents, Come, ye blessed of my Father, inherit the kingdom
prepared for you, from the foundation of the World.

IT will be expected, I presume, before I close my discourse, that a few
thoughts should be addressed to the unhappy man who is the special occasion of
our assembling. Among the infelicities which have attended the scenes through
which the Prisoner has passed, it is not the least, that his ideas have become
so confused and deranged, that, at present, he seems scarcely capable of moral
instruction. We hope the happy change in his state will be attended with as
happy a one in his mind, and that he may yet be comfortable and useful.

MY Friend, We view you this day with the mixed emotions of joy and sorrow, and
we cannot but mingle condolence with our congratulations. You have known what
it is to be arraigned at a human tribunal -- to be tried for your life, upon a
most awful indictment -- to be found guilty, in the judgment of your peers --
and to have the dreadful sentence of death pronounced upon you. You have been
bound in affliction and iron, because of your transgression, and your friends
have trembled for your approaching fate: But, in the mysterious providence of
GOD, events have been so ordered, that the grace of the Commonwealth is
extended to your case, and his EXCELLENCY the GOVERNOR, and the HONORABLE
COUNCIL, have granted you a free and full pardon. We have seen your badges of
infamy knocked off, and you sat at liberty. We congratulate you upon this happy
change. How thankful ought you to be to your great deliverer -- to him who
brings the prisoner out of the prisonhouse -- and changes of the shadows of
death into the light of the morning. What emotions of gratitude should arise in
your breast toward those who have so deeply interested themselves in your
circumstances. You can never think of the names of LYMAN, SEWALL, PARSONS, or
DAVIS, without the tear of sensibility trickling down your cheeks. Your spared
life should be spent in praising your deliverer, and praying for your
benefactors: In endeavoring to lessen the injury you have done, by softening
the sorrows of the widow and fatherless, reduced to this unhappy state in your
impassioned moments. But, especially, should the life, which you have now a
prospect of enjoying, be spent in preparing for that more solemn trial which
yet awaits you. For, remember, Sir, you must yet stand at the tribunal of
JEHOVAH. The pardon you have received extends no farther than to acquit you of
your offense against the laws of your sellow-men. -- None can forgive sins but
GOD only. If the affray with your neighbor was so circumstanced as to reduce
your crime below the letter of the indictment, you must be sensible that there
was great criminality in your conduct. A friend, a fellow-mortal, has been
hurried into eternity, in an impassioned moment, by your deadly weapon. --
Think how you will meet him at the bar of GOD. Or how you will appear before
him who has said, He that is angry with his brother without a cause, is in
danger of the Judgment -- And he that hates his brother in his heart, is a
murderer. It will be of little consequence to be pardoned of men, if you are
not pardoned of GOD: to be acquitted now, if you are condemned in the judgment
of the great day.

LET me then entreat you, if you are capable of receiving the exhortation, to
think seriously of your situation. Improve the respite granted you, to repent
sincerely of this and all your other sins -- to obtain an interest in JESUS
CHRIST -- and to testify to those who may know your case, and be acquainted
with your conduct, that it is indeed a great privilege, that the power of
pardoning offenses is reserved in the Constitution. And may GOD graciously
appear for you, restore you to a sound mind, and give you an inheritance among
them that are sanctified. -- To conclude,

Is there, most assuredly, a day of judgment approaching -- Are the heavens and
the earth, which now exist reserved unto fire -- Let us live under an habitual
practical belief, and expectation, of this great event. Let us frequently
meditate upon it, and think how (...) present conduct will then appear. In
every important decision or resolution, let a belief of this day have its
influence, and let our moral character be such, as we shall wish it had been
when that glorious morning shall open. Will it be a vain repetition, if I say,
Let every secret (...), who is priding himself in his secrecy, digging (...) to
hide his counsel from the LORD, (...) in speculative wickedness, (...) reveling
in (...), think of this day, and blush for his folly. Let the close hypocrite,
who is only anxious to (...) -- throw off the mask, become sincere, and be in
reality what he would seem. Let the afflicted, the oppressed christian, think
of this day, and with patience endure as seeing him who is invisible. Let us
all often imagine that we actually hear the voice of the archangel, and the
trump of GOD -- see the heavens opening -- the JUDGE descending, clothed with
the ensigns of judicial power, that we see the graves burshing, the dead
arising, and the universe assembling at the dread tribunal. And O let us think
what manner of persons we ought to be, when hastening to this coming of the SON
OF MAN.

COPY OF THE PARDON. Commonwealth of Massachusetts.
L. S. To the Sheriffs of our several Counties, and all other our loving and
faithful Subjects, to whom these presents shall come, Greeting.

WHERE AS JOSHUA ABBOT, jun. of Berwick in our County of York, was at our
Supreme Judicial Court held at York, in and for our said County of York, on the
fourth Tuesday of June, being the twenty-fisth day of said month, in the Year
of our Lord one thousand seven hundred and ninety two, convicted of murder:

Whereupon the said JOSHUA ABBOT, jun. was by the Justices of our said Supreme
Judicial Court adjudged to suffer the Pains of Death; as by the Records of the
said Supreme Judicial Court manifestly appears, and a warrant having thereupon
issued to the Sheriff of our County of York to put the same sentence into
execution according to the form and effect of the same judgment, upon Thursday
the sixth day of September next, and whereas the said JOSHUA ABBOT jun. has
humbly supplicated our Grace and favor for the remittance of the said Sentence
-- We therefore by and with the advice of the Council, of our special Grace, do
hereby remit to the said JOSHUA ABBOT, jun. a full, free and ample pardon of
all the pains and penalties he was liable to suffer and undergo by virtue of
the Sentence and Judgment, aforesaid, of which the Sheriff of our said Courts
of York is in an especial manner to take notice.

In Testimony whereof, we have caused our Public Seal to be hereunto affixed --
Witness his Excellency JOHN HANCOCK, ESQUIRE. our Governor and Commander in Chief:
At Boston, This Thirtieth day of August in the Year of our Lord one thousand
seven hundred and ninety-two, and in the Seventeenth Year of the Independence
of the United States of America.

By His Excellency's Command, with the Advice and Consent of the Council. JOHN
HANCOCK,
True Copy -- Attest, (Signed) JOHN AVERY, JUN. Secry.


