Rev. Mr. Morison's ELECTION SERMON.

A SERMON, DELIVERED AT DOVER, STATE OF NEWHAMPSHIRE; BEFORE THE HONORABLE
GENERAL COURT, AT THE ANNUAL ELECTION, JUNE 7th, 1792.

BY WILLIAM MORISON, MINISTER OF A PRESBYTERIAN CHURCH, LONDONDERRY.

NEW HAMPSHIRE: EXETER, PRINTED BY HENRY RANLET, FOR THE GENERAL COURT OF SAID
STATE -- AND SOLD AT HIS OFFICE -- 1792.

STATE OF NEWHAMPSHIRE. In the HOUSE of REPRESENTATIVES, June 7th, 1792.
VOTED -- That Mr. J. MACGREGORE, Mr. GAINS, and Mr. P. WHITE, be a Committee
on the part of this House to join such of the Honorable Senate as they may
appoint, to present the thanks of the Legislature to the Rev'd Mr. MORISON, for
his ingenious and elegant Discourse, delivered before them this day, and desire
him to favor them with a copy for the press.

Sent up for Concurrence. JOHN S. SHERBURNE, Speaker.
In SENATE, June 7th, 1792. Read and concurred -- Mr. SHEAFE, and Genesis PEABODY
joined. A true Copy: J. PEARSON, Secretary.
ELECTION SERMON.
SERMON.
ROMANS XIII. 3. FOR RULERS ARE NOT A TERROR TO GOOD WORKS, BUT TO THE EVIL.
FATHERS AND FELLOW CITIZENS,
THAT the religion of Jesus is the greatest ornament of our nature, and a
source of sublime pleasures to men, will not be denied, by any, who know its
author, understand its nature, or have felt its happy effects. The influence of
christianity has the directest tendency to correct the errors of the heart, and
to make the life better. Its doctrines and precepts are calculated to make us
what we should be, to God, ourselves, and our fellow-men, in every relation of
human life.

IT is, notwithstanding, very apparent, that, through the malignity of its
opposers, christianity has been loaded with reproaches and calumnies; and
especially with the odium of being unfriendly to peace and good government, and
an enemy to Caesar. Hence, the public instructors of this religion, were
stigmatized with every opprobrious character; as turbulent fellows, sowers of
sedition and strife, and treated by some, as common enemies to mankind.

THESE calumnies were greatly occasioned by the rigorous attachment of the Jews
to a system of ceremonial observances; in opposition to which, and agreeably to
the purity and plainness of gospel worship, the apostles taught a glorious
liberty in Christ, and charged christian professors not to be entangled again
with that yoke of bondage.

To wipe away the odium of these groundless assertions from the best of causes,
and to prevent a misconstruction of that liberty into licentiousness, which the
apostles had preached among the people; the author of this epistle takes
occasion, in the chapter where our text is recorded, to enjoin subjection to
civil government on all classes of men: and he enforces this duty, from the
important consideration of its being an ordinance of God. Hence, "Let every
soul be subject to the higher powers; for there is no power but of God: the
powers that be are ordained of God."

THUS, though civil government be a natural ordinance, it is also of divine
appointment: therefore subjection to it, is enjoined, not only "for wrath," or
fear of punishment; but from christian motives, and "for conscience sake."

I PRESUME that the apostle does not here treat of the form of government, nor
of the manner in which persons ought to be invested with power; but of the
origin and rise of government itself; which he says is of God, and ordained by
him. -- Sometimes the way, in which persons arrive at power, is by usurpation
and oppression; and such generally govern in a tyrannical and oppressive
manner. This was the case at the time to which our text and context refer. This
is no otherwise of God; than as he permits it, for the punishment of national
offenses against himself. And though it must be acknowledged, that people have
a perfect right to reform such a government at pleasure; yet when the means of
reformation and such as would justify resistance are not at all in their power,
it is then their duty to submit so far, as may not offend conscience; because
government in some shape or other, is absolutely necessary to the existence of
society.

To this purpose we may suppose, the apostle spoke, when he said, "The powers
that be, are ordained of God: and whosoever resists the power, resists the
ordinance of God: and shall receive to themselves damnation."

THE scriptures do not seem to direct men, to any one particular mode or form
of government, the exclusion of others. We are left to make choice of that mode
of government, that may be most agreeable to our own minds; whether Monarchy,
Aristocracy, or Democracy. The dictates of reason and common sense teach us,
that all men are originally equal and free* that by the voice of the people,
which we are to revere as the voice of God; some men ought to be raised from
the common level and invested with power, to act in the capacity of Rulers.

THE sacred page is very explicit in affording us information concerning the
source of civil authority, which is of God: and concerning its end among men,
which is their good: hence Rulers are called God's ministers, and his ministers
for good: and lastly concerning our duty to government; which is subjection to
it, and honor to its administrators. Agreeably to this view, the apostle
farther enforces our duty to government by the words of our text; which informs
us, what rulers are in the end and ought to be in the exercise of their office.
FOR RULERS ARE NOT A TERROR TO GOOD WORKS, BUT TO THE EVIL. -- They are a
terror, but not to good men. Whatever terror may appear about civil government,
there is nothing in its genuine nature and design, of which a virtuous and well
doing citizen need be afraid. Rulers are a terror to bad members of society
only. The necessity of civil Government arises from the wickedness of men.
Disorderly persons are enemies to society; their conduct tends to injure
mankind, and to dissolve the social union. Rulers are appointed for the
protection of mankind, and the preservation of the social union; therefore they
are a terror to disorderly persons only.

CIVIL Fathers of the State, I am well convinced I have not been invited to
this desk to explain State policy, or to investigate the government of nations.
Any attempt of this kind would be arrogance in me, and a reflection upon the
professional knowledge of the leaders of New Hampshire. I hope therefore, I
shall not be understood in that unfavorable light, while I beg leave to submit
to your candid attention, a few observations, in which I shall endeavor to
show, how, or by what means, Rulers are a terror to bad members of society, and
to them only. After which, I shall conclude, with some suitable improvement. I
proceed then to observe,

1 st. THAT a good plan of government greatly tends to make rulers a terror to
bad members of society, and to them only.

WHEN a constitution is founded on the true principles of moral government, the
existence of a God, and the propriety of religious worship and formed according
to the principles of equal liberty; virtuous rulers act with freedom and spirit
against vice; virtuous citizens are encouraged; and the vicious part of society
alone, are dismayed, and fear the consequences of such a fair foundation, for
the administration of justice, in the suppression of immorality and vice.

WHEN there are any remarkable defects in a form of government, bad men have
their eyes fixed on those, as open, though back doors, at which they escape
with impunity, in the practice of vice. Every good man, can boldly plead the
benefits, and advantages of a good constitution; and the ruler can with grace
and propriety, protect him in the enjoyment of them. On the other hand, bad men
are ever ready to plead the defects, and greatest imperfections of a bad
constitution, in favor of their licentious conduct; and in such cases, it is
not always possible, nor easy at any time for the most virtuous rulers on earth
to prevent bad consequences.

THE baneful influence of a bad plan of government seldom opens the door, for
one species of oppression, and injustice, alone. Persecution for conscience
sake, oppression in civil liberty, with acts of common injustice, and private
injury, generally go together. They flow from the same source; are carried on
by the same means; and are equally subservient in their turn, to the same
wicked purposes of designing men.

A GOOD constitution is formed for the preservation of men in their natural
rights, and is calculated to secure them against the most distant fears of an
invasion, upon what is valuable to men; whether as members of civil, or
religious society, and is the best and most necessary foundation for the
formation of good laws. Which in the

2 d. PLACE, are equally necessary to enable rulers to be a terror to
disorderly members of society. A code of laws, in unison with a good
constitution, formed upon the voice of the people, is similar to a fortress
upon a rock: It raises rulers above enemies to order and good government; and
gives them every advantage, to display dignity and terror; or clemency and
favor, as the happiness of society, or justice and reason may require.

THE protection of life, liberty and property, is the principal object of law
and government. Could these be preserved without government, there would be no
need of laws. These blessings are so inseparably connected, that one cannot be
fully enjoyed without the rest. When liberty is lost, life grows insiped, and
is not worth the wearing; for, in that case, we have nothing we can call our
own. A lust after power and property, is natural to men in general, and a
prevailing passion with bad men. It is therefore evident, that these important
blessings, are exposed to constant invasion by such characters; and laws are
absolutely necessary for their preservation. The more just and reasonable laws
are; the more secure, may we suppose, the innocent and industrious citizen is,
in the quiet and peaceable possession of all his rights, and enjoyments. In
this view, laws are no terror to a good man; they are his safety, designed for
his happiness as a man, and his prosperity as a member of society.

THE vicious and disorderly only, are afraid of good laws. For as the
instruments of death, in the day of battle, are kept constantly pointed against
the enemy; so are good laws directed against evil doers, as enemies to the
common good. They are made to lay such characters under proper restraints, or
to punish them, when the power of restraint fails to prevent their criminalty.
In this respect, the law is not made for the righteous; but for the lawless and
disobedient.

GOOD laws have, therefore, penalties annexed, suited to the nature and
aggravation of crimes. The ablest Legislators in apportioning punishments in
law to offenses, must be guided by reason, and the degree of injury which they
carry, in their nature and consequences, to society. To punish with less
severity, than the nature of the offense requires, may be construed as an
encouragement to offenders: To let the punishment exceed the nature of the
crime, is to establish iniquity by law: besides to extend capital punishments
beyond due bounds, frustrates their design, by destroying their terror, in
making them too familiar to our minds: all extremes should be avoided.

YET no system of laws can be so perfect, as to leave no room for after
amendments. Time and experience in the application of certain laws in society,
best discover their imperfection, or their worth. In some instances, acts
formed by very wise legislatures, have been found to have very different
effects, from what were originally intended in their formation. Among such must
be numbered all laws of human authority, establishing a preference of religious
tenets and denominations. This conduct, according to the history of past ages,
has ever been found, so far from answering the promotion of real religion and
benevolence: that it has been, a fertile source of ecclesiastic oppression, and
bloodshed. -- Such laws have a tendency to contract, and distort the mind, to
destroy benevolence in the heart, and preclude freedom of enquiry from the
human understanding. God alone, is lord over the conscience, and good laws
never, never assume the reins of government over it.

BUT ideas of religious liberty should never be carried so far, as to drop
religion altogether from government. To do this, is to drop the idea of the
existence of God. For, the immutable and eternal principles of reason concur
with revelation, in declaring, that God is an object of religious worship. We
cannot realize his existence, without admitting his existence as an object of
worship. To deny either, is to deny both, and at once destroys the foundation
of conscience, and all moral obligation with it. No oath could be administered
in a society of this complexion. A government of this character is a government
for absolute atheists only. No man can plead liberty of conscience, thus far,
without pleading against the very existence of conscience at the same time; and
surely it must be erroneous to argue for such a conscience, as does not consist
with the existence of a moral world. -- But not to digress.

WHEN experience, which has discovered the errors of some laws, has clearly
evinced the unnecessary nature of others; it may be proper to expunge such,
from the records of legislation. To continue laws of less importance, than can
be carried into execution by the ruler, with dignity and reason, is tempting
subjects to treat law with contempt, and speak evil of dignities. If they are
continued, and not carried into execution; they may sink into oblivion, in the
minds of good men, and may sometimes be improved, by vicious and designing men,
to injure the best of citizens. From these and the like observations, it
appears very obvious, that the promotion of knowledge and literature, is a
proper object of law and government. It has the greatest influence, to
cultivate morality and virtue. Where the improvement of the human mind is
overlooked, by those who ought to promote it; the people sink into ignorance
and vice, and ripen fast for barbarity and bondage.

ACCORDINGLY, in those states where the means of knowledge are supported by
good laws, the people are enlightened: They know the excellency of virtue, and
the odiousness of vice: They love and practice the former: They hate and
despise the latter, as highly injurious to society -- good laws are therefore
essentially necessary. -- They are a defense to society: are calculated to
promote the happiness of mankind: wear the stamp of reason: are agreeable to
the spirit of the constitution; are founded upon the voice of the people. They
encourage knowledge, virtue, industry, and economy: They discourage ignorance,
vice, and indolence; and when properly administered, are a terror to bad men.
This naturally suggests in the

3 d. PLACE, that rulers are a terror to disorderly persons, by the justice and
fidelity of their administrations. When these are wanting in rulers, the best
laws on earth, may be wrested to injure and condemn the innocent, and to
exculpate and even reward the guilty. In some instances, bad men fear not, so
much the righteousness of the law, as they do the honesty of the judge. Hence,
the proverb, "A man guilty of a crime, fears a judge, conscious of uprightness."

THE loss, arising from remissness in men of power, and from unfaithfulness in
public officers, cannot be restored by the goodness of the laws, nor by the
excellency of a constitution; but the deficiencies of laws, and imperfections
in a form of government, may be greatly made up, by the faithfulness and
justice of rulers, in administration. To promote the interest of piety is still
more in their power, when the constitution and laws harmonise in their favor.

ENERGY, accompanied with justice in government, is always pleasing to good
men: and the contrary affords satisfaction to the basest part of society. To
whom under God, the supreme governor, shall the virtuous part of the community
look, for the exercise of both; but to their rulers? Want of energy in
government, is anarchy, and want of justice, oppression; but integrity
preserves from both evils. Should the days come when the eyes of the judge can
be blinded by a gift; or men in place be swayed by prejudice and party spirit;
then may we see wickedness in the place of judgment; and in the place of
righteousness, that iniquity is there. -- "When laws are well made, they should
be inflexibly executed."

A GOOD degree of a disinterested and public spirit is an important idea, to
constitute a faithful and honest ruler. Man is not made for himself. The
apostle, forbids looking to our own things on a narrow scale, and enjoins, that
we extend our views to the things of others. Of all men on earth, a ruler in a
democratic government, is the least made for himself: And with a luster
peculiar to his office, he shines under the influence of a disinterested
concern, for the public good.

BUT I proceed to remark

4 thly. THAT penetration and abilities in judgment, are no less necessary to
make rulers a terror to evil doers; than a faithful and honest heart. The word
of God pronounces misery upon the nation, whose rulers are weak-minded. "Woe,
unto thee, O land, when thy king is a child." i. e. When he is weak, and devoid
of the abilities necessary for the effectual discharge of his office. Enemies
to peace and order, are not always confined to the class of inferior parts.
Weakness does not always accompany wickedness; though we may really wish it
forever might. The latter is no infallible evidence of the former. We can
easily conceive of a very vicious mind, endowed with great segacity, and force
of understanding. Besides, the advantages of a good education, are not bestowed
on friends to morality and virtue, to the exclusion of others: these favors are
frequently flung away, on men of dishonest hearts, and make them able in
eloquence, and conspicuously great in argument. Rulers have often to combat
powerful opponents. Men of inferior abilities, however honest in heart, are not
equal to confront with dignity, and to confound with clearness, the sophistical
arguments which may be advanced in favor of wickedness. Want of abilities in
rulers, has an evident tendency to bring government into contempt; and a
contemptible government, is hardly ever successful in doing good.

EVEN an offender is not struck with much terror, when he knows, that a well
formed harangue, shall prevail, over the credulous and weak, though upright
mind of his judge. Moreover, matters of a public nature, are sometime so
complicated, that men of the best abilities, in connection with undissembled
faithfulness, find it difficult enough to concert measures answerable to the
best ends of good government.

IT was thought a severe judgment upon the Jews, when they made public officers
of the meanest of the people; and there is no reason to consider it as any
thing less upon any nation.

WHEN God is about to do any thing great, and good for a people; he raises up
good and great men to govern in their public councils; but, when he is about to
punish a people for their crimes; or to disgrace them for their transgressions,
he has nothing more to do, than to permit the reins of government, to fall into
the hands of the weak or the wicked: and in either case, the ruin of the nation
is inevitable. We may further observe,

5 thly. THAT rulers are a terror to disorder and vice, when their characters
are adorned with a virtuous life, and conversation. The badges of state in a
ruler, never appear to such advantage, as when united to the beauty of his
virtues.

WE may fear his power in the former, but, can never revere and respect his
person, without the latter. Vice is the great disturber of public happiness:
the devouring lion, that goes about seeking our destruction: and those rulers
alone, support the dignity of their character, and diffuse happiness among
mankind, who oppose vice, and encourage virtue: who honor God by keeping his
commandments, and subject their power to the sovereign laws of morality and
reason.

THE conduct of rulers has a great influence on those, they govern. We
naturally incline to imitate men in higher spheres of human life. When we have
chosen men to govern us, it presupposes our high esteem of, and expectations
from them. We have conferred upon them the highest honors we had to bestow. It
is not more natural for children, to look up with respect and honor to their
parents, than it is for a virtuous people, under an energetic government, to
honor and respect virtuous rulers.

BUT, should vice actuate the ruler in his private life; or ambition and
avarice prevail in his public councils: he sullies his honor -- his reputation
is lost -- his usefulness destroyed; and the people left to bewail their
disappointment, and to detest the object of their own election, as a terror to
good works; but none to the evil. When a selfish and vicious spirit stamps the
character of a ruler, the selfish and vicious approach him, with a familiarity
peculiar to a similarity of disposition, and they mutually strengthen each
other in their wicked conduct. "The wicked walk on every side, when vile men
are exalted." To these observations, permit me to add in the

6 th. PLACE, that a just sense of religion, and the fear of God in a ruler
contribute much to the terror of bad men. This is the fountain in the heart
from whence all genuine virtue in life flows. How amiable is the ruler whose
goodness as a man we admire and love, more than we dread his power as a
magistrate! How pleasing is that obedience, which flows from a united regard to
the excellency of the citizen, and the dignity of his office! Under such
impressions, with what solemn, melting, death inspiring eloquence, does king
David pray for piety to his son, and successor in the kingdom of Israel! "Give
unto Solomon my son, a perfect heart to keep thy commandments, thy testimonies,
and thy statutes." Nor is he less particular in his charge to Solomon himself.
Thus we hear the venerable monarch, with all the pathos of parental affection,
soothing his dying pillow, in his last address, to one of the wisest of
princes. "And thou, Solomon, my son, know thou the God of thy fathers, and
serve him with a perfect heart, and willing mind, for the Lord searches all
hearts, and understands all the imaginations of the thoughts: If thou seek
him, he will be found of thee; but if thou forsake him, he will cast thee off
forever."

What heart, that is not hard as adamant, can read the following description of
a pious ruler, and not feel the sensations of delight and joy? "The God of
Israel said, the rock of Israel spoke to me; he that rules among men, must be
just, ruling in the fear of God; and he shall be as the light of the morning,
when the sun arises, even a morning without clouds; as the tender grass
springing out of the earth by clear shining after rain." Civil rulers of this
character, are here justly represented extensive blessings, as the sun and rain
to society. The influence of their examples, flowing from a just sense of
religion and the fear of God; will resemble the cherishing beams of the sun,
and satisfying showers of rain descending from the eminence of their station,
to nourish and fructify mankind. Good people will esteem them ministers of
heaven, and ordained of God for good. -- They are nursing fathers to the church
of God: Setting a high value upon their own rights, as christian members of
society, they are ever ready to defend the sacred rights of others. --
Realizing the worth of religion to the community, they do nothing to hinder;
but every thing in their power, and consistent with their office, to promote
its general spread and preservation. Conscious that the nation cannot be long
happy, or free, without its benign aid; they are willing and even zealous to
encourage instructors of morality and religion. Being highly favored with the
advantages of christianity themselves, they dread as an unpardonable crime, the
neglect of transmitting its blessed precepts, to succeeding generations. Being
preserved from ignorance and infidelity they fear the dismal consequences of
suffering the youth in a community, to grow up under the disadvantages,
peculiar to nations, not favored with public instruction. You will pardon my
zeal, ye civil Fathers of the State; if I say that the fear of God is a
protecting, and nursing parent, for order and good government. -- It unites the
several parts of society, by the strongest ties of benevolence and love -- it
disposes all orders of men, to be faithful to their engagements abroad, honest
and industrious at home -- it sweetens the power of the ruler, and effectually
secures a conscientious obedience from the ruled. From this mutual harmony,
arise the strength, beauty, honor, and safety of a nation; and public happiness
is a promised blessing. "For righteousness exalts a nation."

ON the other hand, What is it that ripens a nation for ruin? The sacred
oracles concur with the experience of all ages in informing us, that "sin is a
reproach to any people." The voice of the most high is, "If ye be willing and
obedient, ye shall eat the good of the land; but if ye refuse and rebel, ye
shall be destroyed."

THE conduct of providence, to public communities in this world, is frequently
very different, from that which he dispenses to individuals. A veil of darkness
covers the face of providence, in dispensing prosperity and adversity, to
particular persons in this life. Sometimes a man of distinguished goodness, is
oppressed with afflictions and poverty; while another is triumphant in
wickedness, and possesses more than his heart can enjoy. There is, however,
another life, in which all this apparent difference, may be adjusted. But, in a
general way, national sins are punished with national calamities; and when vice
becomes predominant among rulers; the infection goes by an easy descent, to the
lower ranks of the people, and tends to their destruction. A disorder, in the
vitals of the community is soon discovered in its remotest members, and
indicates the political system to be in a mournful decay. Once more, in the

7th PLACE, the eminent nature of their office, affords rulers every necessary
advantage, to discourage wicked and unreasonable men in the practice of
immorality. They are God's deputies on earth. -- They represent his moral
government among men. -- "They are called gods." -- And it is said, that God
stands in their assembly, as in the congregation of the mighty, and judges
among the gods. They are called gods, from the power with which they are
clothed by the people, from God, to make laws. They are awful, from their
appointment by providence, to sit in judgment, and deliberately doom to death
at the bar of justice. They are irresistible, to carry into the fullest
execution, every degree of punishment prescribed by law, where government is in
force and energy. Thus, civil rulers, whether legislative, judicial, or
executive, are representatives of the Supreme Ruler, whom the prophet styles,
our Judge, our Lawgiver, and our King. -- The more agreeable the administration
of government is, to the moral perfections of God, the greater is its terror to
wicked members of society. And as it is an unquestionable truth, that God is
terrible, to immoral men, both in time and eternity: it is equally obvious that
rulers inspired with the spirit of their office, are a terror to injurious men,
in every department of the community. Miserable and wicked men only, wish there
were no God; and they are of the same description who wish there were no
government.

IT remains that we finish this discourse by the proposed improvement. And

LET me remark, if I have said any thing in the foregoing observations, worthy
the notice of rulers; upon proper reflection, we may find something suitable
for the attention of the people. When a society is happy, each member of the
community endeavors to know his duty, and to act his part, with fidelity and
reason.

MY friends and fellow citizens, since the establishment of a free government
does us honor, let us never do dishonor to ourselves, by disobeying its legal
and constitutional commands. Let us never discover an impatient disposition
under the necessary restraints of good government. These restraints are our
safety. Resistance to a government like ours tends to ruin. Neither let us be
meanly jealous of men whose political existence is but temporary, and derived
from the people. Let us guard our elections well, and stigmatize with contempt,
every mark of bribery and corruption. But when we have chosen men to rule by a
clear majority, let even the minority trust them with a manly charity, and
treat them with respect and honor. -- This is their due. -- It is much to the
dishonor of a free community, to resemble an ill bred family, by quarrelling
among themselves, or speaking evil of dignities. We may rest assured, our
rulers have many motives to excite their faithfulness; but few, very few to
lead to the contrary. Every principle of duty and interest conspire to make
them what they should be. It cannot be expected, but, that the characters of
candidates for places of power and trust, should undergo an inspection by the
public eye. If they are found fair, they have the better prospect for public
honor, in new elections: but if not; candidates know that they will, and know
that they ought to be neglected, if not despised. In a republic, the majesty of
the people is great, and their bar tremendous. If we know and exercise the
power that belongs to us under God as the foundation of government, rulers can
never be lost to us, unless they are lost to themselves. This leads

2 dly. To observe, that as the promotion of knowledge and literature is an
object of law with good rulers; so it also ought to be an object of universal
attention among the people. Ignorance is the greatest enemy to the happiness of
any nation. It puts an end to purity of manners, real religion, and good
government. Wicked and designing men, go abroad without fear, as beasts of prey
in the night, to destroy under the clouds of ignorance. -- Knowledge is
necessary to give us a proper view of our rights as men, and of our duty, as
members of society.

AN ignorant people, even in the full possession of their rights, are apt to
carry liberty into extremes, and soon degenerate into anarchy and confusion.
Impatient of delegated power to rule them; they assume the reins of government
themselves, and as a celebrated statesman observes, make laws for the
representatives, debate for the senate, and pass sentence for the judge.
MONTESQUIEU, SPIRIT OF LAWS.
When this is the case, the virtue and comfort of a republic are departed. --
The principles of Democracy being very pure, are easily corrupted, and need to
be carefully preserved on every hand. Licentiousness is as great an enemy to
its true genius on the one hand, as despotism is on the other. He is as real a
political robber, who would fire a nation against a free government by the
former, as the tyrant that would assume government without their consent, on
the latter. A lust of boundless power and liberty, is the source of both their
wickedness. The libertine would fain do what he pleases against good government
by corrupting the people; and the despot would fain do what he pleases against
good people by corrupting the government: and they unite in being equally
destructive to both people and government. Invest a libertine with power and he
is a tyrant; divest a tyrant of his power and he is a libertine. The true
spirit of Democracy is equally distant from these extremes, and knowledge is
the best preservative from them. Where the cultivation of the human mind is
neglected it is distressing indeed! Zeal degenerates into fury -- religion into
superstition, or atheism -- reason into sophistry -- courage into cruelty --
industry into sloth and avarice -- and government into absolute sway. Every
enemy to public instruction, is an enemy to the political happiness of his
nation, and every opposer of christianity is unfriendly to the "best foundation
for order and good government in the hearts of men." CONSTITUTION OF
NEWHAMPSHIRE.


AGAIN, let it not be thought inconsistent with the spirit of my present duty,
or offensive to your delicacy to hint, that it affords satisfaction to every
good mind that the necessary expenses of good government be discharged with
cheerfulness. "Render to all their due, tribute to whom tribute is due." He
that repines at the performance of this part of his duty to government, has not
justly estimated its value, and betrays his ignorance of its real worth. The
support of government should be without regret in the subject, and bear some
degree of useful proportion to the dignity of the office and nature of the
employment in the ruler; but let us never encourage the luxury, pomp or
ostentation of monarchial governments. These are the ensigns of pride,
wickedness and vanity.

LET us my dear countrymen, rejoice this day in the possession of a free
government; where our eyes behold our rulers, not as a terror to good men; but
to the evil. While clouds of hereditary rights, shadows of aristocracy, and the
darkness of monarchial governments involve other nations in slavery, we are
free. Let us rejoice that rays of our rising light and national liberty are
darting to other nations and promising a benign influence over the world. O,
blessed land of light and liberty, where every genius has a spring and acts
itself. Our heart should heave with gratitude to God, the giver of every good,
and governor of nations!

BUT, let all orders of men guard against the abuse of privileges. When the
Jews kept the covenant of their God, they triumphed over their enemies. But
when they forsook him, he forsook them, and they were carried captives to
distant nations. Public vice and irreligion may soon ruin us. The declivity of
public vice, is like a declivity of ice, and hurls headlong to destruction. It
is much easier to shun than to get safe off the slippery precipice. Let not the
tables of intemperance, luxury, or gambling, which end in huts, hospitals and
gaols, enslave our souls from our God, or steal our time and talents, from our
duty. And may we ever stamp that iniquitous spirit of avarice and speculation,
wherever it appears, with every sign of contempt, that has lately done dishonor
to a principal city NEWYORK.
in our continent, ruined some private citizens, and even threatened to injure
our character as a nation. Public virtue and religion are ornaments to the
human mind, and cannot fail to show their effects on society. The boasted glory
of ancient Rome is ascribed to her public virtue and her fall to her vices. Her
rulers are said to have paid the greatest attention to the public good. They
renounced private ease for the welfare of the commonwealth. It was high treason
to employ the public revenues for any other purpose than the interest of the
republic -- she rose -- empires depended upon the voice of the senate, and all
nations revered her resolves.

ON the other hand, her fall in which she left her offspring the slaves of a
race of tyrants is ascribed unto the following vices. A selfish mind takes
place of a public spirit. Ambition advances by intrigue into public trust
without any regard to merit. Intemperance weakens her bodily strength and
debases her once renowned courage -- cruel avarice plundered her provinces to
support the pride of individuals. All orders of men become venal. The seeds of
disorder are universally sown in Rome -- her senators betray her -- her
generals deny their aid, and turn the edge of their swords against her that
bear them -- she is deluged in the blood of her own children. The mistress of
the word meanly bows -- "sues for chains and owns a conqueror." The experience
of all nations may teach the necessity of public virtue and religion to give
permanency to our government, and to prolong our happiness as a nation.

FINALLY, my fathers in government, if I have not already quite exhausted your
patience, suffer me to observe, that as the great concerns of the community are
committed to your care, no one class of men has the increase of our happiness,
or misery so much in their power. You are a source of universal joy or grief,
in proportion as you are qualified for, and faithful in your duty or not. "When
the righteous are in authority, the people rejoice -- but when the wicked bear
rule, the people mourn." What political blessing can any people reasonably
expect from their rulers, that we your constituents may not expect from you,
considering your advantages for being a terror to evil doers? What pains can we
feel or fear of political evils? You are acting upon the firm basis of a
constitution founded under God upon the voice of the people. You are in the
possession of a code of excellent laws, with full power to amend whatever your
experience and superior discernment may see amiss in them.

BY the free suffrage of your fellow citizens, you have the fullest evidence of
the confidence of your country in your abilities and faithfulness for
government. A powerful part of the community will consider it as ominous of
continued prosperity to our state and nation, that you enter on the important
business of legislation, in the fear of that God, whose ministers you are, and
whose moral government you represent.

ANIMATED by such noble motives, you will realize the superintending presence
of the Supreme Ruler, to whom you are accountable in all your deliberations. In
this way, you will answer the benevolent design of your honorable office, in
being a terror to every species of political wickedness and other vices among
men; and a praise to virtue.

ACTING on the political stage of your country under the influence of such
sublime principles, you will shine as lights while you are on it; and obtain
the highest applause of your constituents when you leave it; and O! Fathers,
when the moment arrives, that you must forever renounce seats of honor on
earth, your memories will remain embalmed in society when the name of the
wicked shall rot. -- And the testimony of a good conscience will enlighten your
chambers in death -- scatter the gloom of the grave -- direct and sweeten your
passage to seats of honor and glory immortal.

AMEN.

