AN ORATION DELIVERED ON THE 4th OF JULY 1792.

BEFORE THE PRESIDENT, PROFESSORS AND MASTERS OF WILLIAM and MARY COLLEGE BY
JOHN MERCER, STUDENT.

RICHMOND: Printed by T. NICOLSON.

PREFACE.
THE following Oration was not designed, by the Author, to have appeared before
the Public.

It is sent to the Press by some Gentlemen, who being present when it was
delivered, wished to forward Merit to the World, especially where found
conspicuous in the immediate offspring of the late gallant and virtuous General
Hugh Mercer.

AN ORATION, etc.
Mr. PRESIDENT, GENTLEMEN, and FELLOW STUDENTS.
THERE is no principle more congenial to man, than that ardent desire, which he
evinces to celebrate those great events, which distinguish the most important
and interesting periods in his history. He thus forms certain Epochas, which
serve not only to recall to mind the glorious deeds of his ancestry, but which
in the midst of those calamities that history every where presents, become so
many resting places, where he reposes with joy and exultation. It is this
principle, which operating wherever the human race is found, uniformly displays
the strongest attachment to whatever is great, generous and noble. Do we
consult the records of past ages? We every where find it evinced by some public
testimony. We behold it in the savage as well as in the civilized state, though
perhaps, under different forms -- that sensibility which bursts from the
Indian's breast, and shows itself by violent and external marks, is cooly and
calmly conveyed from the bosom of the American, refined by the polish of
education. So long as this principle is congenial to man, and truly consistent
with the dignity of human nature; so long it clearly discovers the high
estimation in which we ought to hold the gift of certain blessings. It fixes
upon the mind of posterity an indelible regard for their value; and at the same
time, inspires them with the manly resolution of maintaining inviolate, what
their fathers perhaps had risqued their all, to establish. But, if this
principle ever operate with all its force in the breast of man, you, my
countrymen have cause to feel and to confess its fullest influence. The
unnumbered favors which distinguish this land, demand your sincerest return of
gratitude. The success with which your labors have been crowned, requires the
highest veneration for that event, which dissolved the fetters of slavery,
which burst asunder the bonds that connected us to an arbitrary power, and
liberated oppressed America. As to myself, permit me to confess, that no
subject is more consonant to my disposition, than that which this day presents.
Born at the period, when the frightful image of tyranny haunted our dwellings;
bred at a time, when a just regard to the divine Rights of Man, and the
strongest sense of freedom animated every breast, I cherish the sacred
impressions of my infancy, I reflect upon them with love and veneration. --
Would to God, I could express the sentiments, which such impressions always
excite. But! what language can paint the feelings of the heart! what expression
communicate the warmth of patriotic ardor! let those who call themselves
Americans pardon the feeble attempt. Let those who can boast the freedom of
this Western world, now view with the eye of indulgence, him whose tongue was
taught to lisp the language of liberty, whose inclination as well as duty,
prompts him to express, if possible, the sentiments of a heart deeply impressed
with the importance of this memorable day; a day by which the rights of
humanity, and the claims of justice even rescued from the lawless domination of
a British tyrant, and the privileges of man asserted -- When I behold those who
compose this audience; when I stand in the view of youth, of manhood, and of
age; and see even the fair daughters of Columbia, gracing this assembly with
their presence, can I be unmindful of my situation? can I know the patriotic
pulse that beats in each breast and still not feel its sympathetic influence?
every affection that now fills my mind declares it impossible.

Never did I view the light of this returning Sun, but with eyes that streamed
with joy. Never shall its bright beams return, without exciting that expression
of gratitude, and that ardor for liberty, which should now glow in the bosom of
each virtuous American. To name this day, is to call up every idea that can
bring pleasure to the minds of freemen. From this day, as men, we date our
happiness, from this day, as a nation, America assumes a rank in the political
existence of the world. What friend to liberty, what friend to triumphant
virtue, what friend to human nature, does not acknowledge this to be a day, the
most eventful in the annals of mankind! let us welcome its glad return. Let
each freeborn child of Columbia, "Hail to the Sun whose circling ray, revolves
once more the happy day, that gave our nation birth." The voice of gratitude,
the voice of nature demands it, nor will Americans disobey these pleasing
calls. But who among us can behold the delightful prospects,. that are on every
side presented to our view, and yet be regardless of the causes that produced
them? can the mind of man enjoy what constitutes its true happiness, and not
return with a pleasing reflection upon the means from which it sprang? will
you, my countrymen, rejoice in the bounties of an indulgent Heaven? Will you
behold your national credit acknowledged by the powers of the earth, and see
your prosperity rising to eminence at home, without remembering those
transactions in your history which gave them birth: Transactions, replete with
the noble efforts of infant virtue, struggling against the all desolating force
of a full grown despotism, and which kept in suspense the hopes of an anxious
world? The face of tyranny looks pale, when they are mentioned, whilst they
vibrate sounds ever grateful to the ears of freedom. The splendour of British
glory no longer dazzles the sight of admiring man, since the rays of American
fortitude have eclipsed its brightest luster.

When we consider the various passions by which men are governed, and see the
oppression under which the human race has groaned in every age, what generous
bosom does not heave at the sigh of sorrow! what liberal eye does not meet with
the manly tear of pity! the most noble deeds have been too often followed by
some ignoble act. Honors raised upon foundations of magnanimity, and a happy
series of events, have been shaken by the pestiferous blasts of an impolitic
ambition, and the same people, who at one time extended the arm of protection,
have been seen drawing the sword of oppression. The age of Roman Emperors has
been heard of. The age of British Ministers has been seen. No longer let the
despots of Eastern cruelty, be mentioned alone. No longer let the decayed
volumes of ancient records, be the only repositories of unnatural war. One more
in another clime has since appeared. One more second to none, O America, thou
have seen. The crimson car of desolation has marked thy country. The agonizing
groans of thy dying heroes, have have been heard from North to South; and the
icy hand of death has made his pale figure familiar to your eyes. What people
so void of National dignity, so free from every manly disposition, could direct
their unprovoked vengeance upon an infant land! Was it the unfortunate savage
of your forests! Was it some name, till then unknown to same? Humanity hides
her face: Conviction is alarmed at her own whispers; and the ties of
consanguinity are dissolved, when truth, with interrupted speech, declares that
nation to have been Britain. O Britain! thou name once pleasing to the sons of
freedom, why wish to blast their early hopes, and destroy the pillars of thy
own greatness? What unfriendly genius could have prompted thy united arms
against thy descendants? How often, with filial readiness, have they obeyed thy
frequent calls! through what scenes of distress and horror have they not
passed! What trying exigencies for heroic fortitude, have not they encountered
for the advancement of thy glory! The savages of America, still wreak their
ceasless vengeance upon the citizens of this country, who under thy banners,
first made them flee their scattered huts. The frozen plains of Canada, thawed
by the blood of many a bleeding Martyr, will attest the sincere attachment of
America to thy interest. Still united with us, Great Britain might have
flourished the unrivalled mistress of the better half of the globe. Had the
wisdom of her Councils, but equalled her thirst for domination, she would not
now exhaust the bitter cup of sorrow, nor feel the drooping laurels of her brow
withering to decay. But the awful moment was at hand, when the nearest ties of
human connection were to be broken, the common rights of the human species
subverted, and the name of Britain cease to be the name of parent. Not content
to confine our trade to her shores alone, not satisfied in pursuing a system of
uninterrupted oppression, in the hour of presumption, she assumed the language
even of omnipotence. For one people to claim the right to bind another, "in
every case whatever," is an assumption of power, at which human nature revolts.
Yet this right, Britons claimed -- Like the affectionate child loath to quit the
once tender embraces of the now suspicious mother, America still wishes to be
enfolded within the arms of her parent country. In the tone of supplication,
she implored her attention, and asked her justice only. But, the haughty
Monarch knew it not. --

"No ray of mercy, beaming from his brow,"

"No olive branch extended in his hand,"

Her prayers were answered with threats. -- Her petitions, that breathed the
language of reconcileation, were left unopened. O Chatham! Thou friend to
Britain and America, how wast thy aged bosom torn with grief, when you beheld
the infatuated Council of your country! Not even the eloquence of thy tongue,
could stem the impetuous torrent of venal opposition! You saw the Sun of
British greatness fast descending from its meridian height! Rest mighty shade!
Whatever could be done to prop the falling glory of a country, has been done by
thee. Friends to mankind shall drop a tear upon thy deathless memory, whilst
the name of North is mentioned with horror. The storm of war, which had been
long threatening in distant thunder, now burst in all its fury upon our
defenseless shores. -- 'Twas then, that each American felt himself a soldier.
'Twas then, that he who had deeply weighed the justice of his cause, stepped
forth to defend it. Then was the crisis of our fare -- Conducted by the wisdom
of that man who --

'Eripuit Caelo fulmen, Sceptrumque Tyrannis,' and her numerous band of
enlightened patriots, America feared not now the bursting storm. Secure in the
righteousness of her cause, she considently appealed to Heaven -- Her genius
called forth her Washington. Soon she beheld the horizon of this western sky,
enlightened by her brightest luminary. O mighty chief! At the sound of whose
name, freedom smiles and proud oppression starts; let the kindling gratitude of
a youthful breast, venture to address thee. If it be impossible to add new
luster to thy fame, at least let him view thee placed upon the summit of
greatness by the united voice of a free people. Let him behold in thee, the
concentered virtues of an Aristides, a Fabius and a Solon. Already has the
world called thee friend. Already has a nation called thee father -- Thy deeds
shall be the theme for future ages. The unerring genius of history shall show
in unadorned truth, the characters of that host of heroes who have left us
free. Yes, those characters shall be held forth as the great exemplars for
generations yet unborn. Each future father, anxious for the promising virtues
of his son, shall not mention the celebrated names that adorn the bright ages
of Greece and Rome; but leading him, where the lively pencil has animated the
breathing canvass, shall say to him, -- Behold my Son, the Heroes of America --
Behold the renowned characters who flourished in the eighteenth century, who
first taught mankind their rights, and inspired the resolution to vindicate
them. -- These are the men who died in establishing liberty upon its firmest
basis. Let these be your examples. See where the gallant Warren falls, an early
victim to the arms of Britain; see how he smiles even in the agonies of death,
still exhorting his countrymen to prefer his fate to an ignominious slavery.
Remember, he first taught America, though almost destitute of the means, to
oppose the rapid strides of an ungrateful people. Remember he lived the
Patriot, and died the Hero. -- Behold where the virtuous, the intrepid
Montgomery lies. See the pale youth who falls by his side. It Is the generous
Macpherson, whose rising soul fired by Montgomery's bright example, could not
survive his death. But see thou that image robed in white, bending over some
falling soldier! It Is victory, in whose arms, Hackemer has fainted. She is now
entwining his brows with wreaths of laurel. My Son, should age possess thee,
before some just cause calls forth the declining vigor of thy arm; let the
noble example of Wooster be thy guide. The illustrious Chief covered over with
wounds, after having repulsed the foe, falls in his old age. But behold that
circle of men suspended in anxious attention -- It Is the celebrated Council of
America, before whom their patriot General resigns his commission. -- This
great man after having expelled the enemies of his country, and saved a fallen
people, now returns the avenging sword, and gives to the world the noblest
example. Behold him now no longer the commander of armies, but the private
citizen. Heroic man! Let thy example teach the universe, that it is not men,
but the laws which command. --

This must be the language of ages to come. Rising generations will celebrate
the fame and copy the virtues of those heroes who have made the Rights of Man
their care. In the astonishment of their souls, they will appeal to you, ye
venerable fathers, whose sons have fought and died in the cause of America, and
ask, why they sacrificed every possession, but virtue? what powerful motive
could induce them to leave that friendly circle, where aged experience and
matured judgment, might soon have formed their minds to greatness? What unusual
cause could prompt them to abandon the budding fields of science, and leave the
secrets of nature just opening to their view? was it mad ambition, or a thirst
for power? Was it the unbridled influence of youthful impetuosity, or a desire
to trample upon the privileges of their fellow creatures? Say ye widows and ye
orphans, whose tears have so often attested the irreparable loss of husbands,
fathers, sons and brothers, why were ye torn from those most dear? Why were all
those tender charities that attend domestic ease fortaken? Why did not the
fondling of the tender infant and the caresses of the affectionate wife,
prevent the long farewell? What cause could compel them to exchange the
cheerful sounds of peace and harmony, for the cruelties of war and the dreadful
clash of arms? Was it the gratification of one selfish passion? Was it the
influence of one unmanly thought? O nature! thou whose language carries the
stamp of truth, make the answer -- Liberty, that universal, that equal, that
sacred Right of Man was violated, and the lovers of the human race slept forth
for its protection -- They knew, that with^^^ liberty a nation was destitute of
its noblest privilege. They knew, that liberty adds energy to the natural
imbecility of man, and gives a liberal spring to the abilities of the mind,
whilst slavery relaxes the vigor of human nature, contracts the sphere of all
noble exertion, and clouds the efforts of the brightest reason; that liberty
gives rise to the most distinguishing affections that adorn our characters,
whilst slavery chills every warm and generous emotion of the human heart: they
knew, that liberty was a friend to mankind wherever found, whilst slavery
strikes, with equal terror the black of Africa, the white of Europe and the red
of America: that liberty is the gift of God, whilst slavery is the hedious
monster of degenerate man. Shall we then wonder that those memorable men died
for liberty in opposition to slavery? in such a cause, death had no terrors.
They met it with a smile. They gave you liberty and independence. Go mighty
warriors! whilst your memories are adored on earth receive in Heaven a reward
for that greatness which man cannot compensate. Britons, farewell! no longer
does America bend at your nod. If an ignorance of the common Rights of Man,
prompted you to attempt the subjection of this new world, we pity your
condition. If ambition was the cause, we despise the motive. As men, we shall
ever remember you are such; but as Americans we cannot forget the part you have
acted as Britons.

When we consider the establishment of American independence, our minds are
filled with consequences the most important that ever interested the feelings
of Man. It does not comprehend the happiness of these United States alone, the
people of any particular country, or single nation -- It Is influence is not
confined to the shores of America, but extends to the most distant regions of
the earth. In the opinions of mankind, a most striking change is already seen.
Thousands of pens, thousands of tongues have already appeared the powerful
advocates of the Rights of Man; and "ten thousands of swords have leaped from
their scabbards to avenge the long insulted dignity of liberty, that Heavenly
"Queen," which first "lighted on this" new "orb." It was here that "delightful
vision" first "appeared glittering like the morning star, full of life and
splendour and joy -- Oh! what a revolution! and what an heart must I have, to
contemplate without emotion that elevation" of liberty, "and that fall" of
despotism. If firmness conducted thy arms, America, wisdom has directed thy
Councils. If fortitude graced the actions of thy heroes, prudence has marked
the conduct of thy Statesmen.

If the havoc of war, desolated the face of thy country, the Cornu Copia of
peace has returned. Where shall we find a revolution equal to that in America?
whether we consider the consequences which have attended, and will attend it,
or the manner in which it was effected? If we ask why America displayed so
singular an example of greatness, the reason must be traced in the particular
characteristics that distinguish her as a nation. The state of property under
the particular circumstances that it appears in this country, the want of
Titles, of Nobility, fit baubles for children, and which originated whilst the
human mind, was in a state of infancy, together with that diffusion of general
knowledge, which distinguishes the present age; all these may be considered as
the causes which produced that freedom, which has always marked the sentiments
of its citizens -- If we consult antiquity, we are presented with acts of
cruelty, and exertions of ambition, that strike the soul with horror. We see
perhaps a momentary change in affairs, effected by some powerful individual, or
by the unsteady temper of the fickle multitude -- This continues, 'till another
designing head appears, destroys the former plan, and erects one of his own,
perhaps the foundation of slavery. Shall these changes be compared with the
American revolution? Shall the confusion that arises from the folly and
ambition of wicked men, be equal to the regularity, that springs from the
united efforts of reason and virtue? No! Americans, you stand alone, an example
of infant greatness to the world. You rise an exception to the general tendency
of mankind. You show, that government is founded in the reason, and not in the
destruction of men, that civil liberty rests in the hands of the people, and
not on the smile or frown of individuals. The principles of your government
have received your calm and deliberate assent. From it, you have banished the
pomp of Majesty, and the pride of bigoted ignorance. Toleration, that fairest
daughter of Heaven, is received in America, and pours forth the fullness of
happiness on our land. The distressing cries of the cruel rack that penetrate
the feeling soul, and pervert affrighted reason, are not heard in our country.
Those torrents of innocent blood that flowed from the scaffold, feared by the
hands of tyranny, do not here disturb the gentle current of religious bliss.
The understanding freely consults its own dictates, and feels no restraint in
declaring them -- O fortunate people! thrice happy nation! who in the height of
all earthly bliss, by thy example nobly expands the bosom of humanity, and
generously diffuses a knowledge of the Rights of Man. Still let the elevated
task be thine. Remember you are men. Exert yourselves in desseminating that
liberty, so dearly gained, for the noblest purpose, the happiness of man. Be it
yours to regenerate the old world. Already may we welcome the happy era, that
now begins to dawn in the regions of Europe. Let us behold, with joy, the old
world emerging from that dark abyss of misery, into which the cruel hand of
despotism had plunged it. The thick gloom of superstition, which has
overshadowed the minds of man for so many ages, begins at length to retire
before the piercing rays of truth. Already does the liberal Frenchman, animated
by the Sun of this Western hemisphere, keep holy the day, he left his native
land to cross the atlantic, a soldier in the cause of freedom. Fayette! formed
after natures favorite plan, may the object of thy early virtues be cherished
by thy countrymen; may every gift, that Heaven can bestow upon a generous
people, be enjoyed by Frenchmen. Names begin to yield to things. The sound of
King, that synonimous term for the cause of human misery, no longer conveys the
idea of divinity. Even the ignorance of those, whose mighty heads can support
golden crowns, now teaches them, they are no more than man. The gorgeous
palaces, reared upon the ruins of virtue, and supported by the distresses of
innocence, begin to totter. Those insects, that too long have crawled upon
them, and lived on the vitals of man, begin to loose their hold! soon shall
they fall upon their native earth, neglected and despised.

Americans! be wise: liberty attempered only with those restraints, which the
social state requires, now sheds its brightest luster upon you. Be mindful of
yourselves. The fate of fallen states rests before you. The exercise of reason,
a constant recurrence to fundamental principles, a veneration for those sacred
rights, which this day recalls to mind, will forever establish our beloved
republic upon a foundation, which cannot be shaken.

Ye sons of American Statesmen and heroes, who now ardently pursue the path of
science, and trace the wonders of all powerful nature, remember the important
part you are soon to act upon the grand theater of the world. At this early
period of life, let the strong foundation be laid -- Let the hand of science
form the rising virtues of the soul. Let the mild precepts of Philosophy
implant deeply in your breasts, whatever is great, lovely, elevated, or noble
in the character of man. Learn to venerate the rights of others, and to protect
your own. Thus shall you shine the brightest ornaments of that temple, which
your fathers have erected, thus shall you live the protectors of virtue, and
the guardians of the Rights of Man; and when the curtain of separation shall
fall, be received into the bosom of that father, with whom merit meets its
reward.


