FIVE LETTERS, ADDRESSED TO THE YEOMANRY OF THE UNITED STATES:

Containing some Observations on the dangerous scheme of Governor DUER and Mr.
Secretary HAMILTON, to establish National Manufactories.

BY A FARMER.

PHILADELPHIA: Printed by ELEAZER OSWALD, No. 156, Market-street, between
Fourth and Fifth-streets.

M,DCC,XCII.

FIVE LETTERS, ADDRESSED TO THE YEOMANRY of the UNITED STATES.
LETTER I.
AS long as the States of America continue united under the present form of
government, the PEOPLE will have to lament the want of a Bill of Rights, which
would clearly and unequivocally dictate to the Legislature its duty, and to the
People their rights.

It is said that the principle which pervades the Constitution of the United
States, is, that the supreme power resides in the People, and that the
Constitution itself opens with a recognition of this principle -- that it is a
compact entered into by Freemen, to support and protect the rights of each
other, and therefore there is no occasion for a declaration of rights to be
prefixed to the form of government -- that the People, by whom it was ordained
and established, retain all powers not expressly given up, and that the
citizens of the United States may always say, "We reserve the right to do what
we please."

In a small virtuous Commonwealth, where the offices of the government would be
esteemed honorable, but not lucrative, and where every citizen would not only
be eligible to a seat in the Legislature, but which, by a strict rotation, he
would be obliged, occasionally, to occupy. Under a pure democracy of this kind,
a declaration of the rights of the People might not be absolutely necessary:
But a government of the extent and in the situation of the United States, being
destitute of a clear explicit declaration of the rights of the People, the
honor of serving the state, and of being useful to its citizens, will give
place to the most sordid views of private emolument, and laws which should be
made to promote the general welfare, will be perverted to serve the ambition
and avarice of the few. Ambassadorships, and places of profit will be created
for the well born; palaces will be erected, and we shall be told that it is for
the honor of government that all its officers and their dependants should be
supported in a style of ostentation, parade and luxury, however oppressive and
injurious to their fellow citizens: Two parties will exist, the one enjoying
every comfort of life without labor -- the other languishing in penury,
submitting to every insult and injury: And the people, unprotected by an
explicit declaration of their rights, ambitious men will, by artifice and
sophistry, explain away every principle of the government, in order to render
it subservient to their own private purposes.

No people ever experienced a more complete destruction of their liberties by
the encroachments of government than the French -- Few people witnessed a Court
of greater pomp, parade and expense. To preserve their country for the future
from such calamities, that wise and enlightened people thought it necessary to
adopt a declaration of the Rights of Man, as the basis on which their new
Constitution was to stand. The declaratory exordium which prefaces the
declaration merits attention.

Declaration of the Rights of Men and of Citizens.
By the National Assembly of France.
-- "THE Representatives of the People of France, formed into a National
Assembly, considering that ignorance, neglect or contempt of human rights, are
the sole causes of public misfortunes and corruptions of Government, have
resolved to set forth, in a solemn declaration, these natural, imprescriptible
and unaleinable rights: That this declaration being constantly present to the
minds of the members of the body social, they may be ever kept attentive to
their rights and duties; that the acts of the legislative and executive powers
of Government, being capable of being every moment compared with the end of
political institutions, may be more respected; and also that the future claims
of the citizens, being directed by simple and incontestible principles, may
also tend to the maintenance of the Constitution, and the general happiness --
For these reasons the National Assembly does recognize and declare, in the
presence of the Supreme Being, and with the hope of his blessing and favor, the
following sacred Rights of Men and of Citizens. --

1. Men are born and always continue free, and equal in respect of their
rights. Civil distinctions, therefore, can be founded only on public utility.

2. The end of all political associations is the preservation of the natural
and imprescriptible rights of man; and these rights are liberty, property,
security, and resistance of oppression.

3. The nation is essentially the source of all sovereignty, nor can any
individual, or any body of men, be entitled to any authority which is not
expressly derived from it.

4. Political liberty consists in the power of doing whatever does not injure
another. The exercise of the natural rights of every man has no other limits
than those which are necessary to secure to every other man, the free exercise
of the same rights, and these limits are determinable only by the law.

5. The law ought to prohibit only actions hurtful to society. What is not
prohibited by the law should not be hindered; nor should any one be compelled
to that which the law does not require.

That highly enlightened people have prefixed a Bill of Rights to their form of
government, not as being applicable to their own situation alone, but as
constituting the foundation of every just government.

Had the Constitution of the United States a foundation equally firm and
equitable, we should not at this day witness the laws of the Union stained with,

1st. Mercantile regulations, impolitic in themselves, and highly injurious to
the agricultural interests of our country.

2. With funding systems, by which the property and rights of poor but
meritorious citizens are sacrificed to wealthy gamesters and speculators.

3. With the establishment of Banks, authorizing a few men to create a
fictitious money, by which they may acquire rapid fortunes without industry.

4. With Excise Laws, which violate the tranquillity of domestic retirement, and
which prevent the Farmer from enjoying the fruits of his care and industry.

However ambitious men may disguise the fundamental principles of civil
society, by the arts of low cunning and sophistry, yet the social compact
amongst freemen, establishes such an equality, that every citizen lays himself
under the same obligations, and ought all to enjoy the same privileges. Thus,
from the very nature of this compact, every act of the Government should be
equally favorable to all the citizens without distinction; it should know the
whole body of the nation, but distinguish none of the individuals who compose
it, -- What then is a legal government? It is not an agreement made between a
superior and an inferior, but a convention between a whole body with each of
its members, which convention is a lawful one, because founded on the Rights of
Man -- it is equitable because it is common to all -- it is useful because it
can have no other object than the general good -- and it is solid and durable
because secured by the voice of the People.

Such a government will protect and defend, with its whole force, the person
and property of every one of its members, and every individual citizen, by
uniting himself to the whole, will, nevertheless, be obedient only to himself,
and will remain fully at liberty to every thing but injury.

The intention for which a man resigns any portion of his natural sovereignty
over his own actions is, that he may be protected from the abuse of the same
dominion in other men. No greater sacrifice is therefore necessary than is
prescribed by this object. Nothing can be more fallacious than to pretend that
we are precluded in the social state from any appeal to natural rights. -- They
remain in their full vigor, if we except that small portion of them which men
sacrifice for protection against each other. Whenever a Government assumes more
power than this object rigorously prescribes, it becomes an usurpation
supported by sophistry -- a despotism varnished by illusion.

If life be a bounty from Heaven, we reject the noblest part of the gift if we
tamely surrender our natural and unalienable rights, without which the
condition of human nature is not only miserable but contemptible. To preserve
them inviolate, free citizens should always be armed with force and constancy,
and should repeat every day the saying of the virtuous Palatine -- Malo
periculosam libertatem quam quietum fervitium.

LETTER II.
HAPPY for mankind the present inquiry in the philosophical world is not the
mechanism of the universe, or the composition of its elements, but the
principles of civil society. The prodigious advantages which France has already
derived from these inquiries, and the alterations which are daily taking place
in other parts of Europe in favor of the Rights of Man, should have some
influence on the measures of the general government of the United States, which
are tending, in an alarming degree, to undermine the liberties of our country
-- to strip the farmer, the mechanic, the manufacturer, and useful laborer, of
all influence and of all importance -- to consign them to contempt, or at best,
to the sad privilege of murmuring without redress.

The world has been sufficiently flooded with the blood of its inhabitants, --
And free citizens, under the sanction of law, have been to often reduced to
misery and wretchedness.

In this enlightened age let American rulers beware how they proceed --
Whatever may be the opinion of those characters living upon the spoils of their
fellow-citizens, or basking in the sunshine of Court favor, they will find a
spirit of resistance in the People which will not submit to be oppressed, and a
fund of good sense which cannot be deceived by the arts of false reasoning or
false patriotism.

Governments are tranquil when they are adapted to the ideas and lights of the
age: But whenever their regulations become unsuitable to the ideas of the
times, and contrary to the opinion of the People, the rulers should look into
their conduct, and remove every reason of complaint. All attempts to support
unjust measures in this country, where the people, as yet, have so much power,
are absurd, and must ultimately be unsuccessful: justice will finally take
place in spite of all efforts to suppress it.

The same spirit of arbitrary power, which during the last year violated the
rights of the great body of yeomanry, by an Excise Law, now proposes to
interfere in the occupations of the mechanic and manufacturer. A government may
waste the public money in erecting palaces, statues, etc. the evil is but
temporary, but when it assumes principles injurious to the rights of the
people, and by arbitrary laws interferes in the occupations of its citizens,
liberty is but a name. The theory of such a government is falsehood and mockery
-- the practice is oppression.

Smith, in his Wealth of Nations, vol. ii, p. 86, observes, that to prohibit a
great people from making all that they can of every part of their own produce,
or of employing their stock and industry in the way that they judge most
advantageous to themselves, is a manifest violation of the most sacred rights
of mankind.

It may be thought improper at this early period to offer any observations on
the justice or wisdom of the report of the Secretary of the Treasury on
manufactures. It is true, we might have waited for the deliberations and
conclusion of Congress on the subject: but Congress, having adopted a new
method of legislating, by refering the most important business of the country
to the different Secretaries, and adopting their reports, experience justifies
a belief, that the principles of this report will also be adopted, and will
come forward under the sanction of the Legislature in the form of a law. The
Secretary of the Treasury, and his friends in New York, have already prepared
the way, by procuring one of the most unjust and arbitrary laws to be enacted
by the Commonwealth of New Jersey, that ever disgraced the government of a free
people -- A law granting to a few wealthy men the exclusive jurisdiction of six
miles square, and a variety of unconstitutional privileges, highly injurious to
the citizens of that state. This law merits your attention, not as a pattern of
justice, but to convince you how dangerous it is for a free people to place
their whole political safety on the conduct of any set of Legislators, when
surrounded by artful and designing men. Is it reasonable -- is it just, that a
numerous class of citizens, whose knowledge in mechanics and manufactures, not
less necessary for the support of their familes, than useful to their country,
should be sacrificed to a wealthy few, who have no other object in view than to
add to their ill-gotten and enormous wealth?

Such being the nature of this corporation, can it be doubted, whether it
violates the spirit of all just laws? Whether it subverts the principles of
that equality of which freemen ought to be so jealous? Whether it establishes a
class of citizens with distinct interests from their fellow citizens? Will it
not, by fostering an inequality of fortune, prove the destruction of the
equality of rights, and tend strongly to an aristocracy?

There are two kinds of inequality, the one personal, that of talent and
virtue, the source of whatever is excellent and admirable in society -- the
other that of fortune, which must exist, because property alone can stimulate
to labor; and labor, if it were not necessary to the existence, would be
indispensible to the happiness of man: But though it be necessary, yet in its
excess it is the great malady of civil society. The accumulation of that power
which is conferred by wealth in the hands of the few is the perpetual source of
oppression and neglect of the mass of mankind. The power of the wealthy is
farther concentrated by their tendency to combination, from which, number,
dispersion, indigence and ignorance, equally preclude the poor. The wealthy are
formed into bodies by their professions, their different degrees of oppulence,
called ranks, their knowledge, and their small numbers: -- They necessarily, in
all countries, administer Government, for they alone have skill and leisure for
its functions. Thus circumstanced, nothing can be more evident than their
inevitable preponderance in the political scale. The preference of partial to
general interests, is, however, the greatest of all public evils: It should,
therefore, have been the object of all laws to repress this malady, but it has
been their perpetual tendency to aggravate it. Not content with the inevitable
inequality of fortune, they have superadded to it honorary and political
distinctions. Not content with the inevitable tendency of the wealthy to
combine, they have embodied them in classes. They have fortified these
conspiracies against the general interest, which they ought to have resisted,
though they could not disarm. Laws, it is said, cannot equalize men, -- No --
But ought they for that reason to aggravate the inequality which they cannot
cure? Laws cannot inspire unmixed patriotism -- But ought they for that reason
to foment that corporation spirit which is its most fatal enemy? All
professional combinations, said Mr. Burke, in one of his late speeches in
Parliament, are dangerous in a free state. Arguing on the same principle, the
National Assembly of France have proceeded further: They have conceived that
the laws ought to create no inequality or combination, to recognize all only in
their capacities as citizens, and to offer no assistance to the natural
preponderance of partial over general interests."

It is not the distinctions of titles which constitutes an aristocracy: it is
the principle of partial association. The American Aristocrats have failed in
their attempt to establish titles of distinctions by law; yet the destructive
principles of aristocracy are too prevalent amongst us, and ought to be watched
with the most jealous eye.

LETTER III.
WHEN Ministers are suffered to introduce, and Legislators adopt, the spirit
and regulation of a military corpse, into civil government, and by arbitrary
laws interfere in the private actions of citizens -- it manifests a shameful
ignorance of that knowledge of history, with which every statesman should be
acquainted, or a want of that sound judgment, and of those just principles of
philosophy, which would enable them to make a useful advantage of such
knowledge.

The history of civil society does not furnish a single instance of Legislators
interfering with, and directing the occupations of citizens, but with injury.

The celebrated Solon introduced this wretched system of policy. To ingratiate
himself with the licentious citizens of Athens, he ordained, that the
Husbandmen should not sell the produce of their farms, to any, but the
Athenians. The small quantity of oil, raised in the country, was alone admitted
to a free, unlimited sale. This unjust regulation served a temporary purpose of
supplying the city with provisions, at a low price; but the Farmers, feeling
themselves injured, converted so great a proportion of the country into olive
yards, that in a short time provisions became dearer than ever, and the
quantity of oil produced, occasioned Athens to become one of the most
considerable markets for oil in that quarter of the world.

The Athenian policy, of restricting the sale of the produce of the country,
was imitated by the Romans, and produced similar effects. The culture of grain
was neglected in the neighborhood of Rome, and the distant provinces were
oppressed, in order to supply the city with bread.

Modern politicians, without adverting to the inevitable consequences, have too
generally adopted the regulating spirit of the ancients. Some time previous to
the late war, American and British vessels, seeking for the best market for
their wheat, in the Mediterranean, were accustomed to put into Marsailles, to
procure a knowledge of the markets; if the difference of price was not
considerably in favor of any other port, the British Consul, who acted as
Agent, had directions to sell. It sometimes happened, though very rare, that
the vessels were ordered to Genoa or Leghorn. This freedom of commerce gave
umbrage to some of the people -- they procured an order for instituting a
society of Plenty, whose duty it was to seize any provisions coming into
Marsailles, in order that the numerous citizens of that place, might be
furnished with such necessaries, at a low price. After this regulation the
vessels avoided the port, and provision became dearer than before.

Holland affords a striking contrast in favor of a free commerce. The territory
of that republic, not raising a sufficiency of wheat for their own consumption,
have, by the means of a free commerce, not only ensured a full supply for
themselves, but frequently for their neighbors. During the late commotions in
France, the distress of the people of Paris in 1789, was relieved by corn,
supplied by Messrs. Hope, of Amsterdam, to the amount of one million of French
livres. Neckar's Administration, p. 331.


Formerly an immense commerce was carried on in the kingdom of Siam. Historians
attest, that in the sixteenth century, above a thousand foreign vessels
frequented its ports annually. But the King, tempted with so much riches,
endeavored to engross all the commerce of his country -- by which means he
annihilated, successively, mines, manufactures, and even agriculture.

About the year 1750, Sir Samuel Pennant, Sir James Lowther, Admiral Vernon,
and a number of other gentlemen in England, were incorporated into a Fishing
Company, under the name of the Society of the Free British Fishery, with a
capital of five hundred thousand pounds sterling, the object was, the white
herring fishery, which was represented to be of so much importance, that
several acts of Parliament was procured, granting partial privileges and
bounties to this wealthy company: It received a bounty from Government of
thirty shillings the ton for all the vessels engaged in the fishery -- a bounty
of two shillings and eight pence on every barrel of fish exported -- the
delivery of both British and foreign salt duty free; besides all these
encouragements, the subscribers, for every hundred pounds paid into the stock
of the society, were entitled to three pounds a year to be paid by the
Receiver-General of the Customs, in equal half yearly payments. Besides this
great Company, the residence of whose Governor and Directoes was to be in
London, it was declared lawful to erect different Fishing Chambers in all the
out ports of the kingdom, provided a sum not less than ten thousand pounds was
subscribed into the capital of each, to be managed at its own risk, and for its
own profit and loss. The same annuity and the same encouragements of all kinds,
were give to the trade of those inferior Chambers as to that of the great
Company. The subscription of the great Company was soon filled up, and several
different Fishing Chambers were erected in the different out ports of the
kingdom. In spite of all these encouragements, almost all those different
companies, both great and small, lost either the whole, or the greater part of
their capital; scarce a vestige now remains of any of them, and the white
herring fishery is now entirely, or almost entirely, carried on by private
adventurers. Previous to the final ruin of the great Company, Admiral Vernon,
as one of the Directors, waited in person on a Mr. Martin, an old fisherman at
Yarmouth, who, by his attention to the herring fishery, had amassed a
considerable fortune, to inquire of him, by what means, he, a private citizen,
had been successful in the fishery, whilst a wealthy company, having an immense
capital, invested in the business, and enjoying the particular patronage and
bounty of Government, were going to destruction. The old man informed Vernon
and the gentlemen who attended on the occasion -- That he could give them no
encouragement -- that inevitable destruction would be the fate of the Company
-- that their fishing busses, for the construction of which they had gone to a
great expense, were built on a wrong construction -- that their Agents had
purchased improper twine for their seines, and that the mashes of the nets were
too large for the fishery; but that the principal cause of their misfortunes,
and of his success, was owing to the Company employing uninterested Agents,
whilst he personally attended to an occupation, on the success of which, he and
his family depended for bread.

The extravagant ambition of Louis XIV, not only made him anxious to become the
arbiter of Europe, by carrying fire and destruction into the territories of his
peaceful neighbors. But also by interfering in, and regulating all the actions
of his own subjects, he wished that they should regard his absolute will as the
alone object of contemplation and attention -- He instituted manufactures,
encouraged commerce, and undertook public works, and yet his arbitrary
government rendered those very establishments useless. The very steps he took
to render the agricultural interest subservient to his projects of
manufactures, occasioned the ruin and destruction of both. Notwithstanding the
numerous triumphal arches and statues erected in France to the memory of Louis
XIV, and the adulation of his Priests, his Mistresses, and of prostitute
Courtwriters, it is certain, that his system of policy tended to destroy the
agriculture of his kingdom. Independent gentlemen, living on their own estates,
became ruined -- the country was deserted for places at Court, or in the army,
and the cultivation of the land was left to a poor tenantry. Smollet, in his
travels through France, says, -- "In Burgundy I saw a peasant ploughing the
ground with a jack-ass, a lean cow, and hegoat, yoked together. The peasants of
France are so wretchedly poor, and so much oppressed by their landlords, that
they cannot afford to enclose their grounds, or give a proper respite to their
lands, or to stock their farms with a sufficient number of black cattle, to
produce the necessary manure, without which agriculture can never be carried on
to any degree of perfection. The peasants on the south of France are poorly
clad, and look as if they were half starved, diminutive, swarthy and meagre,
and yet the common people, who travel, live luxuriously on the road."

The kingdom of France, although enjoying a good soil and a fine climate, yet
owing to the poverty and wretchedness of the People (previous to the late
glorious Revolution) out of one hundred and thirty millions of acres which that
country contains, only six millions were thought to be under a full
cultivation, the remainder under tillage, affording little more than
subsistence to a miserable tenantry.

The British nation at present appear flourishing; but the government having
adopted the oppressive system of interfering in the occupations of its
citizens, that fine country must fall a sacrifice to such unjust principles.
Some time since the Minister formed the design of erecting a Board to watch
over the interests of trade. The project was carried into execution, but trade
so far from increasing, declined the moment that these Counselors of Commerce
began to give her lessons: of this authentic proofs were produced, and it was
abolished in 1782 Mr. Gibbons, the English Tacitus, was a Member of this
institution. A few years since some farmers in Yorkshire were imprisoned and
fined to the amount of several thousand pounds, for cultivating tobacco,
contrary to an act of Parliament. The wool bill, enacted into a law in 1787, is
a remarkable instance of a violation of the liberty and property of the English
Farmer. The whole advantage of this monopoly centers in the wealthy principals
engaged in the woolen manufacture, whilst the laboring manufacturers can scarce
earn bread above the point of starving, and whilst they and their families are
daily falling on the parishes for support: The tyranny and oppression of the
law does little credit to the British government. The object of it is to
prevent the exportation of wool to France, where the Farmer could procure
twenty per cent, more for it than in England. By such arbitrary and unjust
restrictions and regulations; by excise laws; by taxes and impositions of
various kinds, the yeomanry and independent country gentlemen of 3 or 4001. per
ann. are almost annihilated. The gloomy eye of the Financier, rolling with
baneful vigilance in search of new ways and means, let neither the crops, nor
the domestic comforts of the Farmer escape. Agriculture will not long survive
such measures; or if it should exist, it will be the invidious spectacle of
great Lords, and their devouring Stewards on one hand, and a miserable
dependant peasantry on the other.

When Colbert demanded of an old experienced Merchant what steps his master
should take to encourage commerce, the answer was -- Let us alone. The citizens
of the United States engaged in agriculture, in manufactures, in mechanics, and
even in the Cod-fishery, may with justice and propriety give a similar answer
to Congress.

LETTER IV.
FOR a Government to interfere in the occupations, or in the private actions of
citizens, where such actions are not injurious to the community, is not only
unjust and impolitic, but is highly dangerous to the liberties of the People.
All partial regulations tend to create separate interests in society, and
therefore occasinon jealousy and dissension among citizens, whose true interest
consists in being united. On this subject the sentiments of the great body of
the People in the United States, were clearly expressed during the arduous
contest to establish their liberties. The constitutions of the several states,
formed during that period of public animation and attention, manifest the
strongest disapprobation of monopolies and exclusive privileges. Although these
just and honorable sentiments have been lately suppressed by the influence of
ambition and avarice, yet they are not extinct, but will re-appear with
additional luster, reflected from the glorious Revolution of France. The
Americans will adopt the political principles of that enlightened People, and,
like them, will consider, that the prosperity and happiness of citizens,
constitutes the real strength of nations. If, under a vague, undefined idea of
supporting the general welfare, Congress is permitted to enact partial laws in
favor of a few wealthy individuals, and to grant them exclusive privileges in
any occupation in which their unbounded avarice may prompt them to engage, such
regulations will enevitably destroy the infant manufactures of our country, and
will consign the useful and respectable citizens, personally engaged in them,
to contempt and ruin. All confidence of procuring an honorable support from any
mechanic or manufacturing employ being at an end, no citizen will think of
giving seven years of the prime of his life to acquire the knowledge of any
profession in which he may be supplanted by a junto of monied men, under the
immediated patronage and protection of Government. -- Whatever may be the
plausible pretext of such institutions, they always promote the oppressive and
injurious drudgery of the manufacturers, and the indolent luxury of the
principals.

In the manufacturing towns in England, the poor appear to be in state of the
most abject servitude to their employers. The principals engaged in the various
and extensive manufactories, give the poor artists and laborers six shillings
sterling per week; one half of which is absorbed by Government, by means of
excises, duties, and stamps. To this dark system of British finance, as well as
to the combination of the wealthy to keep the poor employed by them in a state
of daily dependence and servitude, must be attributed the rags, the dejected
eye, and squalled countenance, of a very numerous, and a very useful class of
citizens.

A chain does not derive its strength and utility from being composed of a few
heavy links, and the remainder weak and ill conditioned, but from every link
being as much as possible of equal power. The same takes place in civil
society: a state is rendered more respectable and powerful by the prosperity of
all its citizens, than by the overgrown wealth of the few.

Men educated in a profession which exists by the indiscriminate defense of
right and wrong, will naturally support their opinions with all the art and
sophistry of accute logicians; but reasoning in proportion as it extends, and
becomes complicated, does not owe its triumph always to truth; mental fatigue,
or implicit faith, frequently succeeds in procuring it admirers. A variety of
stratagems may be made use of to deceive the People, but a Minister who knows
nothing more, will never lay the foundation of a great empire; the fabric
raised by his duplecity and extravagance, must fall and bury its supporters in
its ruins.

The success of American manufactures will not depend on financial
calculations, or legislative interference, but on the patronage and
encouragement they may receive from patriotic citizens. The Secretary of the
Treasury begins his lengthy and flimsy report by a vague assertion, that "the
expediency of encouraging manufactures in the United States, which was not long
since deemed very questionable, appears at this time to be very generally
admitted." It is certain, that the powerful and increasing mercantile interest,
have always suggested doubts respecting the propriety of giving encouragement
to American artists and manufacturers. As agents, it is the immediate interest
of the Merchants, that every raw material, and every manufactured article,
should pass through their hands: but no real citizen had ever a doubt of the
expediency of every independent Commonwealth being as much as possible supplied
within itself, with all things necessary or useful in common life.

By giving useful employment and comfortable support to the weakest and most
miserable fellow-citizen, you promote your own consequence and safety;
therefore, duty as well as interest, oblige the members of the same society to
assist each other. Those who use foreign manufactures in preference to such as
may be procured in their own country, receive protection from the government of
which they are members, without complying with their duty in supporting its
citizens -- an injustice that, in its increase, must be the ruin of any
Commonwealth. This principle, however, should be carried no farther than is
consistent with the real prosperity of the state, as connected with the full
employment, the happiness, and independence, of all its citizens.

We ought not to desire the establishment of any kind of manufacture in our
country, which cannot support itself, without Government granting to its agents
bounties, premiums, and a variety of exclusive privileges, in violation of the
Rights of the People.

LETTER V.
CONGRESS have also been officially informed by the Secretary, that "the
embarrassments of our external trade, have led to serious reflections on the
necessity of enlarging the sphere of our domestic commerce; the restrictive
regulations which in foreign markets abridge the vent of the increasing surplus
of our agricultural produce, serve to beget an earnest desire, that a more
extensive demand for that surplus may be created at home." Secretary of the
Treasury on Manufactures.


Commercial regulations, restrictions and prohibitions, may be regarded as the
bane of Europe. They are universally supported by the clamorous importunity of
partial interests, or by the prejudices and contemptible cunning of Financiers,
who seldom possess any real intention to promote the general welfare. Colbert,
the confidential Minister of Lewis XIV did infinite injury to France by his
desire of subjecting the commere, the manufactures, and all the actions of the
People, to financial calculations and regulations. That Minister, by the tariff
of 1667, proposed very high duties upon a great number of foreign manufactures
upon his refusing to moderate them in favor of the Dutch, they in 1671,
prohibited the importation of the wines, brandies, and manufactures of France;
and it has been thought that the war of 1672, was in part occasioned by these
mutual injuries. The peace of Nimiguen put an end to it in 1678, by moderating
some of these duties in favor of the Dutch, who, in consequence took off their
prohibitions. It was about the same time that the French and English began
mutually to oppress each others industry. In 1697, the English prohibited the
importation of bone-lace, the manufacture of Flanders; the Government of that
country, in return, prohibited the importation of English woolens.

The motto of the French economists, Fair le bien e'est le recevoir, is as
applicable to nations as to individuals; yet, in this enlightened period, do we
observe the most polished nations doing every injury in their power to each
other, with the unjust and absurd idea of deriving advantage to themselves, by
circumscribing or destroying the advantages of their neighbors.

Whilst we are exacting a prohibitory tonnage duty from foreigners, and
annually increasing the duties on their produce and manufactures, can we expect
that they will not retaliate, and in their turn obstruct the progress of our
trade, by embarrassments particularly injurious to the agricultural interest?
If we find that such retaliation, on the part of foreigners, has actually taken
place, and that our commercial regulations and restrictions operate to injure
ourselves, by preventing a sale for the surplus produce of our agriculture --
why not adopt a genuine system of policy, founded on the Rights of Man, and at
once remove the evil, by declaring a total freedom of commerce, within the
United States? Is it not more than probable, that other nations would retaliate
real benefits, as well as insults and injuries. A just and enlightened policy,
of this kind, would be fully adequate to remove the complaint.

Experience justifies the assertion, that a perfect free commerce, would not
only take off the surplus produce of our farms, but would stimulate to
industry, and would ensure the prosperity of our country. The small islands of
St. Thomas and Santa Cruz, were under the government of an exclusive company
The Tonnage Duty of Congress places the whole of the American trade in a
similar situation.
which had the sole right both of purchasing the surplus produce of the
colonists, and of supplying them with such goods, of other countries, as they
wanted; and which, therefore, both in its purchases and sales, had not only the
power of oppressing them, but the greatest temptation to do so. The government
of an exclusive company of merchants, is, perhaps, the worst of all
governments, for any country whatever. It was not, however, able to stop,
altogether, the progress of these colonies, though it rendered it more slow and
languid. The late King of Denmark dissolved this Company, and since that time,
the prosperity of these colonies has been very great. Curacoa and Eustatia, the
two principal islands belonging to the Dutch, are free ports, open to the ships
of all nations; and this freedom, in the midst of better colonies, whose ports
are open to those of one nation only, has been the great cause of the
prosperity of these two barren islands. Mr. Adam Smith, in his Wealth of
Nations, speaking of the causes of the prosperity of new colonies, observes,
"that plenty of good land, and liberty to manage their own affairs, their own
way, seem to be the two great causes of the prosperity of all new colonies."

But, as if the measures of Congress were ever to be directed by the momentary
fluctuation of affairs, it is proposed, that to afford relief to the farmer,
recourse should be had to manufacturing establishments, under the particular
patronage and protection of government; and that Congress should grant
exclusive privileges, bounties and premiums, to a few monied men, to encourage
them to establish extensive manufactories, and to enable them to import from
Europe, necessary machines and workmen. Should this scheme take place, under a
false pretext of serving the agricultural interest, a valuable class of
citizens, personally engaged in useful manufactures, will be sacrificed to the
wealthy few.

Whilst Colonies of Great Britain, it was the contracted policy of that Court
to prevent the progress of manufactures in this country. In a report of the
Lords Commissioners of Trade and Plantations to Parliament, during that period,
they say, "It were to (...) wished, that some expedient might be fallen upon,
to divert the thoughts of the Colonists from manufactures, so much the rather,
because these manufactures, in process of time, may be carried on to a greater
degree, unless an early stop is put to their progress."

Had the Court of Britain pensioned a number of men in America, to effect the
ruin of the infant manufactures of our country, they could not have adopted a
scheme better calculated to answer that purpose, than the scheme of DUER and
HAMILTON to establish national manufactories. -- When Britain had power she
exerted it to restrain the growth of American manufactures -- That country may
now accomplish by finesse what she is no longer able to effect by force, -- The
National Manufactory, however plausible its declared intention, is fully
capable of answering this end. -- The immense capital of that corporation will
give the Company an opportunity of monopolizing many raw materials already
procured with difficulty, particularly in the hatting and tanning business, --
Their workmen, being exempt from taxes, militia duty, and enjoying other
privileges, will draw off the journeymen from private manufactures,
beneficially scattered through the different parts of the country, -- The
exclusive privilege enjoyed by the company of establishing lotteries to
indemnify them for any losses, will enable them to sell the articles
manufactured by them at a less price than any individual citizen, not enjoying
such a privilege, can do, without certain ruin to himself. -- The unjust and
dangerous interference of Government in granting to a company of monied men,
privileges, bounties and favors, not enjoyed by individual citizens, honorably
and usefully educated to manufacturing employ, will discourage citizens from
acquiring a knowledge in professions or occupations, in which they may be at
any time ruined by the arbitrary interference of Government -- After all, these
effects are produced, and they most inevitably will be produced, should the
Company be successful: the act of incorporation provides for an easy
dissolution of the Company itself.

The declared intention of establishing national manufactories, is to carry off
the surplus produce of our agriculture. The citizens of the United States
engaged in the cultivation of the ground, comprehend nine-tenths of its
inhabitants. This numerous, laborious, and useful class of citizens, have never
come forward to Government to solicit partial privileges; have never sought to
be incorporated as a distinct body, forming a separate interest from the
community at large, much less do they require a violation of the rights of a
numerous and respectable class of citizens, personally engaged in manufactures.

The Yeomanry of America only desire what they have a right to demand -- a free
unrestricted sale for the produce of their own industry, and not to have the
sacred rights of mankind violated in their persons, by arbitrary laws,
prohibiting them from deriving all the advantages they can from every part of
the produce of their farms.

FINIS.

