THE CHARTER AND BYE-LAWS OF THE GENERAL SOCIETY OF MECHANICS and TRADESMEN OF
THE CITY OF NEW YORK. ALSO, THE RULES AND ORDERS WITH A CATALOGUE OF NAMES OF
THE MEMBERS.

PUBLISHED BY ORDER OF THE SOCIETY.

NEW YORK: Printed by JOHN HARRISSON, at Yorick's Head, No. 3, Peck-Slip. --
1792. --

An ACT to Incorporate the SOCIETY of MECHANICS and TRADESMEN of the City of
New York, for Charitable Purposes. Passed the 14th of March, 1792.
WHEREAS ROBERT BOYD, and others, Mechanics and Tradesmen, of the city of
New York, associated as a Society, under the style of "The General Society of
Mechanics and Tradesmen of the City of New York," for the laudable purposes of
protecting and supporting such of their brethren as by sickness or accident may
stand in need of assistance, and for the relief of the widows and orphans of
those who may die, leaving little or no property for their support, by their
petition, presented to the Legislature, have prayed to be incorporated, to
enable them more beneficiently to carry into effect their charitable
intentions: Therefore,

Be it enacted by the People of the State of New York, represented in Senate
and Assembly, That the said Robert Boyd, together with Nicholas N. Anthony,
Thomas Allen, William Allen, Jacob Arden, Francis Arden, John Amory, Allard
Anthony, Jacob I. Arden, Thomas Ash, Elbert Anderson, Jacob Arnold, John
Burger, John Burger, jun. William Bryar, Michael Brooks, Abraham Bloodgood,
Francis Bassett, David Barclay, Walter Sicker, Gardner Baker, James Brown,
James Bramble, John P. Bessonett, John Brower, Thomas Brewen, James Byrne, John
Brown, Peter Bertine, John Bingham, James D. Bissett, Thomas Brown, John Banks,
Isaac Boyea, Caleb Boil John Campbell, Joseph Cheesem^n, John Commendener,
John Cole, Peter Cole, Richard Cunningham, Samuel Campbell, Francis Child's,
William Corleys, William Carman, John Clitz, Seabury Champlain. John Croleus,
Isaac Coulthard, James Culbertson, Richard Davis, John De la Montayne, Walter
Degraw, James Van Dyck, John Van Dyck, William I. Elsworth, John Elsworth,
Jacob Fi^^er, Gabriel Furman, Jacob Fee, William Forde, George Gosman, William
W. Gilbert, John Goodeve, John Gilmore, Robert Gosman, Alexander Gibson, Caleb
Haviland, Thomas Hazard, Robert Hodge, Peter Hulick, Hercules Heron, William
Hopson, Daniel Hitchcock, Jabez Halsey, Jacob Hallet, Aaron Howel, Obadiah
Helmes, Thomas Ivers, Joseph Jadwin, Seth Kneelen, George Lindsey, Robert
Laburn, Thomas Le Foy, John Moore, John M'Comb, sen. Dennis M'Cready, John
Mills, Malcom M'Ewen, George Meserve, William Meserve, William Mooney, White
Matlack, William Mooney, Peter R. Maverick, David Mann, Andrew Morris, James
Moore, John M'Baine, Robert M'Dowell, John Ming, Isaac Moore, Peter M'Cartey,
John M'Comb, jun. Joseph Newton, Isaac Nicoll, John Norman, Anthony Ogilvie,
Andrew Otterson, Anthony Post, Abraham Polhemus, Jotham Post, John Perrian,
Edward Patten, George Pake, George Peck, Alexander Peacock, William Philips,
William Parker, Abraham Russell, James Robinson, Frederick Resler, Thomas Ross,
John Ross, Abraham Riker, John I. Richie, Daniel Ruckel, John Stagg, Thomas
Stevenson, John Sidell, Daniel Stansbury, John Striker, Gerardus Smith,
Frederick Stymets, Stephen Smith, Anthony Simmons, Jacob Sherred, George Seal,
George Speth, Henry Snyder, William Stymets, Peter Shackerly, Cornelius
Sebring, Andrew Thompson, James Tylee, James Teller, Ahasuerus Turk, Thomas
Timpson, Daniel Tooker, John Utt, John Wylley, Henry Will, Edward Watkeys, Hugh
Walsh, William Wright, George Warner, Henry Wolf, James Warner, Nathaniel
Woodward, Benjamin Williamson, John Wood, John Wright, Andrew Wright, and John
Young, and all persons being Mechanics or Tradesmen and resident within the
city and county of New York, who hereafter shall be members of the said
Society, shall be, and hereby are ordained, constituted and declared to be one
body corporate and politic; in fact and in name, by the name of "The General
Society of Mechanics and Tradesmen of the City of New York," until the first
Monday of April, one thousand, eight hundred and twelve; and that by that name,
they and their successors, for the term aforesaid, shall and may have
succession, and shall be persons in law, capable of suing and being sued,
pleading and being impleaded, answering and being answered unto, defending and
being defended in all courts and places whatsoever, in all manner of action and
actions, suits, complaints, matters and causes whatsoever; and that they and
their successors may have a common seal, and may change and alter the same at
their pleasure. And, also, that they and their successors, by the name of "The
General Society of Mechanics and Tradesmen of the City of New York," shall be
in law capable of purchasing, holding and conveying any estate, real or
personal, for the public use of the said Corporation.

Provided, That the lands, tenements and hereditaments, which it shall be
lawful for the said Corporation to hold, shall be only such as shall be
requisite for the purpose of erecting a house or hall thereon, in which to meet
and to transact the business of the said Corporation, or such as shall have
been bona fide mortgaged to it by way of security, or conveyed to it in
satisfaction of debts previously contracted in the course of its business, or
purchased at sales on judgments which shall have been obtained for such debts.

And Provided also, That the amount of the real and personal estate, which the
said Corporation are hereby enabled to hold, shall not at any one time exceed
the sum of fifty thousand dollars.

And be it further enacted, That the officers of the said Corporation, shall be
a President, VicePresident, and a second Vice President, a Treasurer and
Secretary, who shall hold their offices for one year, and shall be citizens of
this state, and be elected on the first Tuesday in January in every year, at
such time of the day and at such place in the city of New York, as shall be
fixed and ascertained by the bye-laws of the said Corporation. That all
elections of the said officers or any of them shall be by ballot, and such
person who shall have at any election the greatest number of votes given at
such election as President shall be the President; and in like manner the
person who shall have the greatest number of votes as vice President shall be
Vice President; and in like manner the person who shall have the greatest
number of votes for second Vice President shall be second VicePresident; and in
like manner the person who shall have the greatest number of votes as Treasurer
shall be Treasurer; and in like manner the person who shall have the greatest
number of votes as Secretary shall be Secretary: And the said officers shall
hold their respective offices for one year, and until others shall be chosen in
their places: That if any vacancies shall happen among the said officers by
death, resignation or removal, such vacancies shall be filled for the remainder
of the year in which they may happen by a special election for that purpose to
be held in the same manner as the annual elections are made, at such times and
places as shall be provided for and determined by the byelaws of the said
Corporation: That Robert Boyd shall be the first President of the said
Corporation, Anthony Post Vice President thereof, Daniel Hitchcock second
Vice President thereof, Thomas Le Foy the Treasurer thereof and John Elsworth
the Secretary thereof; who shall hold their offices respectively until the
first. Tuesday in January next, and until others shall be chosen in their
places.

And be it further enacted, That in case it should at any time happen that an
election of officers should not be made on any day when pursuant to this act it
ought to have been made, the said Corporation shall not for that cause be
deemed to be dissolved, but it shall and may be lawful on any other day to hold
and make an election of officers, in such manner as shall have been regulated
by the laws and ordinances of the said Corporation.

And be it further enacted, That all elections and all meetings of the said
Corporation, shall be made and held in a place certain to be fixed and
determined by the bye-laws of the said Corporation; and that at all such
elections and meetings of the said Corporation, so to be held as aforesaid,
twenty-five members thereof, including the President, or in his absence the
VicePresident, or in his absence the second VicePresident, shall be considered
as a quorum of the said Corporation, and shall have full power to do and
transact all the business thereof.

And be it further enacted, That the said Corporation and their successors,
shall have full power to make and prescribe such bye laws, rules, ordinances
and regulations as to them from time to time shall appear needful and proper,
touching the management and disposition of their stock, property, estate and
effects for the purposes aforesaid, and touching the meetings of the said
Society, both special and ordinary, excect the first Tuesday in January in
every year, which is hereby declared to be the annual meeting of the Society,
and touching the duties and conduct of the officers of the said Corporation,
and touching the election of officers and all such other matters as appertain
to the business, ends and purposes for which the said Corporation is by this
act instituted, and for no other purposes whatsoever.

Provided, That such bye-laws, rules and regulations, be not repugnant to the
constitution or the laws of the United States or of this state.

And be it further enacted, That all persons, being Mechanics or Tradesmen, and
resident within the city and county of New York, desiring to become members of
the said Corporation, shall be proposed by at least two members, one meeting
previous to his or their election, which shall be by ballot, and determined by
two-thirds of the members present at such election; that then he or they so
elected, on paying into the hands of the Treasurer, such sum as the
Corporation, by their bye-laws shall direct: Provided the same shall not exceed
the sum of ten Dollars, shall have his or their names inserted in the general
register, and shall be entitled to all the privileges and benefits arising
therefrom.

And to the end, that the funds of the said Corporation may never be diverted
to any other than the charitable purposes for which the institution has been
expressly made and created,

Be it further enacted, That the said Corporation shall, within twenty days
after the passing of this act, exhibit to the Chancellor of this state a full
and particular account of all the estate, real and personal, then vested in the
said Corporation, attested by the oath of the Treasurer thereof, that the same
is a true and perfect account: And shall also, in every year thereafter, during
the continuance of this act, and between the first and last days of May in each
year exhibit to the Chancellor for the time being, a like account together with
a particular and detailed account of all moneys by the said Corporation
expended in the preceding year, specifying the several purposes to which it has
been applied: And if it shall appear to the said Chancellor that any moneys,
except for the necessary repairs of any buildings which may belong to the said
Corporation, or for the payment of the Treasurer or Secretary thereof, or for
other charges expressly incidental to the management of the funds thereof, have
been applied by the said Corporation to any use other than for the support of
indigent members of the said Corporation, or the widows or children of any
person having been a member thereof, he shall direct the Attorny-General of the
state for the time being, ex officio, to file an information against the said
Corporation in the Supreme Court of this State; and if upon the traverse, the
said Corporation shall be found guilty, and judgment shall pass thereupon, that
thenceforth the said Corporation shall cease and become null and void, and the
estate, real and personal, which it may then possess, shall vest in the people
of this state.

And be it further enacted, That this act be and hereby be declared to be a
public act; and that the same is construed in all Courts and places, benignly
and favorably for every beneficial purpose therein intended.

The preceding act is a true Copy of the original, examined and compared
therewith

this twenty-third day of March, 1792. By me ROBERT HARPUR. Deputy Sec'ry.



BYE-LAWS and ORDINANCES.
A Law to appoint the Meetings of the Society.
BE IT ORDAINED, by the General Society of Mechanics and Tradesmen of the City
of New York, That the annual meetings of this Society shall be held at the
dwelling house of Mary Amory, in the sixth ward of the City of New York, until
a more suitable place be provided.

And be it further ordained, that when the members are met as aforesaid, the
President (or in case of his absence, death, or removal from office) the
Vice President, or in case of his absence, the second Vice President, shall,
before the hour of twelve A. M. call the members to order, who shall thereupon
proceed by ballot to the choice of their officers for the ensuing year, and
that such persons who may have a majority of votes, shall (by a Committee of
three, to be previously elected by the Society, to canvass and estimate the
same) be declared duly elected, and shall thereupon enter on the duties of
their respective offices, accordingly.

Nevertheless, it is here to be understood that when a new Treasurer is chosen,
his predecessor in office shall be allowed (not exceeding) thirty days to
adjust and settle all such affairs of the Society as come within the duties of
his office, previous to his delivering his trust into the hands of his
successor.

And be it further ordained, that it shall and may be lawful for this Society
to meet on the first Wednesday in every month at half an hour after the setting
of the sun, at the place aforesaid, for the purpose of balloting for such
persons, who may wish to become members of this Society, and to initiate those
who have been elected members; and also to do and transact all such other
matters and things as the interest of the Society shall from time to time
require.

And be it further ordained, that if any vacancies shall happen, among the
officers of this Society, by death, resignation or removal, such vacancies
shall be filled for the remainder of the year, in which they may happen, by a
special election for that purpose, to be held in the same manner as the annual
elections are made, that the time for such election shall be at one of the
stated meetings of the Society, not less than two, or more than three months
after such vacancies shall or may happen, That one weeks notice thereof shall
be given by the presiding President, in two, or more of the public Newspapers,
printed in this city.

A Law to regulate the admission of such persons who may apply to become
members of this Society.
BE it ordained by the General Society of Mcchanics and Tradesmen of the City
of New York, That every person who may be hereafter chosen a member of this
Society agreeable to the charter, the President, who may then fill the Chair,
shall, in such mode and form as the Society shall direct, receive such person,
and on his paying into the hands of the Treasurer Four Dollars for the purpose
of establishing a fund, to be applied to such purposes, as the charter directs,
shall thereupon have his name inserted in the Register of this Society, and be
entitled to all the privileges and benefits arising therefrom.

And be it further ordained, that every person who may hereafter be elected a
member of this Society, shall within three months thereafter, apply for the
purpose of being initiated; and incase any person so elected, shall neglect to
apply within the time aforesaid, in order to be initiated the election of every
such person, shall by such neglect become void.

And be it further ordained, that every person who may hereafter be proposed,
to become member of this Society, and on whose election upon counting the
ballots, or balls, it shall appear that there was a majority against his
admission, such person shall not within six months thereafter be again proposed
for the purpose aforesaid.

A Law to regulate the Monthly Contributions.
BE it ordained, by the General Society of Mechanics and Tradesmen of the city
of New York, that every member of this Society shall pay into the hands of the
Treasurer, one eighth of a dollar monthly for the purpose of establishing a
general fund to be appropriated as the charter directs.

And be it further ordained, that if any member shall neglect or refuse to pay
his monthly contribution for six months successively, he shall be waited on by
the Treasurer, who shall give notice thereof to the Society, and if he can make
it appear to their satisfaction, that his circumstances would not admit his
paying his monthly contributions then the Secretary shall note it in the
Society book, for their consideration; but if it appears that the deficiency
arises from any other cause, and that he the said member declines paying his
monthly dues for three months longer, then his name shall be struck off the
register of this Society, and he be expelled and debarred from any of the
privileges belonging to the members thereof.

A Law to direct the appropriations of the funds of this Society.
BE it ordained, by the General Society of Mechanics and Tradesmen of the city
of New York ^^at as it is a leading motive of this Society, to ^^lieve the
distressed of their members that may fall in want by sickness, or other
misfortunes; every such person having previous to such sickness or misfortune,
been a regular member for the space of two years, shall be entitled to receive
from the Treasurer, such sum or sums, as the Society shall direct, by an order,
signed by the President, or one of the Vice Presidents, who may preside at the
time the order is made.

And be it further ordained, that four members of this Society, shall at every
annual meeting be elected as overseers of the indigent of this Society, whose
business it shall be to inspect into the circumstances of every member, who may
at any time apply for relief; and report such members case in writing to the
board for their consideration.

A Law respecting the Seal, and Plate for Certificates of this Society.
BE it ordained, by the General Society of Mechanics and Tradesmen of the city
of New York, that there shall be a seal provided by the Society, emblematical
of their institution, with such device as shall be agreed on by the Society;
the same to be kept by the Secretary, for the purpose of sealing all
certificates of admissions, and other transactions whereunto it is proper a
seal should be affixed, in order that the whole of their acts and proceedings
may be regularly authenticated.

Be it further ordained, that the seal of this Society shall not be affixed to
any instrument of writing for any purpose whatsoever (except the certificate of
admission) at any other time or place than at a regular meeting of this Society.

Be it further ordained, that there shall be a plate engraved for the purpose
of striking off the certificates of admission; that each member shall be
entitled to a certificate, which shall be presented to him by the Secretary,
dated from the commencement of his membership, free from any cost or expense,
at any time, not exceeding two months, from the time he was initiated.

A Law to ascertain the duty of the Treasurer.
BE it ordained, by the General Society of Mechanics and Tradesmen of the city
of New York, that it shall be the duty of the Treasurer, from time to time, to
receive all the initiation fees, and collect all the monthly contributions; and
also such donations that may at any time be presented to the Society. He shall
pay all specific orders drawn on him by the Society and signed by the presiding
President; he shall suffer no unnecessary delays in payment to the discredit of
the Society; he shall keep all the accounts, relating to this business, fair
and accurate; he shall at every quarterly meeting report a state of the
finances and funds, and subjoin his account thereunto, which shall be for the
inspection of the Society.

And be it further ordained, that whenever a Treasurer is elected, he shall
before he enters upon the duties of his office, give bond with one sufficient
surety in the sum of Two Hundred and Fifty Dollars for the faithful performance
of the duties of his office.

And be it further ordained, that the Treasurer shall be allowed for the
aforesaid services, Twenty Dollars, per annum, which it shall be lawful for him
to retain into his hands.

A Law to ascertain the duties of the Secretary.
BE it ordained, by the General Society of Mechanics and Tradesmen of the city
of New York, that it shall be the duty of the Secretary to attend every meeting
of the Society (except sickness or his being out of town); he shall keep
minutes of all their proceedings, and regularly record the same; he shall
provide and keep a book wherein each members name shall be inserted, in their
order, and in such manner, that it may at first view appear, when each member
was admitted, expelled, or deceased; which book shall be the register of this
Society.

And be it further ordained, that it shall be the duty of the Secretary, to
cause notice to be given of the annual and quarterly meetings of this Society,
in not less than two of the public news papers, printed in this city, one week
previous to each meeting.

And be it further ordained, that the Secretary shall be allowed for the
aforesaid services Twenty Dollars per annum.

A Law to regulate the Loaning of the Money of this Society.
BE it ordained, by the General Society of Mechanics and Tradesmen of the city
of New York, that all loans of moneys, which may hereafter be made, shall be
done at one of the stated meetings of the Society; application for said purpose
having been made one month previous thereunto. That in case there should be
more than one applicant at the same time, for any sum that may be in the hands
of the Treasurer, it is hereby made the duty of the presiding President to
determine by casting of lots, which of the applicants shall have the preference.

And be it further ordained, that no money shall be loaned out by the Society,
unless the borrower lives, (and the real property to be mortgaged be situated)
within the city and county of New York; and unless the real property offered to
be mortgaged, be twice the value of the sum to be loaned.

And be it further ordained, that the members of this Society shall have the
preference of all other applicants, for any money to be loaned.

Passed this 2d Day of May, 1792. Attest, ROBERT BOYD, President. JOHN
ELSWORTH, Secretary.


RULES AND ORDERS For the proceeding in business, of the General Society of
Mechanics and Tradesmen of the City of New York.
I.
UPON the appearance of a quorum the President shall take the Chair, and the
members shall be called to order.

II.
Immediately after the President shall have taken the chair, the minutes of the
preceding meeting shall be read by the Secretary, to the end that any mistakes
therein may be corrected by the Society.

III.
The President shall preserve order and decorum, and decide questions of order,
subject to an appeal to the Society.

IV.
The President shall not vote in any case, unless the Society be equally
divided.

V.
When the Society adjourns, the members shall keep their seats until the
President leaves the chair.

VI.
Every member, previous to his speaking, shall rise from his seat, and address
himself to the President.

VII.
When two or more members rise at once, the President shall name the member who
is first to speak.

VIII.
No member shall speak more than twice to the same question, until he shall
have obtained leave from the Society.

IX.
No motion shall be debated, or put, unless the same be seconded. When a motion
is seconded, it shall be stated by the President before debate, and every such
motion shall be reduced to writing, if the President or any member desires it.

X.
After a motion is stated by the President, it shall be deemed to be in
possession of the Society; but may be withdrawn at any time before decision, or
amendment.

XI.
When any question is under debate, no motion shall be received, unless to
amend it or to postpone it to a certain day, for the previous question or to
adjourn.

XII.
A motion to adjourn shall be always in orderand shall be decided without
debate.

XIII.
The previous question, until it is decided, shall preclude all amendment and
debate of the main question; and shall be in this form -- Shall the main
question be now put.

XIV.
No member shall speak more than once, upon a previous question.

XV.
Petittions, memorials and other papers addressed to the Society shall be
presented by the President, or by a member in his place.

XVI.
Whilst the President is putting a question, no member shall walk out of, or
across the room, nor when a member is speaking, shall any member entertain
private discourse, nor pass between him and the chair.

XVII.
Every bill shall receive three several readings, previous to its being passed,
and the second and third reading shall be at different meetings, unless the
Society unanimously direct otherwise.

XVIII.
All questions in the Society, shall be put in the order they were moved;
except that in filling up blanks, the largest sum and longest time shall be
first put.

XIX.
When a bill passes the Society, the President shall certify the same, with the
date thereof, at the foot of the bill, and the Secretary countersign the same.

XX.
The order of the day shall have preference to any motion before the Society.

New York, June 6, 1792. A True Copy.

JOHN ELSWORTH, Secretary.



MEMBERS NAMES.
JOHN YOUNG, Joseph Jadwin William Allen, Dennis M'Ready, Anthony Post, Robert
Boyd John Burger, John Stagg, Thomas Ivers, William I. Elsworth, Robert Hodge,
John Moore, Joseph Cheesman, David Barclay, John M'Comb, John Wylley, John
Sidell, Francis Bassett, Andrew Otterson, James Brown, John Goodeve, Jacob I.
Arden, William Hopson, George Messerve, David Man, Jacob Arden, George Warner,
Gerardus Smith, John Campbell, Abraham Russel, Nicholas N. Anthony, George
Gosman, George Lindsay, Caleb Haviland, James Tylee, John Mills, Frederick
Stymets, Malcom M'Euen, William W. Gilbert, Edward Watkeys, Herculas Herron
Abraham Polhemus, John Cole, John Commerdener, Walter Bicker, William Bryar,
Thomas Allen, Henry Will, Samuel Campbell, White Matlack, Thomas Stevenson,
James Robinson, Peter Cole, Thomas Hazard, Francis Child's, Michael Brooks,
Jotham Post, Daniel Stanbury, William Messerve, John Perrin, William Mooney,
John Amory, Robert Lilburn John Striker, Frederick Resler, William Wright,
Edward Patten, Richard Cunningham, Abraham Bloodgood, Allard Anthony, Anthony
Ogilvie, John Burger, jun. Joseph Newton, Richard Davis, John Elsworth, Thomas
Greenleaf, Gardener Baker, Thomas Lefoy, James Warner, William Mooney, John
Utt, Stephen Smith, John Montanye, Daniel Hitchcock, Anthony Simmons, Peter R.
Maverick, Jacob Sherred, James Teller, Thomas Ross, Jun. James Van Dyck, Walter
Degraw, John M Comb, Jun. John P. Bessonet, George Peek, John Brower, Thomas
Brewen, James Moore, George Seal, Andrew Morris, John Ross, James Byrne, Thomas
Ash, John Brown, George Speth, William Carman, Ahasuerus Turk, John Clitz,
Henry Snydor, Peter Bertine, Thomas Timpson, John Bingham, Seabury Champlin,
William Stymets, Peter Shackerly, John Crolius, jun. Isaac Coulthard, Nathanied
Woodward, Cornelius B. Sebring, George Pick, Benjamin Williamson, James D.
Bissett, John Gilmore, Gabriel Furman, John I. Richey, John Van Dyk, Elbert
Anderson, Abraham Riker, John M'Bain, Jabez Halsey, Thomas Brown, Alexander
Peacock, John Wright, John Ming, Isaac Moore, John Wood, jun. Aaron Howell,
Jacob Hallet, Daniel Ruckel, Seth R. Kneeland, Jacob Fee, Robert M'Dowel,
Robert Gosman, William Foord, Isaac Nichols, Obadiah Helm, William Philips,
James Culbertson, Peter M'Eachan, Daniel Tooker, John Banks, Isaac Boyea, John
Norman, Caleb Boil, Andrew Wright, Alexander Gibson, William Parker, Jacob
Arnold, Amos Corning, James Hays, Evert Bush, Philip K. Lawrence, Alexander T.
Wiley. John W. Hardenbrook, Garret Walgrove, Kamp Ayrs, John Harrisson, John
Minuse, Edward Ming, Jacob Vredenburgh, Leonard Rogers, Peter Bonnet, Henry
Ackerman, Cornelius Timpson, Frederick Maybie, Henry Burtsell, Charles Warner,
John Patten, John P. Room, Owen Jones, Josiah Furman, Henry Ortly, Jacob P.
Room, Harman Bussing, Jeremiah Wool, Abraham Brower. Edward Day, George
Stanton, jun. John Pier Groshon, John Whitlock, Peter Garbrance, Peter Amerman,
Israel Haviland, Benjamin Benson, Joseph Lions, John Miller, John Fawp^ll,
James Brard, John Day, Adam Fink, John Low, Alexander Fink, jun. John Post,
John Read, Abel W. Hardenbrook, Cornelius Cooper, Samuel Wright, Robert Cocks,
Jeremiah Wood, Jonas Utt, Jotham Wright, William Gilbert Miller, Samuel
Burling, Edward Wade, Eleazer Little, Stephen Halsey, John Slidell, James
Hallet, John Peshine, Charles Hedenberg, Carsan Dickinson, John B. Dash, jun,
Christopher Halsted, Jacamiah Akerly, William Dudley, Joseph Titus, Samuel L.
Whitlock, Timothy Nostrand, Isaac Vredenburgh, jun. James Weeks, John Lent,
John Clock, William Weeks, Henry Whitfield, Theodorus Deforest, William
Humphreys, Thomas Campbell, Robert Jonston, Gilbert Brush, James Scott, Robert
Brown, James M'Cready jun, Simeon A. Bayley, Garret Schanck, William Dally,
Cornelius King, Stephen Allen, Andrew M'Cready, Philip Dally, John Bruce, David
Baker, James Woodruff, Isaac Varian, John Moffit, William Perrin, Sampson A.
Myers, Daniel Van Voorhis, John Robertson, John Waldron, William H. Ireland,
Robert G. Giles, John Rose, William Rollinson, William Kumbel, Judah Myers,
Henry B. Earl, Jonathan Cowdry, jun. Simon Van Antwerp, Garret Cozine, Mathias
Valentine, Abraham Child, Benjamin Haight, John Elliot, William Brown, Augustus
Wright, William Baker jun. John Hoogland, Peter Bourdet, jun. Stephen
Hitchcock, Richard Furman, Thomas Shepherd, Joseph Du Bois, William Quick,
Benjamin Higgins, Garret De Bow, Samuel Delamater, Thomas Fardon, Anthony
Brown, Peter Walker, John Ashfield, Albert Smith. Ahafuerus Turk, jun. Thomas
Garniss, Samuel Machett, Abraham Lazalere, Nathaniel Harned, Isaac Ketchell,
James Jinkins, Elias Billington, George Ritchie, Philip Ruckel, James Duffie,
Jacob Keyser, William King, Stephen Carpenter, John Gould, William Wendover,
George M'Koy, William Rutledge, John Grandine, John Bogart, Francis Many,
Frederick Miller, John Morris, Samuel Brown, Henry Couenhoven, James Ronalds,
Samuel Loudon, jun. John Pelltreau, William Willess, Paul Van Der Voort,
William Wood, Augustus Crygier, Isaac Tor-Boss, Mott Hicks, Jonas Humbert,
Nathaniel Godwin, Henry Mitchell, Joel Post, Jonas Mapes, James Aymar, jun,
Nathaniel Brown, Archibald M'Intire, Evert Duyckinck, William Arnold,
Christopher Gollow, Matthew West, Hazel Myers, John Cheesman, James Ginkens,
Jacob Morris, Josiah G. Pierson.

