THE CHARTER, CONSTITUTION AND BYE-LAWS, OF THE NEWPORT ASSOCIATION OF
Mechanics and Manufacturers.

FOR THE GENERAL GOOD.

PRINTED AT NEWPORT, BY HENRY BARBER, FOR THE ASSOCIATION.

AT a Meeting of the Newport Association of Mechanics and Manufacturers, at the
State-House, on Monday, the 2d Day of July, A. D. 1792,

VOTED and Resolved, That the Pamphlet, containing our Charter, Constitution,
and Bye-Laws, and Recommendation, be printed under the Direction of the
Committee of Correspondence, the Number not to exceed Three Hundred.

A true Copy from the Journals: JOSEPH THURSTON, Sec'ry.

INTRODUCTION.
ASSOCIATIONS having been found, by the Experience of all Ages, of great
Advantage in the Attainment of the most important Objects -- and the Degree of
Eminency to which the Manufactures of Europe have arrived during the present
century, being principally owing to the Encouragement which the Artisans in the
different Branches have received from Societies formed for that express
Purpose, and to the Mechanics themselves being associated together under the
Sanction of the Laws. -- The Mechanics and Manufacturers of the Town of
Newport, in New England, viewing such Associations of the first Importance, and
sensible of the real Utility, in the Infancy of our Country as an independent
Nation, of establishing its Credit, by the Goodness of its Manufactures (as
well those used at Home, as those made for Exportation) -- being also anxious
to prevent, as far as in their Power, the Drain of Specie consequent on the
Importation of the Manufactures of foreign Countries, did on the 10th Day of
November, A. D. 1791, agree and associate themselves together, "for the
Promotion of Home Manufactures -- for cementing the mechanic Interest -- for
raising a Fund for the Relief of such of said Association as may be distressed
-- and for other valuable Purposes, under the Name of the NEWPORT ASSOCIATION
of MECHANICS and MANUFACTURERS."

The Constitution and Bye-Laws of said Association, together with their
Charter, granted by the Honorable General Assembly of the State of
Rhode Island, and Providence Plantations, are here unto annexed.

THE CHARTER.
L. S.
AT the GENERAL ASSEMBLY of the Governor and Company of the State of RHODE
ISLAND and PROVIDENCE PLANTATIONS, begun and holden at Newport, within and for
the State aforesaid, on the first Wednesday in May, in the Year of our Lord One
Thousand Seven Hundred and Ninety two, and in the Sixteenth Year of
Independence.
An ACT to incorporate certain Persons, by the Name of the NEWPORT ASSOCIATION
of MECHANICS and MANUFACTURERS.
WHERE AS diverse Persons have petitioned this Assembly for an Act of
Incorporation, whereby they may be enabled to promote certain Purposes
hereinafter mentioned: -- Therefore, Be it Enacted by this General Assembly,
and by the Authority thereof it is Enacted, That the said Petitioners, to wit:
-- Benjamin Hall, Samuel Vinson, Samuel C. Carr, Timothy Ingraham, David
Melvill (Barber) Nathan Bebee, Anthony Dixon, Henry Mumford, William Prior,
Thomas Arnold, William Tripp, James Center, John Pitman, jun. Isaac Manchester,
William S. N. Allen, Samuel Watson, George Littlefield, Perry Weaver, Thomas
Melvill, jun. Clarke Albro, Daniel Vaughan, Thomas G. Pitman, George Clarke,
Godfrey Wenwood, John Green, Robert Tailor, Samuel Yates, Seth Yates, David
Melvill (Pewterer) Nathaniel Brown, Samuel Thurston, William Card, Jonathan
Simmons; Abner Taber, Azariah Albro, Jethro Briggs, Joseph Thurston, John
Yeomans, Israel Horsefield, Samuel Vaughan, Joseph Vickary, Philip Burgis,
Jesse Lillibridge, William Tew, John Bull, Joseph Allen, Walter Nichols,
William Wait, Samuel Brown, John Jepson, John Weeden, Joseph Cozzens, Jeremiah
Weeden, John Sly, Stephen Hawkins, Elisha Smith, Joseph Dyre, Stephen Cahoone,
jun. Benjamin Hall, jun. George Hall, Thomas Coggeshall, Noah White, John Shaw,
Seth Melvill, John Franklin, Latham Thurston, Thomas Stevens, jun. John
Williams, John Trevett, William Briggs, Noah Barker, Henry Howland, Edward
Stanhope, William Manchester, and Fleet S. Green, together with such others as
they shall elect from Time to Time, shall be forever hereafter a Body,
corporate and politic, in Fact and Name, by the Name of the NEWPORT ASSOCIATION
of MECHANICS and MANUFACTURERS, for the Purpose of promoting Industry, and
giving a just Encouragement to Ingenuity -- that our own Manufactures may be
improved to the general Advantage, not only of the Manufacturers themselves,
but of the State at large, and for raising a Fund, by free and voluntary
Subscriptions, Contributions, Legacies, Donations, and in such other Manner as
is hereinafter, mentioned, to be appropriated as the Association may direct,
for the Purposes aforesaid. -- And the said Association is hereby empowered to
take, receive and hold, all and any voluntary Subscriptions, Donations,
Contributions, Legacies, etc. of any Sum or Sums of Money, or of any real or
personal Estate, and also to have, possess and acquire, Lands, Tenements,
Hereditaments, or any Goods and Chattels whatsoever, and the same to let,
lease, grant, demise, aliene, bargain, sell, convey and dispose of, by Deed or
Deeds, under their Seal, at their own Will and Pleasure; and shall and may be
Persons capable in Law as a Body corporate to sue and be sued, to plead and be
impleaded unto, to answer and be answered unto, to defend and be defended
against, in all Courts and Places, and before all proper Judges whatsoever, in
all and in singular Suit and Suits, Causes and Actions, of what Kind soever, in
the fullest and amplest Manner. -- And if it shall happen, that the said
Association shall become seized of Lands or Tenements, by Mortgage, as Security
for Payment of any Debt or Debts, or by levying Execution on Lands or
Tenements, for discharging any Debt or Debts that shall be due to the said
Association, it shall be lawful for them by Deed, under their Seal, to sell and
convey the Lands and Tenements acquired by either of the said two mentioned
Ways.

And be it further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That there shall be a
Meeting of the said Association in the Town of Newport, on the first Monday in
April yearly forever: At which Time, for the better ordering and managing the
Affairs of the said Association, they shall, out of their own Body, by a
Majority of the Members present, by Ballot, elect a President, a
Vice President, a Treasurer and a Secretary, and such other Officers as they
shall judge necessary; and all Officers chosen as aforesaid shall, before they
are qualified to act, be sworn or affirmed to the faithful Performance of their
respective Trusts.

And be it further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That the said
Association shall have a common Seal, which it shall be lawful for them to
alter, change, break and make anew at Pleasure; and that the said Newport
Association of Mechanics and Manufacturers, by the Name aforesaid, they and
their, Successors, shall have perpetual Succession.

And be it further Enacted, That the aforesaid Robert Tailor, be the first
President; -- the aforesaid William Tripp, the first Vice President; -- the
aforesaid Nathan Beebe, the first Treasurer; and the aforesaid Joseph Thurston,
the first Secretary, of the said Association; to continue in their respective
Offices until the first Monday in April next.

And be it further Enacted, That all Donations to the said Association, by
voluntary Subscription, Contribution, Legacy, or otherwise, shall make a Part
of, and be put into the capital Stock or Fund of the said Association, to be
appropriated as they may direct for the Purposes aforesaid.

And be it further Enacted, That the said Association, at any of their stated
Meetings, shall have, and there is hereby granted to them, full Power to elect
into their Body such Persons as they shall judge proper; and to make such
Rules, Orders and Bye-Laws, and to alter the same, as they shall judge needful
for the better Government of the said Association. -- Provided, that such
Rules, Orders and Bye-Laws be not repugnant to the Laws of the State.

And be it further Enacted, That any Thirteen of the Members (the President, or
VicePresident, or Treasurer, or Secretary, always to be one) being convened at
any regular Time of Meeting, are hereby declared to be a Quorum of said
Association.

And to the End that the Members of the said Association, and all Contributors
thereto, may know the State of their Stock, and the Disposition thereof; -- Be
it Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That fair Entries shall be made in
proper Books, to be provided for the Purpose, of all Donations, Legacies,
Subscriptions, Contributions, etc. made to the said Association; -- and of all
Estates, both real and personal, belonging to them, and of the Income thereof;
and also of all their Transactions, either by themselves, or by their Officers,
or by their Committees, for and on Account of the said Association; and the
said Books shall be brought to each stated Meeting, and shall there be opened
for the Perusal and Examination of the Members of the said Association.

And be it further Enacted, That the said Association have, and there is hereby
granted to them, Powers to affix a Sum, to be paid on the Admission of any new
Member, not exceeding Three Silver Dollars; as also the Sum which shall be paid
annually by each Member; and to alter the same at Pleasure: Provided always,
that these Powers shall not be exercised, except at an annual Meeting.

And be it further Enacted, That if ever there shall be a less Number than
Thirteen belonging to the said Association, then and in that Case the said
Association shall cease; and the remaining Funds shall be distributed among the
Widows and Orphans of those, who at the Time of their Decease were Members of
the said Association, -- under the Direction, and at the Discretion, of the
TownCouncil of the Town of Newport, for the Time being.

And it is further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That his Excellency the
Governor, be and he is hereby requested to sign an Exemplification of this Act,
and cause the public Seal to be thereto affixed; whereupon the said
Association, and their Successors, shall be entitled to, and hold and enjoy,
all the Rights, Privileges and Immunities, to them granted and conveyed by this
Act.

In Pursuance of the foregoing Act, I have hereunto set my Hand, and caused the
Seal of the said State to be affixed, at Providence, this seventh Day of May,
in the Sixteenth Year of Independence, A. D. 1792.
ARTHUR FENNER. By his Excellency's Command, HENRY WARD, Sec'ry.


THE CONSTITUTION.
WHERE AS the greatest Felicity of human Life results from Society -- and as
the present divided State of the Mechanics and Manufacturers of the Town of
Newport is attended with many disagreeable Circumstances, peculiarly
disadvantageous to Ingenuity and Industry. -- And whereas our Brethren, the
Mechanics and Manufacturers of the Cities of Philadelphia and New York, and of
the Towns of Boston and Providence, anxious to place their Craft upon a more
respectable Footing, have formed themselves into Associations: -- The
Subscribers, convinced by the Experience of our own Country, as well as by that
of foreign Nations, of the Utility and Advantages arising from such
Associations, and wishing to increase the mechanic Interest in this Town, and
the United States, as well as to raise a Fund for the Relief of distressed
Brethren and their Families -- have formed ourselves into a Society, by the
Name of the NEWPORT ASSOCIATION of MECHANICS and MANUFACTURERS; -- and,
reposing a friendly Confidence in each other, do hereby agree to be governed by
the following Rules, viz.

1. That the Association shall elect, by a Majority of Votes, to be taken by
Ballot, a President, a Vice President, a Treasurer, a Secretary, and a
Committee of Correspondence, to continue in Office until the first Monday in
April.

2. The President shall have Authority to maintain Order and Decorum, at the
Meetings of the Association, and to call a special Meeting at any Time, with
the Advice of a Majority of the Committee of Correspondence.

3. The Vice President, in Case the President shall die, be displaced, or be
absent, shall have the same Authority as the President.

4. The Treasurer shall receive and pay away all Moneys belonging to the
Association, and keep regular Accounts of the same; observing always to pay no
Moneys, without an Order signed by the President and Four of the Committee of
Correspondence, who are prohibited from drawing more than Three Pounds, between
the stated Meetings of the Association, unless specially empowered at a
Previous Meeting, and the Treasurer shall give Bonds for the faithful Discharge
of his Trust.

5. The Secretary shall keep a Record of the Proceedings of the Association, in
a Book to be provided for the Purpose; and shall cause to be published such
Parts of the Proceedings or Resolutions as the Association may order, or the
President and a Majority of the Committee of Correspondence may direct.

6. The Committee of Correspondence shall at present consist of Eleven (but may
be enlarged or diminished, at the Discretion of the Association) and it shall
be their Duty to attend to, and see executed, the Resolutions of the
Association, and such other Matters as they may think proper for the Good of
the Institution, between the stated Meetings, and report their Proceedings at
the next Meeting; and a Majority of the said Committee shall be a Quorum to do
Business.

7. If any of the Officers aforesaid shall resign, or be displaced, the
Association shall fill up the Vacancy in the Mode prescribed in the First
Article; and if the President and Vice President, or Treasurer, or Secretary,
be absent at any of the Meetings, the Association may elect one to officiate
pro tempore.

8. The Association shall meet on the first Monday in April, in every Year, for
the Purpose of choosing their Officers, and transacting the necessary Business;
and at such other Times as the Association may direct.

9. Thirteen Members (of which the President, or Vice President, or Treasurer,
or Secretary, must always be one) constitutionally assembled, shall be a Quorum
of the Association to transact Business; and if that Number should not attend
at any Meeting, those assembled shall have Power to adjourn the same.

10. Two-thirds of the Members present at any Meeting, constitutionally
empowered to do Business, shall be sufficient to expel a Member they may deem
unworthy; he having had due Notice of the Complaint, and Time to make his
Defense.

11. Any Mechanic or Manufacturer, who has been resident in this Town Three
Months previous to his applying to become a Member of this Association, and
having been proposed by the President, or Vice President, or any Member of the
Committee of Correspondence, may be elected at any Meeting of the Association;
and the Election shall be by Ballot.

12. Every Person having been duly elected, and subscribed these Rules, on
paying into the Hands of the Treasurer Four Shillings and Sixpence, shall be
declared a Member; and the Sum of Two Shillings shall be paid annually by each
Member; but the Association may, at any annual Meeting, augment the said Sum,
but not to exceed Fifteen Shillings. -- And all Donations to the Association
shall be made through the President, who shall pay them to the Treasurer, and
report the same at the next Meeting. -- And any Person desirous of being
dismissed from this Association, on Application to the President or
Vice President, and paying up his Arrearages, if any, shall by him be dismissed
accordingly.

13. If it should so happen, at any Time hereafter, that there should not be
Thirteen Members belonging to this Association, then and in that Case all the
remaining Funds shall be divided among the Widows and Orphans of those who at
the Time of their Decease were Members of the Association, at the Discretion
and under the Direction of the TownCouncil of the Town of Newport for the Time
being; and the said Association shall cease.

BYE-LAWS.
I.
THIS Association shall meet three Times in each Year, besides the annual
Meeting for Election of Officers, viz. -- On the first Monday in July; -- on
the first Monday in October; -- and on the first Monday in January; -- which
Meetings (together with the general Meeting) shall by the Secretary be notified
in the Newspapers in this Town.

II.
Whereas it is of the greatest Importance, for the Peace and good Order of this
Association, that the Election of Officers should be free, regular, and
uninfluenced: It is therefore Voted and Resolved, That in future the following
Rules shall be observed:

1. That at the stated Meetings to be holden on the first Monday in January,
each Member attending shall furnish himself with a List of such Names as he
shall choose to put in Nomination for the four Charter Officers, and the
Members of the Committee of Correspondence, at the ensuing Election, not
exceeding the Number of Twenty-six -- And the first Business to be proceeded on
that Day, after the President takes the Chair, shall be the Appointment of a
Committee of three Members to sort and count the Nomination Votes. -- After
said Committee is chosen, the President shall call on the Members for their
Votes, and the aforesaid Committee shall proceed to count the same, and report
to the President the Names of the Twenty-six highest in said Vote, -- a List of
which shall be immediately made out by the Secretary, and read aloud at the
Table; and each Member of the Association shall, previous to the Election, be
furnished, by the Secretary, with a printed Copy of the same.

2. At the Election, on the first Monday in April annually, each Member shall,
when called upon by the President for the Time being, bring in his Ballot for
Officers singly, from the printed List. -- The Votes shall then be counted by a
Committee of Three, appointed by the Association for that Purpose; and if it so
happens, that any Name, not in the Nomination List, should be voted for, such
Vote shall be thrown out without being counted -- After the Ballots are
counted, the Committee shall report to the President, and he shall declare the
Name of the Person elected to each Office, except to the Presidency, which
shall be declared by one of the said Committee.

3d. A Majority of all the Votes of the Members present, shall be necessary to
determine the Election to any Office; and if, on counting the Ballots, it
appears that there is not a Majority for any one Member, the President shall
declare that there is no Choice, and shall call on the Members for another
Vote, at the same Time informing them of the Two highest in the last Vote, who
shall be the Persons to be voted for in the second Ballot.

III.
That at every Meeting of the Association, as soon as the President takes the
Chair, each Member shall take his Seat, and no Whispering or disorderly
Behavior, obstructing the Proceedings of the Meeting shall be admitted, under
a Penalty not exceeding One Shilling and Sixpence, at the Discretion of the
President.

IV.
That at any Meeting, whenever a Member has any Thing to offer for the
Consideration of the Association, he shall address the President standing up;
and no Person shall attempt to speak, while a Member is speaking, under a
Penalty not exceeding One Shilling and Sixpence, at the Discretion of the
President.

V.
No Person shall speak more than twice to the same Question, without Leave of
the President; and it is expected that each Member will convey his Ideas in as
concise a Manner as possible.

VI.
All Questions (except for the Election of Officers or Members) shall be
determined by a Hand Vote, except a Vote by Ballot is called for and seconded;
in that Case it shall be taken in that way.

VII.
When any Matter is proposed for Consideration of the Association, no
Determination or Debate shall be had thereon, unless it be seconded; and all
Matters that shall be voted upon by the Association, shall be determined by a
Majority of the Members present.

VIII.
The President, Vice President, Treasurer and Secretary, shall continue in
their respective Offices, until other shall be duly elected and qualified to
serve therein.

IX.
The President shall propose all Matters to be voted upon, and shall declare
the Voice of the Association; and he shall appoint the Time of Day and Place
where the annual and quarterly Meetings shall be held, from Time to Time.

X.
The Treasurer's Accounts shall be settled at each annual Meeting, by three
Auditors to be appointed for that Purpose at the previous Meeting; who shall
certify the same in Writing, under their Hands, at the annual Meeting; and all
Bonds and Securities, for Money or Estates, shall be lodged in the Hands of the
Treasurer.

XI.
It shall be the Duty of the Committee of Correspondence to hear the Case of
any Member of this Association, who may, through Sickness or Misfortune, fall
into Want; and (if they see fit) to grant him a Supply, under the Restrictions
provided in the Constitution.

XII.
If it should so happen, that any particular Craft of Tradesmen, at any Time
hereafter, should meet and agree upon any Regulations for their Craft, and sign
the same -- and any Member of that Craft, who is a Member of this Association
shall in any Manner violate the same, on Complaint and due Proof made, he shall
be deemed an unworthy Member, and dealt with accordingly.

XIII.
If any Member of this Association should have a Dispute with a Brother Member,
it shall be his Duty, before he goes to Law, to lay the Case before the
Association; for their Opinion thereon; and the Party refusing to be governed
by the Opinion of the Association, or those appointed by them to settle said
Dispute, shall be deemed an unworthy Member, and dealt with accordingly.

XIV.
No Person shall be eligible to be ballotted for to join this Association,
unless he shall, at the Time of his Application, depend solely for his Support
on some mechanic or manufacturing Business. Provided nevertheless. That it is
not intended by this Regulation to exclude any Person who may, in the
Protecution of his mechanic Business, buy and sell Merchandise or any kind, and
shall, at the Time of his Application, be judged by the Association, a real
Friend to the mechanic Interest.

XV.
No Person, who is a Journeyman, shall be admitted as a Member of this
Association, unless he has served a regular Apprenticeship in this Town, and
can be well recommended, -- or, if a Stranger, shall produce a Certificate, or
Letters of Recommendation, from Three known Masters of the same Craft, in the
Town where he served his Time, -- or has established his Character, by working
Journey-Work, in this or some neighboring Town, so that he can be well
recommended.

XVI.
No Person, under the Age of Twenty-one Years, shall be ballotted for to be a
Member of this Association.

XVII.
Any Person, wishing to become a Member of this Association, shall make
Application to one of the Committee of Correspondence; and a Majority of that
Committee shall be necessary to determine a Recommendation to the Association,
in Favor of such Person or Candidate.

XVIII.
Donations may be made by Persons not of the Association: -- also by those who
are Members, for the express Purpose of forming Funds for the Encouragement of
Manufactures: The Interest of these Donations only to be applied for the
aforesaid Purposes, and the Principal to be held subject to the Orders of those
who subscribed the same, and to be returned to them at any quarterly or annual
Meeting of the Association when they may apply for the same, -- but not less
than One Year after the Donation is lodged in the Treasure; they also giving
Notice that such Application is intended to be made, at a previous quarterly
Meeting.

XIX.
All Persons nominated to become Members of this Association, shall at the Time
they are propounded pay their EntranceMoney, and it not admitted to Membership,
the Money to be refunded.

RECOMMENDATIONS, etc.
I.
ON Motion, resolved unanimously, That it be and hereby is earnestly
recommended, to all the Members of this Association, to discourage as far as
possible, all foreign Manufactures, by using in their Families and Business
those of our own Country; -- and that each Member avoid all Extravagance in
Dress, or other Expenses, in themselves, or those under their Care, whereby an
Emulation may be excited.

II.
It is also recommended, That the Members of this Association very carefully
inspect into the Conduct of their Apprentices, and those under their Care, that
they be not strolling the Streets, late in the Night Season, and disturbing the
Inhabitants by Revels.

IT is Voted and Resolved, That on Application being made to this Association,
at any of their Meetings, by an Inhabitant of this Town, who may think himself
defrauded by bad Manufactures being sold him by any Member thereof; or by any
Member not completing his Contracts in a workmanlike Manner, or by extravagant
Charges, they will immediately appoint a Committee to examine into the Facts,
and endeavor that Justice be done to the Parties.

LIST OF OFFICERS, chosen January 2, 1792.
ROBERT TAILOR, President. WILLIAM TRIPP, Vice President. NATHAN BEBEE,
Treasurer. JOSEPH THURSTON, Secretary.
COMMITTEE OF CORRESPONDENCE.
TIMOTHY INGRAHAM, Chairman, GODFREY WENWOOD, FLEET S. GREEN, THOMAS ARNOLD,
THOMAS G. PITMAN, JAMES CENTER, BENJAMIN HALL, DAVID MELVILL, (Barber) JOHN
PITMAN, SAMUEL C. CARR, JETHRO BRIGGS.

