AN INAUGURAL DISSERTATION ON OPIUM.

SUBMITTED TO THE EXAMINATION OF JOHN EWING, S. T. P. PROVOST; AND TO THE
TRUSTEES AND MEDICAL PROFESSORS OF THE UNIVERSITY OF PENNSYLVANIA; FOR THE
DEGREE OF DOCTOR OF MEDICINE: ON THE SECOND DAY OF MAY, A. D. 1792.

BY VALENTINE SEAMAN, OF NEW YORK.

PHILADELPHIA: PRINTED BY JOHNSTON AND JUSTICE, AT FRANKLIN'S HEAD, NO. 41,
CHESNUT-STREET.

M. DCC. XCII.

TO JOHN STAGG, ELIJAH COCK, THEOPH. BEEKMAN, ABRAM. HERRING, FRANCIS BASSETT,
RICH. LAWRENCE, ELIAS NIXEN, JOHN BROWER, WM. HARDENBROOK, FRED. STEYMETS, WM.
DE PEYSTER, HENRY RIKER, AND WILLET SEAMAN,


Commissioners of the Almshouse in New York. In testimony of sincere thanks
for their many services rendered him in the course of his attendance at the
practical source of medical information, which is under their management. AND
ALSO TO ADAM KUHN, M. D. PROFESSOR OF THE PRACTICE OF PHYSIC, AND BENJAMIN
RUSH, M. D. PROFESSOR OF THE INSTITUTES AND OF CLINICAL MEDICINE, IN THE
UNIVERSITY OF PENNSYLVANIA.

As an acknowledgment for the many obligations conferred by their repeated
favors, during his studies under their direction, THIS DISSERTATION IS
Respectfully inscribed, By their obliged friend,

V. SEAMAN.

INTRODUCTION.
I CANNOT permit the reader to peruse this Dissertation, without previously
soliciting him, generously to withhold any critical remarks on the little
inaccuracies he may observe, as it is a first production, whose composition and
publication were limited within a short time.

I must beg him likewise to excuse frequent repetition, as it originated from a
desire of perspicuity, and although I may thereby have destroyed all beauty of
composition, I shall not regret the sacrifice, if it has enabled me more fully
to communicate my ideas; as clearness of sentiment, particularly in medicine,
is always more to be wished for, than elegance of expression.

And lastly, as there are some opinions advanced in it, which are not
universally received, I must also request him to suspend his judgment, until he
has first disengaged himself from all prejudice; and calmly weighed the
arguments, which are adduced in support of them.

AN INAUGURAL DISSERTATION ON OPIUM.
THIS blackish brown, gummi-resinous substance, of a bitter nauseous taste, and
faintish disagreeable smell, is the inspissated juice of the white poppy,
Papaver Somniferum of Linnaeus: we generally obtain it from the Indies in small
lumps, wrapped up in leaves.

For the particular manner of cultivating the poppies and of extracting the
opium from them, I must refer the reader to a letter on that subject from J.
KERR, surgeon, at Bengal, as communicated in the fifth volume of the medical
observations and enquiries, and to Raynal's history of the Indies, where he
will find it so fully treated of, as to require no further comment here, I
shall therefore proceed to enquire into

Its most general effects upon the animal system at large, and more
particularly upon that of the human species.
Previously to noticing the operation of opium on particular functions, a more
general question arises; whether, when exhibited internally, it acts solely by
its application to the nerves of the Prime vie? or whether some part is also
absorbed, and operates by being united with the blood? From the experiments of
DR. A. MONRO, Physical and literary essays.
where by he found, that frogs, under the influence of opium, expired sooner
when the heart was left in the body and the circulation free, than they did,
when it had been obstructed by removing its ventricle, and tying its vessels, I
am induced to believe, that it may operate in some degree by being absorbed and
united with the blood, not as was formerly supposed, by rarifying or any way
changing this fluid, (for the smallness of its dose, and its sudden operation,
are sufficient proofs against such an opinion) but rather by its being
suspended therein, it will have an opportunity of exerting its influence upon
the nerves of the inner surface of the heart and blood vessels; and the
smallness of the dose can be no objection to this opinion, for it is as easy to
conceive that the one hundredth part of a grain may produce a considerable
operation upon the inner surface of the vascular system, as that a grain shall
produce such a general effect by acting only on the alimentary canal.

Another question is, whether opium acts directly upon the part to which it is
applied? or whether its effects are entirely owing to its operation upon the
brain? From innumerable experiments it appears, that opium destroys motion most
particularly in the part to which it is immediately applied, and that it has
this effect also upon parts cut off from all communication with the brain;
hence we are led to conclude, that it may operate upon the nervous system
without the intervention of the brain; but as opium, applied to the abdominal
muscles of frogs, did not destroy the motion of the heart nearly so soon in
those that had previously had their brain and spinal marrow destroyed, as it
did in others in whom these parts were left entire, Physical and literary
essays and observations, Vol. II. Art. 20.
we must also conclude, that the more general effects arising from opium must
be produced mostly from its influence being communicated from the nerves of the
part, to which it is applied, to the sensorium commune, and thence reflected
back upon the system at large: I say mostly in this manner, because in the same
series of experiments it is proved, that some general effects may be induced
without this interposition of the brain, for notwithstanding the heart was not
affected in those in which this organ was destroyed, to such a degree as when
it remained entire, yet its force and frequency were evidently diminished, as
appeared by comparison with others in a similar situation, that were not under
the operation of this medicine.

Having established these fundamental principles, viz. 1st, That opium acts
primarily and especially upon the nervous system. 2d, That it exerts its
effects most particularly upon the part to which it is immediately applied. 3d,
That the general effects which it exerts upon the system at large depend upon
its influence on the brain; but that 4thly, it may produce some general effects
without its intervention, I shall go on to examine the effects of opium more
particularly upon the animal economy.

In the ANIMAL FUNCTIONS, the operation of opium has always been remarkable for
allaying pain, whence its general title of anodyne and paregoric; but as pain
may originate from different causes, so the use of opium to relieve it has been
attended with different results: thus in that pain, which arises from
inflammatory distention as in phrenitis, hepatitis, pneumonia, etc. though it
frequently will give some temporary ease, yet, as it has a tendency, as will be
shown presently, to increase the cause of the complaint, the pain retunrs with
augmented violence; indeed sometimes in these cases, it is said not even to
give temporary ease, but to increase the pain from its first operation. But in
that species of pain which arises from irritation, as from gravel or a stone in
the bladder, or from the venereal, or from the cancerous virus, etc. it is a
sure and never failing palliative. In a third species of pain, that arising
from spasm, as gastrodynia, cholic, etc. Opium is not only an effectual
palliative, but frequently an excellent and sovereign remedy.

Opium does not relieve pain by its causing sleep, because it often has this
effect without inducing that state, and when it does, the pain generally ceases
first.

In the voluntary muscles, opium occasions a sluggishness and aversion to
motion, and a weakness in their action, when attempted to be moved.

With these effects upon the body, opium also induces a placid tranquillity of
mind, which is often followed by that weakened and depraved state of the
intellectual powers, in which drunkenness consists, destroying all sense of
propriety, reason, and prudence, and indeed almost every distinguishing mark of
man: hence in the Indies Those who are desirous of attempting some desperate
action, intoxicate themselves with its smoke; in this intoxication they fall
upon the first object that presents itself, upon strangers as well as upon most
inveterate enemies. Raynal's history of the Indies.


The powers of sensation, motion, and thought, being thus diminished, soon
terminate in that state which constitutes sleep: this constant attendant upon
the use of opium, has been established, by the observations of physicians, from
the time of HIPPOCRATES to the present day; and it has been confirmed, by the
general consent of mankind, ever true to their observations, in giving it the
term of soporific, hypnotic, and somnific: Yet there are not wanting those who,
by speculative reasoning and partial observation, deny its possessing this
power, and assert a directly opposite operation, except with persons in a state
of debility: That it induces sleep in a healthy person is a fact too firmly
fixed to require any proof. I shall therefore only enquire into the foundation
of the opinion of those, who contend that it sometimes induces wakefulness.

That in small quantities it will not always produce sleep, where there are
powerful stimuli applied at the same time, or where the system is in a very
irritable state, I allow; and I believe it is this negative operation (if I may
use the expression,) of opium, which has led many to suppose that it produces
watchfulness, when in fact, this disposition was caused, either by the nature
of the disease or by some stimulant applied; I had an opportunity a few months
since of witnessing a case directly in point. A convalescent, from the great
irritability of her system, having past one or two restless nights, was
induced, on the succeeding evening, to take a dose of laudanum, and with as
little sleep as before; here immediately the cause of her watchfulness was
assigned to and indeed noted down in proof of the stimulant operation of opium,
but unluckily for the idea, the following night was attended with the same
degree of watchfulness, without its enlivening aid. Had this patient's
irritability been so far overcome by the night succeeding the one on which she
took the laudanum, as to have permitted her to enjoy a little sleep, or had the
want of it on that night, not been particularly observed it would be considered
an incontrovertable fact, that the person had been kept awake by opium; but
from her previous and subsequent watchfulness, there can be no possibility of
supposing that she would not have kept awake equally well without opium, and
the only reason for its not producing sleep must evidently have been owing to
the dose not being large enough to overcome the great irritability of her
system.

From the experiment of DR. I. RAMSAY upon himself, See Leigh on opium.
it appears that thirty drops of Tinct. Theb. did not make him drowsy
immediately upon taking it, but seemed to have a contrary effect, for he felt
more enlivened after it; this circumstance he imputes to the operation of the
opium, but I rather suppose it was owing to a very different cause; for he was
prosecuting his studies, became drowsy over them and then determined to take
opium: to accomplish this, required some exercise, perhaps the necessity of
going into another room, either for laudanum, or liquid, or vessel in which to
take it: if so it requires no stretch of imagination to conceive his being less
disposed to sleep after it, than whilst he continued quietly doing over his
books, for it is by no means uncommon for persons who cannot resist a continued
inclination to sleep, whilst sitting up unmolested, and at case to lose all
disposition thereto, by the time they have undressed themselves to go to bed:
but even putting the case in the most unfavourable light possible, even
supposing the laudanum and requisites for taking it all stood at his elbow,
still it must be allowed, that the train of ideas which had admitted
drowsiness, was broken in upon by introducing a new subject to the mind, which,
besides its novelty, actually required particular attention, for says he I
determined to try (and consequently to observe) the effects of opium. And it is
easily conceivable, how such a change of thought and active employment of the
mind, should overcome, for a time, a considerable disposition to sleep: however
in two hours notwithstanding his determination, he found it very difficult to
refrain from sleep. He then took from ninety to an hundred drops of the same
tincture, which soon roused him from his drowsiness, and not without cause, for
the shock from the very thought of having taken such a quantity of opium, after
observing such considerable effects from a much smaller dose, and which had yet
but just began to operate, would I conceive have been fully sufficicient to
resist the influence of a much greater dose than thirty drops of laudanum; but
observe, in a short time, as soon, I suppose, as the second dose began to
operate, he found himself delirious, which was soon succeeded by inability to
walk, vertigo and finally sleep. From these considerations I am led to believe,
that this experiment, can no way support the opinion of opium's having any
power of keeping a person awake; for even should we allow that the doctor had
no fear or dread from taking such a large dose; yet his sanguine expectation of
such an operation, (which he seems to have gained from an erroneous idea of the
first's having drove away sleep) would alone be adequate to the production of
such an effect. DR. KUHN mentioned in his lectures, a man, who after having
been bit by a dog, that was wrongfully supposed to be mad, actually had all the
symptoms of Hydrophobia supervene; if then expectation will bring on all the
dreadful symptoms of such a disease, need we be surprised that expectation
should suspend, for a time, the soporific operation of thirty drops of laudanum?

Opium exerts a particular operation upon the NATURAL, FUNCTIONS. Inducing,

1st, In the stomach, a weaker action as is evinced by its destroying appetite;
this has been established by many experiments, and confirmed by daily
observation, particularly by the circumstance of its being purchased at
exorbitant prices, by the unhappy sufferers in the famine of 1770, in China, to
allay the cravings of hunger. Kerr's letter in medical observations.
Here I cannot proceed without observing, how cautiously we should avoid being
captivated with any particular opinion, for we are then not only blinded to its
imperfections, but we also look upon its very blemishes as ornaments; as
appears by a person's having lately brought this same fact, to support a
favorite opinion, in illustration of opium's increasing the appetite. Dr.
Handy's inaugural dissertation.


2d, In the intestines, a diminution of their peristaltic motion, as appears by
its constantly producing costiveness, as well as by experiments on the brute
creation, in whom, (by opening their abdomens) after giving them opium, the
intestinal action was not only found to be both slower and weaker than natural,
but in a little time entirely to cease. Edinburgh physical essays vol. II.


3d, In the secretories and excretories of the body, a weaker action appearing
in a diminution of all the secretions and excretions, except that of sweat.

The VITAL FUNCTIONS likewise suffer in their action by the operation of opium.
The pulse and respiration become slower and fuller, and the heat of the body is
diminished. I know that these effects are denied by some, but from an
experiment made upon myself, whereby I found, that in about twenty-five minutes
after taking thirty drops of laudanum, the heat of my body diminished 2 by the
thermometer, and the frequency of my pulse, which until that time had suffered
no perceptible change, was lessened four strokes in a minute, and continued so
near forty minutes, when sleep terminated my observation; from the same effect
of a diminished frequency of the pulse, only in a greater degree, being
observed by DR. BARD in an experiment upon himself, Dr. Bard's inaugural
dissertation.
as well as from the experiments of DR. LEIGH, where, in all the cases in which
opium was administered alone or in an aqueous menstruum, it uniformly produced
this effect, even so as to lessen the pulse fourteen and fifteen strokes: Leigh
on opium.
from these then, and many other observations, which might be adduced, if
necessary, I must conclude, that this power of its diminishing the frequency of
the pulse and consequently the heat of the body, is a general and constant
effect of opium.

Should any, one say, as indeed it has already been said, in opposition to this
opinion, that from several of DR. LEIGH'S experiments, it appears that the
pulse was accelerated after the exhibition of opium; I admit it, and the cause
is very evident, when we consider the menstruum in which it was given, for in
every case where this acceleration of the pulse was produced, the opium had
been administered in alkohol, and there is not the least doubt, but that this
stimulant effect must have arisen from that menstruum, since in all the other
cases, as above observed, it had a directly opposite effect. And that it must
have arisen from that cause I think is also incontrovertibly proved by FONTANA
who having likewise observed the violent effects following the exhibition of
opium in spirits of wine, resolved to make some experiments to ascertain the
cause, from which he concludes, that it proceeded from the spirit, since, says
he, this fluid, when exhibited alone produced all these effects more violently
and quickly, than when opium was dissolved in it. Traite sur le venin de la
vipere et sur quelques poisons vegetaux.


From the operation of opium upon the heart being much less evident than upon
the voluntary muscles, DR. HALLER concluded this organ to be entirely free from
its influence; but from the above observations and experiments, and from the
experiments of DR. MONRO, by which he found, after laying bare the hearts of
frogs and injecting a few drops of a solution of opium into their veins, that,
as soon as the solution had entered the ventricle of the heart, that organ was
rendered incapable of expelling its contents, and in less than a minute
thereafter became entirely paralytic, we are forced to differ from that great
physiologist, and to conclude, that the heart as well as every other living
part is subject to the operation of this medicine.

In short the general effects of opium are nearly as follows. Soon after being
taken, it diminishes pain, except that from inflammatory distension, it brings
on serenity and pleasantness of mind, followed by a state of ebriety, and
attended with an indolence and aversion to all voluntary motion, succeeded by
sleep; it lessens the frequency but increases the fullness of the pulse, it
diminishes the heat of the body; it also produces costiveness and a general
diminution of all the secretions and excretions, except sweat; it destroys the
appetite, and it also induces a fullness in the large blood vessels. It is
observed of this medicine, that it loses its force by repetition; hence a
person habituated to its use will frequently find no effect from a dose, which
would kill a person unaccustomed to it.

The above observations apply most particularly to the effects of moderate
doses of opium. When taken in large quantities, it is often immediately
rejected by vomiting; if not, it soon produces symptoms of intoxication,
confusion of the head, false vision, and delirium, which are shortly after
succeeded by profound sleep, with a full and slow pulse, and great distention
of the large superficial veins; at length convulsions Some cases terminate in
death without convulsions.
come on, which, if no relief is obtained, soon terminates in death. By
dissection, the heart and large vessels are found greatly distended with blood,
and there is generally a slight inflammatory appearance discernible in the
stomach. This appearance in the stomach, is very different from that highly
inflamed and gangrenous state in which it is found after death from a strong
stimulant; as arsenic or Mere. Corros. Sublim.


Having pointed out the most general effects of opium, I proceed to deduce
therefrom

Its Mode of Operation.
In entering upon which, I am conscious, that a man of fashion would not more
surprise his modish brethren, in appearing without his hat crown reared four or
five inches above his head, or without half a dozen buttons strung upon each
sleeve, than I shall many of the faculty in not adopting the new and
fashionable opinion, that opium is a direct stimulant.

I cannot agree to its being a stimulant -- 1st, Because such an opinion will
not account for its effects. 2nd, Because all the phenomena consequent upon its
exhibition, may be accounted for satisfactorily upon a different principle.

It will not account for its effects; for it appears, that by opium we are
enabled to assuage the racking torture of the stone, to allay the pain of bubo,
and even to deaden the force, and render life, supportable under the darting
stings of an inveterate cancer: How then does it produce this effect? How does
it alleviate pain? It is answered, by being a more powerful stimulus to the
system, than either stone, venereal or cancerous virus, it deprives us of their
sensation, as the sun by its superior splendour drives from our sight the
glimmering stars, or as the superior impression of a blow on the head, deprives
us of the trivial sensation from the extraction of a hair at the same time; but
here we meet with an insurmountable difficulty; where are we to find marks of
the superior stimulus of opium? The sun does not hide the stars without showing
us his greater luster, nor does a blow fail of showing a superior when it frees
us from a lesser pain; nor can any stimulus whatever, prevent sensation from a
lesser one without showing some evident marks of its superior operation; opium
does not show so great stimulant effects upon the system as stone, or venereal,
or cancerous virus; therefore it cannot remove their effects by any stimulating
operation. This with many others of the effects of opium abovementioned,
particularly the experiment of DR. MONRO, where it diminished the motion and
force of the heart immediately upon coming into contact with it; as well as
from its constant effect in diminishing the frequency of the pulse and heat of
the body, and finally from its direct tendency to induce sleep; all oblige us
to deny the possibility of explaining its operation from any stimulant power.

I have said all the phenomena resulting from the use of opium may be accounted
for upon a different principle: I mean a direct sedative power, whereby it
lessens the sensibility and irritability of the system, and consequently the
motion, and the powers of motion in it; or in other words, that it has a direct
operation upon and immediately diminishes the mobility of the nervous power.
And in the first place, of its power of diminishing pain; this effect, as
before proved, it could not produce by any stimulant operation; but upon this
principle, it is easily accounted for; it does it in the same manner as an
intervening cloud deprives us of the sight of the stars, viz. by diminishing
the power of the medium of communication: by diminishing the mobility of the
nervous power, rendering it unfit for transmitting the sensation of stimuli. It
was observed above, that pains arising from inflammatory distention, oftentimes
are not relieved by opium, and when they are, it is but temporarily, and they
afterward are augmented; this is no more than what we would expect, for from
its increasing the fullness of the vessels, by diminishing the excretions, and
also, as will be shown hereafter, from its increasing the quantity of fluids in
the deeper-seated vessels, by diminishing more particularly the action of those
on the surface, notwithstanding it may, by diminishing the sensibility of the
system, in some degree allay the pain, yet as it tends to increase the cause,
we need not be surprised if instead of relieving, it should even increase the
pain.

Opium has been extolled for inducing a serenity and cheerfulness of mind, in
those who have taken it, even to such a degree sometimes, as to make them
express that "they feel as though they were in heaven." This state arises
chiefly from the relief from pain, for which the opium was given, for LOCK
very well observes, that pleasure always is the the consequence of the removal
or lessening of pain, Lock on the human understanding.
and hence SOCRATES expressed his having a great sense of pleasure in that part
which had lately been freed from the painful impressions of his galling
fetters, and hence also is that same enraptured expression of feeling as though
they were in heaven, so frequent in the mouths of women, on being relieved by
delivery from the distressing pangs of a painful labor.

Should it be said that this pleasant state of mind is induced in persons who
do not suffer under any particular pain or distress, yet, as has been observed,
Ibid.
from the ordinary necessities of our lives, accidental harms, and fantastical
uneasinesses, which habits, acquired by fashion, example and education, have
settled in us, and a thousand other irregular desires, which custom has made
natural to us, we are seldom at perfect ease, for no sooner is one uneasy
action dispatched, but another is ready to set us to work: Therefore it is very
possible, that in persons laboring under no evident distress, opium may bring
pleasure by suspending these many little uneasinesses.

Should it be even asserted that in an actually indifferent state of body and
mind, a state entirely free from pleasure or pain, opiuim will induce pleasure,
I admit it; for as pleasure clearly consists in a certain degree of relaxation
of the system, as has been shown by an ingenious author, Burke on the sublime
and beautiful.
it would be no way surprising that opium in transporting the system over to
sleep, should carry it through the limits of this pleasurable state. The
luxurious use of the warm bath by the ancient Romans, and also by many of the
eastern nations at this day, as a great source of pleasure, produces this
effect, in a somewhat similar manner to opium, viz. by its relaxing and
enervating power, and the same delicate pleasure, that follows the use of
opium, DR. RUSH in his lectures mentions, often also arises from blood-letting,
and it is by nearly the same means, viz. by debilitating the system.

This pleasant situation is not permitted to be long enjoyed, for opium still
continuing its deadly influence, goes on increasing weakness in the mental
powers, bringing on an irregular train of unconnected thoughts, as is evinced
by a stammering and almost inarticulate speech. This is the state which the
East-Indians bring on when they "are desirous of committing some desperate
action," for the moral faculty ceases to restrain them, and all their sense of
conscience is extinct, the powers of memory also fail them, they cannot
recollect the object of their vengeance, for they fall upon the first that
presents itself whether strangers or enemies. It is this state of mind in which
the Turks are said to show their greatest courage, and I do not doubt but that
in this foolish situation, they may be led up to the muzzle of a cannon, like
an ox to the slaughter; ignorant of the consequences, they run on and are
punished, whilst in their sober moments, like wiser men, they would have
foreseen the danger and avoided it.

During this effect upon the mind it also gradually diminishes the powers of
the body; the weakened muscles first become indolent and sluggish in their
motion, until at length, if a person attempts to walk, he finds them unable to
support his tottering body; these, accompanied with imperfect sensibility, are
followed by stupor and terminated by sleep. Here then we find that opium in the
ANIMAL FUNCTIONS, gradually and regularly lessens their strength, until finally
it forces them down into the quiet bonds of sleep.

This sedative operation is particularly observed in the stomach and
intestines, diminishing their actions and producing want of appetite and
cosuveness: it also diminishes the operation of the secretary and excretory
vessels, by rendering them insensible to the usual stimulus of their contained
fluids.

The effects of opium upon the VITAL FUNCTIONS are very clearly elucidated upon
our idea of its action. In the former part of this dissertation it appeared,
that notwithstanding opium produced some particular operation on the part to
which it was immediately applied, yet that its general effects mostly proceeded
from its influence upon the brain: we conclude then, that when taken into the
stomach, it particularly lessens its tone, and also diminishes the energy of
the sensorium commune, which must be felt without doubt most especially in the
parts most distant from its seat; whence, as well as from their sympathy with
the stomach, the vessels of the superficies must be most particularly weakened
in their action, which must of course give rise to an accumulation in the
larger vessels; hence the large veins appear distended; from this accumulation
of blood in the larger vessels, an increase of its natural stimulus is applied
to the heart, from whence in conjunction with the vis insita which this organ
possesses in a great degree, we can easily account for its not being so
evidently affected by opium, as the voluntary muscles are; yet by the
diminished frequency of the pulse, we find that the motion of the heart is
lessened: its irritability being diminished, it suffers a greater dilatation
from the accumulated blood, before it contracts; this, with the relaxation of
the arteries, gives rise to the great fullness of the pulse. The flower
circulation sufficiently accounts for the diminished head of the body. This
diminution of the heat of the body may also be owing in some degree to the
evaporation of perspiration induced by opium.


That the motions of the extreme vessels are more particularly affected, and
that a preternatural accumulation takes place in the larger ones, are not mere
conclusions from speculative reasoning, but facts established by actual
observation; for Dr. MONRO, by the assistance of his microscope, found the
action of the extreme vessels in frogs, under the operation of opium, entirely
to cease, while that of the heart still continued; and Dr. WHYTT Essay on the
vital and involuntary motions.
says, by opening a frog, that had taken opium, he found the heart and large
vessels leading to it unusually filled with blood.

From an increased quantity of fluids in the system, by an obstruction of the
other evacuations, and from the above mentioned causes supporting the force of
action in the heart and large vessels, with a loss of the resisting power in
those of the surface, the sweating, induced by this medicine is easily and
satisfactorily explained.

Convulsions often follow from a large dose of opium; they also follow profuse
hoemorrhages; here then we see the same effects induced by the abstraction of a
stimulus, as by diminishing its force, by rendering the system insensible to
its application.

By diffection after death, the stomach appears slightly inflamed; the
convulsive pressure of the muscles, as also the before mentioned causes, force
the blood internally, whereby the vessels of this organ, which are particularly
relaxed by the immediate contact of the medicine, are especially distended, and
give rise to this appearance.

The effects of opium being diminished by continued use, perfectly correspond
with an established law of the animal economy, whereby all impressions which
do not excite to action lose their force by repetition.

Should it be asked, since there are so many facts, directly in proof of the
sedative operation of opium, and since all its effects are so clearly and
rationally accounted for upon such a principle; what has given rise to, and
what has supported the doctrine of its being a direct stimulus? I answer that
it originated chiefly with a person, who has endeavored to make himself
eminent in medicine, by boldly hazarding some new opinions, in opposition to
ancient and well established truths. Dr. Brown.

Note -- Though opium may have been looked upon as possessing some stimulant
operation, by persons previously to Dr. Brown, yet he was the first who
asserted, that it was a sample direct and most powerful stimulus, and
anti-soporific.




Novelty, which is so powerful in influencing the human mind, even, as Dr.
HUXHAM observes, to have held Asclepiades out in his absurd and cruel practice
of denying drink to persons in a fever, gained also supporters to this doctrine.

Let us examine the arguments advanced in favor of the stimulant operation of
operation of opium. Such an operation has been inferred from its analogy with
spirituous liquors; thus say they, do spirits produce a pleasant disposition of
mind? do they make the distressed forget his poverty and remember his misery no
more? do they overthrow the minds and understandings of all that will be trying
masteries with it? do they make men forget their friends and familiar
acquaintances, and finally to draw their swords upon their nearest relations?
they surely do, and so in some degree does opium. This may be, and yet it is no
proof of any stimulant operation in opium. Should any one ask whether I deny
spirits being possessed of a stimulant power? I answer, no, but that they also
exert a powerful sedative operation particularly on the mental faculties, every
one of the above effects clearly proves: and hence the wisest of men SOLOMON,
says, It is not for kings to drink wine nor princes strong drink, lest they
drink and forget the law and pervert the judgment of any of the afflicted.
Prove. chap. xxxi. 5. 6.
It was from their weakening the mind, and exposing every flaw and imperfection
in it, that the poet observed, Wife were the kings, who never chose a friend,
Till with full cups they had unmasked his soul,
And seen the bottom of his deepest thoughts.
HORACE.

I have said I do not deny that spirituous liquors are stimulants, and should
it be asked, whether opium like them, increases the appetite, produces strength
of body, watchfulness, an increased force and frequency of the pulse, with
quick breathing, and raises the temperature of the body? I answer, no; and I
trust the foregoing observations have fully proved it to have a directly
opposite effect.

The above first mentioned analogy of the operation of opium with spirits, (at
the same time considering every effect of the latter as arising from a
stimulant power) assisted by partial observation where the nature of disease in
producing watchfulness has been assigned to its operation, as also by results
of experiments, where it has been charged of producing effects, that have been
clearly proved, to have arisen from the stimulating menstruum in which it was
exhibited, is the only slender basis upon which the doctrine of the stimulant
operation of opium is supported, and which I trust must give way to the
superior evidence of a contrary opinion, as soon as time shall have worn off
its dazzling tinsel of novelty, so as to permit the cool eye of reason to
investigate its inherent quality.

I do not think, with the eminent Dr. CULLEN, (whose name I mention with
respect, and from whose opinion I vary with diffidence) that any of the effects
of opium even require us to call in the aid of the vis medicatrix naturoe, for
their explanation; and since wherever it is admitted, it throws an obscurity
upon our system, See Cullens first lines, vol. 1. page 25.
and also as no more causes of phenomena are to be admitted than are sufficient
to explain them, Sir Isaac Newton's maxaim.
and as I think all the phenomena from the use of this medicine have been
satisfactorily explained upon its simple sedative operation; I have therefore
entirely rejected that facultas incognita from this dissertation.

The Uses of Opium.
The limited nature of my dissertation, will particularly affect this part of
my subject; for to do justice to it alone would require more pages than this
treatise (...) consist of; having however enumerated its general effects, and
thence deduced its modus operandi, I shall proceed to give, what I conceive, a
rational explication of its use in medicine.

In the first place, Front its power of diminishing the sensibility of the
system to stimuli, it is usefully employed in allaying the pains From the
venereal disease, cancers, stone in the bladder, when extraction may be
improper, and also to soothe the pungent pain following chirurgical operations,
attending compound fractures, etc. etc. also nervous head aches, etc.

From its power of diminishing the irritability of the muscular fibers, it has
been attended with the happiest effects in allaying any preternatural action in
them; thus in the heart it relieves palpitation, if it is not symptomatic of a
disease that may forbid its use; in the lungs it cures asthma when it is purely
spasmodic, and is of use in the chin-cough, after the sebrile symptoms are gone
off.

In the stomach it is the best remedy for pyrosis and gastrodynia, and for
vomiting, when this does not proceed from any matter proper to be evacuated, or
when it is not accompained by any affection which may be augmented by its use.
In this organ as well as.

In the intestines, it relieves cholera a morbus, is a powerful assistant in
the cholic, in the dysentery it also allays the pain and troublesome tenesmus,
takes off the constriction of the colon and thus paves the way for the more
sure operation of gentle purgatives, as a radical cure. The action of the
intestines in simple diarrhoea seems to be continued, by the increased
irritability to their contents, from an abrasion of their natural mucous
covering from the original cause of the disease, and possibly also in some
degree by habit; here then we would at once conclude opium to be, as in fact it
has proved, a very valuable remedy, for by its first diminishing the
irritability of the bowels, it allays for a time their increased action,
thereby counteracting the powers of habit, during which time, it also by its
peculiar operation of thickening excreted fluids, as is particularly evinced in
catarrh, it furnishes them with their proper defensive coat; thereby proving
not only a palliative, but often a radical cure.

In the uterus, it quiets the efforts threatening abortions, after the plethora
has been removed by bleeding, also false pains and spasms during labor; it is
a sovereign remedy in pains following delivery called after pains, it relieves
the pains that sometimes attend menstruation; it has also proved of great use
in taking off the increased action of the uterine vessels, which arises from
great irritation, and thus checking the immoderate flow of the catamenia.

Opium, by its relaxing power, is very useful in favoring the expulsion of
calculi from the ureters and urethra, and concretions from the biliary ducts,
also in taking off the constriction and permitting the return of incarcerated
hernix.

In the voluntary muscles, opium has been used in tetanus, and from its
antispasmodic power, it may prove a palliative; yet, as the celebrated Dr. RUSH
Rush's medical enquiries and observations,
has proved, that this disease originates in debility, we should not expect it
to give any permanent relief, therefore it should be accompanied with proper
stimulants and tonics. As epilepsy is so often owing to a turgescence of the
vessels of the head, and as opium greatly favors this, not only by its general
operation of accumulating the blood in the larger and internal vessels, but
also by its particularly filling those of the head, by obstructing the refluent
blood by a slow respiration, it must of course frequently be injurious; but
when the disease arises from a particular irritation, as from an aura a
epileptica, great pain, or from passions of the mind, it has proved a valuable
remedy, and when given a little before an expected accession, it has frequently
put off the fit. Tissot traite de l' epilepsic.
In convulsions not attended with coma as particularly the chorea sanctiviti,
it has generally been found of great service.

To its procuring sleep, it owes many of its virtues in certain diseases, but
in none more particularly than in typhus fever, where a constant watchfulness
seems to be hurrying away the fleeting powers of life: opium checks this fatal
career by bringing a refreshing sleep, the want of which wears down the
strength faster than almost any other circumstance whatever; it may therefore
frequently be advantageously combined with other medicines in this disease.

From its increasing the fullness of the vascular system, opium must be
injurious in all diseases accompanied with an inflammatory diathesis, for this
is supported by, (and every indication of cure is to remove) the too great
quantity of fluids already in the vessels. But as with this operation, it also
often procures a free perspiration, by overcoming the resisting power of the
cutaneous vessels, it has even been proposed in inflammatory fevers, and where
this effect can be rendered certain, by the union of emetics and neutral falts,
it has frequently been found a valuable remedy particularly for the cure of the
acute rheumatism. From this power of overcoming the resistance in the extreme
vessels, it proves so effectual in taking off the burning heat and shortening
the hot fit of intermittents. Lind on hot climates.


From its effect in allaying the operation of the secretory and excretory
vessels, it is usefully employed to check a salivation from mercury, and it
very probably, from this power of diminishing the irritability of the
excretories at large, may expedite the cure of the venereal disease by mercury,
by allowing the system to retain more in it at a time, than it otherwise would.
By this operation it also renders excreted fluids of a much thicker
consistence; hence, as observed before, it is of use in catarrh and diarrboea;
and it is from this cause, that it changes the ichorous discharge of irritable
ulcers to a well concocted pus, and hence its great use, as observed by
SYDENHAM in the suppurative stage of the small pox.

Notwithstanding my having arranged the diseases in which opium is employed, as
being relieved by some one of its effects, yes I do not thereby mean to assert
that its usefulness in them solely depends upon such a particular part of its
operation, for every one the least conversant in medicine must conceive, that a
diarrhoe^ and catarrh, beside the particular effects, under which they are
mentioned, may also in part owe their cure to opium's determining to the
surface; a cholera morbus, to its diminishing the secretion of bile; a typhus
to its relaxing the spasm of the extreme vessels, etc. etc. all I had in view,
was to show on what particular quality of opium the cure of certain diseases
chiefly depends.

There are many other diseases in which opium may be employed, but having shown
form what particular effects we are to expect advantage in some, and also from
what effects we are to fear its use in other important complaints, I flatter
myself the ingenious reader will not be at a loss to decide upon the propriety
of its use in diseases in general.

This medicine may be employed either internally or externally: internally
either by the mouth, in doses from one grain to a much larger quantity, the
dose is however to be governed chiefly by the force of the irritation, which it
is to allay, for in great pain, as from chirurgical operations, as well as from
violent spasms, as in tetanus and from incarcerated hernix, etc. patients will
bear and often require such doses of opium, as would have destroyed persons in
health. Or in the rectum: in this way it is proper, where a continued vomiting
prevents its retention in the stomach, as also in tenesmus, and more
particularly in the dysentery, where by being more directly applied to the
part, it will allay the increased action of this intestine and take off the
constriction of the colon, without so materially preventing the operation of
purgatives, as if exhibited by the mouth. When opium is given in this manner it
must be in double the quantity that would have been necessary if taken into the
stomach.

It has been externally applied to the abdomen to relieve spasms of the stomach
and intestines: to the mouth to check salivations: Hunter on venereal disease.
to the cheek to relieve tooth ache, etc. etc.

When a person has taken too large a dose of opium, we should endeavor to
procure its evacuation as soon as possible by exhibiting a quick emetic as
twenty or thirty grains of vit. alb. and tickling the sauces with an oiled
feather; we should use all means in our power to keep him awake. Blisters and
sinapisms should be applied; and vinegar has been recommended to be exhibited
internally, but from some experiments by LEIGH its utility is rather doubtful;
I should put more dependence on the stimulus of val. alk.

Since severe pain has been observed greatly to resist its operation, may it
not be induced with advantage to prevent its deleterious effects in this case?

FINIS.

