LETTERS TO MARRIED WOMEN, ON NURSING AND THE MANAGEMENT OF CHILDREN.

THE FIRST AMERICAN EDITION, PRINTED FROM THE SIXTH LONDON ONE.

By the late HUGH SMITH, M. D.

PHILADELPHIA: FROM THE PRESS OF MATTHEW CAREY. AUGUST 14, -- M.DCC.XCII.

CONTENTS.
LETTER I. Of marks -- the imaginary consequences of frights and longings, A
candid enquiry into the merits of this doctrine. 11 LETTER II. Of Marks --
showing that such blemishes may happen independently of the mother's
imagination. 27 LETTER III. Of Miscarriages. 37 LETTER IV. Mother's Milk -- the
natural and best food for infants. 47 LETTER V. Arguments in favor of suckling
-- as well for the mother's sake, as the child's -- and the evils to be
apprehended in delivering children to the care of foster-nurses. 55 LETTER VI.
The management of infants from the birth -- with directions for putting them to
the breast. 63 LETTER VII. A natural and easy method of suckling children --
this duty proved to be a pleasure rather than a fatigue. 69 LETTER VIII. The
proper method of weaning children. 77 LETTER IX. The safest method of bringing
children up by hand. 85 LETTER X. A general management of children, from the
time of weaning, till they are about two years old -- with observations upon
the cutting of teeth. 99 LETTER XI. A general management of children, from two
years old till they leave the nursery. 113 LETTER XII. The necessity of
cultivating the dispositions of children, to render them amiable and virtuous.
119 LETTER XIII. Of milk -- Its properties examined -- The different kinds of
milk compared with each other -- and their particular virtues explained. 131
LETTER XIV. The sick chamber -- with directions also for invalids. 139 LETTER
XV. Old age -- by virtue rendered truly honorable. The steps by which we
mounted into life, shown to be the easiest and best paths to descend into the
grave. 157


INTRODUCTION.
IN considering my intended subjects, the familiar style of letter-writing
appeared the most eligible; and particularly, when I reflected upon the
absurdity of using terms of art, in an address to the ladies. The three first
letters will not, I hope, be esteemed foreign to my purpose, as they seem to me
altogether introductory to the design. I was induced to add the last letter,
upon old age, in order to make the series of letters complete; having now, in
this collection, taken up man from the first period of his existence, and
carried him through the various stages of life.

It being much to our present purpose, and intimately connected with the
following letters, I shall transcribe a part of the introduction to the eighth
edition of the Family Physician, published about twelve months ago.

"Experience in physic is the wisest path to tread; and considering what poor
crazy constitutions too many of the human race unhappily sustain, and the
various disorders which even the most robust are liable to, no one can be too
particular in remarking such innocent remedies as may relieve slight
indispositions, and consequently prevent terrible and fatal diseases.

"Good nursing is a point which has either been too much neglected, or
mistaken; nevertheless it is of the first consequence toward the cure of
diseases, and the preserving of delicate and feeble constitutions. It is
equally so to render advanced age easy and comfortable, and to preserve
helpless infants. To speculative minds it must be matter of astonishment to
observe the fatality amongst children, which the following table of births and
infant-burials, collected from the bills of mortality, presents for their
serious consideration.

Total number of births. Burials under 5 years of age. Burials under 2 years of
age. In 1762 15351 10659 8372 1763 15133 11163 8200 1764 16801 9699 7673 1765
16374 9948 8073 1766 16257 10197 8035 1767 15980 9449 7668 1768 16042 10670
8229 1769 16714 10061 8016 1770 17109 10121 7994 1771 17072 9447 7617 10)162833
10)101454 10)79877 16283 10145 7987 The average upon the last ten years.

"Thus we see that almost two thirds of the children born in this metropolis
and its environs are entirely lost to society: 16283 are, upon the average, the
annual births; 10145, the infant burials; and, what deserves particular
attention, 7987 are cut off before they are two years old, which is more than
three fourths of those children who die under five years of age. How ardently
therefore is it to be wished that such a fatality could be prevented! -- It may
be prevented.

"Is it not affecting, that so many beings, just entering into life, should be
so untimely cut off, to the detriment of society, and the affliction of their
weeping mothers? It is, truly, a subject of commiseration, a scene which draws
a silent tear from the eye of humanity, and pierces the wounded bosoms of
afflicted parents. -- Above three fourths of these little innocents fall a
sacrifice under two years old. It is well known, that the thrush and watery
gripes generally terminate their existence in the early months; and, if they
survive these maladies, the time of teething too frequently brings on the fatal
catastrophe.

"Could we but conquer the prejudices of the times, and abolish unnatural and
absurd practices -- could we but restore that natural and simple method of
rearing children, which the all-wise Giver of life has sufficiently pointed out
-- did we but confine them to that nutriment, which HE has prepared for their
first state of existence -- and consult that reason which HE has bestowed upon
us, to conduct them forwards -- all would be well. But, alas, indolence and
luxury forbid the task! Nevertheless, to the rational few the following remarks
are submitted.

"The thrush and watery gripes are, in the author's opinion, artificial
diseases, and both of them totally occasioned by improper food; such as, all
kinds of pap, whether made from flour, bread, or biscuit: they all cause too
much fermentation in an infant's stomach, and irritate its tender bowels beyond
what nature can support. This appears to him to be the evident cause of the
beforementioned complaints.

"When infants are past this period, the danger in cutting their teeth is
justly to be feared. This difficulty proceeds altogether from a weakness of
constitution, arising from the same first mismanagement in point of diet: and
here a train of dreadful symptoms present themselves; the head, the stomach,
the bowels, are all at times terribly affected; a general wasting of the body
frequently ensues; and unconquerable fevers prevail, which generally terminate
in convulsions and death.

"To prevent all these unhappy consequences, let us but for a moment reflect
that every mother is designed by nature to foster her own child. If the breast
is not to be obtained, cow's milk is in general to be preferred to any kind of
food that can be invented, because it is nearly similar to that which nature
intended."

I sincerely wish the hints thrown out in the following letters may be attended
to; as the success of rearing children, and the preserving infirm and aged
constitutions, greatly depends upon good nursing; much more indeed than it does
upon the application of medicines. For although, by the medical art, many
violent and dangerous diseases may oftentimes be prevented from proving fatal;
yet, even when the doctor has taken his leave, the good nurse must still be
watchful, "to restore again the invalid to a healthy and vigorous constitution."

I was apprehensive, that many objections would be started both against my
opinions and maxims; which, indeed, was a leading motive for concealing my name
in the first edition: but as I hope I have spoken with candor, and as I mean
to persuade, rather than to find fault, it is to be wished, that the younger
part of the female sex at least, whom it more nearly concerns, will not receive
this little present with such unconquerable prejudices, as would probably have
been experienced from their grand-dames. If, by addressing their understanding,
I should be happy enough to convince their judgment, of the propriety of the
following observations, I trust they may prove in some measure beneficial both
to themselves and their future daughters, in the exalted characters of wives
and mothers.

There is a certain respect due to our ancestors and their customs; and, for my
own part, I would never embrace new maxims or opinions, but upon full
conviction of their claiming preference to old ones. Still it should be
remembered, the mind was never designed for a state of slavery; therefore, when
once our reason is truly convinced of former errors, let the sanction for such
mistakes be never so redoubtable, there is a glorious freedom inherent in human
nature, that prompts a generous mind to revoke erroneous opinions, and adopt
those systems, which, upon mature deliberation, shall appear more rational. And
whenever the contrary disposition is discovered, it altogether shows a want of
candor, and points out an obstinacy, not only culpable with respect to our
private characters, but deserving of censure, as it regards society; for such a
temper tends to prohibit every kind of discovery, that may either improve our
own knowledge, or benefit our fellow creatures.

All our knowledge with respect to infants, must be obtained from observation
alone; as no one ever pretended to remember those sensations and wants which he
himself experienced in the earliest part of childhood; therefore a careful
attendance is required in the nursery. When infants are properly managed, there
is but seldom an occasion for the help of medicine: and should it be necessary
to call in assistance of this land, as they are totally incapable of relating
their distress, it requires an accurate observation, together with a
circumstantial account from the nurses who attend upon them, to enable a
medical practitioner to form a right judgment of their diseases.

LETTER I. Of Marks -- the imaginary consequences of frights and longings. A
candid enquiry into the merits of this doctrine.
PREJUDICES, which have been imbibed in our early days, received from those we
esteem and reverence, and supported by the authority of past ages, must needs
make impressions upon the most candid and ingenuous minds; particularly when
almost every day produces strange and wonderful stories to corroborate the
supposed fact.

The various blemishes frequently discovered upon children at the birth, have
been generally considered as the effect of a fright, or a disappointment of the
mother's longings: and indeed this opinion has so far prevailed, that it has
been, for a long time past, looked upon as incontestible. Should any one,
therefore, presumptuously dare to deny this amazing peculiarity in pregnant
women, and the consequent effect upon the embryo, he must expect nothing less
than the general censures of the female world. Besides, the many positive
assertions upon this head, from the most sensible persons of undoubted
veracity, will naturally lead a prudent man to speak with caution against the
doctrine. Nevertheless, it surely cannot be improper to make a candid enquiry
into so wonderful a phenomenon.

It is a subject by far the most interesting to the ladies: it comes, indeed,
particularly under their cognizance; for the dreaded evil affects the fair sex
much more essentially than it does ours. With my female friends, therefore, I
beg leave to discuss this important point.

It is by every one allowed, to the honor of this nation, (and let particular
commendation be given to the daughters of Great Britain themselves), that in
the education of young women, letters, and the polite improvements, are much
more attended to in this age than formerly; accomplishments which not only
render their manners more engaging, but qualify them likewise for the happy
domestic life; and contribute much to adorn these amiable and sweetly-endearing
companions of the social hour. How essentially necessary is such a friend, to
make life comfortable and happy!

What a luster does every good and accomplished woman add to the matrimonial
state! -- She must by every reasonable man be considred not only as the partner
of his bed, but of his very soul.

I can at this readily call to mind many such exalted characters, to whom in a
most particular manner I now address myself. -- women, whose enlarged minds are
capable of a much greater depth of reasoning than these speculations will
afford; and in whose company I have oftentimes enjoyed the happiness of
friendly conversation -- with whom, upon different occasions, I have, in part,
entered into the subject of this, and the following letters. It is, indeed, at
the request of several of these my worthy female friends, that I have been
induced to collect my thoughts, in order to deliver them to the public.

Ignorance, my fair readers, is the parent of credulity and superstition.
Knowledge is the conqueror that triumphs over such terrible foes. How much is
the understanding enlightened and improved by the use of letters? When
therefore we consider that the art of printing was not discovered until the
fifteenth century, and it was a long time after that before it became universal
in Europe, we shall not greatly wonder at the bigotry and rudeness of manners
in our ancestors; and we shall cease to reflect upon those credolous times.

To the score of ignorance we are to place the many and hideous stories which
have been formerly related of apparitions, goblins, and witches, that have at
times infested different parts of Europe; and even in England have claimed the
attention of civil and ecclesiastical power: instances of which are to be found
in our history.

At this period I believe there are but few who give credit to such romances.
The Spectator and his cotemporaries pretty well cleared the country of witches.
As to ghosts, the last that made its appearance was the notorious Fanny of
Cock-lane; and this arch spirit was effectually laid, as it is called, in a
court of justice; where the gentlemen of the law carefully collected her ashes,
and, like alchemists, turned them into gold; so that there is no fear of any
spirits rising from her urn.

We are now, my intelligent fair, fully convinced of the ridiculous fallacy of
such bugbears; and at this time there is scarcely a female but can enjoy,
without one dreadful apprehension, a cool and silent walk by moonlight: a
pleasure their mothers could hardly be persuaded to partake of; for, not longer
than half a century ago, if a dauntless virgin had thus presumptuously
ventured, the affrighted parents would have been apprehensive for their
daughter, lest she should, some time or another, be punished for such impious
audacity.

Thus we see prodigies and wonders daily vanishing, in proportion as literary
knowledge, and the general improvement of the understanding, are cultivated.

To some future season, perhaps, we must postpone the elucidation of marks, the
supposed consequences of frights and longings: yet, if this matter should be a
subject of dispute with the ladies for the present, I doubt not that a little
time and candid observation will commit the very idea of such romantic
opinions, together with that of frights, and every other superstitious error,
to eternal oblivion.

A fright is generally believed to have the same unlucky effect upon pregnant
women, as a disappointment of their wishes will produce. Hence they are
perpetually racked between hope and fear, to the torment of themselves, and
every body about them; and are sometimes so extravagant with regard to a wish
or longings, as not to be satisfied but at an immense expense: for we have
heard that these strange cravings are not altogether confined to the palate;
they sometimes extend themselves to equipage, jewels, dress, baubles, etc. As a
proof that such chimerical notions even at this time prevail, the reader is
desired to attend to the following relation.

Since the first edition of this work went to the press, the author happened to
dine, in company with a pregnant lady totally free from prejudice, at the house
of an intimate female friend, who has a heart truly good and sympathetic. Her
teeming visitor took notice of a toy; it was a pigeon-house made of
Staffordshire ware, and in a baby-house would appear a proper ornament: yet the
forebodings of this good matron, lest her friend should have entertained a
longing for it, operated so strongly, that the kindly ordered it to be put into
her visitor's carriage. The pregnant lady strongly objected to it indeed, but
to no purpose; insomuch that she was obliged to take the pigeon-house home.

But not to dwell upon such like particulars, which, nevertheless, have been
frequently introduced in support of whimsical desires, and which are
continually magnified in the relation, we shall confine our remarks to the
general manner in which this magic operates.

As I have universally been thought an infidel in matters of this kind, the
ladies have treated me accordingly; nay, frequently, when I have begged
quarter, it has been cruelly denied; which cautions me at this time to be
modestly humble and diffident. I shall assert nothing; but by fair and
impartial enquiry endeavor to search out the truth.

In consequence of my supposed want of faith in these affairs, there is
scarcely a female I am acquainted with, who does not treasure up every
surprising story of this kind that she hears, to tell it me with all the
advantages that a persuasive tongue can give, in order to bring about my
conversion.

I verily believe, that, by the assistance of these my good friends, I could
furnish a large folio volume of such histories. It is a spacious field for the
fancy to rove in. A variety of preternatural marks in living persons may be
produced every day: nor can the existence of these extraordinary appearances be
denied; for that is incontestible, as every one can vouch. The true cause of
such wonders, therefore, is the subject of our pursuit.

In the first place, I shall make bold to declare, that I never met with one of
these blemishes which altogether struck my fancy with respect even to the
imaginary likeness; or which, as to the supposed cause, engaged my rational
confidence.

I have been showed a mark that was compared to the rhind of bacon, and told a
strange story of the mother's longing for a gammon. I fancied it to be like the
tinge of a mulatto, and congratulated the parents that the child was not
altogether swarthy.

A lady of my acquaintance has oftentimes declared that she is marked with a
perfect pig; but I never could obtain the sight of this rarity, it not being
conveniently situated for public inspection. A little while ago, I was in
company with her mother, an elderly woman, and quite a stout champion, as I
found, for marks and blemishes, in consequence of frights and longings. Upon a
particular enquiry, it appeared that she was unacquainted with the accident,
until some considerable time after the birth; and then, from the appearance of
the mark, she very well remembered the occasion of it -- which was this. When
she was very near her time, her husband and self were invited to the house of a
relation, living at some distance, who, she knew, had some very fine sucking
pigs. They both thought the ride would be too much for her; but she recollects
her having said, that she would go at all events, if she was sure they would
dress one of the pigs for dinner. However, the husband went alone, and returned
in the evening with a quarter of a pig that had been dressed on purpose for
their dinner, her relation knowing she was fond of it. But alas! as her evil
genius would have it, when she sat down to supper, she could eat but very
little; and at that time unluckily rubbed the part with her hand, where her
daughter is marked, which, she is very certain, occasioned the form of a pig. I
asked her how the child could be marked, since she had her desire? No matter
for that, answered she: though I had the pig, the child to be sure must be
marked; because I longed for it nice and hot, with good plum sauce and gravy,
but was obliged to eat it cold. We all laughed heartily at the conclusion,
though, as the reader may judge, from different motives; but the old lady
thought she had obtained a complete victory.

I have given this little history, to show the absurd manner in which these
things are usually accounted for. It will be also proper in this place to
remark the notorious dissimilarity between such blemishes and their supposed
originals. We are to take notice, likewise, of the ease with which the fancy is
imposed upon, or imposes on itself in such cases, even to infatuation;
magnifying the most trifling conjectures into the strongest confirmations. How
often do women rack their minds, to find out the origin of these marks! which
evidently proceeds from their aversion to be thought capable of producing an
offspring with any imperfections; and their servants and nurses, considering it
actually as their business, are always ready to help them out upon these
occasions.

Fruit, wine, boiled lobsters, fresh salmon, and such like things of a red
color, are the most common marks; and there is scarcely a family in the
kingdom, but some one or more of them can produce instances of this sort.

These strange effects, we are told, not only happen to the human race, but
also, how wonderful to relate! -- to brutes. There is a worthy family, whose
veracity is not to be doubted, that are firmly persuaded of the following fact;
of which they were all spectators. I shall deliver the account, as nearly as
possible, in the lady's words, who favored me with the relation.

Her father's favorite cat happened to produce a kitten, which, to the
surprise of all the family, was marked upon the back with a rat. As the kitten
grew, the rat increased likewise; till, at the end of some months, it dropped
off the kitten, quite perfect in its form; -- and the lady had it in her own
hand. I was questioned, very particularly, whether I could any longer doubt the
consequences of longing and frights, since it even extended to brutes -- for,
continued she, what could be the cause of this, but the creature being
disappointed of some rat she was pursuing?

Thus closely pressed, I begged her yet to pardon my want of belief. As to the
cause, I was silent about it; that there was a substance upon the kitten, which
fell off, as related, I had no doubt. -- What then could I doubt? -- That their
own imaginations deceived them. -- How was that possible? -- Much more so than
they were aware of. -- Where is the rat, madam? -- Thrown away long ago. --
That is unlucky; for, had I seen it, probably it might have struck me as
resembling an owl, or some other thing altogether as extravagant. It was
downright obstinacy in me; for I would not believe any thing. I further said,
had it been a rat, I thought she would have wanted courage to touch it -- even
supposing it to be dead; and had it been alive, it would certainly have run
away, and prevented her. This pleasantry abated somewhat of the earnestness of
our argument; and a laugh made us very good friends -- but I was an incredulous
man.

I have heard of a woman surprised in the street, when she was very near her
time, by a person with a withered arm: upon her return home, the fright threw
her into labor, and she was delivered of a child with a withered arm. How can
we possibly believe such an immediate effect as this to be produced? -- Is it
to be credited, that the mother's terror should instantly blast the arm of the
child, thus rendering it similar to the object of horror?

And if this be rejected, how can we allow the total loss of a limb from a
(...) cause? -- Could it be annihilated? This no one will assert. If not,
supposing the effect to take place, and the arm of the keg should be separated
from the body, what becomes of it? Such divided part is never to be found upon
these occasions. On the contrary, where there is an addition to the form,
proceeding also, as we are told, from fright; such, for instance, as a toe or
finger extraordinary, an arm or a leg; in the name of wonder, from what source
can those exuberances be so immediately produced? Is it not astonishing, that
such credulous infatuations should thus beguile our reason?

Not to trouble my fair readers with any more of these relations, which, by
prejudiced persons, are accounted undeniable, I shall just mention a few facts
for the consideration of the candid.

A lady of my particular acquaintance, during the time of her pregnancy, was
unfortunately overturned in a coach; by which accident, as she endeavored to
get out, the first joint of her second finger was entirely broken off. This was
an alarming circumstance to all her friends, and the dreadful apprehensions of
the child's being born a cripple disturbed every one; but, to the great
astonishment of her acquaintance, she was delivered of a fine and perfect boy.

An eminent practitioner relates a story to this effect, which is equally to be
credited, as happening under his own observation.

A lady of quality being in convulsions, the family sent for the doctor in
great haste. He found her upon the bed, extremely ill indeed. When her ladyship
came a little to herself, she cried out, The black cat! the black cat! -- her
well-known particular aversion to this domestic animal seemed to point out the
cause of the disaster, of which till now they were entirely ignorant; and the
servants diligently searched for the object; when in a tub, placed to receive
the rainwater near her ladyship's dressing room window, poor puss was
discovered.

This sight so terribly affected the lady, that her fears were ever uppermost,
and she was miserable until the time of her delivery. Neither could her friends
pacify her, nor the arguments of so able a man bring her to reason.
Notwithstanding all they could say, she was fully persuaded her child's face
would be like this black cat's. At length Lucina smiled propitious on its
birth; and her ladyship's apprehensions vanished, upon her being brought to bed
of a lovely boy, without either mark or blemish.

Just about the same time, it happened that the same gentleman delivered
another person of a boy also. The child had a small darkish spot upon the
forehead. He was curious enough to interrogate the mother about it, and she
most ingenuously declared, that she was neither sensible of any fright or
longing during; the whole time of her breeding.

Had this blemish happened to the child of the noble parent, the doctor truly
observes, the black cat would undoubtedly have occasioned a remarkable anecdote
in the history of her ladyship's house; -- for by all her family and friends it
would have been looked upon as an incontestible proof of these prodigies; and,
give me leave to add, with much more seeming plausibility, too, than the
generality of these stories can boast; because the lady had declared her
apprehensions at the time of the supposed injury.

I shall here add another instance of an apprehension altogether as fruitless,
as that of the noble lady. It was made known to me, in consequence of reading
the above to a particular friend, who immediately replied, that he was under
great anxiety for his wife, upon account of her being terrified at the sight of
a person who had a very unhappy blemish on her face. The wife of this
gentleman, by chance going to St. Paul's church, was placed in a stall exactly
opposite to the unfortunate object, which affected her so much, that her
devotion was entirely lost; and she talked of this poor woman continually after
she left the church.

In a few weeks this lady went again to St. Paul's, and was unluckily placed
opposite the same person; which so distressed her, that she dared not to
venture there any more. Surely this is as striking an instance as we can
suppose. I told my friend I was glad he acquainted me of it before his wife was
brought to bed, and that I should pay great attention to the consequence; but
at the same time desired he would endeavor to make both himself and wife very
easy, assuring him, on the observation of myself and others, how little room
there was to be under any dismal apprehension on this account. To finish the
story, his wife was soon after delivered of a fine and perfect child. Since
which, this lady has declared her apprehensions so terrified her, that she
dared not to look at the child, till she collected from the conversation of her
attendants, that the boy's face was free from blemish. What a cruel suspense
and painful sufferance must this have been to a mother!

Not long ago I was in the chamber of a lady newly delivered: her mother being
present, took me to the window, and in great distress acquainted me the child
had a large mark upon the right side of its face; that she was terrified at the
thoughts of breaking it to her daughter, and begged me to acquaint her of it.
Accordingly, after congratulating the good lady in the straw, upon her own
health and a fine baby, in the course of conversation, I jocosely told her that
we were at a loss to account for a pretty spot upon the child's face, and must
desire her to inform us of the occasion of it. After a very minute
recollection, she frankly confessed she did not remember any one thing that she
longed for during her pregnancy, neither could she any how account for the
accident.

A variety of other circumstances might be enumerated, to discredit, though
many stories are related to confirm, this wonderful affair. I shall not,
however, introduce further particulars, though diverse have happened within my
notice; but conclude this letter with remarking, that in every instance before
related, where the misfortune of a blemish was apprehended, it did not happen;
and in the other cases, where marks appeared, they were entirely unexpected,
and the cause of them totally unknown to the mothers; which, I may venture to
say, has always been the case. If, therefore, women would wish to be credited
in these stories of frights and longings, let them declare, before they are
delivered, like the two ladies mentioned in this letter, that they have marked
the child, and make known the cause of it. Nothing less can prove this fact;
and, till then, even the possibility of it may very reasonably be doubted; for
surely we may conclude that so remarkable an effect of sympathy can never take
place, without the immediate and most certain knowledge of the mother.

LETTER II. Of Marks -- showing that such blemishes may happen independently of
the mother's imagination.
AS to longings, I doubt not but every person must have been sensible of such
inclinations. I can answer for myself, that, when indisposed, and my stomach
rather weak, I have many times suffered not a little, in being disappointed of
a thing that seemed particularly to strike my fancy: surely I may be allowed to
say, that the prejudices of female education are likely to encourage such
inclinations to a much greater degree in pregnant women, whose appetites are
usually weak and fanciful; and, as it is the case in every passion when too
extravagantly indulged, I take it for granted, ladies may be sometimes very
much hurt by such a disappointment, independently of superstitious, tormenting
apprehensions.

I would wish to arm every female breast with the resolution necessary for her
own happiness. Yet I do not deny but upon a thousand occasions the ladies
suffer, unavoidably as it were, from fear; and materially so in the present
instance.

Women, from the delicacy of their frame, and the particular mode of education
in polite countries, are, without doubt, much more under the dominion of fear
than men, who are continually spurred on by custom and vigor to exert their
courage. This renders a variety of objects, although terrible to the fair sex,
so familiar to ours, that contempt alone is oftentimes a security against many
such horrible intruders.

We confess, then, that women are exceedingly subject to fear: it is also
granted, that, in things they long for, they may be painfully disappointed. It
is not denied but that there are oftentimes very extraordinary appearances at
the birth, which the fancy likens to a variety of things; but it does not
therefore follow, that we are bound to believe such marks or blemishes to be
the effect of fright, or the consequences of a parent's disappointment.

In the first letter, we gave several relations on both sides of the question:
I shall now beg leave to propose a few queries, which, if allowed, in my
opinion, seem in part to account for these extraordinary appearances; and what
cannot be illustrated upon a rational enquiry, why may we not suppose to
proceed from hidden, accidental causes in the operations of nature? Since
excrescences upon trees, plants, and indeed blemishes on almost every kind of
animals, (of which daily experience will convince a common observer), seem
strongly to authorize such a conjecture; I say, why may we not suppose this to
be the true reason, without the assistance of a wonder-working imagination?

Will not an inflammation upon the eye frequently produce an universal redness
over that part which otherwise appears beautifully white?

What is the cause of this surprising alteration?

Must not there ever have been a fluid circulating in those tender vessels? --
And must not that fluid be necessarily limpid?

Are not those vessels, therefore, unless injured, too small to admit the
sanguinary fluid in its compact and red state?

And does it not evidently appear, that they must be considerably distended,
before the red blood can be admitted, which denotes this inflammation?

Save where the virgin blush brings the blood into the cheek, or the
rosy-coloured nymph rivals our courtly beauties; -- does not the whiteness of
the skin, in almost every part of the body, plainly show that its vessels
equally deny the admission of this red fluid?

We are told, by curious enquirers, that, for several months after conception,
the embryo receives its support from a lympid fluid, and that the form itself
is nearly limpid, or colorless.

If so, are not the vessels of an unborn child, as it arrives nearer to the
birth, gradually enlarged, so as in the proper parts to give admission to this
red sanguinary fluid?

May not therefore some accidental pressure upon a pregnant woman -- the
violence of a sudden jolt -- or the shock received by a false step or a fall,
with a variety of other casualties, convey such an injury to the tender embryo,
as upon some part of the skin to occasion a similar effect to that of the eye?

Do we not oftentimes observe inflammations in the eye to be in a manner
habitual?

Why may we not then suppose these delicate vessels, when thus distended, to be
so oppressed by the particles of the fluid which rush into them, as never more
to be able to recover their natural size?

Hence these parts, and these parts only, giving admission to the red blood --
is it not probable that they may assume the various forms, which in various
infants are imagined to resemble so many different things?

The cure of the beforementioned inflammation of the eye frequently depends,
not upon bleeding, but upon constringing the vessels, and restoring them to
their original state, so that they again only admit their proper limpid fluids;
and perhaps, if astringent applications were used at the birth, where a strong
pressure could be made upon the particular part, many of these blemishes might
in a great measure, if not altogether, be removed.

Such are our conjectures on the cause of those marks which are totally of, or
approaching to, a red color. But there are other blemishes, which, at first
sight, my readers may take for granted cannot be accounted for by this way of
reasoning; such, for instance, as appear to be of a light and dark brown, of a
chocolate and black color. Nevertheless, my fair friends, permit us heartily
to proceed.

A blow sometimes stains the skin yellow; if the part be much bruised, the
tinge is deeper, and frequently turns quite black. A curious observed must have
noticed, in those persons who from violent blows have received such contusions
as are vulgarly called black eyes, that the skin, before it returns to its
natural color, assumes a great variety of different hues; all proceeding from
the same first cause. Is it not then probable, that some such accident
happening to an unborn child, may produce a similar effect? This perhaps will
be allowed: but then why should such blemishes continue in children, since they
usually disappear in the case before mentioned? However, to proceed in the
enquiry: Such effects being admitted, their permanency then is the difficulty
to be overcome. Let us consider, that, although in mature life the constitution
has generally strength sufficient to repel most accidents, not instantly
mortal, yet in childhood, and old age, the powers of the body are overcome by
very slight injuries. In the meridian of life, those parts of the body, which
are disfigured by accidents, most commonly recover themselves; nevertheless
many instances are to be produced, even in adults, where the skin continues
discolored. Bruises and other injuries upon the shins, particularly in feeble
constitutions, frequently occasion marks that never disappear. The same is
likewise observed upon the legs of those who are accustomed to sit too near
fire, in which case we say they have burnt their skins; and old sores generally
leave such marks. I have seen many of these lasting blemishes. My readers
probably recollect the fact, and also that such injured parts assume a variety
of colors; black, red, brown, motley, etc. much resembling those which are
supposed to proceed from the force of imagination.

Since, therefore, we find such like appearances are sometimes permanent in the
different periods of life, what can be said to disprove their continuance in
infants, when supposed to happen either before or at the time of delivery? For
surely we may conclude, the more delicate the form is, it will prove the more
susceptible of injuries, and those injuries will last the longer; the tender
vessels in such cases not being so able to recover themselves. And as we often
find it to be so in the feebleness of age, and in a variety of other instances
-- why may we not in the tender embryo also suppose these blemishes sometimes
to remain, and be durable?

But if you think the above reasoning not sufficently plausible, let us
consider the difference of complexion in different persons of this country --
but principally the different colors of Europeans and Africans: and since we
find appearances so diametrically opposite in the skins of persons, why may not
the same contrast in some measure take place in the skin of one and the same
person, through a kind of error in nature from her intended scope?

Nay, do not those blemishes called freckles, and more especially moles, which
frequently make their first appearance in advanced life, and are often covered
with hairs -- I say, do not these, with the common excrescences of warts, etc.
show us how easily most of the different colors and appearances may be
produced at any age? And though the cause of these is full as little known as
the matter under present consideration, was the effect ever deemed miraculous?

Now is it to be wondered at, if these sportings of nature should bear a
resemblance to some or other of the vast variety of objects in the animal or
vegetable creation?

Or in fact, if they bear no such real resemblance, cannot the imagination
readily suppose they do; in like manner as, when looking upon the clouds, we
easily descern men, horses, trees, forests, flocks of sheep, armies, and indeed
every thing which the most fruitful invention can form?

Some further rational conjectures might be added; but they would probably in
this place be considered as too technical for the generality of my readers: I
shall, therefore, wave them at present; for I think there has been already
enough said upon this subject, to check at least, if not entirely to subdue,
these reigning infatuations.

Now if the doctrine of marks, in consequence of frights and longings, should
prove to be nothing more than prejudice, ladies will avoid the continual
distress which in these circumstance they labor under; for sorry I am to say
it, but at present it seems as fashionable to cultivate such dispositions in
young married women, as to recommend matrimony itself.

On the other hand, supposing all that has been advanced should prove to be
chimerical; the removing of the apprehension, by which I mean the foreboding
fears of the mother, will be to remove the greatest part of the evil: and
surely it is time enough at the birth to discern an imperfection. This, indeed,
is a point which the strongest advocates for the force of imagination must not
only allow, but likewise approve of its tendency; since fortitude is the only
preventive, according to their favorite system, against the miserable
consequences of frights, and disappointed longings: for if such a degree of
courage can be obtained, as will prevent fear, and such a degree of resolution
maintained, as will prevent the mind being hurt, upon any casual disappointment
of the inclination, the evil itself is at once remedied; because the
imagination will never painfully dwell either upon objects of disgust or
inclination; and consequently blemishes can never happen from such causes.

I trust that my attentive and intelligent readers will not be displeased with
the discussion of this (...) interesting subject.

LETTER III. OF MISCARRIAGES.
WE are now, my delicate fair ones, entering upon a subject which requires some
circumspection, to divide the province of the physician from the advice of a
friend.

There are undoubtedly constitutional errors, which oftentimes prevent women
from becoming joyful mothers; and they may be hindered also by accidental
circumstances. Both these considerations, however, belong to the physician. In
a word, therefore, these directions do not extend to such remote causes; my
counsels at present being designed to assist you in your own sphere.

The desire of children is evidently predominant in almost every female
disposition: it must be certainly owing to the wise ordination of Providence,
that their education is so admirably calculated to encourage this fondness. How
engaging are the childish amusements of a daughter! -- Let us picture an
innocent little girl fondly caressing a waxen image, dressing and undressing it
with all the pomp and importance of a tender mother. What a delightful
employment! -- how amiable does the child herself appear! -- and so endearing
is this female province, that it is justly remarked to grow up with the sex
into life.

I have, with inexpressible pleasure, seen many young ladies, women grown,
happily amusing themselves at their younger sister's baby-house, and often
discovered a crimson blush, that genuine mark of female modesty, arising from
their being somewhat confused in suffering themselves to be thus unexpectedly
surprised.

There are, indeed, some persons who have declared an aversion to children. I
have painfully suffered from the enumeration of the difficulties and
inconveniences which they describe parents to labor under, who have the care
of a little family. -- Selfish and unsocial considerations!

God has universally manifested, that the whole human race are dependent upon
one another; and those persons, who think and act thus narrowly, can neither be
accounted good characters in themselves, nor worthy members with respect to
society. But, alas! they are strangers to the feelings of parental fondness.

Certain I am, ye amiable wives, that, if it be your good fortune to become
happy mothers, your children, those dear pledges of love, if prudently
educated, prove not only an engaging comfort to yourselves, but a great and
lasting security for the affections of your husbands. Trust me, there is a time
when the charms of beauty must cease, and the passions of youth bend, to the
majesty of wisdom: -- it is then goodnature and good-sense, with that essential
ingredient, a cheerful disposition, will in a great measure secure your
conquest; and a charming offspring will assuredly contribute to unite parents
in the lasting bonds of friendship.

How desirable, therefore, are children! Even poverty itself does not prevent
the sanguine wish for them. Let us then endeavor to promote their safe and
happy increase.

The difference of constitution in women is an important affair: there are some
who upon every trifling occasion are subject to miscarriages -- others, again,
who, in spite of the most direct and powerful means, are often compelled to
bear the token of unwarrantable amors; and there are instances even of married
women, who, not supposing themselves to be breeding, have been treated in the
most likely manner to bring about an abortion -- but all in vain. A remarkable
story of this kind occurs to my memory, which I relate from my own knowledge.

An honest laboring man and his wife lived together many years without having
children; and they were both beyond the meridian of life, when the poor woman
was supposed to be afflicted with a dropsy. From time to time she advised with
several eminent physicians, who, from her appearance and the account she gave,
treated her as dropsical; administering the most powerful remedies against that
disorder.

At length she grew so very big, that all hopes of a cure were given over, and
the operation of tapping was recommended. The husband's circumstances being
narrow, and the expense of this illness putting it out of his power to employ a
surgeon, the poor woman was advised to go into the hospital: this, however, she
refused.

A week or two after this, the husband called, with a most joyful countenance,
to inform me his wife was brought to bed, and that both the mother and child
were likely to do well. I was at that time very young; but my reflections upon
the oddity of the event determined me to be always wary in the examination of
dropsical female patients.

Thus we see in this woman, and in a variety of other cases, where impious
efforts have been used to promote a miscarriage, that nature, in spite of great
violence, sometimes will not be interrupted.

Let us then aim at assisting her in this great work, where the constitution
appears not able to go through with it; and point out the most rational means
to prevent abortion.

Our first letter, over and above the enquiry concerning marks, longings, and
frights, greatly tends to this material end. Women of a delicate form, and too
great sensibility, are the most liable to miscarry: such also are the most
likely to imbibe, and to be affected by, the prejudices we there wished to
caution them against. The power of fear is undoubtedly sovereign over most
persons; and this, as it frequently occasions miscarriages, is truly to be
dreaded. If, therefore, the prejudices were discountenanced, the unhappy fear
itself would assuredly cease.

And further, there is nothing tends more to render life happy, either to men
or women, than to conquer, as much as possible, the passion of fear. This is
the monster, which in some degree subdues us all, and too frequently makes
mankind miserable. There is no calamity but would easily become supportable,
could we divest ourselves of fear; and daily experience proves women to be most
subject to its tortures. How many trifling insects, that a man continually
spurns from him, ruffle the breast of females, and throw them into the greatest
agonies!

The evil, therefore, is seated in the imagination; for it is the dreadful
apprehension of their own mind that torments them; which, by a firm and steady
resolution, may generally be overcome. Fortitude is an inestimable jewel.

However difficult the task appears, the earliest and strongest prejudices may
commonly be conquered. I am sensible, that sometimes it will require great
pains, and never can be done but by the strength of reason. Would you, my too
susceptible fair, follow my advice on this subject, a thousand accidents might
be avoided that hourly happen to you upon this, and many other occasions.

Reason was bestowed upon us, both for the preservation of our health, and the
promotion of our happiness. The abuse of it as necessarily destroys the one as
the other.

How do we continually reflect upon ourselves for inconveniences, mental as
well as corporeal, that arise from inconsiderateness and folly? Believe me,
ladies, miscarriages are frequently brought about by imprudence. When a wife
has the pleasing prospect of becoming a mother, it is no longer a time to be
revelling in midnight assemblies. Such a conduct not only deprives her of
natural rest, but also endangers her health, and thereby oftentimes promotes
this dreaded evil.

In this and every other point, I beg leave to caution you against falling into
wide extremes. Some ladies I have seen madly running up and down, and jumbling
all the town over in the most jolting hackney-coach that could be procured;
and, although at the same time they complain of being shaken to pieces, yet
this they say is to prevent the accident. -- Others never step out of doors,
nay, nor so much as go up and down a pair of stairs, for several months: this
also is to avoid the danger.

Again let me warn you of both extremes. Be this your guide -- whatever
exercise you are capable of taking without fatigue, indulge -- but no more.
Never, in this point, regard the example of others. Because your friend can do
this and that, it is no reason you should; and if the attempt gives pain, it
should certainly be avoided.

I need not caution the present age against the pernicious custom of lacing too
tightly; for a lass of fifteen, in the dress of our times, would in the last
age have been supposed to be just at down-lying.

I do not mean to condemn, but to praise the ladies for giving themselves room
in the waist: nevertheless extremes, you know, are not advised. There is a
certain medium in every part of life, which is the je-ne-sais-quoi that
constitutes the agreeable.

It is as uncommon now to see a young girl crooked, as it formerly was to see
one perfectly straight. I believe no one denies that their shapes were greatly
injured by the stiffness of their stays, and by being laced so exceedingly
close. This pernicious custom was frequently the cause of a bad state of
health, and threw many young women into consumptions. We now rarely see ladies
fainting in public places: but when they did not allow themselves room to
breathe, it happened every day. It is to be hoped the ladies will not again
lace themselves up, to display fine shapes; the Author, however, wishes to warn
them against so pernicious a fashion.
This prudent alteration, therefore, so serviceable to maidens, is still more
necessary for married women.

There is another caution at this time to be observed. I have frequently
beheld, with pain, diverse ladies too apt to be lifting and playing with heavy
children: there are certain sympathetic emotions, altogether natural and
laudable, which prompt them to it; and far be it from my thoughts to deprive
them of so tender and generous a gratification: nevertheless, to see a delicate
little form, very near her time, stop a bouncing boy, and catch him in her
arms, is really an alarming sight: many miscarriages happen from such
inconsiderateness; and, if our conjectures are not wrong, many blemishes also
by these means are probably occasioned.

But there is a practice indiscriminately used even to this day, worse than all
the rest; and that is bleeding. Whether a woman be robust or weakly, if she is
pregnant, she must be bled. Has she any pains? No matter. -- Is she in health?
Yes. -- But she must lose blood. -- Why? Because she is with child. Her mother
always did it, and her grandmother, aye, and her great great grandmother too,
time out of mind; and therefore can the propriety of it be doubted? -- These
are the general arguments used by women in favor of bleeding, when they are in
perfect health: but if any slight indisposition happens, be it ever so foreign
to their particular situations, and which perhaps at another time would pass
unnoticed, dreadful consequences are apprehended, if they are not bled: nay,
indeed, those little temporary inconveniences which generally and unavoidably
attend advanced pregnancy, in their mistaken opinions, call aloud for bleeding.

In our two former letters, we took notice of the difficulty that attends
rooting out fixed and prevailing prejudices; and I am apprehensive that this is
as deeply seated in the minds of women, as those of which we there treated.
However, let us ask the assistance of reason also in this particular, and
search a little into the merits of the custom.

Is not the infant supported by the mother?

When there are two to be supported, is not more nourishment required than for
one of them only?

Is this then a time, without a real necessity, to sport with the blood of a
weakly and delicate woman? No, surely.

Let me therefore beg of you, my ingenuous friends, to consider this matter in
a rational light. I have given a plain and easy clue to pursue the enquiry; and
the subject will not permit me to enter more fully into it with my fair
readers, without assuming the character of the physician, and without advancing
those things, which may, in this collection of letters, be considered as an
affront to delicacy.

To your own thoughts then I commit it; and will conclude this letter with
saying, that, though I do not deny but there are cases which require bleeding,
yet I caution you against doing it at random, and, indeed, without very good
advice: at the same time, I firmly believe such instances rarely happen to
those who are not of a robust constitution, and am fully persuaded that many
women are daily injured by this wrong practice.

LETTER IV. Mothers milk -- the natural and best food for infants.
I HAVE endeavored to set forth the ridiculousness of women terrifying
themselves, and every body about them, during their pregnancy, with evils that
most probably are altogether imaginary. I would wish my female readers to
consider this subject in a more extensive view, and to aim at greater fortitude
than the sex can generally boast, in the common occurrences of life; when the
tenderness of men is not so much engaged, and when the ladies cannot reasonably
expect such kind allowances as are made at this particular time. Think me not
severe; a faithful monitor must speak with freedom; the man who is blind to
this foible, must be insensible to your charms, and unworthy of your
confidence. Your happiness is at stake, much more so than a superficial
observer may imagine. Female vivacity softens the rugged paths of life; and,
believe me, self-love operates powerfully even upon the most generous minds.
The woman who indulges gloomy ideas -- who is continually brooding over
melancholy -- who, in her hours of domestic retirement, is perpetually
rendering herself miserable, and her most intimate acquaintance, and dearest
relatives, unhappy -- such a mistaken SHE must only expect the cold eye of
pity. However powerful her personal attractions, she will ultimately banish her
husband and her friends. It will be found her greatest misfortune, and at a
time too when it is irretrievable, to have once had the merit to gain, perhaps,
a valuable heart, when she has not discretion enough to keep it. -- The
importance of the subject will, I hope, apologize for this digression.

We have also earnestly labored to conquer the prejudices concerning marks, in
consequence of frights and longings; and have exposed the fabulous histories of
those wonders. We have likewise shown how the understanding may be deceived by
the forms of fancy; and have no less earnestly endeavored to explode the
mistaken custom of bleeding indiscriminately, during pregnancy -- pointing out,
upon rational principles, the absurdity of all. A task equally arduous in every
part; a thousand prejudices being imbibed against the whole.

Another subject at this time presents itself to view -- I mean that of women
suckling their own children; against which the present obstinately received
opinions are still more unaccountable than the former; as nothing but a strange
perversion of human nature could first deprive children of their mother's milk.
Give me leave therefore to observe, that milk is the natural support which the
great Author of our being has provided for our infant state; and I am heartily
sorry the present manner of bringing up children puts me, in some measure,
under the necessity of proving milk to be the best food that can be given them.

Milk is a nourishment produced from the various kinds of food taken in by the
mother. Her stomach breaks and digests the aliment, which, after various
operations of nature, becomes so far animalized as to be a kind of white blood;
from whence animal bodies at all times receive their constant support and
recruit. This therefore being admitted -- until an infant's powers are
sufficiently strengthened to perform so great a business as that of digestion,
the mother, by the all-wise appointment of Providence, from her own breast
supplies it with the means of life. Hence no other nourishment appears so
proper for a newborn child.

For the farther information and satisfaction of my female readers, and to
convince them that milk is the most proper nourishment for tender infants, I
think it will not be improper to give a concise account of the manner in which
grown persons receive their constant recruit and support from their daily food.

Whether it be animal or vegetable diet, or a mixture of both, taken into the
stomach, the quality of the food is so far altered by the digestive faculties
that a milky nutriment is produced from it (...)passes through the bowels, the
milk is taken up by a great number of fine vessels, which, from their destined
office, are called the milky vessels; and through them it is conveyed into the
blood for our support: and, as before observed, nature has so admirably
contrived the animal fabric, that mothers are likewise enabled to support their
young from this constant supply, which at the same time also affords to
themselves their own proper nourishment.

This is the grand scheme of nutriment: for, when these particles of our food,
which afford us sustenance, are thus taken up by the milky vessels, the grosser
parts are, by the same wonderful construction of the bowels, rejected and
evacuated, in a manner well known to every one.

Whoever, therefore, gives this argument a rational consideration, will, I
trust, be led to acknowledge milk to be not only the natural, but the best and
most strengthening nourishment that infants can possibly receive; because their
digestive faculties are, at this time, incapable of producing a good and proper
milky nutriment from any kind of food which can be given to them.

The Author of Nature has universally committed the support of infants, and the
early part of children's education, to women; if it were not thus ordained, he
would undoubtedly have furnished men also with milk for the nourishment of
their young; and experience convinces us, that women are much better qualified
both by nature and custom for this important concern. This system of nursing,
therefore, is peculiarly addressed to the fair sex, who are most interested in
it, and who will most sensibly feel the happy or miserable effects of the
manner in which they discharge this first great trust which is reposed in them.
-- Here, indeed, a mother will assuredly reap the happy fruits of fortitude,
and those likewise of a lively, cheerful and obliging disposition. This subject
will be treated at large in the twelfth letter; nevertheless, give me leave to
observe, in this place, that such as the mother is, generally speaking, such
will be the first, and most probably the most durable impressions received by
the child. It therefore naturally follows, that infants, whose minds are early
accustomed to agreeable objects, and whose expanding ideas are gratified with
pleasing sensations, unabated by flavish fears -- such, and such only, as they
(...) into life, will possess that generous gratitude, which prompts them to
consider it as a first great duty to contribute to the happiness of their
parents.

I am exceedingly offended, whenever I observe a child, grown to man or woman's
estate, who shows, upon any occasion, a want of respect or duty to its parents;
and more particularly so, if such slight or contempt be exercised toward a
good mother. Unnatural monster! to be wanting in respect to her who bore him in
her womb -- who cherished and supported him with her milk -- and for many years
after his birth gave up her own pleasures and recreations entirely for his sake
-- and who had no cares but for his welfare. I would have a mark set upon the
forehead of such a barbarous savage; and he should be hunted from the society
of men.

Those mothers, who by a foolish indulgence spoil their children's tempers and
dispositions, are undoubtedly culpable; but the example of a violent,
passionate, yet negligent and insensible father, is equally or more to be
dreaded. A mother has this plea, that she endeavors at least at the time to
make her child happy; and it may be said, in excuse for her conduct, that she
is to be pitied in not knowing better: but there is no excuse, either to God or
man, that can be urged to mitigate the vice and folly of such a father: the
iniquity rests with himself alone; for the benevolent Author of our being is
not to be arraigned upon this or any other occasion.

How provident is nature in all her works! How wonderfully indulgent to man,
and other helpless animals, in their first state of existence, by thus enabling
the mother to feed her young with nourishment drawn from her own body, until
such time as the offspring has obtained strength sufficient to provide for
itself! This gracious bounty is abused only by man, the most intelligent of
earthly beings; whose misuse of reason leads him astray, whilst humble instinct
directs all other parts of the creation aright.

If we look around us, we shall find every animal that gives suck, carefully
fostering her young: and other enjoyments are no more thought of, until they
are capable of providing for themselves. An example by which mankind might
profit much: but the strong impulse of passion, in this and many other
instances, subdues our reason. Did we consider the benefit of our children
more, and the indulgence of our selfish inclinations less, the race of man
would be more healthy, strong, and vigorous, than we can at present boast. But,
alas! such is the depravity of human nature, that it would be in vain to
enlarge upon this topic of complaint; it is therefore our present business to
prevent, as much as possible, the future growth of these evils.

Let us, my friends, as you are all interested in the enquiry, compare the
success of mankind with that of the other animals in rearing their young. A
little observation will convince us, that greater numbers of the human race are
lost in their infancy, than of any other species; for near one half the deaths,
within our bills of mortality, happen to children under five years of age. And
further, compare the opulent with the rustic, the success is still exceedingly
different. How many children of the great fall victims to prevailing customs,
the effects of riches! How many of the poor are saved by wanting these luxuries!

Again, compare the success of such as suckle their own offspring, with that of
those who commit them to the care of nurses, or bring them up by hand; and we
shall there likewise find an amazing difference: but more of this hereafter.

From these considerations, it is evident, that Nature is always preferable to
art; whence the brute creation succeed better than the human, in preserving
their own species. And the peasant, whom necessity compels to follow nature,
is, in this respect, happier than his lord. Those mothers also, who, in spite
of custom, pride, or indolence, will take their little babies to their breast,
must have more comfort and success, than those who cruelly consign them to the
care of foster nurses; thereby denying them that food, which is not only the
most proper, but is ordained likewise for their infant state.

Let me then entreat those who are desirous of rearing their children, not to
rob them of their natural breast. Would they wish them to be healthy and
beautiful, let such mothers give suck: for even wet nurses, we shall find, are
very little to be depended upon.

LETTER V. Arguments in favor of suckling -- as well for the mother's sake, as
the child's -- and the evils to be apprehended in delivering children to the
care of foster nurses.
HEALTH and beauty are desirable, and the latter in particular, to women. They
must, in this case, be united; as it is impossible for a woman to be truly
beautiful who wants health. Disease blights the rosy bloom upon the cheek,
turns the delicate whiteness of the skin into a sallow hue, and destroys the
enchanting luster of the eye. How insufficient is it for a lovely maid to make
a conquest, if she cannot keep it, as a wife!

It is not at present my province to enlarge upon the accomplishments of the
mind. How necessary they are to secure the affections of a husband, every
prudent woman knows: and she must be equally sensible, that the elegance of her
person is also to be regarded; an advantage which those who are in a bad state
of health have scarcely spirits to attend to: besides, illness too often
renders the sweetest dispositions cross and peevish.

Those who are happy enough to have children, run the greatest risk, not only
of losing them, but of destroying their own health and beauty, by repelling
their milk immediately after delivery. It never can be done without producing a
fever. Oftentimes tumors, and cancers in the breast, owe their origin to this
pernicious custom; asthmatical complaints, and lingering diseases, are
frequently occasioned by it; and too commonly, the immediate death of the
mother follows from such ill management.

Consider, my fair pupils, for your own health's sake, and for the sake of your
future happiness, how necessary it is to preserve such dear pledges of mutual
love. By these powerful ties, many a man, in spite of impetuous passions, is
compelled to continue the prudent, kind, indulgent, tender husband. Did you but
thoroughly know the secret impulses of the human heart, you would not risk the
loss of your children, by unnaturally denying them the means of life.

Let not the mistaken husband insinuate, that you will be less charming in his
sight, by doing your duty to your little ones: many -- many instances have I
known, of weakly and delicate women, who, at my particular request, have
suckled their children, and thereby obtained a much better state of health;
nay, they have been more pleasing in their persons, after thus becoming happy
mothers; and their husbands have, with pleasure, acknowledged their improved
charms.

There may be some cases in which it is not prudent for a mother to give suck;
but these instances very rarely happen: and there may be some women, who,
although they are ever so desirous, cannot suckle; this, however, is but seldom
to be urged. I sincerely sympathise with those unfortunate ladies, who are thus
deprived of a happiness, only known to those who enjoy it. What shall we say
under these necessitous circumstances? Shall we advise such mothers to employ a
wet-nurse; or to bring their children up under their own management, according
to proper rules which shall be laid down in a following letter? They are both,
in my opinion, wretched necessities. Yet, was an infant of my own thus
unhappily situated, without hesitation I would prefer the latter; for much is
to be apprehended from a child's sucking a strange woman: nothing less than
absolute necessity would make me comply with it.

Too often diseases, and those of the worst kind, are imbibed from the breast.
It is a shocking truth, but vicious inconstancy is become so universal, even
among the lower rank of people, that many women offer themselves, and are daily
employed as wet-nurses, who are laboring under dreadful and infectious
diseases. Yet, supposing you can arrive at a satisfactory assurance in this
point, there is a certain cleansing quality in the milk of a woman immediately
after childbearing, exceedingly necessary for the newborn babe, in order to
prepare its stomach and bowels for future food: this you very rarely can obtain
from a wet-nurse.

There is yet a further evil to be dreaded: as it is through necessity alone
that a woman will desert her own infant, and take another to her breast, she
may be induced, by the advantage she gains, to conceal her being again with
child, and continue to suckle the infant, till it pines away and dies, for want
of proper nourishment. Thousands have been sacrificed by these means. Should
they, however, escape, in either case they are, too generally, miserable
beings: for, in consequence of the first, diseases of the glands, known by the
vulgar name of the king's evil, and other terrible complaints, succeed; and in
the latter, the rickets, watery gripes, and many other maladies, proceeding
from a weakly and relaxed habit of body, most commonly ensue.

On the other hand, disease and death are the usual consequences of the present
erroneous method of bringing children up by hand. Scarcely one in four of these
little innocents live to get over the cutting of their teeth; and the vitiated
blood of those that escape, occasioned by improper nourishment, generally
renders them infirm, or short-lived. Almost every complaint to which children
are subject, appears to me to proceed originally from an improper management of
them; for the young of all other animals are full of health and vigor.

And moreover, independently of these misfortunes, the future happiness of the
parent herself is greatly interested in this maternal concern; as it generally
falls out, that those children who are neglected by their mothers during their
infant years, forget all duty and affection toward them, when such mothers are
in the decline of life; and this contempt from a child is nothing less than
plunging a dagger into the breast of its parent: and besides the cruel pangs
which she must unavoidably experience from this want of duty, daily observation
convinces us, that widows frequently suffer not a little, even in the common
conveniences of life, by the means of those very children, who, if properly
educated, would have probably become their support and comfort.

Such are the melancholy prospects attending the present unnatural practice of
wet and dry nursing; from which a curse is oftentimes entailed upon a
generation, of which parents ought to esteem themselves the authors. How
terrible soever these things appear, I esteem it my duty to acquaint mothers in
particular, what a risk they run in thus hazarding the health and lives of
their children, together with their own present and future happiness; and
sincerely hope I may imprint the same objections upon them, that daily
experience in my profession presents to me, against these pernicious customs.

Oh! that I could prevail on my fair country-women, to become still more lovely
in the sight of men! Believe it not, when it is insinuated that your bosoms are
less charming, for having a dear little cherub at your breast. I speak from the
feelings of a man, and of one too who has an universal and generous love for
the virtuous part of your sex. Trust me, there is no husband could withstand
the fond solicitations of an endearing wife, would she be earnest in her desire
of bringing up her own children. Rest assured, when he beholds the object of
his soul cherishing and supporting in her arms the propitious reward of
wedlock, and fondly traces his own lineaments in the darling boy, it recalls a
thousand delicate sensations to a generous mind: perhaps he drops a sympathetic
tear in recollecting the painful throes of the mother, which she cheeefully
bore, to make him such an inestimable present. His love, tenderness, and
gratitude, being thus engaged -- with what rapture, must he behold her, still
carefully intent upon the preservation of his own image!

How ardent soever such an one's affections might be before matrimony, a scene
like this will more firmly rivet the pleasing fetters of love: -- for, though a
beautiful virgin must ever kindle emotions in a man of sensibility, a chaste
and tender wife, with a little one at her breast, is certainly to her husband
the most exquisitely enchanting object upon earth: -- and surely, ladies, had
fashion but established this laudable custom among you, it would prove so truly
amiable, as not only to excite the emulation of your maiden friends to worthy
conquests, but also raise their ambition to shine in characters thus dignified.
How greatly then would you contribute to the felicity of your own families, and
of mankind in general!

LETTER VI. The management of infants from the birth -- with directions for
putting them to the breast.
HAPPY, thrice happy woman, now become a joyful mother, nurturing her young!
Say, tell me, you who know the rapturous delight, how complete is the bliss of
enfolding in your longing arms the dear, dear fruits of all your pains! --
pains now no more remembered. Long may you preserve the darling, and be doubly
blessed in its future beauty, health, and virtue!

I am not unmindful, my charming friends, of the prejudices necessary to be
conquered, before so material a benefit to mankind, as that which I am to
picture out in this letter, can be generally obtained. In my last, the
misfortunes attending the neglect of this duty were fully explained; and as I
have frequently succeeded among the private circle of my friends, by addressing
their understanding, I trust to the candor of the more ingenuous sex, for my
success in public. My endeavor, therefore, throughout, shall be to convince
you that I have reason and truth on my side. Happy then shall I think myself,
and amply rewarded for my trouble, if I am fortunate enough to meet with your
approbation; as your observance of the rules laid down in this little manual
must necessarily follow. Much depends upon your maternal care in the first
stage of life; it is a pleasing duty, to which you are honorably called, both
by nature and the custom of all nations.

I am truly sensible, that, according to the present mistaken manner of
suckling and rearing children, the business is a fatigue, which frightens many
at the first attempt; it is a method altogether culpable and unnatural. To this
letter particularly belongs the first management of them. In my next, I shall
point out the subsequent errors, and lay down some general rules, that will not
only prove beneficial to the child, but make the task of suckling easy and
delightful to the mother: even the polite and gay may cheerfully undertake
this, at present laborious, employment, without greatly interfering with a
social life -- for the gloomy ideas of a nursery will vanish. The paths of
nature are easy and delightful. Come then, my fair, and let us follow her, step
by step.

We have before observed, that a child brings its immediate nourishment into
the world with its birth. Man is born in sorrow. The fatigue and pain of
delivery, both to the mother and the child, require rest; and generally, where
no improper means are used, they both directly-fall into a sweet refreshing
sleep; during which time the milky vessels of the breast are dilated. Thus with
prudent management, in a short time a small flow of milk will be obtained. The
child, replete with nourishment at its birth, awakes equally refreshed with the
mother, and by eagerly sucking the nipple encourages its more plentiful supply.

Sometimes there may be a little inconvenience with the first child; but this
is rendered still greater by keeping it away, perhaps two or three days, from
the mother, and suffering her attendants to draw her breasts, which generally
occasions sore nipples. The gentle, easy, and frequent suction of an infant,
will not only prevent this inconvenience, but gradually invite the milk,
thereby relieving the mother from a troublesome burden: the nipple also, by
this means, will be drawn out, so that the child may suck without further
difficulty. This is the lesson nature teaches; and wise are they who observe
her precepts.

As to an infant's clothing, the lighter it is, and the more unconfined, the
better; very little covering is necessary: and the future deformities of shape,
etc. not to mention the deplorable loss of health, sometimes proceed from the
dress being too heavy and confined, at its first entrance into life.

I am entirely against an infant's receiving any nourishment until it can be
put to the breast; and much more so against cramming it with what nurses call
pap. The stomach is not yet sit for any other food than what Nature has
prepared. Art cannot produce a diet with such an affinity to animal blood, as
to render it proper for the tender bowels of a newborn child.

The cries of an infant are generally occasioned by the uneasiness it suffers,
either from its dress, or in consequence of thus cramming it. The complaints of
children in these early days, as I before observed, and likewise the difficulty
in cutting of teeth, which I shall hereafter speak of, proceed almost entirely
from this wrong practice. Watery gripes, offensive stools, and most disorders
in their bowels, are altogether occasioned by improper food.

Custom has rendered this ridiculous practice so universal, that the good women
continually complain it is impossible for a child to remain without food till
the milk comes. Let any mother make a fair and unprejudiced trial, and
experience will convince her of the truth of our maxim.

How are other animals supported? Nature, in no one part of the creation, is so
imperfect, as to be indebted to the wisdom of man to rectify her works. And
suppose a case, in which the milk does not flow so soon as in general it is
expected, let the child, under such circumstances, be put to the breast again
and again; a very little nourishment will at present suffice, and that will
most commonly be obtained from the nipple; if it is not, a little warm milk and
water, with a small quantity of Lisbon sugar, is the only nourishment, in my
opinion, that is proper to be given: this advice I have caused to be strictly
followed, and have happily experienced the good effects of it in an infant of
my own, who scarcely received any support from the breast till after the third
day from the birth. Follow, my dear ladies, these rules; and where there an
hundred accidents that now happen to mothers, in consequence of milk fevers,
and to children, in consequence of being denied the breast, you will rarely
find one. I am convinced of the truth of my assertion by experience, and
therefore am the more bold in recommending it to you, and to the public.

LETTER VII. A natural and easy method of suckling children. -- This duty
proved to be a pleasure rather than a fatigue.
NOW then, my nearly interested friends, let us observe those parts of the
creation where instinct only can direct, and for once learn a lesson from the
tender brute. Behold those animals which are familiar to us, how successful
they are in bringing up their young: animals that give milk to three, four,
five, six, and sometimes more of their offspring at a birth. How well and happy
are their dams! What unremitting care do they take of their nurslings! They
never desert them, until time has given to their bodies strength sufficient to
provide for themselves. Provident nature! -- and shall mankind alone distrust
thy goodness? Let us learn, and be wise. Never more suffer it to pass for an
argument, that a woman, who is capable of bearing a child, has not strength to
suckle it, when the little creatures that surround us can rear a whole family
at once.

O that I could convince you of the breast alone being a sufficient support for
the most robust of children! Consider nature well in all her works! Let
ignorance and prejudice no longer prevail! Believe this solemn truth, almost
every woman is capable of supporting her babe; and great will prove the
advantages, both to herself and her infant. When it is confined altogether to
the breast, it gains strength every day, and defies disease. The mother, under
these circumstances, would not again conceive so quickly; and miscarriages
would thereby be, in a great measure, prevented; unless hurried on by frequent
bleedings, and other mistaken practices.

If, for the sake of your families, you value your own lives, attend to this
indisputable fact. You yourselves know how many women are ruined in their
health by not suckling their children; and what numbers are continually
sacrificed by unskilful methods of treatment, at the time of their delivery.
You may -- you should support your young; the task is easy and delightful, and
the thriving child rewards your pains. It is not laborious. I would not wish to
see you slaves: the tender delicacy of your frame forbids the very thought. The
method is plain and easy -- only follow nature.

Sleep is essentially necessary to life; and that the stomach should sometimes
be at rest, is as essentially necessary to health; both these things the mother
and child equally require. Thus the slavish part of the business is set aside;
for it is an absurd and erroneous custom, after stuffing it continually in the
day, to keep a child at the breast all night. This counteracts the operations
of nature, not only by depriving it of its rest, but also, from a constant
fullness, the powers of the infant-body are prevented from exerting themselves
in a proper manner upon the aliment received. Hence the stomach and bowels are
enfeebled, and thereby rendered incapable of producing such wholesome
nourishment as a child would otherwise obtain from its food; to which grand
purpose, sound sleep and abstinence are equally conductive.

On the other hand, the mother, being continually disturbed during the night,
is also prevented from assimilating that good and perfect milk, which would
otherwise be produced from the food of the day. Hence she becomes ill, grows
tired of her task, and the crude milk proves noxious to the weakened bowels of
the infant. Thus disappointment and death frequently succeed.

I know it will be urged by some, that it is impossible to keep children quiet
and at rest, during the night, and that they cry for food. Let them be managed
from the birth agreeably to the directions here given, and then I believe few
persons will complain of their being troublesome. One reason why children do
not sleep well by night is, that they are indulged too much in the cradle by
day, when they should have exercise. Another still greater reason, I am
inclined to think, proceeds from pain, occasioned by improper food, in the
first passages; for I will venture to affirm, that almost every child's bowels,
from the present wrong management, are in a state of disease, which too
frequently grows up with it into life; and thus in infancy the lurking cause of
a bad constitution is oftentimes established.

When their little stomachs, irritated by too large a quantity, and the bad
quality of food, become somewhat empty; a pain, probably like what we call the
heart-burn, and acidities at the stomach, awakens them from their disturbed
slumbers; and these little creatures can then only discover their uneasiness by
crying. Hence nurses, partly for their own quiet, and partly through a mistaken
notion that children cry only for nourishment, cram them until they are quite
gorged. Such infants eagerly devour whatever is given them, because the
reception of food takes off that too great sensibility of the stomach which
caused the pain. A similar effect to this, grown persons, troubled with the
complaints I have now mentioned, must every day experience upon taking
nourishment; for it always affords a present relief.

Four or five times in the twenty-four hours are sufficient for a child to
receive the breast; and let the following rules be nearly observed. About six
or seven in the morning, after which the child may be allowed an hour or two's
sleep; -- again, an hour after the mother has breakfasted -- and a third time,
if she pleases, before dinner -- a fourth time, at five or six o'clock in the
evening, being two or three hours after dinner -- and lastly, between ten and
eleven, just before she goes to rest.

Now, by those mothers who have servants to take off the laborious part of the
management of children, this surely cannot be deemed a fatigue: that the task
itself is a pleasure, the fondness of nurses toward children at the breast
fully proves; and that it is an indispensable duty, the feelings of human
nature evidently proclaim.

In the early months, sleep may be indulged during the day; but exercise should
also at proper intervals be given to children. As they grow stronger, sleep
should be less encouraged, and exercise increased.

There are several points of management that I have no fault to find with; and,
among others, think it needless to dwell upon the necessity of keeping children
dry and clean: it is so evident, that few nurses are culpable in these
particulars. But as to rocking children, the custom is altogether absurd. He
was an ingenious man who invented a mouse-trap, though none but a fool first
thought of a cradle; it was certainly invented to save the attendants trouble,
for which, by the bye, they suffer more in return. I never permitted a cradle
to disgrace my nursery. Infants, if well, sleep without this lullaby-labour;
and such forced dozings generally render them peevish and watchful in the
night; which is the most proper time both for them and their nurses to enjoy
their rest.

At the end of six or seven months, when the four first teeth ought to appear,
children should be kept awake, and exercised as much as possible; by which
time, if managed properly, they will generally gain strength enough to shoot
these teeth, and the others will in due course be cut with ease,

Thus you will avoid an evil that sweeps away great numbers; of which, however,
I shall speak more fully in another letter; for It is entirely owing to the
weakness of their bodies, that children cut their teeth with so much
difficulty, and that it is attended with fever, convulsions, and death.

This weakness of body is but little understood; for if a child be bloated with
fat, which too generally happens when it is improperly fed, the parents and
their friends call it a fine child, and admire how it thrives -- when, alas!
that very fat is the disease which renders its constitution thus feeble: for if
the butcher did not kill lambs and calves when they become immoderately fat,
they likewise would die as frequently as children. Which death may be justly
attributed to the preposterous method, so generally in use, of giving them too
much crude unsalutary nourishment; and not managing them in other respects as
nature requires, to strengthen the body from the food received.

After what has been advanced concerning the early part of infant-management,
give me leave to observe, that the arguments enforced upon this important
subject are submitted to the consideration of those mothers who are desirous of
preferring a rational system to bigoted maxims and opinions, I would wish them
to be attended to, and I trust that they will merit their approbation. I do not
expect the foregoing rules to be invariably adopted from the birth. I know very
well, and it is obvious to those who have been attentive to children, that
infants require some more, and others less attendance, especially during the
first month or two; and a certain time is necessary, even under the most
prudent management, to accustom them to our wished-for habits. There is a wide
difference between knowing what is right, and doing it; and oftentimes,
although we may be desirous of strictly following the most prudent maxims,
difficulties will unexpectedly arise in the first attempts. Let me therefore
desire you to aim at the above regulations, which by perseverance will soon
become practicable; and then, determine for yourselves, how greatly they will
contribute to your own ease and comfort, as well as to the advantage of your
children.

LETTER VIII. The proper method of weaning children.
IN my last letter I condemned the present erroneous method of suckling and
feeding children, and recommended a plain and easy way of rearing them to six
or seven months old, upon a rational plan, pointed out by nature in many
different parts of the creation; and which most probably was strictly followed
by mankind in the early ages of the world, before luxury, pride, and indolence,
crept into society. Ancient history never could have boasted of so many strong
and valiant men, had not mothers, in their infancy, given strength and vigor
to their constitutions; and the cause of the present pusillanimous, feeble,
weakly, and diseased race of mortals, may in some measure be ascribed to the
want of this earliest maternal care.

Let us talk with the plain and simple husbandman, who has a nursery of trees
under his direction: he will tell us it is not sufficient for the stocks to be
good of their kind; for, unless they be secured from rude winds, and properly
cultivated, so that they may receive nourishment, they will never thrive.

It is literally the same in animal life; there are unfortunate mothers who
daily and woefully experience the truth of this argument. How many women are
blessed with fine children, not a blemish, nor the mark of a disease, about them
at their birth; and yet before many months are past, for want of prudent care
and proper nourishment, do they not waste away and die? I need not say more;
the tears of many of my gentle readers, at the unhappy recollection, will
sufficiently testify the fact. May such tears prove a warning for their future
conduct, and, trust me, my honored matrons, your sorrow will be turned into
Joy -- a joy of the tenderest nature, generous and truly laudable!

Let not man, in the vanity of his heart, triumph in a superiority over the
fair sex! for to them alone it belongs to lay the foundation, not of what he
is, but what he should be -- healthy, strong, and vigorous. You, ladies, form
an hero in the cradle; and courage is received from the breast. Gratitude in
return demands a protection to you from man. With yourselves, therefore, it
remains to render him capable of that protection. Thus nature, my fair-ones,
ordained your importance in the creation.

But to return to the husbandman: he will again tell us, that when his trees
have received their infant strength, and their roots begin to shoot, it is
necessary to transplant them from the nursery to a more extensive soil, in
order that they may arrive at their natural perfection. So you, my friends,
having brought the child through its infant state, by the tender nourishment of
the breast, must, at the time of weaning, (which, in my opinion, is best
postponed until it be near a twelvemonth old) transplant your little nursery
likewise to a more extensive soil that is, you must afford it more copious
nourishment, in order to bring it to maturer life.

Yet, as great skill and caution are required on the part of the husbandman, in
this business of transplanting, so great judgment and care must be shown by
you, in this your province of weaning children; for custom has so far deviated
from nature, as to render the greatest circumspection necessary to point out
the happy medium.

A further care, therefore, at this time demands our attention. Man, according
to the present mode, particularly in England, is greatly supported by animal
food. A sudden transition, from one extreme to another, is always dangerous;
and every material alteration, to avoid inconveniences, should be brought
about step by step. If nature ever intended us to destroy the animals around us
for prey, surely we may conclude this food never could be designed for our use,
until such time as we had teeth to eat it.

Many ill consequences arise from persons devouring their meals too eagerly;
and if the stomachs of men are oppressed, by not sufficiently chewing their
meat, certainly the weak and tender stomachs of children, who have not as yet
teeth sufficient to break it, must be still less fit to receive it altogether
whole.

Animal food, then, at this time of life, is absolutely forbidden, from reason
and reflection; but as it is in some measure necessary to prepare them for their
future method of living, broths and jellies may be now given sparingly, and, as
they increase in strength and age, more plentifully. Hereby the animal juices
are received, which contain the only nourishment in flesh, without any labor
to the stomach; and let it be remembered, that the juices of full-grown animals
are to be preferred to the younger and fattened kind; but more of this in its
proper place.

Let children at this time be fed once or twice a day with about a quarter of a
pint of broth, and a little bread mixed in it. When you give a stiff jelly, a
large tea-cup full is sufficient; but I would recommend as much warm water, or
milk, with it, and likewise a little bread. The breast should not be allowed
them now so often as when they were wholly confined to that nourishment; in
short, every meal that you thus introduce, should supply one of the stated
times of suckling. Thus are they gradually and insensibly weaned from the
breast, and accustomed to animal food, without any pining on their parts, or
much trouble to the mother.

Having shown the proper manner of putting a child to the breast, and likewise
the most prudent method of taking it away; we shall, in the next letter, point
out the safest rules for bringing children up by hand: but another observation
or two will not be improper in this place.

The gravy, which runs out of meat, upon cutting it when brought to table, is
exceedingly wholesome, being nothing more than the pure juices of flesh. A few
spoonfuls of this beef or mutton gravy, mixed with an equal quantity of warm
water, and a little salt, make very good broth. I mention this, because parents
generally imagine it to be unwholesome for children; and oftentimes, when I
have recommended it, some good old lady has stoutly opposed me, alleging that
it fills a child with humors; whereas, on the contrary, this is the only part
of flesh that produces good nourishment.

Here let me protest against the custom of not suffering children to eat salt,
for fear of the scurvy; not making a distinction between salted meats, and salt
eaten with meat. In this point also, strong prejudices are frequently to be
combated with; for many a time have I been told by persons of reverent years,
that children were not suffered to eat salt in former days; adding, perhaps
with, a significant shrug, that the present age think themselves much wiser
than their forefathers.

"Animal food, which has been any considerable time in salt, becomes hard, and
requires more force to break and digest it, proper for nourishment, than weak
stomachs are capable of exerting; consequently, salted beef, pork, and such
like things, are improper for children."

Nevertheless, salt in itself is so far from producing; the scurvy, that it is
now generally supposed to be its greatest antidote; otherwise, why do so many
thousands yearly flock to bathe, and drink seawater? There is, further, a
certain stimulating quality in salt, that greatly promotes digestion; and
whatsoever assists that office, must of course rather contribute to purify the
blood, than to render it foul; which is the supposed cause of the present
frequently imagined, but oftentimes only a, fashionable disease -- called the
scurvy.

I have been repeatedly thanked for the following information. A table spoonful
or two of salt, put into a quart of spring water, is a most excellent wash to
cleanse the skin, especially if the face be well rubbed with a coarse cloth
some little time after it has been washed with the salt and water. By this
means the pores of the skin will be kept open, and no obstructed perspiration
will remain, which is the cause of carbuncles and those red pimples which are
generally mistaken for the scurvy. It is this stimulating and cleansing quality
of salt that makes the seawater so useful to those who are troubled with
eruptions; therefore, by the above proportion, the water is rendered still more
efficacious, and will clear the face and neck of heats and pimples which
frequently disturb the ladies.

I cannot bear the modern prostitution of the words female delicacy: the duties
of a mother are by some thought to be indelicate; and the appellation is now
given only to disease and sickness; for a woman must become a walking ghost, to
be styled truly delicate. I frequently lament, that the idea is not more
strictly confined to mental accomplishments; nevertheless, I wish my fair
friends to bestow every rational and laudable attention to render their persons
neat, elegant, and engaging. I cannot conclude this letter better than by
observing, that, although beauty stands like a cipher when alone, every
additional qualification increases its merits ten-fold; and the less sensible
of it the possessor herself appears to be, the more it will always be regarded
by the admiring world.

LETTER IX.
The safest method of bringing children up by hand.
WE have hitherto, my fair philosophers, been carefully observant of, and
obedient to, the laws of nature. Her paths are infinitely various. Every step
we take, affords new and engaging prospects. We have traced man from the first
period of his existence, and have followed reason and instinct, to give him
strength and vigor in the earliest part of life. So fair a dawning promises a
robust and healthy constitution; nevertheless, necessity obliges us to proceed
to a further speculation.

Let it, therefore, be the business of this letter to enquire how nearly art
can supply the place of nature. Let us endeavor to point out a method to those
unfortunate mothers, who are, through necessity, deprived of the happy
enjoyment of suckling their own children. It may not prove unworthy the
attention of those, who, by choice, commit them to the care of others. I
propose to carry my observations in this letter, as far as my instructions have
been given to the valuable and truly praiseworthy matrons, whose duty to their
family over-balances every other consideration. By and by, when the suckling is
about to be weaned, and the dry-nursed child brought equally forward, the rules
of diet will be the same for both; on which account I went no farther in my
last, than the proper period for introducing broths, jellies, etc. All other
considerations will be brought under general directions.

Mother's milk we have shown to be the natural and most proper support for
tender infants; it is a digested fluid, already animalized, and therefore
fittest for the nourishment of children. This remark also shows that the infant
body is, by nature, designed to receive only a liquid nourishment; a hint
particularly necessary to be attended to at this time, as it altogether
obviates the general objections against confining children to milk, in
preference to thicker victuals, of which I shall speak more fully before I
conclude this letter.

We have taken notice how tender the stomach and bowels of infants are, and
have thence inferred, that almost every complaint they are afflicted with,
proceeds from the improper quality of their food: and the too large quantity
given them, also increases the disease. We took notice, that the digestive
powers of a newborn child are incapable of producing a kind nutriment even
from bread, and therefore exclaimed against feeding them with what is called
pap. But suppose it to be otherwise: what a poor pittance of support does such
a mother allow to her child, who gives it only bread and water!

I have seen many fatal instances of such strange management. We ourselves
should think it hard, indeed, and nothing but dire necessity could compel us to
live thus sparingly; besides, how would our flesh waste, and our strength
decay! If so, surely it cannot be proper for an infant, whose bones have not as
yet strength sufficient to support its frame. How is it possible for a child to
thrive under such treatment? -- Perhaps some will allow a little milk to be
mixed with its food, but very sparingly; because they imagine it stuffs the
stomach, and fills a child full of phlegm. Idle and ridiculous are these, and
all other arguments that can be urged against this natural and salubrious diet.

Milk is here spoken of in general terms; because I intend, in a subsequent
letter, to examine the several properties of different milks, and to remark the
purpose to which each kind seems best adapted. Cow's milk being mostly used,
and in my opinion the properest, in general, to answer our present design, I
would therefore be understood to recommend that, if no other kind is
particularly mentioned.

I know very well that many persons, and perhaps some gentlemen in the practice
of physic, will differ from me in opinion, when I prefer cow's milk to every
other kind of nourishment, in the early months, where it is necessary to bring
a child up by hand. Let me beg of them only to make the experiment, as I speak
from experience; and if they have reason to censure me afterward, we shall
meet upon equal terms; till then, at least, I shall hope for candor from every
one.

It has frequently been suggested to me, that cow's milk is too rich, abounding
also with too much cream, and that being of a fat oily nature, it will relax
more than strengthen. But, however, this fault is not much to be apprehended
from the milk used in and about London. Supposing it to be the case in the
country, which I am far from allowing, you may let it stand till the cream
rises to the top, and use the skimmed milk; or by boiling deprive it of the
greatest part of this oily quality, which collects itself upon the surface, and
may then be readily taken off; or it may be diluted with water.

These doubts being removed, the milk of cows appears, I think, to be the
properest substitute we can make, for that of the breast; and will answer best,
after the first month or two, without boiling, unless it purges the child; in
which case, boiling it will generally prevent the inconvenience, proceeding in
all likelihood from its oily particles. I have no objection to a small quantity
of Lisbon sugar being mixed with it, particularly if the child be costive; and
indeed this may frequently be of use, to prevent its too great tendency to
become acid, from whence disorders of the bowels sometimes arise. Let it be
remembered, that, through this system of nursing, children are supposed to be
free from disease, and that I am to be considered not as the physician, but as
the friend: when they are ill, it is the business of those persons who have the
care of them, to direct a proper food; and upon many occasions, milk may be so
managed as to prove greatly instrumental, even as a well-adapted nourishment,
to their recovery. In too laxative a habit of body, for instance, rice and
cinnamon may be added; but then care should be taken, that the rice be well
boiled in water, before it is mixed with the milk. In the watery gripes, I
frequently direct the following diet, for infants: Boil a table spoonful of
ground rice, with a little cinnamon, in half a pint of water, till the water is
nearly consumed; then add a pint of milk, and let the whole gently simmer for
five minutes; strain it through a lawn sieve, and make it palatable with a
little sugar. This food corresponds well, in such complaints, with the curative
intention.


One remark I shall beg leave to make, which comes in here with propriety. We
have taken notice in a former letter of the cleansing quality of mother's milk,
upon its first coming into the breast. Now, where children are debarred from
receiving it, a substitute of some gentle purgative is highly proper, to give
such a stimulus to the bowels, as nature has provided by the mother's means.
What I have experienced to be the best calculated for answering this purpose,
is something of the following kind.

Suppose we say, syrup of violets and oil of almonds, of each one ounce, with
four or five grains of rhubarb. This composition being shaken will pretty well
unite. A tea-spoonful may be given as often as you find it necessary.

In case the milk be thrown up in a curdled state, a small quantity of salt
will generally prevent it; a circumstance I would wish to have attended to; as
many children are subject to this complaint; and it is a method I have seldom
known to fail, unless they are greatly over-fed. Whenever a child throws up the
milk, it is to be considered as a complaint, and particularly so if it appears
curdled; because it has then passed through the first change it undergoes in
the stomach, and consequently discovers that the stomach itself is too feeble
to execute its further office. In this case, sometimes the stomach abounds with
too great an acidity, but more frequently it is loaded and oppressed by the
quantity which has been given to the infant. Milk always curdles in the
stomach; and it is only a vulgar error to suppose the contrary; for by this
means it becomes a substantial aliment, and affords a proper nourishment to
children and other animals; whereas, if it continued in a fluid state, it would
contribute but little to their support.

What we have next to observe, is the quantity of milk proper to be given to a
newborn child, in the twenty-four hours. What think you, my dear ladies, of a
Winchester pint being a sufficient quantity for the day and night! Methinks I
hear an exclamation -- O barbarous man! Under a pretense of correcting us, he
intends to starve the little helpless creatures. Was there ever such a cruelty
heard of before? Allow a child only a pint of milk in a day! Why, it would eat
two quarts of pap, and still cry for more. -- Yet, after all surprise, an
infant in the month will receive, from one pint of milk, more real and good
nourishment, than from ten quarts of pap, as it is called; indeed I might say
more nourishment than from any other kind of support: for, notwithstanding the
juices which afford sustenance are all liquid, it is necessary they should,
contain the essence of substantial food: and although a man who is accustomed
to daily labor, would soon be emaciated by living continually upon broths, yet
milk alone would support his strength and spirits, because it curdles in the
stomach, and thereby becomes a more solid and nutritious aliment. And further,
let me again remind you, that not only the human species, but likewise all
other animals, receive their continual nourishment from a milky juice which is
prepared in their own bodies from the aliment received, as was before explained
in the fourth letter.

There are, as we have mentioned, very great errors in the quantities as well
as the qualities of infants' food. It was before observed, that children's
stomachs should not be always crammed. To this it is in a great measure owing
that they are so continually puking: a circumstance looked upon by some to be
natural and wholesome, who preposterously encourage this disposition by
frequent vomits. But, surely, nature never intended more nourishment to be
received than is necessary for our support. Does any person in a good state of
health, after a moderate and proper meal, ever find an inclination to throw it
up again? Are the young offspring of other animals constantly puking? How
therefore can it be supposed natural for children to do so? A little reflection
would soon convince such superficial observers of their error; for you will
rarely find a child throw up its food, when properly nursed.

If one pint of milk, therefore, in the first week or two, be too little, it is
an error on the right side; for it appears to be enough to support the child;
and much worse consequences are to be apprehended from giving it too much. We
must, every one of us, have often experienced how necessary it is to be hungry,
in order to relish our food; and that to be continually indulging, palls the
appetite. Certainly then, it must be equally necessary, that the infant stomach
should sometimes know the sense of hunger.

Would not three or four pints of milk, in the twenty-four hours, support a
grown person? If so, undoubtedly one third part is amply sufficient to nourish
a newborn child. But I would not be understood to cavil scrupulously for a
spoonful or two; I only mean to assist the candid enquirer in this most
essential part of the management of children, who are denied the breast.

We come next to ascertain the proper quantity to be given for a meal. A
quarter of a pint is fully sufficient to be taken at a time; and let the hours
of feeding, as well as every other particular, be regulated according to the
rules laid down in the seventh letter. In ten days, or a fortnight, you may
increase the daily allowance a quarter of a pint: and at the end of a month you
may allow a pint and a half in the twenty-four hours: another half-pint may be
gradually permitted by the time it is three months old; and this quantity, if
the child is voracious, may be still increased to three pints in the day;
which, I am persuaded, if the milk be good, will prove sufficient: and this
allowance will, I hope, cancel the severity of every matron's censure.

Having now given you my thoughts upon this part of infant management, there is
but one rational objection that strikes me, against the propriety of so plain
and simple a method of bringing children up by hand. Their natural food is
allowed to be milk -- but it may be urged, that the human milk, in consequence
of the mother's diet, is more strengthening than that of cows, asses, or any
other species of brutes. Granted -- but then again this argument equally
proves, that cow's milk partakes more of a vegetable nature than the milk of
women; and, during the early months, all that the advocates for the present
custom would contend for, is -- what? pap, panado, etc. which are of the
vegetable kind; and therefore their arguments require no farther answer. Were
it proposed to add some proper broths to cow's milk, after the first four or
five weeks, where there is no circumstance particularly to forbid it, the
design would appear reasonable, in supplying the supposed deficiency of the
animal property; and it is a point I would readily join in, nay, it is what I
mean to recommend toward the end of the third month. I frequently order milk
and broth to be mixed together, and think it proper food. But let every such
meal, however, as before advised, supply the place of the usual milk. In
whatever way you manage children, be careful not to feed them overmuch.

There is yet a circumstance of great moment to be attended to, and, if rightly
comprehended by my fair pupils, will convince them, that the allowance for the
earlier months is amply sufficient: it is the manner in which infants ought to
be fed.

Surely it is wrong to put a large boat full of pap into their little mouths,
suffering them to swallow the whole of it in the space of a minute; and then
perhaps, from their cries, to ply them with a second, which is no sooner down
than thrown up again.

We have mentioned the ill consequences of grown persons devouring their
victuals too eagerly; and experience must often have convinced every one, that
a much less quantity than we generally take, if eaten leisurely, and well
chewed, will suffice for a meal; and also that, after such meals, we seem more
comfortable, and are inclined to pursue either business or pleasure with far
greater ease to ourselves. On the contrary, from a too hasty and hearty meal
the stomach will be distended overmuch, which is always productive of
indolence, and a tendency to sleep. The same must certainly hold good with
respect to infants.

Besides, to obtain milk from the breast, nature wisely obliges them to earn
their nourishment by the labor of drawing it. The stream being exceedingly
small upon the milk's first coming into the breast, it requires a long time to
procure a quarter of a pint; and the very exercise fatigues them, before they
have received too much. This, in my opinion, fully proves that quantity to be
sufficient for a meal.

There is nothing, therefore, wanting, I hope, to complete our system, but a
contrivance to supply the place of a nipple, that the child may still labor to
obtain its support; which alone will greatly prevent the error in quantity. I
have seen some inventions of this kind, by means of parchment or leather sewed
to the pointed end of a horn, which is no bad thought, and capable of great
improvement. The Hollanders, when they travel, have a small pewter vessel,
somewhat in the form of a cone, which is filled with milk, and a piece of
sponge covered with a linen cloth is tied over the smaller end. This serves the
children very well as an artificial nipple: for it is observed, that a Dutch
woman seldom or never gives suck to her child before strangers.

We have plainly demonstrated, that infant nourishment, particularly in the
early months, is designed by nature to be altogether liquid: against such
contrivances, therefore, I cannot see an objection.

Would you, my fair friends, undertake this pursuit, from the happy fertility
of female imagination, I am certain a little experience would point out to you
a ready and convenient method to answer every purpose; and I am thoroughly
satisfied, the happy consequences would amply reward your pains -- by
preserving many dear little innocents, that daily fall a sacrifice to repletion
or over-feeding.

P. S. -- Since this book made its first appearance, I have contrived a
milk-pot for my own nursery upon the above principles; it appears to my family,
and to many of my patients, preferable to those now in use, and may probably be
still further improved. For the satisfaction of my readers, I shall give a
description of it. This pot is somewhat in form like an urn; it contains a
little more than a quarter of a pint; its handle, and neck or spout, are not
unlike those of a coffee-pot, except that the neck of this arises from the very
bottom of the pot, and is very small; in short, it is upon the same principle
as those gravy-pots which separate the gravy from the oily fat. The end of the
spout is a little raised, and forms a roundish knob, somewhat in appearance
like a small heart; this is perforated by three or four small holes: a piece of
fine rag is tied loosely over it, which serves the child to play with instead
of the nipple, and through which, by the infant's sucking, the milk is
constantly strained. The child is equally satisfied as it would be with the
breast; it never wets him in the least; he is obliged to labor for every drop
he receives, in the same manner as when at the breast; and, greatly in
recommendation of this contrivance, the nurses confess it is more convenient
than a boat, and that it saves a great deal of trouble in the feeding of an
infant; which is the greatest security to parents, that their servants will use
it, when they themselves are not present.



LETTER X. A general management of children, from the time of weaning, till
they are about two years old -- with observations upon the cutting of teeth.
I AM just now returned from a nursery, where, with sincere pleasure, I beheld
a happy mother with a pretty little puppet at her breast, which she had the
satisfaction of saving in its earliest days, by her amiable affection and
tenderness; an infant born under melancholy circumstances, when the mother
herself was afflicted with a terrible quincy in her throat, and had been
confined to a sick chamber five or six weeks before her delivery. No one
expected the life of the child, and the mother's was equally doubtful. Nothing
but the greatest care on her part could have saved the infant; and, had it been
committed to any other person, the diseased state of its bowels at the birth
would, probably, very soon have put a period to its existence.

Judge, ye considerate fair, indulge with me the pleasing reflections of this
good woman! Behold her, fondling at the breast a smiling bey, to whom she not
only gave a being, but generously preferred his welfare, and dared, even
contrary to the advice of her friends, to suckle him, thereby endangering her
own, to preserve the life of her child. May gratitude and duty expand within
his breast, and prompt him virtuously to reward this truly maternal affection!
May he, in future years, become the pleasure and support of her declining life!

This amiable mother has three other little ones, that for health and beauty
stand almost unrivalled; all nurtured under her own wing -- supported by her
breast. What an encouragement is this to follow nature! Her heart was never
torn by the bitter reflection of not having done her duty to her family. Example
glorious! worthy of praise -- worthy of imitation!

But to return to our present point: the suckling being weaned, and the
dry-nursed child brought equally forward; we shall now join our different
nurseries together, and endeavor to make them thrive under one general
direction.

I must, however, beg leave to mention, that as I before advised to have the
child kept to the breast till it is near twelve months old, and have also
pointed out the prudent manner of introducing broths and jellies, preparative
to weaning it entirely; so this letter is designed to recommend a proper
management of infants from the period of one to two years of age.

The best method likewise having been laid down for bringing children up by
hand, upon those principles that approach nearest to nature, which surely
renders them unexceptionable; and having indulged them with broths and jellies
earlier than the sucking child; I shall suppose these also gradually brought on
to the twelfth month, and thence proceed with both together.

I most earnestly recommend that they be strictly confined to the following
diet, and not fed oftener than three, or four times at most, in the twenty-four
hours. The quantity for each meal may now with propriety be considerably
increased; it will be longer, therefore, of consequence, before the stomach
becomes empty.

Thus, for instance, let their breakfast, at six or seven in the morning, be
half a pint of new milk with about two ounces of bread in it. The second meal
should be half a pint of good broth, with the same quantity of bread; let this
be given about ten or eleven in the morning. The third meal, about two or three
in the afternoon, should be broth in like manner: and their supper, about six
in the evening, new milk and bread, the same as for breakfast. When you
substitute jellies, or gravies, for broth, let them be always plain and simple;
and a less quantity will prove sufficient. Under the article salop in the
Family Physician, p. 26, you will find proper directions to prepare an
excellent strengthening food, by mixing salop with milk, which makes it of the
consistence of a custard. This preparation of milk is highly proper for
children, invalids, and aged persons; and it is withal a very agreeable and
palatable nourishment.


If children are thirsty between their meals, a little barley-water and milk
may be given them; but I would not too frequently encourage this custom.

From hence, the general intention appears throughout, to decrease the quantity
of milk, as you introduce other substantial and proper nourishment -- though I
would always allow children a pint of milk each day.

Biscuits, sweetmeats, sugar plums, etc. all which tend to spoil the appetite,
are highly improper, and ought to be looked upon as one of the pernicious
effects of luxury. Where is there a child, unaccustomed to such indulgence,
that would not be equally pleased with a crust of bread? It is not my business
here to enter so philosophically into the doctrine of nourishment, as to
contend with those who suppose it altogether to proceed from the saccharine
qualities of food: but allowing them the utmost force of their arguments, I
answer, that nature will always prove the best chemist, to separate these
sugar-like particles from the aliment we take in. So much for the present, with
regard to the regulation of their diet.

As to other particulars: Little or no sleep should now be permitted in the
day. Air and exercise are greatly to be recommended. Let them rise as early as
you please; and the sooner they are put to bed, when the evening begins to shut
in, the better. Their clothing should now, and indeed always, be light and
easy. By no means suffer children to be confined in very warm rooms, but
accustom them by degrees to those variations of the seasons, which they will be
compelled to struggle with in future life.

It is a great misfortune for children to be brought up too tenderly. Should
Providence hereafter design them to contend with difficulties, how little
capable will they be of conquering them? The child thus nurtured most commonly
grows up too delicate and feeble to encounter hardships. Should necessity, or
chance, hereafter lead him to seek his fortune on the raging seas, or to bear
his part in the hardy service of his country by land; how pitiful will such a
man appear! How unequal to the necessary toils of sieges, storms, and tempests!
-- But, however, this great error, to the credit of good mothers be it
confessed, is of late years much corrected.

I beg leave, my fair friends, to say something concerning their being put upon
their feet. With respect to the time, the strength of the child must determine
that period. Of this be assured, that all children will show an inclination to
walk, as soon as their bones have acquired a firmness sufficient to support the
body. I am fearful many heavy children are injured by exciting their feeble
efforts to walk too soon. Doubtless it is a convenience and ease to nurses to
set them upon their feet, as they do not then require exercise in the arms; and
consequently are not so great a trouble and fatigue to those who have the care
of them. But it is a fault entirely to be condemned, and what I particularly
caution you against; because, whoever you may have to attend upon your
children, they will certainly encourage them to walk, for reasons above
mentioned.

Therefore throw aside your leading-strings, and your back-strings, and every
other crafty invention which tends to put children forwarder than nature
designed. Our young plants are to be cultivated without art. The industrious
gardener, it is true, can boast of his exotics, and early fruits, by forcing
their growth. Yet say, ye sons of Epicurus, are your grapes or pines thus
raised, equal to the produce of their natural climate? And notwithstanding the
merit of your gardener, who is thus capable of gratifying this high zest of
luxurious extravagance; even in this your boasted pride, a simple clown would
be wise enough to expose your folly, by the honest preference which he would
give to nature. Such as the fruits are, watery and insipid; such also are the
plants thus forced, weakly and tender; susceptible of the slightest injuries,
and exposed to continual dangers: such likewise are the poor feeble infants,
forced upon their legs before nature has designed them; while others, managed
without art, like fruitful vines, defy the inclement seasons, and triumph in
their natural strength and vigor.

I do not mean, from what has been said upon this subject, to prevent them,
when they really show an inclination to walk, but to admonish you against being
too precipitate. It is, in my opinion, a good method to suffer the little
creatures first to crawl upon a carpet, or any other convenient place;
permitting them to tumble about as much as they please. By this means an
exercise will be given to the body and limbs, without their continuing in one
position long enough to hazard a distortion, from too great a weight of body.
Thus let them, by degrees, learn to walk upright, which their own inclinations,
in imitation of those about them, will prompt them to, full as soon as nature
designed.

I shall now beg leave to offer a few hints with respect to the teeth: a
circumstance this, materially to be attended to, as woeful experience daily
convinces us.

Children are teazed with cutting of teeth from four or five months, till they
are two years old, and upwards; nay, some are so backward as not to have their
complete number till they are turned of three years old. I shall not enter into
the distinction of teeth, but speak of them in general, so as to give a
competent idea of the precautions I mean to recommend.

It is also very uncertain with respect to the exact time of their shooting any
of their teeth; but this also, I believe, chiefly depends upon the strength of
the constitution; and if the rules laid down in the preceding letters be
properly observed, you will generally find children cut all their teeth by the
time they are about two years old. You will, likewise, rarely meet with an
instance of their being cut with difficulty. It has been already taken notice
of, that the reason of their being backward in their teeth, and so many
children lost on this account, is entirely owing to a weakness of body, which
is a fact that scarcely any one will deny.

Yet, where the constitution is not strong enough of itself, as a great
assistance may be obtained by lancing of the gums, let not a false tenderness
prevent fond mothers from allowing such relief to their little babes, in the
excruciating tortures they suffer by the cutting of teeth. The operation is not
to be deemed pain; for if you put any thing with a sharp edge into their
mouths, they will save you the trouble of doing it, by pressing hard against
the instrument, and cutting the gum themselves.

When the teeth are discernible to the sight or touch, there is very little
sense of feeling in the gum; their tortures proceed from the sensibility of a
fine membrane which envelopes the tooth. If that membrane is sufficiently
divided, although the gum should again unite, there will be no more trouble;
for teeth thus lanced will gradually advance without future pain. Never,
therefore, I say, let a prejudice like this hinder you from relieving such poor
little helpless creatures.

There are many persons, who, about the age of twenty, have two, and sometimes
four, additional teeth, at the furthermost part of the jaws; and, from the time
of life in which they appear, they are called the teeth of wisdom. Let me
desire such wise ones, sensible of the pain upon this occasion, to reflect how
insupportable it must be to many infants, who perhaps are cutting the whole of
their teeth almost at once; at a time too, when their tender frames are but
little capable of bearing pain. Many grown persons are obliged to have such
teeth lanced; let them declare how much relief they found from this simple, but
useful operation.

Candid reasoning, from experience, is the surest way to conquer prejudices;
and those who give themselves leave to think upon the point with candor, will,
I doubt not, allow the force of this argument.

It may not be unseasonable, in this place, to give a caution, which those who
lance teeth would do well to observe; as carelessness or ignorance in the
operation frequently frustrates the intended benefit. Let me advise you not to
depend upon old women, or nurses, who undertake to do it with crooked
sixpences, and such like ineffectual means.

We took notice a little above, that the pain arises, not from the gum, but
from the sensibility of a fine membrane which envelopes the teeth. It is not,
therefore, sufficient to make a longitudinal incision into the gum, that being
too commonly done without dividing this membrane; in which case, instead of
good, it does hurt. After cutting through the gum, the instrument should be
drawn round the tooth; and the person should be satisfied, that it grates in
every part against the tooth, which will effectually divide this too sensible
membrane. Where the gum is exceedingly tough, a transverse incision ought
likewise to be made, and with these precautions the operation will assuredly
succeed. Parents cannot be too careful in this particular; for I have often
observed ill consequences from the carelessness before mentioned.

In my observations upon children that are lost between the age of five months
and three years, I have found they are generally carried off either by sudden
convulsions, or what is called a tooth-fever, or a wasting of the body: in the
two last cases, the scene likewise is commonly closed with convulsive fits.

The original cause of these disasters having been frequently taken notice of
to proceed from the wrong management of children, it appears equally evident to
me, that the immediate cause of these fits almost always arises from want of
strength in the constitution to cut the teeth. It is true, the bowels sometimes
are greatly affected, which indeed generally attends a wasting of the body; but
then the immediate cause of such complaints at this time is most commonly the
teeth: for if children are capable of enduring the improper aliments before
mentioned in their most tender state, during the first four or five months;
surely, without some more active principle, the vital powers would not
afterward be by them alone subdued.

This makes me particularly solicitous to recommend lancing of the gums before
it is too late to assist children; being firmly persuaded that many might be
saved, who daily fall a sacrifice to those complaints for want of it.

Among many other instances that I could relate, to show the necessity of
admitting this operation before the strength of the child be decayed, and its
body wasted, I shall conclude this letter with a remarkable case of this sort.

A poor woman in the neighborhood, some time since, brought her child to me:
he was apparently a stout fine boy, and then about nine months old. She desired
my advice for an eruption the child had all over his body, which she called
scurvy; but I found it nothing more than some pimples proceeding from the
improper quality of its food; and in fact, notwithstanding the chubby
appearance of the boy (which in reality was nothing more than bloated fat), he
was actually of a very weakly frame, as appears by the sequel -- and I think it
necessary, as a farther confirmation of my assertion, to inform you, that his
father was at this time between sixty and seventy, his mother not less than
four or five and thirty years of age.

Near or quite six months afterward, the same woman came to beg the favor of
me to look at her child again, who, she said, was dying. I saw an infant worn
away to a mere skeleton; and, upon enquiry, found it to be the same chubby fat
boy I had seen before. He lay panting for breath, and had taken little or no
nourishment for twenty-four hours. Upon examining the little patient, there was
not a tooth appeared. The cause of the disease, therefore, was immediately
evident to me; but I told her it was too late to be of service, for I found the
child could not recover.

However, to satisfy the mother, I advised lancing the gums. To the
astonishment of every one about the child, sixteen large teeth were cut out;
but the gums being very much hardened, for want of this operation, it was with
no small difficulty now performed. The immediate relief which the child
received, surprised them all still more. From a convulsive state that he before
lay in, he instantly recovered, took notice of every body in the room, and,
during the time I staid, eagerly devoured a considerable quantity of
nourishment.

The grateful parent thanked me a thousand times, and reflected upon herself
for delaying to apply to me before. But, alas! I foresaw it was only a
temporary relief, his strength being utterly exhausted. I left her, without
giving the least hopes of his recovery; and the next morning the child died. A
reflection upon this case, I take for granted, is entirely needless. It is
evident, had the teeth been cut in due time, this fatal accident would not have
happened.

It is, indeed, a topic of serious concern; but as it comes under the class of
diseases to which infants are subject, it cannot be enlarged upon in this
little volume. Some opinions, and medical observations, are thrown out in the
introduction to these letters, which, if carefully attended to, may assist the
intelligent parent in her endeavors to preserve the lives of such little
innocents. A table of births and infant burials is also inserted, which proves
the melancholy truths I am aiming to establish.

LETTER XI. A general management of children, from two years old, till they
leave the nursery.
THE cultivation of the mind I have intentionally reserved for the subject of
my next letter; for which reason I shall now finish my observations upon
nursing, and endeavor to point out the safest and most prudent method of
introducing children into the family way of living.

At length, after surmounting the difficulties and inconveniences attending
the cutting of their teeth, we have now set them upon their legs; to the no
small joy of the mother, and the relief of those servants whose business it is
to wait upon them.

We have hitherto permitted breed, milk, and the juices only of flesh; and
before we advance any farther, I beg leave to make the following remarks, by
which my intelligent readers may profit.

The food of man, in all its various shapes, however tortured and disguised, is
still confined to animal and vegetable productions.

Of vegetables, bread is the most valuable preparation, as the experience of
ages proves. That made from wheat flour is still the most strengthening, and
ever to be preferred by those who have the means of obtaining it.

The milk of cows, although it may be supposed not to partake so much of a
strengthening nature as the human milk, those creatures feeding altogether upon
vegetables, is, nevertheless, to be considered as a food partly animal, and
partly vegetable, prepared also under an all-wise direction.

Gravies, jellies, and broths, we know, are animal juices; either spontaneously
flowing from flesh, upon cutting it, after it is dressed; or obtained by a
maceration of it in water.

From these reflections, therefore, it appears, that in the regimen already
permitted, the most valuable supplies of life are granted, and in a manner the
best adapted to infant constitutions; requiring but little exertion of the
digestive faculties, and gradually introducing that nutriment, which, as the
body becomes stronger, it must prepare for itself from the grosser aliments.

The intention of what has been said is to encourage, as much as possible, the
continuation of this diet a little longer; and, indeed, some of the finest
children I ever saw, have been chiefly confined to a food like this, for the
first five or six years. But although I strongly recommend it, and am conscious
that children, unacquainted with the indulgence of variety, would be perfectly
satisfied without animal food; yet I am persuaded that the culpable fondness of
most parents will initiate them, too early, into the luxuries of a plentiful
table.

It is true, we made an observation, that nature never intended flesh for our
food, until we had teeth to eat it; but it by no means follows, as soon as we
have our teeth, that with an unbounded freedom we are to devour animal food.
Remember, likewise, ye too indulgent parents, it has been before observed, that
every alteration in our manner of living should be brought about step by step,
hasty transitions being always dangerous: and let this teach us to be cautious
in our manner of admitting flesh into the meals of children.

After what has been advanced, and after having given you my opinion that it is
yet time enough to suffer children to eat flesh, I now leave this very
important point to the discretion of parents: however, permit me to recommend,
that when flesh is first introduced into their food, at whatever time it may
be, this part of their diet should be allowed them but sparingly; and a regard
also should be paid to its quality.

The flesh of barn-door fowls, beef, mutton, and full-grown animals in general,
is the best. Crammed poultry, calves, and house-fed lambs, kept up to fatten,
are improper, because their juices yield by far less nourishment.

Hence, beef tea, and mutton broth, are preferable to those made from lamb or
veal. The flesh also of such young fattened animals does not pass off weak
stomachs so easily as the other.

High-seasoned gravies, and soups, made dishes, and salted meats, are ever to
be avoided; though salt with their meats may be allowed, for the reasons before
given.

Although it is not meant to confine them at this age so strictly to bread, I
am by no means for permitting too free a use of vegetables; being convinced,
that some complaints of the bowels, in children more advanced in life, proceed
from this error, and particularly worms: since, if the eggs of these insects
are not taken in, together with these productions of the garden, on which they
harbor and feed, yet this food at least affords a considerable quantity of
slime, which, stagnating in the bowels, serves as an habitation for these
pernicious little animals. This is my reason for allowing a little wine, now
and then, to be given to children, and I am persuaded that I have seen its good
effect. Care should be taken in the choice of vegetables; those of the mealy
kind, that approach the nearest to bread, are to be preferred, such as
potatoes, rice, etc. Turnips are also good. Lettuces, and some few others, may,
in moderation, be given to them, which your own prudence must point out.

The kitchen preparations of milk, such as custards, blamange, white-pots, etc.
are exceedingly proper; and in this kind of food a greater variation may be
indulged with less harm, being, for the most part, equally good and innocent.
Salop mixed with milk, as mentioned in the last letter, may be granted as often
as you please; and let it be remembered, that it is the best way of giving that
nutritious vegetable to children and invalids. See Family Physician, p. 26.
Eggs are good; and if the yelks be beaten up with warm milk, without boiling,
they afford the best nourishment; yet, however they are dressed, never suffer
children to eat them, if the yelks be hard. Puddings in general are likewise
good; but the most simple are best. Tarts and fruit-pies may be allowed in
moderation.

Shellfish, and indeed most other kinds, may, now and then, be given; but the
firmest are to be preferred. These are the most prudent directions that occur
to my memory; but, after all, those are wisest who do not pamper young children
with too great a variety.

I shall not trouble you with the curative part of diseases incident to
children, that being altogether the concern of the physician; though it would
give me a real pleasure to see such complaints treated of, in a masterly
manner, by some accurate observer of nature. This present system of nursing is
intended only to manage children so as to prevent illness; and it has cost me
no small pains to separate the two provinces, which, I hope, is effected to the
satisfaction of my readers.

As to rhubarb, Gascoign's powder, magnesia, etc. every mother's observations
in some measure direct a proper use of them Those parents who are at a loss
upon these points may consult the Family Physician. -- For Rhubarb, see p. 26,
-- Gascoign's Powder, p. 15 -- Magnesia, p. 19.
; but when disorders do not give way to such simple methods, there is no time
to be lost. I beg leave therefore to caution parents, who can obtain the advice
of an experienced practitioner, not to depend upon their own judgments so far,
as to suffer a continuance of complaints until they exceed the power of relief.
Delays are always dangerous, with respect to disease, even in grown persons;
but they are much more so in children, because they have not equal strength,
and consequently sooner sink under bodily infirmities.

LETTER XII. The necessity of cultivating the dispositions of children, to
render them amiable and virtuous.
CONFESS, ye worthy parents who know the height of earthly bliss, what
temptations in life could prevail upon you, after two or three years of age, to
part from the dear dear offsprings of your mutual loves? Ye tender mothers,
speak! I generously applaud an affection thus fondly rivetted in the female
breast, and answer for you, ladies, that nothing upon earth could prove
equivalent to such a loss. Ten thousand soft enchantments bind them to your
very souls.

This is the time in which their little fond endearments begin to operate;
their every action is wonderfully engaging, and their pretty lisping tongues
are one universal harmony. How exquisite is the delight to view their expanding
minds -- now catching sound, that quickly rises into sense, beaming a happy
prospect of future understanding! Here the volume of man begins -- even at this
time the fertile genius glows. How transporting is their sweet sensibility!

O powerful Nature, how unspeakably strong are thy ties! What heart, unless
strangely perverted, can resist thy impulse? Hence arises the unspeakable
difference of a laudable and virtuous passion, compared with an unchaste and
vicious life. My God! that met should waste their health and fortunes in the
stews with harlots, rioting in obscene and brutal pleasures, where the rational
being is sunk even below pity!

Such conduct, in the cooler hours of thought, if ever they reflect, must cause
nothing but anguish and remorse; on the contrary, by cultivating a chaste and
honorable love, such wretched libertines might become the joyful parents of
little smiling families. What an alternative is this! Be dumb, ye lawless
rovers; it is an enjoyment beyond your comprehension, for virtuous minds alone
can relish it.

What numbers of debauchees, in different climes and ages, worn out by guilty
intemperance, mournfully lament their cursed fate, in not being blessed with an
heir to succeed to their half-ruined fortunes! Considerate Providence! thus to
disappoint them -- for what but impurity and disease could they give birth to?
Happy, thrice happy decree of Nature, that virtue alone can claim a smiling and
a healthful progeny.

This is a theme worthy of an abler pen. How often has prattling innocence
disarmed the rugged fierceness of a brutish nature, and melted down the rage of
passion into more than female softness! How often, I say, by these means is a
man of wrath insensibly dissolved into tenderness and love! I must tear myself
away from the digression: should I indulge my zealous inclination, a volume of
panegyric would fall short of the subject.

The human mind, in its infant opening, has been justly compared to a blank
sheet of paper, susceptible of every impression: whence it may be supposed,
children receive their prejudices and inclinations from the dispositions of
those persons to whose care they are entrusted, in like manner as these letters
convey the sentiments of the author.

That any children are born with vicious inclinations, I would not willingly
believe. When I hear parents exclaiming against the bad dispositions of their
own children, I cannot help oftentimes secretly condemning the parents
themselves, for introducing such vices into their habits. Instinct, even in
brutes, produces a tenderness for their young -- a harmless society amongst
their neighbors -- a passive fear toward their enemies -- and violence seldom
is discovered but against those animals which nature has appointed for their
support. Can we then imagine that a worse than brutish fierceness should be
naturally discernible in our infant state? -- that spite, malice, anger, and
revenge, such diabolical passions, should tyrannize before we are capable of
self-defence? The very supposition seems to me an arraignment of providence in
the noblest part of the creation, and appears to be inconsistent with the
justice of a benevolent Deity.

It therefore behooves every mother to be watchful of her own conduct, and
perfectly satisfied of the dispositions of such servants as she entrusts with
the care of her children, at this susceptible time of life; when even the more
affectionately these persons treat them, the worse consequences are to be
apprehended, if their own tempers are not good: for as children are gratefully
fond of those who use them kindly, they are by far the more likely to imbibe
the bad qualities of an indulgent attendant; and, on the contrary, to profit by
good examples.

Objects that attract the eyes are the first delighting: the pleasures from
hearing are the next. From sight and sound ideas take their gradual rise.
Hence, a partial fondness is formed by children toward those whose province it
is to attend upon them: and for this reason they are more fond of their nurses,
who are constantly prattling to them, than of parents neglectful of their
infancy.

The want of duty and affection in children toward their parents, so much to
be censured, and so generally complained of, often proceeds from this early
mismanagement. The indifference also of too many parents toward their
children, frequently owes its origin to depriving themselves of the enjoyments
of their little ones at this engaging season of life. Even to an uninterested
person, the expanding of an infant mind is a delightful entertainment; but to
good parents, the pleasure and attachment must certainly prove exceedingly more
agreeable and lasting. We must indeed pity those whom necessity deprives of
this happy solace, but utterly condemn such whose inclinations drive their
little nurslings from them. Unnatural and mistaken persons, who, if they are
punished with undutiful children, suffer only in consequence of their own
neglect!

Would you, my tender and considerate matrons, wish to see your children truly
amiable? Be then ever careful of yourselves. Endeavor also as much as possible
to prevent violent excess of passion in your husbands. This is a laudable task,
and much more in the power of women than they generally imagine. Trust: me, my
fair-ones, truly prudent and good wives, by bending a little to the rugged,
headstrong, and boisterous dispositions of some husbands, may for the most part
civilize them; and by their endearing and soothing manners, in spite of early
vicious habits, compel them to a behavior of tenderness and love. Thus, by the
example of an engaging deportment on your part, you will soften their tempers,
so as to render them good husbands, good fathers, good masters, and valuable
members of society.

While, on the other hand, vindictive and peevish women not only forfeit this
female importance, but too frequently estrange their husbands' affections from
them: and need I say that this want of harmony and sincere friendship, between
man and wife, is a dangerous pattern for their children?

From the strong force of example, it becomes in a manner natural to the
children of such persons to give an unbridled loose to every impulse; nay,
their emulation is soon engaged to become equally tyrannical with their
parents. On the contrary, where no such precedents are before their eyes --
where impassioned and youthful love keeps pace with sentimental friendship --
where the polite and well-bred man shows a virtuous inclination toward his
wife; and they both join in a proper regard for their children -- how much
reason have we to expect that their young and tender minds will be impressed
with virtue! Nay, I dare aver, that, from this rectitude of behavior, such
parents will generally be rewarded with good and dutiful children.

With respect to the management of children, how shall we draw the line between
indulgence and severity? Although they are diametrically opposite to each
other, it is scarcely possible to be done; nay, it cannot be determined, so as
to admit of absolute decision. Children necessarily require a different
treatment, even from their natural disposition, as it is usually called; and a
conduct indulgent to some, will prove the greatest severity to others. Let it
therefore be remembered, that our plan is to subdue the first irregular
emotions in the bud, so as to prevent them from rising into passions.

I would, then, at all events, earnestly recommend temper and forbearance to
those who have the government of their infant years. Kind treatment, good
words, and a generous encouragement, to most dispositions, will prove equal to
every thing that you require of them; and if they can be conquered by such
laudable and gentle means, you not only carry the first points in the most
eligible manner, but accustom them also to an obliging behavior, and excite
their emulation to endeavor to please.

Carefully therefore observe every emotion that is praiseworthy, and let a
reward accompany it; for the encouragement of one virtuous impulse will have a
much happier effect than the correction of a hundred faults.

Such are the impressions necessary to form a virtuous mind, and they will
certainly grow up into their habits. On the contrary, where children's
dispositions are untoward; if they be subdued by harsh words, threats, and
chastisement, how are their tempers ruffled by such treatment! -- and what is
to be expected, but that they consider severity and violence as the only means
for them to obtain any point over others, whom they may have a future occasion
to contend with? What a wretched foundation of perpetual disquietude!

Where reproof is necessary, mortification is undoubtedly the best means of
correction; and let an acknowledgment of the fault prove the means of
reconciliation.

"And, next to right, pray condescend
"TO acknowledge doing wrong, my friend."
This humbles them in their own opinions; it necessarily begets shame; and
before a disposition is hardened into vice, shame will always produce amendment,

Moreover, in this case there is no object for resentment, that great support
of pride; consequently it initiates them to consider thoroughly their own
conduct, and of course to dwell upon the cause for which they are thus humbled.
What, therefore, can more thoroughly conduce to render children amiable as they
grow up, than the accustoming of them to a retrospection of their own
behavior, and to an inward condemnation of their faults, of which their making
a concession is sufficient proof?

Even in the most trifling promise a parent can make to children, I most
earnestly recommend that it be religiously adhered to; otherwise you teach them
a shocking lesson of deceit.

For equivocation and falsity, their mortifications ought to be exceedingly
severe; but in every point where you find it necessary to correct be sure you
make them truly sensible of their error: at the same time, in every
misdemeanor, be thoroughly satisfied that it proceeds from a culpable emotion,
before you reprove it; for it sometimes falls out, that wrong actions may
proceed from laudable intentions.

How often in life does it happen, that exceptions are taken against a friend,
who is at that very time actually meditating the angry person's advantage; and
yet, perhaps, appearances so blind him that he thinks of nothing but revenge,
until an eclaircissement takes place, when he as passionately reproaches
himself for his ingratitude! The case is still harder with children; for, when
they are punished wrongfully, it is seldom that they have it in their power to
clear themselves; and further, they may probably suppose their own good
emotions to be the guilty cause, and thereby endeavor to suppress a rising
virtue.

Indulgence over much is liable to produce effects equally bad, as extreme
severity; for as the latter inures them to every act of violence, so the former
encourages the breach of every civil duty that thwarts their selfish
inclinations.

But the greatest misconduct of all arises from these two opposite ways of
management being united together, in the widest extreme; when one moment the
little creature's bones are almost broken for a fault of which it is scarcely
sensible, and the next moment it is fondly cherished to reconcile it to the
mistaken parent; and in return, not improbably, indulged in exercising its rage
upon toys, in torturing birds, dogs, cats, and suchlike domestic animals, as
infant tyranny can lord it over; and permitted also at the window to sport with
the lives of little buzzing insects, that fall a sacifice to wanton cruelty.

The child who is fondly and foolishly indulged, promises only a melancholy
prospect; but where, on the other hand, as is too generally seen, an occasional
severity inures it to cruelty, the disposition is inevitably ruined. The
consequences of such severity and such indulgence fill the mind with every
disagreeable apprehension: and indeed, what can they produce but inordinate
desires, brutish rage, and violence?

Those parents who are happy enough to subdue their own choler, and thereby set
their children proper examples, will have very little cause for complaint
against them: on the contrary, such as are perpetually quarrelling with each
other, with their children, servants, and every body around them, cannot expect
much peace and comfort from their rising families. But if they will take this
friendly advice, to correct their own errors only once, for every hundredth
time they chastise others, it will probably bring about some amendment in
themselves; and the force of their example must surely produce the best effect
upon their household.

We have now conducted children through the different stages of helpless
infancy, and gradually introduced them, though as yet but junior characters,
upon the grand theater of life; where the happy effects of such careful
regulations are generally to be distinguished. As to literary improvements,
they properly come under another jurisdiction, and therefore claim your future
consideration. Nevertheless, a condescending obligingness, a sweet affability,
an unassuming sensibility, and a modest deportment, ever denote the proper
education of a female mind. In like manner, prudence, abstemiousness, and
virtuous dispositions in men, most frequently proceed from the good impressions
of childhood. Severe stripes, and harsh usage, add fuel to a turbulent and
revengeful spirit, and too frequently render a sullen boy malicious: on the
other hand, the indulged and spoiled child commonly turns out an abandoned
libertine.

Thus, my fair-ones, you may easily discover how much society is interested in
your motherly conduct, at this early time; "for, as the twig is bent, the tree
will grow;" and the seeds of iniquity, in those dispositions where virtue is
not planted, unavoidably, as it were, take root, and spring up without much
cultivation.

Every notorious vice shows an utter contempt for the moral duties of life; and
the man whose character it infamous, seems but little to regard the opinion of
others: therefore the good fame and chastity of women become his ridicule and
sport. Such men are continually assaulting their virtue, and aiming at their
seduction. Of consequence, the darling, who has never been curbed in the early
impulses of erroneous inclinations, will prove to be very little capable of
subduing the tempestuous passions of youth; which will not only hurry him on to
his own ruin, but also too generally occasion the disgrace, infamy, and
destruction of many unfortunate young women.

Thus it appears, how greatly the happiness and prosperity of the fair sex are
affected by the sensual misconduct of ours; insomuch that, in the present
instance, women as well as men must fall degraded.

LETTER XIII. Of milk -- Its properties examined -- the different kinds of milk
compared with each other -- and their particular virtues explained.
MILK has been recommended, in several letters, as the proper food for infants;
and in the fourteenth and fifteenth, it is again spoken of, as being equally
necessary for invalids and aged persons. It shall, therefore, be the business
of this letter to examine so far into the qualities of milk, and into the milk
of different animals, as may enable us to determine what kind of milk is, upon
different occasions, to be preferred; which will take in every thing, not
elsewhere observed upon this subject.

Milk was before remarked to be a kind of white blood, prepared by the mother
for the support of her young; so far we may speak of it in general terms.

In different animals, therefore, it is reasonable to suppose, and fact
confirms our supposition, that the qualities of milk are also different: hence,
by first examining into its general properties, and, from those principles,
setting forth the peculiar variations in the milk of different animals, we
shall arrive at the desired conclusion.

In milk, by stepping into the dairy, we may discern three principal component
parts. After it has remained some time in an undisturbed state, the cream
floats upon the surface. It is the least in quantity, though most nourishing,
of an oily balsamic substance, and inflammable in its nature, as the butter,
which is made from it, plainly demonstrates.

A lady, before whom I once made some experiments, asked me why the cream
floated upon the surface; for being, continued she, the thickest part, ought it
not rather to sink to the bottom? I told her, it was the thickest part, to be
sure, but at the same time it was also the lightest; specifically so, as oil is
lighter than water, and therefore rises to the top.

The cream being taken off, the remaining milk appears bluish, and thinner than
before; and when thus robbed of its thick, creamy part, it consequently is not
so smooth to the palate.

On the addition of runnet, or indeed any acid, a separation of the two
remaining parts soon takes place, and we discover the curd. This, being the
heaviest, when separated from the whey, falls to the bottom. It is the least
valuable part of the milk, glutinous in its nature, and composed of the most
earthy particles, being also of an astringent quality.

The third and only remaining part, being the whey of the milk, is the largest
in quantity, of a diluting and cleansing property.

Let us now by this standard compare the different kinds of milk, mostly in use
with us, and apply them to the purposes for which they seem best calculated.

The human milk, when drawn from the breast, has exactly the same bluish
appearance as cow's milk when the cream is taken off. It affords very little
cream, and but a small quantity of curd; therefore the whey constitutes the
chief part: but the more healthy the woman is, and particularly if between the
age of twenty and thirty, the more her milk abounds with rich creamy balsam,
and the more it also contains of the curd or earthy particles; probably from
her constitution being, at this time, in full vigor, and the digestive powers
therefore more perfect.

These observations will point out the best substitute, where the breast is
denied, and will likewise direct those, who prefer wet-nursing, in the choice
of the properest person; for there is, in my opinion, an equal objection
against the milk of a very young girl, as against that of a woman almost past
childbearing. The cleansing quality, before taken notice of, in a breast of new
milk, will also, together with reason and experience, show the propriety of
recommending those women who have not been long delivered.

Ass's milk is generally allowed to be the nearest to the human, and, according
to the above experiments, we find it so, abounding mostly with whey, and having
little of the cream or curd in it. Hence, after a severe fit of illness, where
the body is much emaciated, and the stomach weak, or where the blood is loaded
with sharp, acrid humors, the cleansing quality of ass's milk deserves a
preference to that of any other animal which is used for this purpose. In
consumptive cases, or where there is a slow, habitual fever, it is justly to be
preferred, until such time as the constitution may have gained a little
strength, when the more nourishing ought to supply its place.

Mare's milk is esteemed to be much the same as ass's; but this, indeed, is in
very little use.

Cow's milk comes next under consideration. This appears to be the richest and
most nourishing of any of the brutes' milk here mentioned. It abounds with a
great deal of cream; for, after standing twelve hours, and being skimmed, it
appears equal to any other milk. It contains also a large quantity of curd;
and, after all, even the whey is by far more nutritious than any other.

We observed that ass's milk, in the experiments, mostly resembles the human.
Why then not prefer that to cow's milk, for the food of children? I do not
totally deny the use of this milk for that purpose; but in our part of the
country, it is very expensive, and cannot be obtained in any large quantity;
for which reason it would be impracticable to bring it into general use.

There is, likewise, another reason which inclines me to give a preference to
cow's milk; for, notwithstanding the similarity of human milk to that of asses,
the first may well be supposed most strengthening, since women usually feed on
animal as well as vegetable diet, while the brutes we speak of are confined
entirely to vegetables. Whence, if we substitute ass's milk, we shall fall
short of the nourishment nature designed for us; and therefore for a young
child, who requires a heartening diet, the milk of cows, in my opinion, is
preferable, as the richness of it is, in some measure, adequate to the supposed
difference in the qualities of human milk, and that of other animals.

The milk of sheep and goats consists mostly of the curd, or earthy particles:
hence, where the blood vessels are injured by acrid humors, and frequent
bleedings happen from this cause, or where children are subject to the rickets,
from a weakness of the bones, that milk, which abounds mostly with the curd, or
cheesy part, seems best calculated to answer the intention; its earthy,
mucilaginous, and astringent property having the greatest tendency to heal such
ruptured vessels, and to give a firmness to the bones: but as these milks
possess less of the cleansing power, it will, in most cases, particularly in
bleedings, be proper to use the more attenuating kind first.

We have now examined the different milks familiar to us, and, from their
different properties, pointed out the end each sort seems best calculated to
answer; whence every person will quickly be determined which to give the
preference to in particular complaints.

When any one first begins to eat milk, especially if a free liver, it may
probably purge a little; but such inconveniences will most commonly be
removed, by accustoming the constitution to the use of it; and boiling the milk
will in a great measure prevent this effect. I have always remarked, that
those, who, by reason of a pampered appetite, complain of milk and vegetables
being windy, and not agreeing with them, are the very persons who most require
such a diet; for it is the debauched state of the stomach and bowels, that
occasions their uneasiness, which this regimen seems the most likely to correct.

I have recommended a little salt to be mixed with milk, before it is given to
children, if they are apt to throw it up curdled, and shall mention the
experiment which induced me to give that advice; since it is equally worthy the
attention of grown persons, some of whom make this an objection to their eating
milk; as I am inclined to believe such precaution will render it agreeable to
most constitutions.

I put two ounces of milk, warm as it came from the cow, into a tea-cup, with a
little common salt; I put the same quantity, of the like warmth, into another
tea-cup, without salt; then dropping a very little distilled vinegar into each,
a hard curd presently appeared in that milk which had no salt in it, while the
other with the salt was scarcely altered.

I tried the same experiment again, with a large tea-spoonful of runnet, and
observed the milk, which had the salt in it, to continue in its fluid state,
while the other grew thick and turbid, and almost instantly separated into
curds and whey. This last experiment answered the best, and is much more to our
purpose than the former. From these hints, it seems reasonable to conclude,
that salt, taken with milk, might equally prevent the too hasty curdling of it,
where there is a great acidity in the stomach; in which case, the curdled milk,
having too quickly assumed a solidity, becomes troublesome; and because it is
not as yet designed to pass into the bowels for the office of nourishment, a
part of this intolerable load is generally discharged by vomiting. Moreover,
the stimulating quality of salt will greatly assist a weak digestion, and
thereby facilitate the passage of the milk from the stomach into the bowels;
and from experience, in recommending it to children who used to throw up their
milk in a curdled state, I am convinced of its utility.

In all cases, where infirmities or age require a prudent regimen, I have
directed a similar care to that of dieting children. Milk, therefore,
comprehends a very material part of such food; and I am fully persuaded, that,
if it were more universally used, the world in general would be greatly
benefited. I do not, however, mean to be understood, that I debar those from a
reasonable quantity of animal food, who are capable of digesting it. But such
as are emaciated by illness, or have the misfortune to labor under gouty
complaints; such, also, as are consumptively inclined, or those who have crazy,
infirm constitutions, and are subject to an habitual feverish disposition, will
do right to eat flesh only once in the day, and, for the rest of their
nourishment, to live almost, if not altogether, upon milk.

LETTER XIV. The sick chamber -- with directions also for invalids.
WE are now, my dear ladies, entering into the sick chamber, in which, as well
as in the nursery, many amiable characters may be drawn. Here, the conjugal
affection of a wife is laudably displayed -- the tender love of a mother fondly
exerts itself -- the gratitude and duty of a daughter are conspicuous -- the
good sister also endears herself to a worthy brother -- and female friendship
wears a thousand additional charms!

Let us picture a truly tender and good wife, in this exalted character! Let us
suppose, that she has deserved recompense, by restoring to her chaste and
longing arms the distinguished choice of her youthful love, ennobled by a
generous sympathy of virtuous inclinations!

Let us imagine this happy man perfectly recovered from a dangerous and painful
illness; to which recovery her unwearied attendance proved greatly
instrumental: his mind, likewise, impressed with every thought a consciousness
of such an obligation can inspire! Behold the husband admiring her transcendant
excellency; while the honest tear, perchance, trickling down his check, betrays
the big emotion of a grateful heart. "She, on her part, with looks of cordial
love, awhile in silent rapture glows -- then on bended knees adores her Maker"
-- returns most fervid thanks, for that her prayer of sorrow has been heard,
that He has graciously restored the husband and the father! How great must be
their reciprocal felicity!

I shall now proceed to those instructions which are necessary for the proper
execution of this friendly office. There is a certain impertinence frequently
proceeding from laudable motives, which, nevertheless is totally culpable: I
mean, the desire of our acquaintance to visit a sick chamber. It is oftentimes,
I acknowledge, the effect of tenderness, ill-placed, and a real concern,
imprudently expressed. In general, those visits should not be permitted. I
every day experience the ill effects of chem. When, indeed, a patient is upon
the recovery, and capable of sitting up three or four hours at a time, the
company of a friend, who knows how far to engage with propriety in
conversation, is a sweetly refreshing solace: but locks, bolts, or bars cannot
be too strong to keep prating gossips, at all times, out of a sick chamber.

During a fever, it is a load sufficient for any patient to bear the disease.
Quietude on his part, and silence on the part of those about him, ought
universally to be imposed. It is not a time for the mind to be engaged either
in the pursuit of business or pleasure.

This leads me to a consideration of the utmost importance; and as I am not
speaking as a physician, but as a friend, it comes properly within that
province, and I hope it will be seriously attended to by every reader. If it is
now prejudicial for any one to think, even of the common concerns of life, how
much more injurious must it prove, to have the mind engaged in that great work
of settling, forever, our worldly affairs!

Would you, my rational friends, wish to be freed from an intolerable burden,
never postpone this important business until you are upon a bed of sickness.
Not to say how incapable the judgment at such a time will often prove, perhaps
to the detriment of some deserving friend, or not unlikely to the confusion of
a whole family, the very mention of it from any one about us, or the conscious
necessity in ourselves, must exceedingly hurry and depress the spirits, when
tranquillity and support are essentially necessary: for what can such an idea
convey, but death? -- A last will and testament is one of the most solemn acts
of life, and ought never to be postponed till the agonizing moments of death.

The chamber, proper for a patient, is of no small moment. There ought to be a
free circulation of air, whether it be in the summer or winter. I never would
have any person confined to a room without a chimney; it is equally necessary
in the warmer season for the purpose of discharging the offensive vapors of
disease, as it is in cold weather, by means of a little fire, to bring the air
to a due temperament, which also contributes to remove the like offense.

To you, my female friends, this concern of nursing belongs. It is an
important, and oftentimes a fatiguing task. I would willingly engage you in it
upon principle, and therefore shall endeavor to show that man and woman were
born for each other's support and comfort. Their respective dependence upon
each other is, undoubtedly, the wise ordination of Omniscience.

I cannot speak of this mutual obligation, without being mindful of the
beautiful passage in our immortal Milton's Paradise Lost, book the fourth,
where Eve gives Adam an account of herself; and I shall introduce the
description at length, as a quotation from this author can never be deemed
impertinent. Let us attend to the mother of mankind! --

To whom thus Eve replied. O thou! for whom
And from whom I was formed; flesh of thy flesh;
And without whom am to no end; my guide
And head! what thou have said, is just and right.
For we to him indeed all praises owe,
And daily thanks; I chiefly, who enjoy
So far the happier lot, enjoying thee
Pre-eminent by so much odds; while thou
Like consort to thyself can no where find.
That day I often remember, when from sleep
I first awaked, and found myself reposed
Under a shade, on flowers; much wondering where
And what I was, whence thither brought, and how.
Not distant far from thence, a murmuring sound
Of waters issued from a cave, and spread
Into a liquid plain, then stood unmoved,
Pure as the expanse of heaven: I thither went,
With inexperienc'd thought, and laid me down
On the green bank, to look into the clear
Smooth lake, that to me seemed another sky.
As I bent down to look, just opposite
A shape within the watery gleam appeared,
Bending to look on me; I started back,
It started back; but pleased, I soon returned:
Pleased it returned as soon, with answering looks
Of sympathy, and love: there I had fixed
Mine eyes till now, and pined with vain desire,
Had not a voice thus warned me, "What thou see,
"What there thou see, fair creature, is thyself;
"With thee it came and goes: but, follow me,
"And I will bring thee where no shadow stays
"Thy coming, and thy soft embraces; he
"Whose image thou art: him thou shall enjoy
"Inseparably thine, to him shall bear
"Multitudes like thyself, and thence be called
"Mother of human race." What could I do,
But follow strait, invisibly thus led,
Till I espied thee? fair indeed, and tall,
Under a plantan; yet, methought, less fair,
Less winning soft, less amiably mild,
Than that smooth watery image: back I turned;
Thou following cry'dst aloud, Return, fair Eve;
Whom fly'st thou? whom thou fly'st, of him thou art,
His flesh, his bone; to give thee being, I lent
Out of my side to thee, nearest my heart,
Substantial life, to have thee by my side
Henceforth an individual solace dear:
Part of my soul, I seek thee; and thee claim,
My other half! -- With that, thy gentle hand
Seized mine; I yielded; and from that time see
How beauty is excelled by manly grace
And wisdom, which alone is truly fair.
To illustrate my argument of our mutual dependence, I must beg leave to
indulge myself, and hope likewise to entertain my reader, with another
quotation from the same author. Adam, desirous of retaining the angel Raphael,
relates to him what he remembers, since his own creation, and among other
things, that which is to our purpose, his first meeting and nuptials with Eve.
After recounting his dream, wherein he was informed of her creation, he
proceeds: --

I waked
To find her, or forever to deplore
Her loss, and other pleasures all abjure.
When out of hope, behold her! not far off;
Such as I saw her in my dream, adorned
With what all earth or heaven could bestow
To make her amiable; on she came,
Led by her heavenly Maker (though unseen),
And guided by his voice; nor uninform'd
Of nuptial sanctity, and marriage rites:
Grace was in all her steps, heaven in her eye,
In every gesture, dignity and love!
I overjoyed, could not forbear aloud. --
This turn has made amends! Thou have fulfilled
Thy words, Creator bounteous, and benign!
Giver of all things fair! but fairest this
Of all thy gifts! nor enviest. I now see
Bone of my bone, flesh of my flesh, myself
Before me: woman is her name; of man
Extracted: for this cause he shall forego
Father and mother, and to his wife adhere;
And they shall be one flesh, one heart, one soul.
She heard me thus; and though divinely brought,
Yet innocence, and virgin modesty,
Her virtue, and the conscience of her worth,
That would be wooed, and not unsought be won,
Not obvious, not obtrusive, but retired,
The more desirable: or, to say all,
Nature herself (though pure of sinful thought)
Wrought in her so, that seeing me, she turned;
I followed her; she what was honor knew,
And, with obsequious majesty, approved
My pleaded reason. -- To the nuptial bower
I led her, blushing like the morn: all heaven,
And happy constellations, on that hour
Shed their selectest influence: the earth
Gave sign of gratulation, and each hill:
Joyous the birds; fresh gales, and gentle airs,
Whispered it to the woods, and from their wings
Flung rose, flung odours from the spicy shrubs,
Disporting! till the amorous bird of night
Sung spousal, and bid haste the evening star
On his hill-top, to light the bridal lamp.
Thus I have told thee all my state, and brought
My story to the sum of earthly bliss,
Which I enjoy: and must confess to find
In all things else delight indeed; but such
As, used or not, works in the mind no change,
Nor vehement desire; the delicacies
I mean of taste, sight, smell, herbs, fruits, and flowers,
Walks, and the melody of birds: but here
Far otherwise! transported I behold,
Transported touch: here passion first I felt,
Commotion strange! in all enjoyments else
Superior and unmoved: here only weak,
Against the charm of beauty's powerful glance.
Or Nature failed in me, and left some part
Not proof enough such object to sustain;
Or, from my side subducting, took perhaps
More than enough: at least, on her bestowed
Too much of ornament: in outward show,
Elaborate; of inward, less exact.
For well I understand, in the prime end
Of Nature, her the inferior; in the mind,
And inward faculties; which most excel:
In outward also her resembling less
His image who made both; and less expressing
The character of that dominion given
Over other creatures. Yet, when I approach
Her loveliness, so absolute she seems,
And in herself complete, so well to know
Her own; that what she wills to do, or say,
Seems wisest, virtuousest, discretest, best:
All higher knowledge in her presence falls
Degraded; Wisdom, in discourse with her,
Loses discountenanced, and like Folly shows;
Authority and Reason on her wait,
As one intended first, not after made
Occasionally: and (to consummate all)
Greatness of mind, and nobleness, their seat
Build in her loveliest, and create an awe
About her, as a guard angelic placed.
How exquisitely charming are these descriptions! what valuable portraits of
the first human pair! The lines elegantly strong! the colorings beautifully
rich! Then again the amazingly soft and delicate touches of this great master
of the human feelings, wherever we cast our eyes, enchantingly appear!

What can more fully show our mutual dependence! -- So amiably engaging to each
other, our first parents, in this poem, are described, that the labor of
either, whereby the other was benefited, must prove a real pleasure. What an
example for the encouragement of matrimony! -- O that we could more generally
display the character of Adam! Then you, my fair-ones, would strive more
ardently, in gentleness and love, to imitate this first of women.

If man would endeavor to curb unlawful inclinations, cherishing and
comforting the wife of his bosom; if he would fondly regard her charms and
virtues; what emulation must such a conduct excite in every female breast -- to
give honor and dignity to her husband! Let men but begin the reformation, and
I will be accountable for the right behavior of the generality of your sex.

Nevertheless, the culpableness of man will not excuse the folly of woman; and
this piece of advice, from a real friend, the ladies will do well to observe.

I know my fair pupils will tell me, that although a husband may have follies
and vices, yet, if he is but a sensible man, they can overlook them, and
cheerfully submit to their lord and master -- but who, say they, can be
governed by a fool?

When once a woman has drawn her lot, it is not only her duty, but the height
of policy, to make the best of it. Let her choice prove ever so disagreeable,
or supposing that she was led into such a marriage by the cruel compulsion of
her friends, still honor and obedience are required on her part. By giving
importance to an husband, (even those husbands we are now speaking of, for
others will command it) a wife merits, and generally obtains, praise and
adoration, not only from him, but from the whole world.

On the contrary, the mistaken she, who in company degrades, and upon every
occasion tauntingly reproaches her husband, thus making him, poor man, the
contemptible but to level her triumphant shafts at; notwithstanding she
imagines her own wit and superior talents are happily displayed, to the
entertainment and admiration of her friends; believe me, ladies, by those very
friends she must ever be condemned; and let her merits, in other respects, be
ever so great, this culpable part of her behavior they most assuredly despise.

But to return from our present wandering, which I intentionally followed as an
encouragement to virtue, a consistency of character, and mutual love; being
convinced that these qualifications will make even a constant attendance in a
sick chamber not altogether unpleasing. Now then let us pursue our further
care, where female tenderness can assuage the severest bodily pains, and render
the greatest misfortunes of life at least supportable.

In every disorder, physic and good nursing ought to go hand in hand; and I am
the more desirous of giving my opinion with respect to good nursing, as I mean
to oppose it to poor and bad nursing, which has been too much the unlucky and
mistaken practice of the sick chamber: for under the vague idea of
inflammation, and inflammatory diseases, even bread and water have been
sometimes accounted too great a support for the patient. But with pleasure, we
now see physicians act upon more rational principles; and I would wish to
convince you, ladies, whose province it is, of the propriety of supporting
patients under every disease.

The sick chamber is our subject; but it is also to be understood, that the
precautions here laid down will prove equally necessary, where invalids are
permitted to attend to the common affairs of life; for, without a prudent
regulation in our method of living, few constitutional or long-existing ails
can be removed, or even rendered in any degree light, and easily to be borne;
but I am clearly convinced, that it is very possible for many infirm persons to
pass comfortably through a tolerable length of life, and, at last, to pay an
easy debt to nature. It would be swelling this letter to a very great bulk,
were I to enter into a particular account of the diet proper for invalids. The
reader who is under the necessity of observing such a prudent restraint, is
therefore referred to my observations upon diet, in the Family Physician: some
hints of this kind are there thrown out, which he may probably consider as not
altogether unworthy of his attention.


The observations, therefore, upon children and aged persons, are equally
applicable to those who, by ungoverned passions and intemperance, have ruined
their health; for in either of these cases, where the bodily powers are
enervated, and the digestion weakened, a proper, light, and nourishing diet is
as necessary to restore health, as it is to support the young, and preserve the
aged.

Every disease is to be considered as a deviation from health; and a fever is
the means made use of by Nature to free the body from something that is
noxious. Ought, we, therefore, to counteract her in this her own great work?
Ought we not rather cautiously and prudently, like a valuable handmaid, to tend
upon her movements, and generously support her in the design she aims at?
Surely this appears to every one reasonable.

However, where there is a fever, or great weakness of the body, or where the
body itself is emaciated, an alteration from the common manner of living is
certainly necessary. To these points, therefore, I shall confine my advice, as
other considerations come under a medical direction.

Few persons are constrained to keep their chambers, who are not troubled with
great loss of strength, or feverish complaints; either as the first cause, or
as symptoms accompanying other diseases. Supposing then these circumstances,
the constitution being thus reduced, or Nature laboring to throw off a
disease, the body certainly requires a nourishment of the most simple kind; by
simple, I mean easy of digestion, but let it at the same time be comfortable.
The stomach and bowels must, of necessity, be equally affected with the other
parts of the body, and consequently unable to perform their offices upon the
common supports of life.

Animal food, therefore, is particularly to be forbidden: and I am sorry to be
obliged to blame the fondness of parents, and those who assist in sick
chambers, for too frequently indulging patients thus unwarrantably. Give me
leave to observe, if flesh be permitted during the existence of a fever, or
when the body, by illness, is exceedingly weakened and emaciated, from the
incapacity of the digestive faculties, the nourishment produced must be
imperfect, crude, offensive; and consequently, instead of a support, must add
an additional weight to the disease.

But, at the same time, let it be remembered, that, as a support is necessary,
good broths, wine whey, jellies, panado, a beverage of wine and water, etc. are
to be discretionally permitted; and indeed the inclination of the sick person
will generally determine the propriety of these things; for where they are
hurtful, an universal loathing of them commonly takes place.

These, and such like sippings, being easy of digestion, are not only the
properest for a diseased state of the stomach and bowels, but they also supply
the body with a necessary nourishment to uphold its strength under the
disorder. It is a point at present acknowledged by all good physicians. It is,
in my opinion, a circumstance minutely to be dwelt upon; for woeful experience
has often convinced me, that the rashness of an obstinate nurse, in one unlucky
hour, has counteracted the operations of a well-regulated, and otherwise
successful, regimen.

Although I would debar patients from animal food, where there is a feverish
complaint, nevertheless I do most earnestly recommend a generous, but
discretionary, support of easily digested and comfortable liquid nourishment,
in every fever. I mean, that barley-water, mint and balm tea, with such like
drinks, will not sufficiently support the strength of a patient under any kind
of fever, even for a few days, and much less for as many weeks. As to the
distinctions of inflammatory, nervous, and putrid, it is not my business to
enter upon them here; but supposing the fever to be inflammatory, the patient
is, or ought to be, confined to bed, and a breathing sweat encouraged. Will not
then an already almost digested and innocent liquid nourishment answer the
physician's aim, at the same time that it supports the patient? Experience has
convinced me of its utility. I cannot help, therefore, strongly recommending
it; for I am too apprehensive that many lives are daily lost for want of this
necessary support.

I am laboring to prevent that mistaken care, which is commonly called
starving a disease, and to set aside the dreadful apprehension that a little
innocent nourishment given to a person in a fever, is still adding fuel to the
fire. By these errors the ablest assistance is oftentimes baffled, to the cost
of the patient; and, not unlikely, to the disgrace of a worthy practitioner. Be
assured, that it is more eligible to endeavor to support, and build up again,
a shaken, diseased, and tottering frame, than to attempt to pull it down. Never
let this be done but by the express command of wisdom and experience; for it is
a serious affair at all times to deprive a tenement of its foundation and
strength. It is much to be wished, as it surely must prove a general advantage,
that physicians would more particularly direct the regimen of diet in sick
chambers.

The punctuality of nurses, and those who attend upon the sick, in the
administering of medicines, is of no small import. It is a cruel reflection upon
the honest part of the profession, that practitioners consult the number of
their fees, or the length of their bills, more than the health of their
patients. Such iniquity is but very seldom, I hope, if ever, practiced; and as
few persons employ any but those of whom they entertain a good opinion, let me
warn you, as a friend, not to indulge a suspicion which betrays a mean soul,
and most probably will, at some time or other, produce fatal consequences to
yourselves. Great relief, nay, oftentimes, perfect health, is assuredly to be
obtained by the help of medicine. Great evil, nay, too frequently, certain
death, ensues from a jealous contempt, or wanton neglect of this salutary aid.

I must speak of another mistake, with regard to the management of linen. A
patient cannot be hurt by changing wet, filthy, and offensive linen, for that
which is dry, clean, and comfortable; provided this be done with proper care,
not to give cold during the time of shifting the clothes. Linen which is
perfectly dry and clean is, at all times, to be preferred to that which has
been used; for the latter may have absorbed offensive vapors, of which the
former must be entirely free. Against this observation, I am convinced, there
are great prejudices; nevertheless those who employ their reason but for a
moment, will see the propriety of the present caution.

A free succession of air is essentially necessary not only to carry off the
offensive vapors of disease, but also to the recovery of the patient; nay,
even to the preservation of those who attend upon the sick. It is true that a
fire is proper in cold weather, for reasons before given; but at the same time
the chamber ought to be no more than comfortably warm; for where this degree of
heat is exceeded, faint sweats are likely to exhaust the patient's strength,
whereby he sinks, perhaps, under a disease, through which, probably, he might
otherwise have been supported.

Having now cautioned you against the most material errors, which, at present,
occur to my memory, I will beg leave to observe what poor creatures men in
general are, when necessity confines them to a sick chamber! If we reflect upon
this scene, ought we to complain of the spirits of women? I scarcely ever find
a man, in sickness, support himself so well as a woman does. Men are, for the
most part, depressed in their spirits, to the greatest degree, when they are
ill. Be it then with gratitude remembered, that in a sick chamber, the pleasing
vivacity, and, let me add, the true philosophy, of a kind female friend, prove
essentially necessary. A good nurse will, in a great measure, alleviate our
bodily infirmities, by supporting our spirits in time of sickness.

A man, by striking and superior abilities, industry, and good fortune, is
sometimes lucky enough to raise himself, aggrandise his family, and bring to
his wife conveniences far beyond her expectations. But what are all these
things, compared to the comfort, and tender support, which she in return can
largely bestow upon him; at a time too when the infirmities of nature will not
suffer such an exalted favorite of fortune to relish any one enjoyment of
life? Ask this very darling, when he is stretched on the bed of sickness, and
rendered helpless by disease; -- let us fancy him too almost expiring under
excruciating agonies -- and now put the question to him, Which is more
eligible, fortune or health? He will assuredly answer, that one moment's ease
is more desirable than all the splendid advantages he may have obtained.

In like manner, the truly affectionate and sympathising concern, the delicate
deportment, and careful attendance of a good wife, in these scenes of painful
sufferance, more than over-balance every thing that is in the power of the most
successful husband to bestow upon her; and it is a truth which truly generous
minds will ever gratefully acknowledge.

A man under these circumstances, with some regard to his accustomed manner of
living, and the particular disease, is to be considered as a child; and
consequently ought to be submitted to female management. Your care, therefore,
will of course direct you to seek the assistance of able and experienced
physicians. May their skill conquer the disease, while you generously support
his strength and spirits; and thereby greatly contribute to restore again the
invalid to a healthy and vigorous constitution!

LETTER XV. Old age -- by virtue rendered truly honorable. The steps by which
we mounted into life, shown to be the easiest and best paths to descend into
the grave.
SPRING, summer, and autumn, have their various engaging charms; and there is
something peculiarly pleasing in each transition; but stern winter can boast of
nothing besides the fruits of the preceding seasons.

The life of man is often, with propriety, compared to the progressive year;
and the only happiness that can be expected in old age, must arise from the
(...) of a well-spent life; at which time, being likewise the winter of our
days, every person may generally reap the fruits of a past virtuous conduct: --
for although the benumbed limbs deny the body their usual support, and the
hoary head trembles on its withered shoulders, there are valuable comforts yet
in store for those, who, like the industrious ant, have been wise enough to
treasure them at the proper season.

Such a good man or woman, one would hope, has wherewithal to procure the
indulgencies their years require, and a sufficiency to requite the attendance
of a faithful servant. Join to these a further blessing, that, perchance, kind
Heaven has bestowed, a dutiful and good daughter to support their infirmities,
and, by her affectionate tenderness fully to repay them for the pains of her
education, and that parental anxiety, which must necessarily have been
sustained during her youth. Here, I say, the wisdom and tender indulgence of a
kind parent is amply rewarded, by the fostering care of a truly virtuous and
affectionate child. These are inestimable comforts; and such is the easy
decline that Providence intended to old age -- thus to close life with a not
unhappy period.

Let us, my amiable friends, picture a worthy and aged man in his second infant
state. Let us with composure attend him to the gates of death, there to deliver
him up into the bosom of his Creator! Let us indulge a rational sorrow, but at
the same time support that calmness and serenity which denote a
religiously-informed mind. Let us consider this as a debt we must assuredly
pay, and that it puts an everlasting period to the calamities of this life!
Whence may be drawn this comfortable conclusion; that, if to the uttermost of
our power we have contributed to the great end for which we were created, our
future state of existence must be happier than the present.

Come then, ye tender and sympathising fair, let us approach the chamber of
death! Let us advance to the bed of this good parent, and behold his calm and
resigned countenance! Although we shall find it a solemn scene, yet there is
nothing so terrible in this sight as the world generally imagine. But draw the
contrary character, that of a wicked man in his last moments; and it must be
shocking indeed.

As ripened and mellow fruit drops, untouched, from the tree to its mother
earth; so the good old man falls peaceably into the grave, and mingles again
with the common dust from which he originally sprang.

It is the vicious alone that have reason to be terrified at the thoughts of
death; but we are describing the upright man, not unlikely taking a last and
affectionate farewell of his lovely and dutiful daughters; exhorting them to
the practice of virtue, and recounting the rewards attendant upon it. The
eldest, perhaps, in her willing arms supports the expiring fire, while the
youngest administers some refreshing cordial to detain, for a moment, the
fleeting spirit. Mean while the tranquil parent, peradventure, gently rebukes
the falling tear, prophetically foretelling that their last moments shall be
peaceable like his -- and blesses them with his dying lips.

For such characters, delineated more at large, and which are worthy of our
admiration and reverence, I must refer my gentle readers, for the female one,
to that great master of human feelings, mr. Richardson, in his history of sir
Charles Grandison. How beautifully is honorable age exemplified in the
character of mrs. Shirley! The account there given of the latter part of her
life will assuredly delight and instruct every one. The death of lady
Grandison, how inexpressibly interesting! Although her temples were covered
with untimely snow, yet, in the character of wife, parent, and christian, her
exalted virtue had shone unrivalled; and when the awful period approached,
behold her departure, like the setting sun, -- leaving husband, children, and a
world of friends, to mourn the eternal absence of her cheering rays!

The whole work contains a noble system of morality, and is highly to be
recommended to all young persons. These useful lessons will be still more
instructive, when read in the company of those who are capable of making proper
remarks. This being premised, virtuous emulation will ever be most excited in
young minds from characters which appear real, because example always proves
stronger than precept. Thus entertainment and improvement will go hand in hand.

For the other character, I mean that of the good old man, no one has excelled
the ingenious and learned dr. Armstrong, in his Essay upon health. The whole
poem, indeed, is written in a masterly style, and conveys many useful
instructions, truly worthy of perusal; but his description of honorable age is
inimitable; and although very concise, nevertheless it contains a volume of
panegyric. I shall beg that gentleman's leave to transcribe it. --

How to live happiest; how avoid the pains,
The disappointments, and disgusts of those
Who would in pleasure all their hours employ,
The precepts here of a divine old man
I could recite. Though old, he still retained
His manly sense, and energy of mind.
Virtuous and wise he was, but not severe;
He still remembered that he once was young;
His easy presence checked no decent joy.
Him even the dissolute admired; for he
A graceful looseness when he pleased put on,
And laughing could instruct. Much had he read,
Much more had seen; he studied from the life,
And in the original perused mankind.
Such characters render old age desirable, lovely, and truly honorable. The
odium of peevish and morose vanishes, while our reverence and admiration stand
alone engaged. Who would not wish to be that old man, whose calm tranquillity
far surpasses the transient and passionate enjoyments of youth? Happy children
blessed with such happy parents!

From this description I hope to interest the tender passions of my fair
readers, so as to make them cheerfully contribute to the comforts of their aged
parents, while they yet live. A dutiful daughter must ever make a good wife and
tender mother; and to a prudent discerning man, it is certainly one of the
greatest recommendations in the choice of a companion for life.

On the other hand, a cruel and undutiful child is the most odious and
unnatural monster upon earth; insomuch that the Chinese are said to punish such
crimes with the greatest severity. It is recorded in their history, that if a
son should be known to kill, or so much as to strike his father, not only the
criminal, but his whole family, would be rooted out, their dwelling razed to
the ground, and its foundation sown with salt; nay, Le Compte adds, that the
inhabitants of the place where he lived would be put to the sword; as they
conclude there must have been a total depravation of manners in that clan, or
society of people, who could have bred up among them so horrid an offender.

How beautifully has our inimitable Shakespeare drawn the two contrasted
characters, in his description of Lear and his three daughters; where the two
elder appear like Satan's evil angels, while Cordelia, the poor Cordelia, is an
exalted example of filial tenderness and affection!

To your peculiar province, ye amiable fair, is this last great duty consigned:
to instruct you, therefore, in the proper execution of it, a few useful
observations may not be unseasonably introduced.

In a former letter we likened infancy to a lender plant; where we taught the
best method of rearing it, so as to make it flourish in the garden of the
world. The summer having produced you, the fair fruit of this goodly tree; and
the autumn of your parent-stock having ripened your understanding; it is but
meet that such knowledge should direct you, at this frozen season, to cherish
the decaying root from whence you sprang.

We have taken notice of the helpless state of childhood, before the body has
acquired strength sufficient to prepare its own nourishment: we have shown the
time when instinct and reason direct us to provide for ourselves; and
particularly observed, that animal food was never designed for our use until we
had teeth given us to eat it.

Let us continue these speculations, and regard the natural growth of our
bodies, together with the increasing strength of our constitutions. Behold the
child, whom you lately fondled in your arms, now contending with his
play-fellows in boyish sports: again, observe him who lately returned from
school with his satchel in his hand, now panting foremost in the chase: and now
see manhood stamped upon the downy cheek. Let us likewise remember the equally
gradual declension. At length the sturdy son supports his feeble sire; for he
who, in his youth, was swiftest in the race, is now scarcely able to uphold his
tottering limbs. The man of war, whose sturdy arm wielded the blood-thirsting
sword of battle, is now bending under the weight of his own body. Behold, his
sinews are dried up, and the purple current that bounded in his veins, now
heavily and scarcely creeps along. In every part alike the powers of this
wonderful machine decay. The teeth, designed both for use and ornament, robbed
of their beautiful enamel, become unsightly, and drop out of their sockets: the
penetrating eye, that searched into the very abyss of thought, is altogether
useless, or but dimly discerns the rays of light. Manly fortitude is now no
mere; and wisdom itself retires from the decayed mansion. Such is the almost
universal condition of old age, properly called our second childhood; and plain
are the inferences to be drawn from hence.

If a light and easily digested nourishment was necessary before our bodies had
obtained their proper strength, surely a similar method of living is the most
proper when they have lost it; and therefore -- the steps by which we mounted
into life, are the easiest and best paths to descend into the grave.

The digestive powers of age are equally enfeebled with the members of the
body; and, undoubtedly, the same reason that forbad the use of flesh, before we
had teeth, points out the necessity of gradually declining it as they decay.
There are, indeed, some few persons toothless who are not far advanced in life;
but such constitutions are generally feeble, and therefore the precautions are
not unapplicable to them,

These arguments being rightly understood, there will be little occasion to
enlarge upon this subject; as the directions for the management of children,
from the time of weaning them, until they may be entrusted to the care of
themselves, comprehend every necessary instruction for the regimen of old age;
and those persons act wisely who consider it as a second childhood.

I need not be more particular on this head, as few, I am persuaded, will
suppose this period to commence with themselves, before it is necessary for
them to conform to these rules.

Age, undoubtedly, requires indulgence; but at the same time indolence creeps
on it imperceptibly. Those persons suffer least from pain, who rouse themselves
to a state of activity; and there are exercises well adapted even to advanced
life: an additional warmth of covering is at this time necessary; yet those act
most prudently who do not accustom themselves to very warm clothes, and very
warm rooms, while they are capable of enduring the variations of their natural
climate.

Nevertheless, one remark must not escape our observation; I mean, the happy
effect of temperance through life: it not only prevents disease as we are upon
our journey, but enables us to receive the intended benefit, and cordial
support, of wine, and other comfortable sippings, in this time of need. Nature,
in a temperate person, obtains fresh vigor and spirits from such exhilarating
juices; but where the constitution has been accustomed to excess, no advantage,
in the decline of life, can be derived from their use.

I have now fulfilled my present design; and through every letter have aimed at
conveying my observations in a rational and amusing manner; calculated, I hope,
to please, at the same time that I wish to instruct. It is a topic, which, in
different parts of it, has been handled by very able men; and yet has
generally, I believe, been esteemed a dry subject, particularly by the ladies,
to whom it essentially belongs. This dislike seems, probably, to have arisen
from the style not seeing sufficiently void of terms of art; for the taste, as
well as the judgment, must be pleased, when we mean to encounter prejudices,
and to correct long established errors.

It will give me a particular satisfaction, if I have so far succeeded in my
undertaking, as that the present collection of letters may deserve a place in
the ladies library; and perhaps this little volume may sometimes prove the
companion of the nursery and sick chamber, or even afford an hour's amusement
in a carriage.

It is intended, my fair, to render your characters truly amiable; and I trust
will be received as a present from a sincere friend to the sex. Where
tenderness, goodnature, sense, and virtue, are beautifully blended in a female
form, our admiration and love are equally engaged; and where this proves to be
the case, every man is, surely, desirous of contributing to the service of
perfections so irresistibly engaging -- such, at least, is the resolution of,

LADIES, Your devoted Humble servant, HUGH SMITH.

THE END.
Books and pamphlets printed by Matthew Carey.

dls. cts. 1. Duncan's logic,.75 2. Beauties of Fielding, 3. Beauties of
poetry. British and American,.80 4. M'Fingal, an epic poem. By John Trumbull,
esquire..37 5. Beattie's elements of moral science, Of this book the critical
reviewers (vol. 69. p. 268) say: "We have seen nothing on these subjects more
plain, more perspicuous, or more generally useful." N.B. It is introduced into
the university of Pennsylvania..75 6. Necker's treatise on religious
opinions,.80 7. American constitutions,.62 8. American jest book, in two
parts,.60 9. Ladies' library, containing a number of excellent essays,.87 10.
Smith's history of New York, 1. 25 11. Blair's sermons, 2 vols. 2. 12. Doway
translation of the vulgate bible, 6. 13. Garden of the soul. By bishop
Challenor,.50 14. Vade mecum,.25 15. Think well on it,.25 16. Christian
economy,.20 17. Colonel Humphreys'a poems,.33 18. Select poems,.16 19.
Examination of lord Sheffield's observations on the American commerce,.62 20.
Burke's reflections on the French revolution, 1. 21. Beauties of Blair,.50

Said Carey has in the press, and will publish about the beginning of November,
BLAIR'S LECTURES on rhetoric and belles lettres. In two volumes octavo, on a
large type.


