MR. ROBBINS'S DISCOURSE ON ROMANS IX. 18.

DIVINE (...) THE SALVATION, AND (...) OF SINNERS (...); IN A DISCOURSE,
Delivered at WEST CHESTER, in COLCHESTER.

BY ROBERT ROBBINS A. M. PASTOR of a Church in COLCHESTER.

SUBMITTED TO PUBLIC INSPECTION IN COMPLIANCE WITH THE REQUEST OF SEVERAL
RESPECTABLE GENTLEMEN.

We are the CLAY, and THOU our POTTER. PROPHET ISAIAH. NORWICH: PRINTED BY
EBENEZER BUSHNELL, M, DCC, XCII.

A DISCOURSE.
ROMANS IX. 18. Therefore has he mercy on whom he will have mercy, and whom he
will he hardens.
UNBIASSED reason clearly dictates, that God has an original inalienable right
and propriety in all things; and particularly in mankind -- a right to make
what use of them he pleases. And that he is not obliged to render an account,
why he deals with one in this, and another in that manner. Because, as
creatures, they are his absolute property, and, as sinners, are obnoxious to
his wrath.

BUT it is evident that the divine disposal, relatively to mankind, has met
with great opposition and complaint -- Is a doctrine very disagreeable to human
pride -- And is what the Apostle labored to establish, in the text and context,
against the carnal reasonings, and self-conceited pretensions of the Jews, and
all others who have the audacity to deny, or question God's absolute right, and
uncontrolable authority to dispose of men and things according to his sovereign
pleasure.

THE subject of discourse in this chapter is the rejection of the Jews, and the
extension of saving mercy to the Gentiles. The former prided themselves in
their descent, their privileges, and their legal righteousness. On these
grounds they (...) expectations of life and salvation. And claiming the
peculiar favor and protection of the Almighty, they despised the Gentile
world; as out^^^^s from God, and not deserving their regard. Therefore, when it
was (...) that the Gentiles were fellow ^^irs and p^rtakers of the blessings of
the Messiah through (...), equally with the believing Jews, by far the greater
part of that people rejected the counsel of God against themselves, and were
left to their own stub^orn (...), to bring ruin and destruction upon themselves
(...) the Gentiles, by the power of the Holy Ghost, were brought to believe in
Christ and obtain salvation.

To set aside their vain pretensions; and vindicate God's right and authority
to dispense the (...) of his goodness according to his own will, the (...)
observed v. 6 and 7. "They are not all Israel which are of Israel: Neither,
because they are the (...) of Abraham are they all children." The (...)
according to his sovereign pleasure, made a difference between Is^^^e^, and
Isaac, in favor of the la^^^r, And should it be urged "there was an obvious
(...) for this discrimination: because Is^^^el was the son of the bond, but
Isaac: of the free woman." The next instance cannot be liable to such an (...)
-- the difference made by God between (...), and (...), twin children of Isaac
by Rebecca. For the younger was preferred to the elder: not because it was
foreseen that the temper and behavior of the younger, would exceed the elder
in goodness: For this (...)ence was given "before the children were born, and
had done any good or evil" v. II. Which (...) opposite discrimination was
designed to illustrate this great doctrine. "That the purpose of (...)
according to election might stand, not of wor^^. (...) that calls." The Jews,
who professed (...) regard for the writings of Moses, could have (...) son to
object to this as arguing unrighte^ (...) God because He says to Moses, v. 19.
"I will have mercy on whom I will have mercy, and I will have compassion on
whom I will have compassion." In which words JEHOVAH claims a sovereign right
to dispense his mercy and compassionate regards, where, when, to whom, and in
what measure he pleases. "So then, v. 16. it is not of him that wills, nor of
him that runs, but of God that shows mercy" For, although Isaac willed the
blessing to ESAU, and (...) ran to get the venison; yet, by the divine
ordination and disposal, it was conferred upon Jacob. And further, concerning
Pharaoh the Scripture says, E^. IX. 16. "And in very deed for this cause have
I raised thee up for to show in thee my power, and that my name may be declared
throughout all the earth." His being raised up may intend his advancement to
the throne of Egypt: or his being made to stand up when the hail, pestilence,
and other judgments carried off so many Egyptians. Pharaoh was not immediately
destroyed for his contempt of God; as he justly might have been. God spared him
when so many fell around him, that he might make his power and vengeance appear
more conspicuous and triumphant, by overthrowing him and his hosts in the red
sea.

FROM these well chosen and weighty particulars, and the reasons combined with
the adduced instances, the consequence is drawn in the words read. "Therefore
has he mercy on whom he will have mercy, and whom he will he hardens."

THAT we may derive proper instruction, and conviction from this important
passage of sacred Writ; we are naturally led,

I. To investigate the meaning of God's having mercy on whom he will have
mercy. Also, II. THE meaning of the counter-part to this, And whom he will he
hardens. III. EVINCE, and illustrate this great truth, That it belongs to God
-- is his essential prerogative, to have mercy on whom he will have mercy, and
to harden whom he will harden. Then, IV. ANSWER objections. And, V. IMPROVE the
subject, by deduction, and Application.
As it may tend to relieve the minds of some readers, I shall divide the
discourse, it being lengthy, into three parts.

THE FIRST PART, Containing an attempt to explain the text.

To do this orderly and clearly it is necessary to investigate the meaning of
God's having mercy on whom he will have mercy.

MERCY, when applied to God in the Bible, is sometimes used with greater
latitude, than at others. The divine character, generally summed up in
holiness, is sometimes expressed by mercy. But mercy, more strictly considered,
is a branch of holiness -- is of the nature of benevolence; yet does imply
something in the object toward which it is exercised, whereby it is
differenced from benevolence in a general view. Benevolence respects being --
intelligent existence. Mercy respects the ill-deserving. Great favor may be
shown, much good, may be conferred upon the innocent: but favor shown to the
innocent is not of the nature of mercy, strictly considered: because mercy is
contrary to desert; or the good, which is the effect of mercy, is so far from
being merited by those who are the recipients, that they deserve only evil.

WE may, therefore, define mercy applied to God by saying, It is the divine
inclination to do good to the ill deserving.

ACCORDING to this definition, mercy may be distinguished from compassion, as
well as from benevolence. It is true, that mercy and compassion are oftentimes
used synonimously; yet strictly speaking, misery is the object of compassion,
without joining to it either innocence, or ill desert: whereas mercy has
respect to misery well deserved.

Now, as all mankind are sinners, "for there is none righteo^s, no, not one,"
and consequently, odious to divine purity, and obnoxious to divine wrath: so
all the good things men enjoy ought to be considered, as flowing to them from
mercy. The innumerable blessings conserred upon them in the present state, are
mercies equally numberless. Whereby it appears, that in different ways and
degrees, all have experience of mercy from God. It is evident, however, that,
in the text, mercy is not to be understood in this general sense. Here respect
is had, not only to discriminating, but also to saving mercy. That which, in a
lower sense, may be called discriminating mercy, is exercised toward many who
are not the subjects of saving mercy. Discriminating mercy is exercised in
temporal blessings and spiritual privileges. Some abound in riches; and enjoy
better health of body than others do. Some are under better advantages in
respect to society: and better advantages for mental and moral improvement,
than others are. And there are more powerful operations of the Holy Spirit on
the minds and consciences (...) some, than of others, who yet may be left to
stifle their convictions, and never experience the change of regeneration and a
saving conversion to God. And in such respects it may be truly said, He has
mercy on whom he will have mercy.

THAT, in the text, particular reference is had to saving mercy, is evident
from the tenor of the discourse in this chapter. For it was obviously Paul's
design to vindicate the divine conduct, in rejecting the body of the Jewish
nation, and extending saving mercy to the Gentiles. Moreover, it is
sufficiently evident from the latter part of the verse. Whom he will he
hardens. For they who are not hardened, are softened, i.e. renewed and
sanctified: because there is no medium between these. Therefore saving mercy is
here intended.

As there is a difference in the exercise of divine mercy, in other respects;
so there is a most wide and important difference in the exercise of saving
mercy. It is not bestowed upon all mankind; but upon some only -- even those
upon whom God is pleased to bestow it. In the text, and many other places, the
exercise of mercy is resolved into the will or sovereign pleasure of the Deity.
No reason is he^^ assigned only his will. He has mercy on whom he will have
mercy. What then, are we to understand by this mode of speaking?

1. WE are not to conceive that God acts from mere will, as this is generally
understood, when applied to men. The potentates of the earth are frequently
represented as acting from mere will, to signify that they act tyrannically,
contrary to all reason and equity; by displaying their power, in numberless
ways of violence and oppression, to gratify their ambition and avarice. The
will of God, in the exercise of his saving mercy, is not arbitrary in any such
sense. For no wrong is done to those upon whom he does not bestow his mercy:
neither is partiality exercised, in the sense that being partial or a respecter
of persons, implies any thing mean and unworthy.

2. WE are not to conceive that God acts without wisdom -- without a regard to
that which upon the whole is best, in the choice he makes of these, upon whom
he is determined to bestow his saving mercy. The divine will is not blind, nor
capricious. Although we are not able to investigate them, no doubt there are good
and sufficient reasons, why God bestows his saving mercy upon some, and not
upon others. And why those very persons upon whom he does bestow it, rather
than others. But, in respect to this matter, his tho'ts are not our tho'ts --
are high above them, as the heavens are high above the earth. It is not,
because some are more noble, wise, and mighty than others; or have done more to
recommend themselves, than others have done. It is those, upon whom, in his
infinite wisdom, God sees best to bestow it: Whose salvation will most
effectually conduce to his own glory, and the illustrious display of his grace.

3. "HE has mercy on whom he will have mercy" signifies to us; That God has
and exercises a right to do what he will with his own.

ALL men being sinners, he is not obliged to exercise his saving mercy toward
any. And it lies in his own breast to determine on whom he will confer it; and
on whom he will not. By this, we see, the exercise is arbitrary, in respect to
subjects. Neither they upon whom such mercy is bestowed, nor they upon whom it
is not bestowed, have any claims to advance. Therefore, if any are saved; their
salvation must be the effect of mere mercy, sovereign grace.

4. WE may farther observe, That this mode of speaking does naturally lead us
to conceive; that as mercy is the only spring of salvation: So in the exercise
of it, God is self moved, and perfectly free. Nothing out of himself, strictly
speaking, does induce God to show mercy. The exercise of saving mercy, in its
whole extent, flows from his infinitely free self-moved propensity. It is true,
God exercises mercy in a view of the guilt, and ruin of sinners: For if sin had
not taken place, there would have been no room for the exercise of it.
Therefore we may humbly conceive, Sin was permitted to take place, to prepare
the way for the manifestation of divine justice, in the punishment of some; and
that the infinitely merciful heart of the Deity might work forth, in the pardon
and salvation of others: And that the most important ends, respecting the Deity
himself, and the created intelligent system, might be accomplished in the final
result. But the whole scene is laid, and the exercise conducted in such a
manner, as to make it manifest; that when God bestows his saving mercy upon
any, he acts of, from, and for himself. And the regard shown to those upon whom
he confers his saving mercy is rather subordinate, than original and ultimate:
or if ultimate, yet certainly, not supreme.

ON the whole, God has determined the objects of saving mercy according to the
counsel of his own will, and so as to answer his own most important ends. Not
needing, nor asking any assistance; not looking upon himself amenable to any
creature. And without paying the least attention and regard to those
circumstances and distinctions, men are apt to think, ought to influence in
such a determination, and consequent procedure. For, "Who has known the mind
of the Lord? or who has been his counselor?" instructing and aiding him in
what he ought to resolve and do. "Or who has first given to him?" Certainly
none.

MANY are ready to think it is proper they should be the objects of divine
favor, on account of their.descent; or because they have superior abilities and
advantages; or because they have made a profession of religion, are civil and
moral in their behavior, and if not sinless, are less criminal and unworthy
than many others they could easily name. Or because they have taken abundant
pains to recommend themselves to divine favor. Indeed there is a great variety
of particulars, implying different circumstances and distinctions which take
place among mankind, on account whereof they are apt to imagine, God will show
them his salvation. But the Almighty does not regard those distinctions, in
which weak mortals are so apt to pride themselves. He does not make less
comparative guile and unworthiness the ground of his choice; For upon some he
bestows salvation whose guilt is very great -- even upon the chief of sinners.
Some of one; and some of another nation are saved. Some descended from worthy
progenitors; others not so descended. Some of such a station and employment are
chosen; others of the like station are rejected. And where there is a
similarity of circumstances, it is probable, some are saved; others not.

We cannot determine beforehand who will be saved, From the situation (...)en
are in, the way they pursue, the exertions they make, we cannot know that God
has saving mercy in design for them. It is not possible to know that God will
bestow mercy upon one, or another before he does bestow it; unless he should be
pleased to reveal his purpose, in respect to certain persons, to some of his
servants. But he is not wont often, if ever to do this. And although the
situation some persons are in, who have not as yet obtained regenerating grace,
may render it more probable they will obtain mercy, than that others in general
will, and more probable in the given situation, that they in particular shall
obtain, than it would be, were they not in such a situation: Yet no situation
-- no external circumstances, or even state of mind persons may be in
antecedently to regeneration, ought to be considered, as having the least
influence in the divine determination, respecting the bestowment of his saving
mercy.

ON the other hand; when we find saving mercy, in event is conferred upon
persons, who were in such a particular situation, external and internal, we are
to conceive they were brought thereunto, because God purposed to save them.

HAVING thus stated what we are to understand by God's having mercy on whom he
will have mercy. The way is prepared.

II. To investigate the meaning of the counterpart to this, And whom he will he
hardens.

IT is true that he hardens whom he will, as it is that he has mercy on whom
he will; because the same pen of inspiration asserts both. They on whom he has
mercy are regenerated, are united to Christ, are justified, and shall be saved:
seeing, as has been observed, there is a particular reference, not to common
and promiscuous; but to special saving mercy. Consequently, by the hardened we
are to understend those who are, or shall be lest in an imp(...)t unbelieving
state to the last -- to their eternal ruin and des(...)n. For the event of
remaining impenitent and unbelieving to the end of this probationary state will
be endless ruin and misery. Of the truth of this doctrine the Scriptures afford
abundant proof. At present, I shall only refer to the 22d. verse, which is not
only in point, but decisive. For here we are taught, that God will show his
wrath, and make his power known on the vessels of wrath fitted to destruction,
and endured with much long suffering. Now should these vessels be eternally
happy after having been ever so many millions of ages in torment; they would be
vessels of mercy, and not vessels of wrath. And salvation, rather than
destruction would be their end -- that to which they are fitted.

WE are compelled to understand the text to mean being hardened in this awful
sense. The scope of the Apostle evinces it: which was the rejection of the Jews
through unbelief to their destruction, and the extension of saving mercy to the
Gentiles. The adduced instance of Pharaoh whose heart was hardened to his
destruction, proves it. For this instance is brought (...) to support the
declaration stated in the text. As he hardened Pharaoh to his destruction: so
whom he will he hardens to their destruction. And more than all this, the
antithesis used in the text does necessarily require such a construction.
Because, although there are various respects and degrees, according to which,
several persons may be said to be hardened, and even the same person at
different times. Yet if any should be hardened in impenitence ten, twenty,
forty years or more: but should be renewed by divine grace, and saved at last;
upon such God would have mercy in the sense of the text. Therefore it is
evident, this would destroy the contrast -- would leave no opposition between
those upon whom he has mercy, and those whom he hardens.

THE expression, he hardens, is used in a metaphorical sense. It is borrowed
from particular (...) that are called hard; such as a stone, piece of (...) or
dried clay, which are not easily penetrated, broken and changed. They will
resist a considerable power applied to alter them. And some bodies naturally
hard, being worked upon, will grow harder still. Whereas substances that are
soft will readily yield, giving way to impressions made upon them. Hardness,
when applied to the mind, does import an unaptness to be rightly moved and
affected; a bent to resist the truth, and oppose the authority and commands of
God. Leaving the metaphor -- a hard is the same with a selfish, proud, unholy
heart. And according to the degree of selfishness, and opposition to truth and
holiness is the degree of hardness. And lastly, whatsoever serves to render
men's minds stupid, averse to good, proud and stubborn, may be said to harden
them.

WHAT being hardened does intend may now be seen. But the great question is,
what we are to understand by, whom HE will HE hardens? Or in what sense may
it be truly said God hardens any man? For it needs not to be a laboring
point in our minds, that he should harden whom he will, if we can find a
consistent sense, in which he may be said to harden any one. Because that which
will serve to vindicate his character in hardening any one, may serve as well
to vindicate it in hardening another, and as many as he shall see fit to
harden. For, if doing it in one instance implies no denial of his holiness;
doing it in ten, or ten thousand instances will imply no denial thereof -- It
being easy (...) to see, that where there is no denial or opposition in a
single instance; there will be none in ever so many instances of the same
nature. The question returns, what are we to understand by whom HE will HE
hardens?

THIS indeed is a tremendously delicate subject; and by using great freedom and
boldness of enquiry there may be danger of our conceiving, and uttering what
shall be exceedingly reproachful to the Deity. And there seems to be danger
on both hands; So that by steering beyond the proper point to avoid Scylla; we
fall into Charybdis. And this I apprehend we shall do. If on one hand, we
wholly deny any interposition (...) and divine disposal in respect to the
taking place of sin, and a continued series -- a confirmed state in wickedness,
ending in eternal ruin and destruction. Or by ascribing more, in any essential
respect, to a divine interposition and disposal than ought to be ascribed, on
the other. And it may not be easy to determine which would be most injurious
and reproachful. Yet, perhaps, it is not possible for us to fix the point
precisely, by ascertaining with exactness, how far the will, and disposal of
the Deity are concerned in this delicate affair.

To proceed with humility and due caution in the enquiry, it may be observed,
that since God hardens whom he will, it is certain his will, in some sense,
must be concerned in hardening men; and the active verb hardens does import
some divine agency and disposal. So that, without flat contradiction to the
plainest assertion of the pen of inspiration, we cannot wholly exclude the will
and agency of God. From this however, it does not follow, that there is the
same agency or exertion of divine power in producing the event called sin, and
hardness of heart, as there is in producing the effect called holiness. And
notwithstanding the divine will and disposal are concerned in the former; they
may be, and we may have reason to apprehend they are concerned in a very
different sense and manner, in the latter, i. e. in the communication of
holiness, and conservation of saints in a holy state. Indeed this mode of
speaking does not necessarily imply, that God exerts any immediate influence at
all in hardening men. For, should we suppose sin -- hardness of heart to take
place in consequence of the suspension of a particular kind of influence, which
by many has been called supernatural influence, producing, and continuing
holiness in creatures: Even as the absence of light is darkness; as night
follows the going down of the sun, without any positive immediate exertion to
produce night or darkness -- I say, on such a supposition, the manner of
speaking in the text, would not be improper. For the night -- darkness is
sometimes represented as being made, yea created. And, we ordinarily say the
absence of light causes darkness.

IT is true, that sin is in opposition to holiness; selfishness to benevolence;
so that we may invariably say selfish and benevolent exercises are contrary to
each other. And it is certain, that holy benevolent exercises in creatures are
the effect of divine exertion; do take place in consequence of the influence of
the Holy Ghost upon the heart. For God works in the saints, "both to will and
to do of his good pleasure." It is also evident, that men do not act
independently of God, when they act sinfully. God does not withhold every kind
of influence and support. If he should they would cease to be. There would be
no ability, no sufficiency for any kind of perception, and exercise. "In him we
live, move, and have our being." This is true in respect to the wicked, as it
is in regard to others. But it does not follow, because holy, and sinful
exercises are opposite to each other, and holy exercises are the effect of a
divine supernatural operation; that sinful exercises must be the fruit of any
similar exertion of divine power. For the same efficiency that produces an
effect of one kind may not be necessary to produce an effect of another, and an
opposite kind. Allowing the same cause may produce different, and even opposite
effects; as the same fire that melts wax, and fuses metals will dry, and harden
humid soft clay: Yet, perhaps, in nature's ample field we shall not find an
instance, affording a decisive proof, that the same cause does produce opposite
effects in the same subject; unless there is a materil variation in some
circumstance, or circumstances attending the subject, and then indeed as to the
case in hand, the subject is not the same. And many considerable effects seem
to be produced, or occasioned by privation of influence, rather than by
positive exertion. A river congealed so as to form a bridge sufficiently strong
for an army, with ammunition and baggage to pass safely over, is a great, real,
sensible effect. How is it produced! Not by the presence and powerful influence
of the sun; but by his absence, or the faint influence of his beams. It is
true, there can be no ice without water; and there can be no water without an
omnipotent hand to create it: also, the presence and power of God in the beams
of the sum is necessary to keep the water in a warm flowing state. But that,
the beams of the sun being withdrawn, there is need of a superadded influence
to turn the flowing water into a congealed state may not easily, if at all, be
made to appear. And who would choose to affirm? There may not be something as
great, and even more considerable in respect to moral voluntary effects, than
in regard to those which are natural and mechanical: where there is no pretense
of any proper agency in the subjects of the effects, or their mediate causes.

LET it be farther observed, That, in regeneration and sanctification, the
Scriptures ascribe a peculiar interposition and influence to God, This argues
that sinful exercises are not the effect of divine influences in the sense holy
excrcises are. Should it be urged, "that although the extrinsic influence which
produces holiness in creatures is not the same with that which produces sin:
Yet as creatures have no independent sufficiency for any kind of perception and
volition, there necessarily must be an extrinsic divine influence, and as
immediately exerted, to the production of sinful, as of holy volitions."
Answer. This will not follow. Because the sinfulness of volitions may proceed
from a privative, rather than a positive cause. In other words. According to
Scriptural representation there seems to be a peculiar, and what has been
called supernatural influence, in producing holy perceptions and volitions,
which influence is over and above that general influence -- extrinsic exertion,
necessary to prepare the way for perceptions and volitions, to take place in
creatures. i. e. to enable them to understand and choose. If so; then there is
not a necessity of influence tantamount to this, to prepare the way for sinful
exercises to take place. Because the suspension of the kind of influence, which
has been mentioned, may be attended with this consequence. Sinful exercises
may be conceived of as taking place, without any other kind of influence --
extrinsic exertion, than what is necessary, to enable man to understand, choose
and act.

To sum up the whole, I think it is more safe, and does better accord with the
Scriptures to say, That God orders the occasion; and for wise, and important
ends, does not interpose that influence, which in the given circumstances,
would be necessary to prevent sin and impenitence; than that he causes sin and
impenitence by his own positive and immediate energy. And that he permits,
which is to say does not effectually prevent, than that he produces, or infuses
such hardness.

SOME very bold inquirers, and reasoners, may censure this permitting; ordering
the occasion; not preventing; as making use of expressions, too lenient and
timid. And may urge, that such a stating of the case is only an expedient to
relieve the imagination; but does afford no relief to any real difficulty. In
regard to such persons I would farther observe. Although I do not assert, that
the supposition of such a direct, positive agency in the taking place, the
continu nce, and prevalence of wickedness in the system, as they may insist
upon; would necessarily involve the idea, or consequence that God is the author
of sin, in such a sense, as to render the sinner less criminal, and sin less
odious to the divine being, than it would appear to be on any other
supposition, and the Scriptural representatious make it to be. And although the
abettors of the direct, positive agency of the Deity in the production of all
moral evil, for ought I choose to say to the contrary, may have clear
conceptions of the evil of sin, just desert of the sinner, and God's infinite
hatred and aversion to sin: Yet there seems to be something in it which does
naturally, if not necessarily shock the mind. And, as I apprehend, has a
powerful tendency to prejudice the minds of people in general, and of many
pious well-meaning persons (who (...) able to pursue references metaphysically
refined) against the system of truth revealed in the Bible, and lead them to
entertain very unworthy thoughts of the blessed God, the glorious fountain of
being and good. And after all, it seems to be a philosophical point, respecting
the manner of accomplishing the divine purposes, about which it is not
necessary the world should be exercised.

As Paul drew the consequence, whom he will he hardens, from what is said
concerning Pharaoh -- our conceptions may possibly be assisted, by bringing
into view what is narrated of him in the history given by Moses.

GOD sent Moses to demand of Pharaoh permission for the children of Israel to
go, and offer sacrifice in the wilderness; but told him, that he would harden
Pharaoh's heart so that he should not let the people go. When Moses delivered
the message to Pharaoh; he answered, "who is the LORD that I should obey his
voice to let Israel go? I know not the LORD, neither will I let Israel go."
Pharaoh made the Israelites serve with hard bondage in brick, and mortar. His
pride and covetousness could not consent, to loose the service of so many men.
Therefore, instead of complying with the demand God made by Moses he ordered a
heavier task to be imposed upon them. By the divine command, Moses began to
work signs and wonders to convince the king of Egypt, that he was really sent
by God, and influence him to comply with his demand. Pharaoh called for his
magicians; Jannes and Jambres withstood Moses. And so long as they did
something in imitation of the miracles wrought by Moses and Aaron, this served
to fix him in his resolution, not to let the people go. When the magicians
could not produce lice; but owned themselves defeated, and that what Moses did
was the finger of God; it is not improbable Pharaoh thought Moses did this;
because he had greater skill in magic, than Jannes and Jambres, and thereby his
heart was hardened. When the magicians were farther contounded: so that they
could not stand before Moses, because of the blains that broke forth upon them;
as they did upon man and beast throughout all the land of Egypt. It is
said,."the LORD hardened the heart of Pharaoh." Yet, after this it is said, "
Pharaoh sinned yet more, and hardened his heart he and his servants." And when
the judgments succeeding the hail were inflicted it is repeatedly said, "the
LORD hardened the heart of Pharaoh". And although at last, by the destruction
of all the first born in Egypt, Pharaoh was constrained to let the people
depart; they had not gone far before he recanted, and pursued them with his
chariots and horsemen, the LORD hardening the heart of the king of Egypt to do
this, and the hearts of the Egyptians. Which is thus expressed: "the enemy said
I will pursue, I will overtake, I will divide the spoil: my lust shall be
satisfied upon them; I will draw my sword, my hand shall destroy them."

HERE a most wonderful scene was laid open: remarkable in respect to
manifesting the extreme wickedness, and hard-hear edness of Pharaoh, and his
servants; and displaying the power and glory of JEHOVAH in the deliverance of
his people, and the punishment and overthrow of Pharaoh and the Egyptians."
"For the LORD triumphed gloriously by throwing the horse and his rider into the
sea." Upon this occasion it was proper to ask in a strain of devout admiration,
as Moses did, "who is like unto thee O Lord among the gods! who is like thee,
glorious in holiness, fearful in praises, doing wonders?"

No one who reads and attends to the whole narration ought to entertain the
least doubt, whether this scene, antecedently to its being opened, was
comprehended in the divine plan. And it is evident, there was a previous
certainty that Pharaoh's heart would be hardened. And that God raised him up
for this very purpose, that he might show his power in him, and that his own
glorious name might be declared throughout all the earth.

BUT how are we to understand this? Shall we say, "that God intended to make
his power known by hardening Pharaoh's heart, in virtue of his own positive
immediate energy, working such hardness in his heart?" Answer. This does not
appear from the history: but rather this. God intended to make his power known
in many stupendous miracles wrought to convince, and persuade Pharaoh; whose
heart he did not see fit, by any positive efficiency, to prevent growing hard,
and increase in obduracy, notwithstanding all that was said and done calculated
to reduce him to a willing subjection and compliance. And to make his power and
name glorious by triumphing over him, as he did at last, in his deserved
destruction.

IT may be observed, that three modes of expression are used in setting forth
the hardness of Pharaoh's heart. The LORD hardened his heart; his heart was
hardened: and he i. e. Pharaoh himself hardened his heart. According to this
account, his hardness is sometimes ascribed, neither to God, nor to Pharaoh
directly, leaving room to say it was occasioned, in part, by certain
circumstances. And although these circumstances were ordered by the wise holy
providence of God: yet this may be far from amounting to a direct positive
divine efficiency in producing such hardness. And it is evident, there was no
such agency of the Deity in the affair as to prevent his hardness of heart
being with propriety ascribed to Pharaoh himself. And as it is sometimes
ascribed to himself it is apparent, there was no compulsion -- there was no
other, than a moral necessity, of his remaining in a hardened state. Or what
consisted in his own inclination and choice. He acted spontaneously; he chose
to gratify his avarice by detaining the Israelites in his service;
notwithstanding all that was said and done, to gain a compliance with what was
demanded of him by Moses, in the name of JEHOVAH.

THEREFORE, the narration given by Moses only renders it necessary we should
maintain, that hardening the heart of Pharaoh was comprehended in the divine
plan -- That it was previously certain he would continue in a hardened state,
God not being obliged thereto, and not seeing fit to prevent it, by the
efficacious influences of his spirit and grace. And in this, or some sense like
this, it may be said God hardens whom he will. He has determined whom he
will harden, and upon whom he will have mercy. There is a previous certainty in
respect to a certain number unknown to us, but perfectly well known to God, who
will be hardened to their eternal ruin: notwithstanding all that has been, is,
or shall be done, to prevent it. That is to say, who after their hardness and
impenitent heart, will treasure up to themselves wrath and damnation, by
despising the riches of his goodness, long-suffering and forbearance. Whom the
goodness of God (however well adapted in itself to that purpose) will not lead
to repentance; nor the divine severity drive from the love, and pursuit of
their evil ways. In all of whom God will make his power known; and at last, not
only declare his name throughout all the earth; but render it divinely glorious
to the utmost extent of creation, and to the endless ages of eternity; as he
will also, the exceeding riches of his grace in their salvation, upon whom it
shall please him to have mercy.

THE SECOND PART. Containing some proof and illustration of the doctrine.

WE may now proceed,

III. To evince and illustrate this great truth, that it belongs to God -- is
one of his essential prerogatives to have mercy on whom he will have mercy, and
to harden whom he will harden.

THE following arguments may sufficiently evince and illustrate this important
doctrine.

ARG: I. GOD has an original inalienable right and propriety in all things.
Therefore it belongs to him -- is his essential prerogative to have mercy on
whom he will, and to harden whom (...) will.

I. WHEN we say this belongs to God, is a divine prerogative, we do or ought to
mean, that it is essential to Deity, an original inalienable prerogative. That
it belongs to him in an absolute independent manner; so as to render it absurd
to say, or suppose it does not belong to him: so absurd, as that the denial
thereof does imply a denial of the supremacy, perfection and glory of Jehovah;
and is tantamount to the denial of the existence of a Deity, the first cause,
and last end of all things.

WHEN the Psalmist says, "power belongs unto God," he no doubt means, that
original absolute power belongs to him, inherently, and essentially. That he
does not in the least degree derive his power from any other, and is not at all
dependent on any other for the exercise of it. And strictly speaking, that he
does not derive it from himself; any more than he derives his existence from
himself: But this power is in him necessarily, with a necessity absolute, like
that of his being.

2. IT may easily be seen, that the denial of absolute perfection, perfection
original and every way exempt from derivation, implies a denial of divine
existence, although, in our conception, and the order of stating things, we
place existence first. For divine existence is the existence of a being
absolutely perfect. Therefore, since in the idea of Deity absolute perfection
is included, we cannot admit the idea of such existence, without being
compelled to admit the idea of absolute perfection, as necessarily pertaining
thereunto: And to deny such perfection is impliedly, to deny the existence to
which the perfection does necessarily belong.

WE may indeed Without this conceive of existence, and call it Deity: however
it is not Deity, strictly speaking, but our own false conception, and vain
imagination. It may be proper also to observe here, That the will of God ever
is, and necessarily must be wise and good in the highest sense: because it is
repugnant to the idea of absolute perfection to admit the possibility of the
contrary. For, if his will, in any instance and respect, should be unwise, not
good this would be a proof of the want of absolute perfection.

3. WHEN we consider God as possessing absolute perfection, originally and
independently. And also consider him as the creator of all things. Of whom,
through whom, and to whom are all things!" That he has an original inalienable
right and propriety in all things, to order and dispose of them according to
his wisdom and good pleasure, is implied therein, or does flow therefrom by
infallible consequence. In so much, that it will amount to a denial of his
absolute perfection, and his divine existence, by necessary implication, to
deny he has such an inherent inalienable right.

4. As it thus appears, That it belongs to God to dispose of all creatures and
things, according to the counsel of his own will: Therefore it belongs to God
-- is his essential prerogative to have mercy on whom he will, and to harden
whom he will; as the matter has been explained. For a denial of this, is, in
effect, a denial of his right to dispose of all creatures and things as he
pleases; because this is comprehended in his having such an original
inalienable right. Consequently, by what has been said, a denial of this will
involve a denial of his absolute perfection -- his divine existence.

IN all the divine arrangements, perhaps, there is no higher, brighter display
of prerogative; than what is exercised in the Salvation and Damnation of
sinners. And we may not limit the divine prerogative, by admitting the exercise
of it in other matters; but denying that it does extend to this. However
contrary to the pride, the overweening conceits men have of themselves; and
however they may be disposed to set up, and maintain their notions of
independent power and liberty to choose for themselves, and fix even their
eternal state: Yet God asserts it to be his prerogative to have mercy on whom
he will, and to harden whom he will. And on good ground; for it does
essentially and necessarily belong to him.

ARG. II. Justice and mercy are essential to the divine character -- a
character, complete in all perfection. Therefore it belongs to God, to have
mercy on whom he will have mercy, and to harden whom he will harden.

1. IF justice, even punitive justice, be not a perfection it is an
imperfection. And, if it be an imperfection, then the character of Jehovah
revealed in the Scriptures, "To me vengeance belongs, I will repay says the
Lord," is a bad character. And the Bible does not give us the knowledge of the
true God. Likewise, if mercy be not a perfection, it is an imperfection. For,
in a moral consideration, there is no medium between perfection and
imperfection. We see then, it is impossible that mercy and justice should not
be a beauty, or a blemish in the divine character. And we see with equal
evidence, that mercy and justice are included in the idea of absolute
perfection.

2. IF mercy and justice are essential to the divine character; it is proper
that these should be made to appear in exercise, in events. The propriety of
these being made to appear is the same, with the propriety of the divine
character or absolute perfection, being made to appear: because the character
cannot be manifested, if any thing essentially distinguishing in the character,
is ^eft out. Moreover, the character cannot be seen, cannot be understood by
creatures; unless it is manifested in some suitable effects, or work, For none
but God himself, by intuition, self consciousness can know who, and what he is.

By this it appears, that in denying the propriety of mercy and justice being
exercised, there is implied a denial of the propriety of absolute perfection
being made to appear, as belonging to the divine character. And this will run
us into a denial of absolute perfection: and in fine the denial of a God --
will land us in atheism.

3. IF sin had not taken place, never had and never should take place, there
would have been no room and opportunity; and consequently no possibility, that
punitive justice and redeeming mercy should be exercised. It is no limitation
of divine power, on such a supposition, to say there would not be a
possibility. For, in such a case, the possibility implies a contradiction. And
it is no limitation of divine power to say God cannot do what implies a
contradiction, A contradiction is not the object of power. Hence it follows,
That sin must be comprehended in the projection of a plan, designed and
calculated to exhibit absolute perfection of character to the minds of
creatures. And in the same view, a divine decree relative to sin in event, and
such a disposal of things in the system, as should be followed with this event,
wholly by the fault of the creature, was necessary.

4. SIN has taken place in this lower world, by the fault of man, according to
the determinate counsel and foreknowledge of God. And, in unsearchable wisdom,
he has devised a method, that of redemption by Christ, according to which
mercy can be exercised in the salvation of sinners, consistently with justice,
and to the honor of the divine law and government. It therefore belongs to God
-- is his essential prerogative to bestow mercy on whom he pleases, and inflict
deserved punishment on whom he pleases. Mercy on those, in his unsearchable
wisdom, he finds it best should be made the subjects of mercy: And punishment
on the rest, the vessels of wrath fitted to destruction, and endured with much
long suffering.

By this it is demonstratively evident, That the determination of the
character, and disposal of the state and circumstances of creatures,
particularly the eternal state of men, is God's peculiar province, and
essential prerogative. That it belongs to him originally, and independently; is
what he cannot be divested of by any, and indeed is that of which he cannot
divest himself: It being essential as absolute perfection, involving justice
and mercy, is essential; and the denial of it, inferring the denial of divine
existence.

ARG. III. GOD actually has mercy on some, and hardens others, Therefore it
belongs to him to have mercy on whom he will and to harden whom he will.

1. THE fact is certain, because it is asserted in the Holy Scriptures. He
hardened Pharaoh and his servants to their destruction. He had mercy on Paul,
and many others have been the subjects of his saving mercy. The fact cannot be
questioned, unless we will question the truth of the Bible.

2. IF it be so done in a few instances or a single instance of each sort; it
may be done in more, even ^s many as God sees fit and best. And as the weight
of objection, supposing any are disposed to object, must lie against his
hardening whom he will; because it may be fairly presumed none will find fault,
that God exercises saving mercy, except it be in this point of light, that he
exercises it, toward some and not others, those toward whom he exercises it,
being no less guilty and ill-deserving, antecedent to the exercise thereof,
than those in whose favor he does not exercise it. But this will bring the
objector to the other point, whom he will he hardens. I say, then, If God
does harden any -- does so dispose of things in the system that they are
hardened to their eternal destruction, as testimony concerning fact evinces he
has done. Then it belongs to him, it is his province so to do. For he never
did, and it is impossible he ever should act out of his real province, contrary
to his essential prerogative. It also follows; that it is his prerogative to
harden whom, and as many as he will. For, if the thing itself implies any
opposition to absolute perfection -- the holiness of the Deity; such opposition
will be implied in a single instance. And if one instance does not imply
opposition; neither will two, ten, or ten thousand; because ten thousand
nothings are nothing.

3. By what has been said it is manifest; that from the instance of Pharaoh
and the other instances mentioned in the context, with great propriety the
Apostle drew the consequence. Therefore has he marcy on whom he will have
mercy, and whom he will he hardens. If he hardened Pharaoh he may harden whom
he will. There can be nothing to object against his conduct, let him do it in
another, and ever so many other instances, as many as he pleases; any more than
there is for his having done it in that instance.

WE must therefore prove, that he did not harden Pharaoh, and that he never
has hardened any; otherwise the consequence will follow, let us make ever so
many, attempts to evade it.

ARG. IV. THE potter has power over the clay, of the same lump to make one
vessel unto honor, and another to dishonor. Therefore it belongs to God to have
mercy on whom he will, and to harden whom he will.

THIS illuminating proof is suggested by Paul himself as an answer to the
objection stated thus, verse 19. "Thou will say unto me, Why does he yet find
fault? for who has resisted his will?" After having said, "Nay but O man, who
art thou that reply against God? Shall the thing formed say to him that
formed it, Why have thou made me thus? He adds, "Has not the potter power over
the clay, of the same lump to make one vessel unto honor, and another unto
dishonor?"

THE same comparison is frequently used to represent God's sovereign power and
uncontrollable authority in his disposal of men and things. Isaiah says XLV.
9. "Woe unto him that striveth with his maker, Let the potsherd strive with the
potsherds of the earth. Shall the clay say to him that fashioneth it, What
make thou? or thy work, He has no hands?" And Jeremiah, XVIII. 2 -- 7.
"Arise and go down to the potter's house, and there I will cause thee to hear
my words. Then I went down to the potter's house, and, behold he wrought a work
on the wheels. And the vessel that he made of clay was marred in the hand of
the potter; so he made it again another vessel, as seemed good to the potter to
make it. Then the word of the LORD came to me saying, O house of Israel, cannot
I do with you as this potter? says the LORD. Behold, as the clay is in the
potter's hand, so are ye in mine hand O house of Israel."

HERE several things may be observed. As,

1. THE potter acts in regard to the clay just as he pleases. He holds no
consultation with it; and if he should the clay could not inform him what is
proper to be done. He only consults himself; he forms his own plan; he moulds
and fashions the clay according to his own skill, and pleasure. Of the same
lump he makes some into larger some into smaller vessels; some into one shape,
some into another, some he designs for this, some for that purpose, just as he
will -- as he conceives will best answer his own ends; in displaying his
workmanship, or in gaining profit.

2. IN this affair no one pretends to find fault. It is readily granted by all
that the potter has power over the clay; that it belongs to him -- is his
unquestionable prerogative to fashion the clay as he pleases.

3. IT appears from the above cited passages, That as clay is in the potter's
hand; so are men, and all creatures in the hand of God. And that there is no
room to question his power, right and prerogative, to dispose of them as he
pleases; any more than to question the power the potter has over the clay, to
mould and fashion it as he pleases.

4. WE may add, that this figure is not sufficient to give a full idea. Nor can
any similitude be introduced that will every way answer the purpose: Because it
is a prerogative absolutely without a parallel. Perhaps no figurative
illustration can be devised, better adapted to render the idea clear and
familiar, than that of the potter and clay. But this fails. For, Should, it be
asked, What right has the potter to the clay? The answer must be. He has not
an original underiv(...) and title to it. The potter does not make the clay, he
only fashions the clay already made to his hand; and made by God, as also was
the potter himself. Therefore the potter has not a right to the clay, as he
would have, were he the maker of it. God grants him liberty to use the clay
himself has formed. So that it is only in a secondary sense, and by derivation
the potter has the least right to make use of clay for his work. Whereas the
divine right and propriety in all creatures and things is absolutely original,
and wholly underived. And it ought to be remembered, that men are at an
infinitely greater distance from God than the clay is from the potter. And that
he has infinitely more important designs, to be accomplished in his disposal
of men and things; than the potter has in forming different vessels from the
same lumps.

5. WE may therefore argue from the less to the greater. If the potter has
power over the clay, of the same lump to make one vessel unto honor, and
another unto dishonor: Much more does it belong to God to determine the
character, and dispose of the eternal state of men as he pleases. It belongs
to him in a much higher degree, and in the most absolute sense. And it appears,
that God exercises condescension, when he compares his power and prerogative to
that of the potter over the clay: Because, although there is some likeness; yet
it represents the case only in a very faint manner. However, as no one pretends
to question the right of the potter to make what vessel he pleases, and
appropriate them to his own purposes: much less ought any to dispute God's
right to bestow his saving mercy on whom he pleases, and withhold it from whom
he pleases.

ARG. V. EVERY possible ^^^othesis respecting the determination of the
character and disposal of the eternal state of men, except that which is
resolved into the wisdom, and good pleasure of the Deity, is weak and
insufficient if not impious and absurd. Therefore it belongs to God -- is his
essential prerogative to have mercy on whom he will have, mercy, and to harden
whom he will harden.

To finish the series of argumentation. Let us for once suppose, That God does
not claim it as his inalienable prerogative to determine the character, and
dispose of the state and circumstances of creatures; and in particular the
character, and eternal state of the individuals of the human race. And then
ask, Who does or shall determine and order such a variegated, infinitely
important scene of things? And consider withal what the probable; yea certain
consequence must be. In doing this it may be expected. That they who attend
without prejudice, and with becoming seriousness and care, will be thoroughly
convinced of the folly and absurdity of denying, or calling in question, the
divine prerogative to have mercy on whom he will, and to harden whom he will.

I WOULD premise, That this supposition ought not to be admitted a single
moment, in any other view, than to manifest the falsehood, the vast absurdity of
that doctrine which teaches, that it does not belong to God to exercise a wise
and holy sovereignty in the salvation and damnation of sinners. And this is to
say, it does not belong to God to exercise his justice and mercy as he pleases
-- as he sees it to be necessary, and best they should be exercised. Unless I
mistake the point entirely, it does, appear by what has been said that there
is no room to make the supposition, as though God might consistently relinquish
his claim to such a prerogative. For, if the precedent reasoning be just, it is
absolutely essential and inalienable. It so belongs to God, that he cannot
relinquish it any more than he can deny himself; can diminish his perfection,
which would be the same as to undeify himself.

WITH this premised let us proceed. If it does not belong to God to determine
the character, and ascertain the eternal state of men, the question will
return. To whom does it belong?

IN the first place. "Is this to be determined and ordered by the skill and
power of some created being, or by the united deliberations, the joint consent
of finite intelligencies?"

IT is very weak indeed to imagine this great affair may be determined and
ordered by any one created being. Gabriel alone is not sufficient. And there is
no room to suppose the united deliberations of finite intelligencies, not those
of the human kind; Because they come into existence by succession, and only a
few are alive on earth at once. And should the supposition only comprehend
those who are alive on earth at once. It would be impracticable for them to
meet together, and unitedly consult and determine who should, and who should
not be the objects of saving mercy. Moreover, if they could meet together, and
the affair, in respect to each individual, might issue, according to the
determination in which they should be united; there is not the shadow of a
probability they would unite. Their various selfish biases, and desigus would
necessarily, and effectually prevent an agreement.

IN the next place, "Shall we suppose it is the province of the angels to
determine and order who of the human race shall be saved, and who shall be left
to perish?" But what angels? The good? Or the bad? Or shall we say? That the
good angels determine how many, and who of the human kind shall be the subjects
of saving mercy. The evil angels how many, and who shall be hardened to their
destruction."

IN regard to the evil angels it may be observed. That they fain would have all
without exception hardened and destroyed. And are unwearied in their attempts
to accomplish the eternal ruin of mankind. Are represented going about as
roaring lions seeking whom they may devour. Not for the sake of justice, the
support of government, and vindication of the divine character; but to gratify
their malice, and revenge.

As to the holy angels -- They would find the affair so awful, so deeply
involved, and attended with such infinitely important and eternal consequences,
as that they would not dare to attempt it, were it to be proposed to them, and
if they should attempt, would find themselves wholly unequal to it.

IN the last place, "Shall we say this great affair is left to men themselves?
Each one is to determine and ascertain his own character and eternal state?"
This indeed is not morely supposed; but asserted, and strenuously insisted upon
by many. It is not as God wills and disposes; but as men themselves will and
order. There are who say, "Men shall be blessed as far as man permits; A nature
Rational implies the power Of being blessed or wretched as we please. Heaven
wills our happiness, allows our doom; Heaven but persuades, Almighty man
decrees; Man is the maker of immortal sates."

IF this supposition should fail; I apprehend it will be allowed that every
other hypothesis must be given up.

CONCERNING what is now before us, it may be proper to mention several things,
and proceed by steps. Here then.

1. IT may be granted, That it was referred to Adam (as far as any such thing
could be referred to a creature) to determine his own, and the character and
state of his posterity. It is certain, however, that Adam had not that liberty
of indifference, that self-determining power, that power of originating
volitions, which is urged by many as being essential to moral agency; and
necessary to render the volitions and actions of men worthy of praise, or
blame. Because such power and liberty is no where to be found, in men, angels,
or the Deity; the very notion being absurd. Real perfect indifferency in such a
state of mind as takes away the very idea of will or inclination. And to
suppose a power to choose without motive, and even against the strongest
motive, or motives, is to suppose a power to do nothing. For without motive
there can be no choice; because motive is implied in choosing. It is in reality
to say, men have a power to choose without choosing, without being able to
choose any thing. And if a real indifferency might be supposed without
absurdity it would be evil -- sinful. For there ought to be no indifference,
respecting holiness, in the hearts of moral agents. To return,

IT may be granted; that, in a low qualified sense, it was referred to Adam to
determine his own, and the character and state of his posterity. And we well
know the issue of that trial was sin and ruin. As the affair stood at the first
fail of man: Adam, and all the human race would have been hardened, to his, and
their eternal destruction, if not prevented by a special divine interposition.

2. THE work of redemption by Christ has opened the way to prevent the eternal
destruction of the human kind. But it is ever to be remembered, that the work
Christ finished on the Cross, in itself considered, does make no alteration in
the state of men's minds. The bias of their minds, while unregenerate, is only
in favor of sin. Certainly it is not in favor of holiness: For then there would
be no need of being born again. And our Savior did not prea^^ and inculcate
the truth when he said, "Except a man be born again he cannot see the kingdom
of God." Were the decision, therefore, to be left to men themselves, as the
case now stands, they would determine in favor of sin, of persevering
opposition to God; would reject salvation, unless they might be saved in their
own way, and on their own terms. And truly, the very mercy -- the salvation
itself, holiness being essential thereto and as it were the whole thereof,
would be rejected on whatever terms it might be proposed. And so the
consequence would be no salvation: but destruction to the whole race:
notwithstanding what Christ has done, and suffered to procure redemption.

3. THE way of recovery and salvation by Christ being revealed, offers made,
and calls given to men; Should it be conceded, that some may possibly be
prevailed upon to accept the proposals of the Gospel, without any special
supernatural influence to change their hearts, and captivate them to the
obedience of Christ: Yet, it must be uncertain, whether any would comply. It
might turn out so in event, that Christ should not see his seed; not see of the
travail of his soul, and be satisfied; and might have none finally to present
to his Father. In a word, his death, as to its saving effects, might be wholly
frustrated.

4. THIS will lay us under a necessity of maintaining that God (with awe may it
be spoken) has projected a vague plan -- a plan some of the most important
parts of which are undetermined -- a plan full of ^^certainty -- the event of
which himself could not know before hand; although it is said, "Known unto God
are all his works, from the beginning." For, if there is no certainty who
shall, and who shall not be saved, it cannot be known who shall share the
saving effects of divine mercy. Because the previous certainty of an event is
implied in the knowledge, or foreknowledge of the event. For, to know that an
event shall take place when it is uncertain that it will take place, and may
never take place, is a contradiction in terms. And it is no limitation of
divine knowledge to say, God cannot know that which is unknowable; any more
than it is a limitation of divine power to say, God cannot do that which is
impossible -- that which implies an absurdity. For, as the latter is not the
object of power; so neither is the former the object of knowledge.

5. FROM this view of things it appears to be no ways sitting, that the
determination of the character, and disposal of the eternal state of men should
be left to men themselves; nor to any created beings. And if it were, the
utmost uncertainty and confusion would be the consequence. And as God could not
know what would be the event of things in the system; he might be brought to
vary and shift, to alter and amend; so as to accomodate himself to the fickle
changing humors of creatures. The folly and absurdity of which does clearly
evince, that it belongs to God to determine the character, and dispose of the
eternal state of men according to his own wisdom, and good pleasure.

6. As without this supposition, the system of things is a chaos, without any
consistent design: So when we admit the idea, He has determined, and
ascertained the character, and eternal state of men according to his wise and
holy will; it appears at once, there is order, connection and effect. JEHOVAH
takes, and fills the throne -- acts in character of a glorious independent
sovereign -- has a plan of operation settled -- knows what he is about to
effect -- can speak of things that are eventual, as if they were already in
event -- has the issue so determined as to be liable to no disappointment --
his counsel stands, and he does all his pleasure. Hence,

7. THIS dilemma is unavoidable. Either the Deity has no will, no pleasure
respecting the salvation, and damnation of the individuals of the human race,
or his counsel does not stand; Unless it be true that he has mercy on whom he
will have mercy, and hardens whom he will; as fully and definitively as has
been mentioned.

To say his counsel does not stand, is not only to deny the spirit, and express
letter of the scriptures by a daring contradiction. But is also to affirm in
effect, that "the blessed and only Potentate" is liable to mutation; is
subjected to caprice, multiplied beyond expression; and exposed to experience
and less disappointment.

ON the other hand; to say he has no will, no pleasure respecting the
character and eternal state of men, is as much as to say, he is unconcerned in
regard to what takes place in this part of the system. And we may as well say
he is unconcerned in regard to what takes place in another, and in every other
part of the universal system. Or say he has no system, no plan of operation.
And for any to urge, "That the divine will is conditional. There is nothing
definitively fixed in the divine mind respecting the individuals that shall be
saved, and that shall perish: Only this in general: He is resolved to have
mercy on all who repent, and to harden and destroy all those who remain
impenitent. And this being the sum of his will and counsel: he not only has a
will in the matter; but his counsel must stand, let it fall as it may with the
individuals of the human race." I say, to urge this will afford no relief.
Because repentance is implied in God's having mercy on any, in the sense of the
text; and impenitence continued to the last is implied in his hardening whom he
will. To say God is determined to have mercy on whom he will, less or more, on
supposition they repent; when, at the same time, his having mercy comprises
their repentance on whom he will have mercy. And to say God is dotermined to
harden whom he will, less or more, on supposition they remain impenitent; when
impenitence is what is meant by being hardened, is plainly absurd -- is,
absolutely, saying nothing to the purpose. By this it may be seen, that there
cannot be any conditional decree or determination in the divine mind,
respecting his having mercy on some, and hardening others.

8. THEREFORE on the whole. Since a denial that it belongs to God -- is his
essential prerogative to have mercy on whom he will have mercy, and to harden
whom he will; is so full of weakness, and absurdity. Since there are no other
beings to whom it does or can belong. And since the admission of this sets God
upon the throne; subjecting the materials and the intellectual world, to his
authority and will. And in fine, leads us to see how his own, which are the
wisest and best ends, may be certainly and infallibly accomplished. We ought to
be established in a clear conviction, and full persuasion of this great truth:
That it belongs to God -- is his essential prerogative to determine the
character, and dispose of the eternal state of men; in holiness, and salvation;
or in sin, and damnation, according to his own good pleasure.

THE THIRD PART. Containing answers to objections, and an improvement of the
subject.

I APPREHEND the following are the most considerable objections any can pretend
to advance against what has been stated and urged.

OBJ. I. "THE preceding representation must necessarily be contrary to truth,
and is really chargeable with blasphemy: For it makes God the author of sin."

ANS.1. IF, by author of sin, is meant acting, loving sin, or being a sinner;
to say God is the author of sin would be full of blasphemy. And any scheme any
sentiment fairly implying this, ought to be rejected with the greatest
abhorrence. What has been said upon the subject implies no such thing. It is
not asserted, that God is the creator of sin. It is not said, he wills sin, as
desiring it to take place, for its own sa^e. And the divine agency and disposal
are not concerned in the event, in any such sense, as to render the sinning
creature less to blame than he would be, should sin take place, without any
divine agency and disposal respecting it.

Now when all these ideas are removed, should any insist that God's hardening
whom he will does make him the author of sin; he must be the author of it,
without any thing criminal being implied, or any denial of his infinite
holiness, his absolute perfection, And consequently, without any thing to be
faulted, to be objected against with any really colorable pretext.

2. SINCE the phrase, author of sin, is odious, and calculated to excite the
prejudices of mankind against any doctrine. It may not be uncharitable to
suppose, there are who strenuously insist, that the taking place of sin, and
the damnation of sinners, in consequence of any divine decree and disposal;
makes God the author of sin, and the ruin of his creatures, on purpose to
prejudice the minds of men, against admitting such doctrine. And in event,
against what the scriptures plainly and unequivocally declare, and even urge,
as being essential in the plan of the divine counsels and works.

3. IF to have sin, as an event, comprehended in the divine plan, and such a
disposal of things in the system that a certain number shall be hardened in
wickedness, entirely by their own fault, to their eternal destruction, makes
God the author of sin: Then, that God is the author of sin is implied in what
has been stated and defended. But, what is there in this to disgust an
inquisitive, unprejudiced mind? In this case, it would be a harmless,
misapplied epithet -- misapplied; because the word author is calculated to
convey some other idea, and prejudice the mind against the doctrine -- yet
harmless; because, in reality, it would not imply the imputation of blame, or
any thing wrong on God's part.

4. WILL, the objector insist, "that sin in event was not comprehended in the
divine plan. And that God meant every way as much as possible, to guard against
and prevent such an effect?"

HE may as well say there was no plan, and there is no divine disposal; and
deny there is any such thing as moral evil in the system. But the fact is clear
and indisputable: Sin has taken place, and is constantly taking place in this
world. And it is fact that sin takes place under the divine government. God,
therefore, has not interposed so as to prevent sin taking place.

FROM this it follows. Either first. That God did not design effectually to
prevent sin taking place. Or secondly. That he was not able to accomplish his
own purpose. And certainly, it is too much for any to say he could not possibly
have prevented it. But, if any will insist that he did design to prevent it,
and has failed in accomplishing his purpose. Then it will follow thirdly. That
he is disappointed. Because disappointment consists in this very thing, a
rational being not reaching, not accomplishing his intention and expectation.
Moreover, the disappointment, in this case, must needs be great, vastly
ineffably great. So that, according to this doctrine the counsel of God,
instead of standing, is broken and destroyed in instances and ways innumerable.

5. IT will not avail any thing to say, "That, although sin was not
comprehended in God's original plan; and it has taken place contrary to his
intention and will in every view: Yet, upon the taking place of sin, in his
unsearchable wisdom, he has devised a method to defeat the sinner; to
vindicate and establish his character and government most fully and most
gloriously; and in the end gain by disappointment, of which sin is the
occasion, in the frustration of his original plan and scheme of things." For
this in effect would be a denial of his eternal existence, and absolute
perfection; a denial of his omniscience, omnipotence, and immutability. For, if
something has taken place which he did not comprehend before, he cannot be
"the high and losty One that inhabiteth eternity." And if he has changed his
original plan he must be a metable being; and not that father of lights -- that
fountain of knowledge, excellence, power and glory "with whom is no
variableness, neither shadow of turning." This therefore, is a futile impious
evasion; full of atheism and blasphemy.

6. IT is evident that the work of redemption is more glorious than any, than
all the other works of God. In the contrivance and execution of which there is
the clearest and fullest exhibition of the divine character. Also the display
of perfection therein to be made, and the good thereby to be produced, was the
ultimate end of creation. Now to deny this was comprehended in the divine plan
is to deny, that the most illustrious display of perfection, and that in
reference, and some sort of subservience to which all other divine works are
done, was comprehended therein. Which is a weakness, and an absurdity too gross
to be admitted a single moment. But, if the work of redemption was comprehended
in the divine plan sin was comprehended therein: because the work of redemption
supposes, and necessarily implies sin. For without sin there would have been no
room, no need of atonement for sin. If there had been no sinners, lost
perishing creatures, in the nature of the case, there could be no savior of
sinners. If God had not been dishonored his character could not be vindicated
by the obedience, and death of Christ. There would have been no opportunity for
the united, and contrasted display of vindictive justice, and redeeming meray.
Therefore, by excluding sin in event from (...) comprehended in the divine
plan, we exclude (...). In a word, we must turn atheists; and a(...) whatsoever
takes place to chance, or blind sat; lest by admitting a providence, and
foresight we should make God the author of sin. And when we have done this, all
talk of sin and moral evil will be vain and foolish.

OBJ. II. ACCORDING to what has been advanced "it is necessary that some
should be hardened to their destruction. If so, liberty is destroyed; men are
mere machines; and there can be no reason to impute guilt and blame to them."

ANS. 1. I THROW several ideas and different expressions into this objection;
because they seem to be united, and will stand or fall together. For, if men
are moved and acted like a wind mill, or a watch, there is no liberty -- no
moral agency. And if there is no liberty, and moral agency doubtless men are
not to blame; and there can be no reason to impute guilt when they commit, what
are called, the grossest crimes. And finally, the doctrine of a natural
absolute necessity and fatality must be admitted. But none of these horrid
consequences do follow from this position, He hardens whom he will. Men are
not machines, are not acted like machines when they are hardened in sin: For
they are voluntary, they move and act of choic^ Whereas in a mere machine there
is no volition, (...) acted upon; but does not act, does not put forth any
exertion. There is then, an essential difference. A mere machine cannot
exercise liberty, cannot be to blame; because it has no design, no volition.
But God in hardening sinners does not influence them in any such manner, as to
prevent sin being their own act -- or to prevent their actins of choice. And
because they act voluntarily, respecting that which is evil and make the evil
their own, they are to blame, are wholly without excuse. Sinners are not
compelled to do wickedly. Whatever extrinsic influence there may be in the
production of volition it is not of the nature of compulsion. For we mean by
compulsion, that power which effects a thing against, or at least, without our
will and consent. But there is nothing of this. Neither has it been maintained
that God infuseth hardness into men. There is no necessity, therefore, of mens'
sinning at all, and remaining under the power of lust, of any such kind as will
exculpate them; as will extenuate their sin and guilt in the lowest degree, by
taking away their liberty.

2. THE most hardened sinners are, to all intents, moral agents and
accountable; because they act freely. And the more hardened they are the other
criminal; because this is no more than voluntarily and freely acting wickedness
to a higher degree.

3. ALTHOUGH there is, in some sense, a necessity of being hardened when it is
said, "Whom he will he hardens" i. e. a necessity of a moral kind -- a
certainty: yet this is no such necessity as is opposed to liberty. The greatest
certainty or moral necessity may be consistent with the highest liberty. It is
necessary God should act in a holy manner; yet he acts with the most perfect
freedom. And there is a certainty that the glorified saints will be holy and
happy forever; by which their liberty, their moral agency will not be
destroyed, or infringed; but confirmed, and exalted.

OBJ. III. "THE sentence, Whom he will he hardens as it has been stated,
implies a denial of the divine holiness. For the moral law is a transcript of
the divine perfections; discovers the heart -- the will and pleasure of the
Deity. He there forbids sin upon pain of his eternal displeasure, and
represents it to be that abominable thing which his soul abhors. But, if sin
was comprehended in his plan and disposal of things it must be agreeable to his
mind that sin should take place. And it is false to say, He is of purer eyes
than to behold iniquity: for he must, according to this doctrine, behold it
with complacency rather than abhorrence; because it is hischoice and the
consequence of his disposals.

ANS. 1. IF the sentiment which has been advanced does really imply a denial,
or any repugnancy to the holiness of the Deity, it ought to be rejected.
Certainly God is a holy being, infinitely holy. With the greatest propriety do
Seraphim, and Cherubim cry, "Holy, holy, holy is the LORD of hosts." So that no
sentiment that denies God's essential infinite purity is to be endured 2
moment. Also, sin is diametrically opposite to holiness -- is what God must
necessarily hate with perfect detestation. Evil does not, cannot dwell with him.

2. THERE is no denial of holiness in saying, God wills the event; or wills not
effectually to prevent sin taking place, and disposes things so as not
effectually to prevent it. Indeed this is so far from implying a denial of
holiness, that his will and disposal in reference to sin is entirely holy -- is
done in the exercise of his infinite purity. And his perfect hatred of sin
itself is implied therein. For,

3. A DISTINCTION is to be made between God's preceptive, and decretive
providential will. The Bible teaches us to make such a distinction. And it is
necessary to reconcile what otherwise might appear to be irreconcilable. A
distinction of this kind is evidently implied in what is said, respecting the
conduct of Jos;eph's brethren, in selling him to the Ishmaelites -- In what is
said respecting the king of Assyria -- and the part the Jews acted in the
crucifixion of Christ.

Now were sin in event as contrary to the decretive and providential, as sin
itself is to the preceptive will of God; we may be sure it never would take
place, on supposition there was no possibility of preventing it. And to say
there was no possibility is to limit the divine power. But God certainly could
prevent it, if no other way, by withholding existence. And this he no doubt
would do rather than sin should take place, were sin in event, as contrary to
his providential, as it is to his preceptive will.

4. WHATSOEVER takes place through the system from beginning to end, takes
place in consistence with the decretive and providential will of God; but sin
takes place in perfect ^^nosition to his preceptive will. From which it does
not follow, that the decree is in repugnance to the command -- it does not
follow, that God's will in the former case opposes his holy will in the latter
-- it does not follow that God has two wills thwarting each other. Were there
a real opposition insisting on the distinction would run us into the Manichean
heresy, or what would be as gross. And would even amount to a denial of divine
existence. For God is one and ever consistent with himself in all he purposes,
faith and does. Let me add,

5. THERE may be a clear ground for distinction where there is no opposition.
Order and harmony imply distinction; but no opposition, So that while the
exercise of one and the same, will of the Deity is distinguished, it is and may
appear, even to our understandings, perfectly harmonious.

HERE it may be urged. "Sin is in full opposition to the preceptive will of
God. And it appears that his preceptive will is holy; because it forbids, and
by forbidding opposes sin. But the providential will of God, as allowed above,
is in favor of sin taking place. Now if this does not imply a contradiction,
What does or can? For, if that will which forbids sin be holy, that will which
decrees and gives it event must be unholy."

REPLY. THERE is no opposition. The will of Deity in both is perfectly holy:
For, although God determined not to prevent the taking place of sin, and does
dispose things in the system so as not effectually to prevent it; and the
certain consequence of his not preventing it is, that sin does take place by
the creatures fault: Yet his decretive providential will is not at all in favor
of sin itself; does not imply a disposition to be pleased with sin or any the
least approbation of it; but the contrary. Sin is considered by God, in his
decree and providence relative to it, as being perfectly evil and hateful. And
as such by him to be opposed. Perhaps the matter may be rendered more
intelligible, and satisfactory to some, by expressing it thus. The will of
Deity, in his decree and disposal of things relative to sin, does not fix upon
and cleave to sin, as its object. Properly speaking sin is not the object in
view; the object, strictly speaking, is that which the mind rests upon -- that
which is ultimate. The divine mind does not terminate on sin; but his own
glory, and the final establishment and reign of holiness to be accomplished,
through his overruling wisdom and providence, by occasion of sin taking place.
And as the advancement of holiness, and the divine glory were ultimate in his
decreeing sin, and in all the disposals of his providence relatively to it: So
his decretive providential will, must be perfectly holy, and entirely
concordant with his preceptive will.

SHOULD any, hoping to evade, or greatly embarrass this reply, ask, "Why may
not God command his creatures to sin with a view to his own glory, and the
advancement of holiness; as well as decree sin in event with such a view? Also,
Why may not creatures commit sin, they having the same thing in view, that God
is said to have in decreeing it -- to give him occasion by their opposition
eventually to honor himself, and establish holiness? And in sine, Why may not
sinners express their good will in sinning, as it is insisted God expresses his
good will in permitting sin to take place?"

To all that can be urged in any such line this will be a sufficient rejoinder.
That Paul has obviated and repelled with indignation a similar insinuation, as
if it were a just consequence from the doctrine lie had advanced. See Romans III.
7.8.

MOREOVER, it is a plain absurdity, a manifest contradiction. The case stated
or supposed, in the above queries, destroys itself. For in sinning the love of
evil is implied: But none can love evil, which necessarily implies the hatred
of good, an overlion to holiness, with an ultimate view to that good -- that
holiness -- To say this is an evident contradiction: Whereas in God's decreeing
sin, and his disposal of things no love of evil is implied; but a perfect
hatred thereof, and a determination to counteract its bad tendency. and bring
good out of evil. Or thus. Creatures in sinning ultimately regard themselves.
This essentially belongs to the idea, the true description of sin. Now it is a
contradiction to say creatures may ultimately regard themselves, with an
ultimate view to the glory of God. And it is equally absurd to say, God may
require creatures ultimately to regard themselves, in a view to their
ultimately regarding or glorifying himself, in that very regard they bear to
themselves.

OBJ. IV. "If God has mercy on whom he will, and hardens whom he will, in
the sense which has been stated, he is the most tyrannical being in the
universe: For it represents him as exercising an odious partiality in his
treatment of his creatures -- As making a multitude of rational beings on
purpose to damn them. And as acting manifest injustice and cruelty in his
disposal of things."

ANS. SUCH kind of language, which many are free to use under the notion of
discrediting God's sovereignty in his decree and disposal of things, is
calculated to fire the imagination, and inflame the passions; but not to
convince the reason and conscience. The doctrine itself, rightly understood, is
not calculated to excite such ideas, or prompt men to use such language, And it
greatly behooves those who do not admit the doctrine to take heed how they pass
their censures upon doctrines, too plainly revealed in the Scriptures to be
questioned with propriety, much less to be denied and ridiculed; lest they
should be found fighters against God. -- If this may not be taken as sufficient
to refute the objection, which in what has been said, is viewed rather as a
cavil than a serious objection. Let me answer,

1. THE subject above stated and vindicated represents God as being an awful,
infinitely amiable and glorious sovereign: But not a tyrant; Not a respecter of
persons, as this character is given to denote something wrong and mean in the
conduct of a judge. And not exercising the least injustice and cruelty.

SOME in their minds seem to blend sovereignty, and tyranny. With them, to act
in a sovereign manner is the same as to act without reason and propriety; or
rather against reason and justice. And they may have been led to blend these
together, by considering what commonly is exhibited in the character of those
who take the style of earthly sovereigns and potentates. Odious tyranny and
despotism, the greatest injustice and cruelty being exercised by them, in
sporting with the fortunes and lives of men to gratify their pride and
ambition. But were it allowed, that there is no propriety in calling any mortal
advanced to a throne a sovereign. And should all who are so called prove
tyrants, this would not make sovereignty and tyranny the same: Because the
abuse of sovereignty does not make sovereignty to be the same with tyranny.
Therefore, if any are used to blend these together, it is owing to their
weakness or prejudice. God is an absolute sovereign. This is no other than to
say, He has an original inalienable right and propriety in all things to
dispose of them as he pleases. Not indeed that he ma^^^ his pleasure the
principle and law of his conduct toward his creatures in that sense, the great
ones of the earth make their will their law; which is to trample on the rights
and privileges of others, because it is in the power of their hands to do so,
without any consideration of wisdom, or regard to justice. But God does and
there is perfect propriety he should determine who shall be the objects of his
favor, and who the subjects of his wrath according to his own wisdom and
pleasure, without asking counsel of any. And it is utterly improper any
creature should say, What do thon? or why do thou so?

2. IN making one man unto honor and another unto dishonor, there is not the
shadow of injustice. This might be ur^^d with good reason if God had, or should
d^^^e men to destruction without any consideration of their (...) and should
i(...) a great punishment than they deserve. But this is not, and never will
be done. By what has been said I trust it appears: That men are no less
criminal in the commission of sin, than they would be, were there no decree and
divine disposal relative to sin in envent. And as the misery to be brought upon
the finally impenitent will not exceed their just deserts, no injustice (...)
be done to them whom he hardens. On the o(...)d; justice will be glorified in
their punishment (...) destruction.

"WHA therefore if God willing to show his wrath, and make his power known on
the vessels of wrath fitted to destruction" by their own demerit, "and endured
with much long suffering." What complaint or objection can be reasonably made?
Surely none.

3. As no injustice; so no cruelty will be exercised. Cruelty is a disposition
to wound and grieve without, cause; a disposition to delight and sport with the
misery of others. No such narrow revengefulness of disposition will be
exercised by God in making the vessels of wrath suffer amazing, endless misery.
It is true, God will take pleasure in himself glorified; in order, and the
reign of holiness established and increased by means of their torment; but not
in their torment itself. God will certainly inflict endless punishment upon
finally impenitent sinners: Yet he does not delight in the death of snners. "He
has sworn by his own life, that he delights not in the death of him that
dies." He is induced to punish them by considerations of wisdom, propriety,
justice and necessity. Or because it is important they should be destroyed; and
on the whole, all things considered, most desirable.

4. HARDESING some, and saving others does not make God to be a respecter of
persons, in the sense the Scripture says He is no respecter of persons. The
sentiment advanced is not denied by saying, "In every nation he that fears
God, and works rightcousness is accepted with him:" Because it is true, that
they in every nation on whom God has mercy do, or will fear him, and work
righteousness.

WHEN a judge favors one and condemns another contrary to the law, the rule by
which characters, well and ill deserving are to be decided, and sentence to
pass; for instance when he passes sentence from repossession, or some wrong
bias, as being nearly related, or having received a bribe, he is a respecter of
persons, is guilty of a mean odious partiality. So; if God should bestow his
mercy on one merely because he is a Jew, and refuse it to another because he is
a Gentile, the Gentile having the same qualification with the Jew by complying
with the condition required. And more evidently and eminently still, the
Gentile complying, and the Jew refusing a compliance. He would then be a
respecter of persons in a truly objectionable sense.

Now, although for a judge to act as has been represented would imply a
criminal partiality: Yet the same person, or any other not a judge, having an
estate and no natural heir, might select one, or a few just as he should
please, on whom to confer his estate; and no one would have a right to tax him
with being a respecter of persons, because he did not bequeath it to all
without discrimination. And if such a prerogative is allowed to men, in respect
to what they possess, and call their own, shall not God bestow his special
favors on whom he pleases, without the imputation of being an odious respecter
of persons?

OBJ. V. "THE subject, as it has been stated and defended, makes God to act in
a trifling insincere manner, and impose upon men in the calls and offers of the
Gospel. Because he appears to express great kindness and tenderness toward
sinners, willing rather that they should turn and live; when he is determined,
at the same time, to withhold his saving mercy from multitudes, and make them
monuments of his eternal wrath.

WHAT possible kindness and sincerity can there be in offering salvation to
any, except those on whom he (...) mercy? And why may it not with propriety be
deem^d Indicrous to invite and urge ALL to come? using language to which
carries the appearance of pather and zeal, and proceeding so far as to beseech
sinne^s to be reconciled; when by an unfrustrable decree (...) has excluded
from a share in his saving mercy, (...) may be the greater part of those, to
whom he make^ the proposal and gives the invitations, so warmly and
pathetically urged and enforced? And is determined that they shall be hardened
to their eternal destruction?"

ANS. 1. GOD is perfectly sincere in the offers he makes and the invitations he
gives to sinners. He is as serious, sincere and kind in making the offer of
salvation to those who do not and never will accept, as he is, in making it to
those who do accept. And his having mercy on whom he will, and hardening whom
he will does not militate against this in the least. God does not trifle with
sinners when he invites them to accept of salvation, any more than he does when
he commands men to be holy as he is holy. His calls and invitations are
authoritative; they point out what is good, and in itself desirable. This
implies, that he is as willing all should comply with his calls, as he is, that
all should obey him. God looks upon himself really and greatly slighted,
dishonored and undervalued by their refusal. And that he has good reason to
dislike and punish the ill treatment of those who scornfully, and obstinately
reject them. Therefore,

2. I SAY again, the sentiment advanced does not militate against the divine
sincerity at all: Because the sentiment has no concern with the calls and
offers of the Gospel, in the sense put upon them by the objector. They are
distinct things. It is sufficient to vindicate the divine sincerity, that God
stands ready to fulfill and bestow what is set forth in the calls and offers he
gives and makes, on supposition they are complied with by sinners: For this is
clear and certain, "Whosoever will, may come; and him that comes Christ will
in no wise cast out." There is no decree or divine disposal to prevent their
coming if they will, if they are cordially inclined to come. And being, (...)
re^^^ning unwilling (...) entirely their own fault.

PERHAPS some will urge; "that he^e lies the difficulty. Sinners are unwilling.
God knows they are, and must continue so, unless, in the day of his power, he
makes them willing, What kin^ness and sincerity then can there be in making
offers, giving invitations, and using entreaties; when he knows they will, and
has determined they shall be rejected?

REPLY. 1. THERE is the sa^e kindness and sincerity as if God knew the offers
would be most cordially accepted. And his having mercy on some, by disposing
them to accept, is a distinct thing, and superadded to the calls and offers
themselves. Therefore, although it is readily conceded, that much greater
kindness is exercised by God toward those on whom he has mercy, by making
them willing in the day of his power, than toward those who are not made
willing: Yet this greater mercy is not exercised in the calls that are given,
the offers that are made; but in respect to the offers, and the arguments used
to induce a compliance, there is precisely the same kindness and sincerity
toward all.

2. GOD might be sincere in making the offer to all on supposition none did,
and not one ever should accept it. Even as he is sincere, serious and earnest
in requiring the subjection and obedience of all those who are in a state of
unregeneracy; although none in that state do yield any cordial subjection and
obedience to his commands, and he knows perfectly well that they will not.
Also, their not doing it is as much the result of the divine decree and
disposal, as hardening whom he will to their destruction is the result of his
decree and disposal. Therefore,

3. WE may as well say, God acts sarcastically, and tantalizes his creatures
when he requires their subjection and obedience, they being and remaining
indisposed to yield obedience, as that he does so when he makes offers, they
being indisposed to accept them. Now this is as much as to say. The will, the
inclination of creatures is the measure of their obedience. If they have no
inclination to obey, there is no reason they should be required to obey. And
this again is as much as to say. Every creature ought to do as he pleases, and
God has no right to exercise any authority; and if he pretends to do it he
treats them in a ludicrous abusive manner, and they have good reason to
complain and find fault. But,

4. WHO art thou that thus reply against God? Let thy mouth be stopped; or
surely, thou shall be most justly condemned.

OBJ. VI. "THIS is a gloomy uncomfortable doctrine calculated to lead men;
especially awakened sinners to despair: Or else to stifle their convictions.
The natural tendency of it is to render means and endeavors vain and useless.
For, if it is not of him that wills, nor of him that runs: If the
unregenerate may not lay any claim to saving mercy after all their most painful
seekings and strivings: If there is a certain number on whom God will have
mercy, and a certain number whom he will harden to their destruction -- to what
purpose can it be to seek and strive? Each sinner may say. If I am to be saved,
I shall be saved, and if I am to perish I shall perish, let my exertions be as
they may. And since it is not left with men to determine their own character,
and ascertain their eternal state; but it hangs on a decree and disposal which
they cannot frustrate; let them stand still, and see what God means to do,
whether to save or to damn; and give themselves no exercise and concern about
that which does not belong to them; and which to say that it does belong to
them implies a denial of God's essential, inalie^able prerogative."

ANS. 1. IT is true, that the doctrine is calculated to lead men to despair of
help from themselves; and to see the vanity of priding themselves in those
distinctions, in which mankind are exceedingly disposed to glory. To shut out
all boasting, and make men know that salvation is of God alone. It is true
according to this doctrine, and many other things revealed in the Holy Book,
that the unregenerate do not, and cannot lay God under any obligation to save
them, by their exertions. Nor will any of their exertions render their
salvation certain. Their salvation, if they are saved, will not be the proper
fruit of their exertions; but wholly the effect of sovereign mercy. So that,
this doctrine being true, men must be brought to renounce dependence on
themselves altogether, and submit to divine sovereignty.

2. ALL this notwithstanding; the doctrine is so far from being gloomy, and
calculated to drive men, particularly awakened sinners to despair, that it is
their only proper source and ground of hope. It is the hinge, on which the door
turns from despair to a ray of hope. For were it not so, that God has mercy on
whom he will have mercy there would be no hope at all. Or whatever expectations
might be raised, would be no other than deceiving presumptions. It is most
fallacious and preposterous for sinners to think they can, by their doings,
confer any obligation upon God, and recommend themselves as worthy of his
regard. The unregenerate do not remove; nor lessen their guilt by their
exertions. Therefore, if God could, or would not exercise his saving mercy,
unless by their strivings unregenerate sinners should recommend themselves to
his favor; there absolutely would be no ground of hope; their case would be
remediles^ly desperate.

BUT since the way is open for God to have mercy on whom he will have mercy;
sinners whose minds are exercised about their eternal concerns need not
despair. They are in the hand of a holy and (...); yet merciful being. God can
save them; it m(...)e he will. And although they find that they have sinned
exceedingly; find themselves ever so guilty, ill and hell-deserving; yet God
can, and it may be, he will have mercy upon and save them. Add to this,

3. IF any are awakened, and solicitously inquiring after God and salvation, it
is more probable ^^at saving mercy is intended for them; than if they were not
awakened and inquiring. And more probable; than that it is intended for others
who are going on carelessly and daringly in ways of impiety. Because; before
God visits sinners with saving mercy, he is wont to bring them into an
exercising situation. And if any continue to give themselves no concern about
their souls, and obtaining salvation, it is a token of dereliction.

4. THERE is not the least ground from the doctrine to say, If we are to be
saved we shall be saved let us live as we may, and whether we take any pains or
not. Because repentance, faith, and obedience are implied in, or will certainly
follow the exercise of saving mercy, whenever it is bestowed upon any. And it
is palpably absurd to say, If God purposes to have mercy on such an one he
will have mercy upon him, although he should remain careless and impenitent,
and continue to live in wickedness to the last; because repentance is comprised
in God's having mercy. For this would be to assert, and at the same time deny
his having mercy, in the sense intended.

5. THAT any may on good ground be persuaded they are the subjects of saving
mercy, they must find, must experience those exercises and effects, which the
Scriptures state, as what will proceed therefrom. Such as humility, faith, self
denial and obedience. They must live in the exercise of the graces, and
practice of the virtues and duties of Christianity. We are to make our calling
and election sure by adding to our faith virtue, Knowledge, temperance,
patience, godliness, brotherly kindness and charity. Finally, they who have any
experience of God's saving mercy are, from the doctrine vindicated (...), as
well as (...) of (...) incited "to work out their own salvation with fear and
trembling," by this most pertinent, and weigl^y argument. "It is God which
(...) in you, both to will and to do of his own good pleasure!"

Improvement.
I. FROM what has been argued and illustrated in the proceeding discourse we
may learn the (...) and futility of the objections, commonly advanced, against
the divine decrees. And that decree, in particular, whereby a certain number of
mankind were from eternity ordained to everlasting life, called the decree of
election.

THE doctrine of an eternal decree, in a general view, is discarded by many.
Barely to mention an eternal irrevocable decree fires their indignation; and
more especially to men^ion and in^st upon the decree of election. If God,
according to the counsel of his own will from eternity, did choose a certain
number in Christ and appoint them to obtain salvation and pass by the rest; and
that number will be saved, and the rest perish. Then say they: "He must be a
hateful respecter of persons, one who exercises partiality, injustice and
cruelty: Must have a des^g. ^o make creatures on purpose to damn them, and
sport with their misery and destruction: Must be the author of their sin and
destruction: Events are unalterably fixed beforehand: and being fixed there can
be no liberty in respect to choosing and acting: Men are machines, and ought
not to be blamed: The old heathenish doctrine of fate is palmed upon the Bible:
A great part of mankind have no chance for their lives: And, it is as much in
vain for men to seek and strive and exert themselves, as it is to attempt to
alter immutability itself. In a word, Men are chained down by an ^^^^^trable
decree; The divine government is an exercise of the most o^^ous tyranny: And it
is not reasonable, nor po^^ible to love a being of such a character."

IT is in a (...) way of (...), that such consequences are drawn, and turned
into objections against the divine decree, in general, and that of election, in
particular. They are, most if not all of them illogical, unfounded, vain and
impious. Werethere a real ground for such objections from any quarter (and most
certainly there is not,) it is evident they are not with the least propriety
drawn from and pointed against the divine decree. For if the arrangement and
disposal of things in the manner they are actually arranged and disposed of in
the system be not faulty, be not really objectionable; a decree to arrange and
dispose of them in such manner can by no means be blameworthy. If the divine
providence can be vindicated, in respect to things taking place, as they do in
fact take place, a divine decree preordaining the taking place of things as
they do take place, will be vindicated of course; for the former is a full
unanswerable vindication of the latter. Neither can eternal annexed to the
decree be any real objection. It is no more contrary to human liberty; no more
the exercise of partiality, injustice, and tyranny to choose one, and pass by
another, in a decree from eternity; than to have done it only a thousand years
ago; or even a day, an hour, a moment before the event does actually take
place. Besides, to object to the eternity of the decree is, in effect, to
object to the eternity of God himself. Whatsoever he resolved must be from
eternity; unless he is a mutable being.

THEREFORE, if men will object, let them point their objections, not against
the decree; but against facts. Let (...) fault the system; and not the divine
determination to produce, and order it as it is produced and ordered. And
evince, that such a system in the final issue is not a good one -- I say, in
the final issue. For we are prone to judge by a part, and not the whole, and it
is true, we are not able to comprehend the whole; yet the issue is so stated in
the Scriptures, as that we may know in some good measure what it will be, and
judge by it now. In the light of God's Holy Word, if not in the light of the
preceding discourse, it may be very safely ass^med, that the objections
commonly advanced against the divine decrees, are vain and impious. Drive them
through; and it may be clearly perceived that they center in this, "The fool
has said in his heart -- no God."

II. WE may learn the obligation men are under to admit the doctrine which
teaches, that God is a sovereign in the highest sense, an absolute sovereign.

WHAT I intend by absolute sovereign, and what I apprehend has been generally
meant is, that God has an original right and propriety in all things, to
dispose of them as he pleases. And in regard to mankind to dispose of them as
he pleases. In ^^ing a sovereign and acting as an absolute sovereign, were
there, implied a disposition to act blindly, unwisely, rashly, and unjustly, it
would be altogether improper to call God a sovereign; because it is contrary to
infinite perfection that he should act so, in any instance. But that God who is
infinitely wise, holy just and good, who is the creator of all things, and the
high possessor of heaven and earth, should dispose of all creatures as he
pleases, is perfectly fit and suitable. To act as an absolute sovereign is to
act in character; and should he act otherwise, he would, act beneath himself,
and not like God over all. His sovereignty is necessary; and no more to be
relinquished than his Godhead and Lordship. So that for any to deny this
prerogative is, in effect, to deny the divinity.

THEREFORE it is not a mere ceremony, an empty name and title. And it is by no
means a matter of but small moment, whether we allow him this character or not.
But the question with many will be, how far we are to conceive the sovereignty
of the divine being does extend: And particularly whether it belongs to God, as
an essential inalienable prerogative, to determine the character, and dispose
of the eternal state of men according to his own wisdom and good pleasure. Here
many will admit no such thing as a divine determination and disposal, except it
be merely conditional, insisting that it is left with men themselves to
determine their own character, and fix their own eternal state. Now to deny God
the exercise of sovereignty, in regard to this, is to deny him the exercise of
that glorious prerogative, in one of the most illustrious displays of it. And
it is certain, that he has asserted his sovereignty in respect to this, as
fully and unequivocally, as he has in regard to any point whatsoever. He
faith, "I will have mercy on whom I will have mercy, and I will have compassion
on whom I will have compassion. It is not of him that wills, nor of him that
runs, but of God that shows mercy. Therefore, has he mercy on whom he
will have mercy, and whom he will be hardens. Has not the potter power over
the clay, of the same lump to make one vessel unto honor, and another unto
dishonor! What if God willing to show his wrath, and to make his power known,
endured with much long suffering the vessels of wrath fitted to destruction;
and that he might make known the riches of his glory on the vessels of mercy,
which he had before prepared unto glory? And not only the Holy Scriptures, but
the dictates of unbiased reason also clearly evince the truth of this great
doctrine. To establish your minds in a conviction and persuasion of this truth
has been one principal design of the foregoing discourse. May I not with
propriety, as a deduction therefrom, call for your assent? And urge that you do
not persist in making opposition to the doctrine? For certainly, it is a
doctrine of great importance, and not to be opposed without extreme hazard.
This is a prerogative -- a part of the divine glory, which God will not give to
another.

III. WE may learn the importance not only of assenting to the doctrine of
divine sovereignty, but also, of being cordially reconciled to it.

IT is not sufficient that we assent (...) it as true; it is also necessary
that we consent to it as right and good. A distinction is to be made between
assent of mind, and consent of heart. The reason and conscience may be
convinced, while the heart ^oth not approve. Although distaste, disappro^ation
of heart has a tendency to blind, and warp the reason and conscience, (men
being with difficulty made to believe, what they do not love should be true:)
Yet light and evidence may be so clear and cogent, as to engage an assent of
the mind. Although they fain would, men may not be able, to gainsay some
disagreeable truths. The hearts of sinners are opposed to an acknowledgment of
the justice of God, in that sentence of his law which is annexed to
transgression: Yet conviction may be so powerful as to make it stand clear in
their consciences, that it would be just in God to execute the sentence upon
them. The wicked at the day of judgment will without doubt be fully convinced
of the truth and justice of that sentence. "Then every objecting mouth shall be
stopped, and all the world shall become guilty before God."

Now as the doctrine is not only true, but also exceedingly important, wherein
the divine character and honor are very nearly and deeply interested and
concerned, we ought both firmly to believe, and cordially to embrace it. None
ought to view themselves as being truly reconciled to God, unless they are
reconciled to his holy sovereignty. Or to what is really implied in his
sovereign authority and uncontrollable dominion. By the influence of insensible
prejudice and mistake some may possibly dislike the term, and yet heartily
approve the thing intended. If any are in this predicament, I should be
disposed to embrace them with cordiality; looking upon them mistaken, and not
stubborn. But there is reason to apprehend that a great, if not the greater
part of those who object to the doctrine, do it from real distaste and hatred.
They cannot bear the Deity should be represented as clothed with such
sovereign authority and power. They choose to take the throne themselves rather
than bow and submit to him who is, by natural and essential right, "King of
kings and lord of lords." They resent with acrimony the idea of God's
determining the character, and disposing of the eternal state of men as he
pleases. They who do thus are the enemies of God.

SHOULD it be urged, "that by this stroke, many of the most amiable character
and engaging behavior are cut off, and in effect doomed to destruction. Many
civil, serious persons: and constant in their attendance on divine
institutions; in meditation and prayer, in reading and hearing the word."

To this it may be answered; that for any to wish needlessly to cut off, or
disturb persons of such a description would argue a very base rancorous
disposition: but if the truth does cut them off, they must be cut off. And it
would be the greatest kindness to make them sensible, that they must be finally
cut off and sent to hell, unless an essential alteration does take place in the
frame of their minds. It is sadly true, that among the civil and externally
well behaved, too many do disrelish and reject such doctrine. And it is also
true, that morality, as it is commonly called, never did, and never will save
any man. Let it be valued as highly, as in any consistence with reason and
Scripture it can be done; still something else, something farther is absolutely
necessary. Who more virtuous and well behaved, in the common acceptance of
such words, than the young ruler mentioned by the Evangelists? Yet he refused
to accept the self-denying proposal made to him by our savior. All
self-righteous persons are opposed to the sovereignty of God; and many of them
have a very amiable exterior: But this does not render their insubmission less
criminal or less dangerous.

SHOULD it be urged on the other hand, "That among the licentious and
prostigate there are to be found, not a few, who will patronize such doctrine."

IN regard to such it may be replied; that although they abuse, they do not
prove the doctrine to be untrue; nor to be, in itself considered, of a bad
tendency. All the doctrines, pertaining to the glorious grace of God in the
salvation of men by Christ, are apt to be abused by sinners; but let them turn
the grace of God into lasciviousness, as they may, and many do, the doctrines
stand firm, and unshaken notwithstanding.

IT may and ought to be asserted, in respect to all, who through real hatred
make attempts to evade, and all, who directly oppose the doctrine of divine
sovereignty, that they are not reconciled to God; are not his true friends; are
not in favor with him; but are, in very deed his enemies, and obnoxious to his
wrath, how high soever their hopes may be raised; and how sanguine soever their
confidence of obtaining eternal life may be. Men are as far from faith in
Christ, and obtaining salvation as they are from embracing the doctrine of
divine sovereignty, in its just extent.

IV. WE may infer, that want of submission to God's sovereignty, and the
objections (...) his uncontrollable dominion must be owing (...) that is
criminal, and very wrong.

SOME pretend a high regard to Deity, and concern for the honor of the divine
Majesty; and may be ready to say, "by all the regard we owe a Deity, and moral
governor such doctrine ought to be rejected." And I am not about to deny their
sincerity. But that men do not embrace the doctrine must be owing to their
^^ruption, their pride, their selfishness. Many are insensible what it is to be
creatures; what it is to be sinners. That spirit of self dependence, self
importance, gods half self-made so much cultivated by mankind is a disgrace to
human nature. God will, and ought to be exalted: Men are disposed to exalt
themselves. And in this lies a main point of controversy between God and men.
Their high thoughts, and reasoning imaginations prevent a compliance with the
proposals made to them in the word of God. These must be brought into sweet
captivity to the obedience of the Gospel of Christ, else salvation cannot be
obtained.

V. WE may learn what is necessary to remove objections from the hearts of men,
and effect a real reconciliation to God.

IT is not to be effected by making men persuaded in the first place, that
their sins are forgiven; that Christ died for them in particular; that the
divine mercy has been, or will be directed toward them in distinction from
others; that God has the same partial fondness for them they have for
themselves. If is not to be effected by their doing those things, the doing of
which they trust, will recommend them to the divine acceptance and favor.
Neither is it to be effected by the proposal of arguments and motives, most
apposite and weighty, and by these working upon those springs and principles in
the unregenerate which are unconnected with real holiness. Their selfishness
remaining in its full strength will forever prevent a reconciliation, men must
become meek, humble, benevolent. With such a disposition they will be led to
see and feel, that "it is every way proper and fit, the government and disposal
of all creatures and things should be, and remain in the hands of infinite
wisdom, power and goodness." All this is to say, that to effect a real cordial
reconciliation men "must be born again -- born, not of blood, nor of the will
of the flesh, nor of the will of man, BUT OF GOD."

VI. THE subject presents a criterion by which men may try themselves, and come
to know what manner of spirit they are of, know their true character and state.

THE Scriptures draw the line which separates friends from foes with sufficient
clearness and exactness. It is true many flatter themselves that they are
reconciled to God, who most certainly are not. But this seems to be principally
owing to their drawing a wrong character of Deity in their minds, which they
call God, and because they are pleased with the character they have drawn, and
falsely applied, they imagine they are reconciled to God, and accepted to favor
with him. Were we to go through the world, and state the claims of JEHOVAH;
draw his titles properly, and assert his authority and dominion, in their
fullness and extent; we should not find very many doubting and halting. A great,
if not the greater part would object and find fault. As we are in regard to
relishing and approving the true character of God; so are we in reality; so are
we in respect to our true character and state.

THEREFORE, let every of us apply the subject by a careful examination. Let
each one put the question to himself seriously and closely. Am I reconciled to
the divine character? to the holy sovereignty of God? Does it seem proper, and
fit that he should have mercy on whom he will have mercy, and harden to their
eternal destruction whom he will? And do I find myself willing to submit all to
his arbitrament without any reservation?

"SHOULD any ask, what is intended by All?" I answer, Our lives, our
circumstances on earth, and the vast concernments of eternity.

AT this ^^me may boggle and start. "What submit our eternal concerns to the
divine decision. Perhaps he will not have mercy upon me, may one and another
say, but pour his vengeance upon my devoted head. Submit to this! I will not. I
cannot. It is the same as being willing to be damned, which none can, no one
ought to be."

IF being willing to suffer the damnation of hell is implied in a true
submission and reconciliation to God; such willingness would certainly be
right, fit and necessary. I have not said it is implied; neither do I suppose
that it is. To me it is a very uncouth phrase. The damned will be the eternal
enemies of God, as well as suffer great torment. Submission to divine
sovereignty cannot imply a willingness to be his eternal enemy; because it is
absurd. Or thus, The damned do not, and never will cordially submit to the
sovereignty of God. So that insubmission -- an eternal refusal to submit
belongs to the character and state of the damned. But it is a contradiction to
say, that submission implies insubmission, or a willingness to be eternally
opposed to a submission. To return. It is necessary that men see, feel, and
own, that God might justly cast them off, and make them completely miserable to
all eternity. And be of a disposition to say, Let all heaven forever love, and
adore the infinitely glorious Majesty; although we should receive our just
deserts, and perish forever. Possibly, some may come on and say, "did we know
that God had a design to exercise his saving mercy toward us in particular, we
would submit the decision to him." This, as I should be ready to understand
them, would be no submission at all. And yet it is true, that God will exercise
his saving mercy toward all who do cordially submit, or rather, cordial
submission and reconciliation implies the actual exercise of saving mercy. If
men's uncircumcised hearts are humbled, and they accept the punishment of their
iniquities they need not fear a rejection. At the same time, it is evident that
God's having mercy upon a particular person cannot be the idea -- the ground on
which he submits and becomes reconciled. Because, that God has or will have
mercy upon any one in particular, cannot be known until a submission is
actually made. To say that a submission is made upon this idea, that God has
or will have mercy, when this cannot be known until an actual submission has
taken place is a contradiction in terms. In true submission men resolve
themselves into the will of God; and make a surrender to his disposals with no
more than this: It may be he will have mercy; and if he does not he is
perfectly just and divinely glorious.

LET secure profane sinners, and all self-righteous persons be roused from
their lethargy, and renounce their vain hopes; be awakened to attention, to due
consideration, and unfeigned repentance; before it is too late. Know for
certain that you are in an extremely hazardous situation; "in the gall of
bitterness, and in the bond of iniquity." And may, for ought you know, be
struck dead and sent to hell any day, hour, or moment. And that so long as you
remain careless, or depend on your own exertions, there is not the least
prospect you will obtain mercy and salvation.

LET awakened sinners be cautioned against the innumerable delusions, to which
they are exposed; against mistaking convictions of conscience for spiritual
illumination, and godly sorrow; and a forced humiliation for cordial
submission. And see that you do not content yourselves with loving God from any
selfish, partial considerations. Be reconciled to God, as God.

AND let penitent believers in Christ upon whom it has pleased God to have
mercy, "show forth the praises of him who has called them out of darkness into
his mavelous light, by denying ungodliness and worldly lusts; by living
soberly, righteously, and godly, in this present world."

FINIS.

