PRACTICAL LANGUAGE INTERPRETED: IN A DIALOGUE BETWEEN A BELIEVER AND AN
UNBELIEVER.

IN TWO PARTS.

REPRESENTING A BELIEVER UNDER THE INFLUENCE OF GRACE, SPEAKlNG CANAAN'S
LANGUAGE.

-- PART 1 --

Represents an Unbeliever under the Influence of a Carnal Mind, refusing to
accept of the Invitations of the Gospel; whose Practice often speaks plainer
and louder than Words, saying of CHRIST the KING, We will not have this Man to
reign over us.

-- PART 11. --

Shows some of the Language of a Soul under Conviction: And how the Unbeliever
becomes a Believer.

WARREN, [R. I.] PRINTED FOR RICHARD LEE.

PREFACE.
THE following lines were written at first for the satisfaction of my own mind,
as I take a peculiar pleasure in writing upon divine subjects. And though it is
very contrary to my natural inclination to let any of my writings be published,
yet since the Lord in his mercy has (as I hope) look me as a brand from the
burning, and showed me the danger of the way, of sin, and also showed me the
way of peace: And since he has made me desire with my whole soul to spend my
life in his service, and to spare no pains in seeking the welfare and
everlasting happiness of my fellow creatures, whose souls are as precious and
need salvation as much as mine. And since the present time is very short, and a
long eternity will soon succeed, where our souls shall be forever fixed in keen
despair and the most bitter anguish, or in the perfection of complete
happiness; the consideration of these things make me willing this weak
performance should be printed, hoping the LORD, who is able to show his wisdom
in folly, and his strength in weakness, will bless it for the good of some
souls. To whose rich blessing I desire to recommend these lines, and all who
read or bear them. Written by one who is under great obligations to spend her
whole life in the service of the KING of GLORY.

EUNICE SMITH.

Ashfield, January, 1792.

A DIALOGUE, etc
Believer. O HOW I admire the wonderful love and free grace of God; he has
plucked me as a brand from the burning. Why am I not now in the torments of
hell? There I was going with haste, and there I should soon arrived had not the
Lord prevented. He has took up out of an horrible pit and miry clay, and has
set me upon the rock and established my goings, and put a new song in my mouth,
even praise to God. Come taste and see how good the Lord is; come feel the
virtue of the Savior's merits. I see I have obtained joy by his sorrow, and
life by his death. And now he feeds my soul with satisfying and refreshing
dainties: and I have liberty to invite you to come and feast also; for here is
a full store opened for whosoever will.

Come sinner then, O come and taste
Of this reviving gospel seast!
If once your soul begins to feed,
You Will say it is heavenly meat indeed.
Unbeliever. I have no relish for such discourse as this, and I can take no
delight in your company if this must be your theme. And as for the fealt you
invite me to taste of, you may enjoy it to yourself without me, for I have no
desire to taste thereof. If I can have enough of this world, I desire no more.

Believer. Though you slight my discourse and company, yet let me try to
convince you of your dangerous, unhappy state. -- You are in bondage to the
same cruel master I once served, who kept me always to work, to provide fuel
for my own burning, and treasure up wrath (for myself) against the day of
wrath. I fed upon ashes and drank in iniquity like water; and death, eternal
death was to be my wages -- yet I was so bewitched and deceived through the
deceitfulness of sin, I was stupid in the slavery of this hard master, and
should been soon led by him to eternal misery, had not a lovely Being stronger
than he, came and set my soul at liberty. He drew me with the cords of love and
I ran after him. He showed me his beauty and my soul was ravished therewith;
and now through grace I have got a new Master, whom I determine to serve. And
for his dear sake I am heartily willing to bid a final adieu to all the sinful
pleasures of this world. And since I have found the way of peace, I want to
have you find it too that we may walk together to the blisful mansions my
glorious Deliverer has prepared for all who are willing to leave their bondage,
chains, and fetters, and walk at liberty in the pleasant way of peace. -- Great
peace have they that love him.

Unbeliever. You tell of a new Master, but I can see no goodness in him, nor'
any pleasure in his service. I intend to serve my old master for the present.
Though you say that death is to be his wages, vet death appears to be a great
way off from me, and I must provide for life now, and think of death when it is
more near. I hope it will all be well at last, I see no present danger.

Believer. O that you could see one glimpse of thy Lord and Master whom I now
serve! You would soon cry out with wonder, how great is his goodness! How great
his beauty! And if you had once entered into his sweet srvice, you would find
such pleasure therein, that you would rejoice to spend and be spent for him and
his dear children. You think that death is a great way off from you, but if you
see your case as it is, you would see that you are now in state of death: To be
carnally minded is death; and since you are under the power of a carnal mind,
you are also under the power of death. Your soul is now dead in trespasses and
sins, and you are condemned and continually exposed to have natural death,
seize upon your soul, and shut it up in keen despair, beyond the reach of any
help or hope forever; and yet you are so stupid as to see no present danger.
Who can forbear lamenting to see how active, rational creatures, are led on in
darkness and blindness to everlasting ruin and destruction.

Unbeliever. What you tell about my being in a state of death, and the like,
sound to me like idle tales and vain fancies. I have often heard such stories,
and sometimes I have been afraid they were true, and I feated I was in danger
of enduring eternal misery: But since I have got rid of these perplexing fears.
I can go on very easy, and the more I hear of these things the less effect they
take upon my mind, therefore pray let me alone, for I resolve to take pleasure
I can in this world, let what will come hereafter.

Believer. If this is is your case, O how sad it is indeed If this is the
language of your heart, let this corrupt language be like thunder to awaken you
up. Remember that solemn word in Prove. xxix. He that being often reproved,
hardens his neck, shall suddenly be destroyed and that without remedy. You
have been often reproved, and hitherto it seems you have hardened your neck,
and who knows but sudden destruction is just ready to seize upon you, and cast
you into that doleful furnace, where their worm di^^^^ not, and the fire is not
quenched? But if terror willl not drive you, O that love and mercy might draw
yon to Jesus Christ. I have not a word to say against your taking all the
pleasure you can in this world, but I can tell you there is nothing worthy of
the name of pleasure to be found in all the ways of sin. If you desire
pleasure, come suck it where it is to be found. Come taste of the love of
Jesus; enter into his service, and devote yourself wholly to him, and then you
will know what peace and pleasure mean. If you want riches, come to Jesus and
buy without money and without price, gold tried in the fire, that will endure
the last consuming fire, when the elements shall m^l^ with servent heat, and
the earth and the works therein shall be burnt up. That will make you rich not
only in time but to eternity; and white r^i^^nt that will make you shine forth
like the sun in the kingdom of heaven; and food and drink that will satisfy
your hungry and thirsty soul, and make you fat and flourishing in the courts of
the Lord forever. If you desire honor, O do not took that honor that is no more
enduring than the breath of mortals; but seek that honor that comes from God
only. Consider what an honor it is to be an heir of God, and joint heir with
Christ, to be a fellow citizen with the saints and of the household of God.
What an unspeakable honor is this while living in this world, and when death
shall come to send a saint home to glory, what an honor it will be to be waited
upon by shining Angels, and safely conducted to sit down with the King of Kings
in his throne, to live and reign with Christ. But it is beyond my power to tell
what shall be done to the man whom the King of Glory delights to honor: He
says, They that honor me I will honor, (...) that despise me, shall be lightly
esteemed; the wise shall inherit glory, but shame shall be the promotion of
fools. Will you be so foolish as to spend all your life in seeking that honor
that will make you ashamed before the whole creation, and in laying up that
treasure that will be as fire to torment you forever, and in taking that
pleasure that is like stupifying poison, to make you senseless while you are a
vessel of wrath, fitting your self for everlasting destruction.

Unbeliever. This talk strikes me with some fear; I cannot wholly shield it
off: But I love my sins so well I cannot be willing to part with them yet. It
is likely I shall live many years, and I see no need of setting out now to be
religious: If I can but be converted just before I die, it will do my turn as
well as if I should be religious all my lifetime. -- When I am old it will be a
very proper time to repent of my sins and prepare for another world. And if I
should not live to be old I can be earnest in-seeking after Christ in my last
sickness; then I Will cry day and night, and never give out until my soul is
safe. So upon the whole I expect I shall have peace at left, though I walk for
the present after the imagination of my own heart.

Believer. O do not grieve away the Holy Spirit that invites you to come to
day. The present time is all that you can call your own. It is very unlikely
Whether you will ever see that future day, wherein you expect to repent and
prepare for eternity. Who knows but the Lord will say, Thou feel, this night
thy soul shall be required of thee. It is dangerous to flight and despise a
good offer, with a vain hope of having the same offer another time; or to put
off the most important business, which must be done, or you are undone forever,
to old age or a sick bed, when it is very unlikely whether you will ever be old
or sick to this world. How often does the King of Terrors suddenly seize upon
those who are careless and secure, and send them to their long homes as in a
moment. But if you should be sick ever so long, or live to be ever so old, who
can promise you the salvation that you now refuse: Then perhaps the Lord will
withhold his spirit that you now grieve, and say it shall no longer strive with
you. O how dreadful would such a sickness be! The body racked with distress,
and the poor soul without any good hope, just ready to be forced into the
flames of devouring fire, there to dwell in endless anguish. If this should be
your unhappy case, doubtless you will look back with sorrow and remember such
and such a time, when you was lovingly invited to come to Christ and obtain
eternal life, but you would not. O come now and be happy! Choose you this day
whom you will serve. If nothing else can move upon your mind, go to the houses
of mourning, and see what difference there is between the righteous and the
wicked, between him that served God and him that serves him not, at their
death. Go see a vain youth that has spent his life vanity; or a rich sinner
that has fared sumptously every day, and took all the pleasures that this world
could afford him, when leaving all his good things behind him: In horror and
anguish the soul leaves the body, and in hell he lifts his eyes being in
torments, pleading for a drop of water to cool his tongue, but pleads in vain:
There the poor wretch must remain helpless and hopeless to eternity: Go also
and see a poor saint that has passed through great tribulations here: The heir
of glory has got upon the last edge of his time, and nothing before him (after
death) worse than unspeakable joys and pleasures forever. He leaves all his
evil things behind, and enters into peace. With joyful expectations the happy
soul leaves the body, and is carried by Angels to the mansions of glory above.
There the happy saint will remain and enjoy all his heart's desire without any
trouble to eternity. Now choose you which of these circumstances you will be
in: You know not but that this is the only time that ever you will be allowed
to make your choice, to the endless ages of a long eternity.

Unbeliever. I choose to die like the poor saint, rather than like the rich
sinner. Let me die the death of the righteous, and let my last end be like his.
But though I desire to die as the righteous do, yet I am not ready to live as
they do.

Believer. O do not flatter yourself with any hope of dying in peace, as the
righteous do, unless you a live holy as they do. If you intend to go to heaven
you must walk in tha way that leads there; which is a way of holiness, very
straight and narrow, directly contrary to the broad way that it so pleasing to
poor fallen sinners. Heaven will be no place for those that love sin and hate
holiness. If you could be permitted in amongst all the shining hosts above,
with such a disposition as you now manifest, what is their joy, would be your
torment, and you would rather the weighty mountains should fall on you, than to
see that glorious, lovely face, which all the saints long to behold. Without
holiness no man shall see the Lord with delight. The gates of the glorious city
above will never receive any thing that defiles, nor them that love and work
iniquity. If you choose the faint's portion hereafter, then choose their
portion here, which is Christ, in them the hope of glory, and a blessed portion
it is.

Unbeliever. If the case is as you represent it, I choose the way to hell, for
the way to heaven is so contrary to my inclination, that I had rather run the
venture of all that can come hereafter, than to walk therein. I esteem the
honor of my fellow creatures worth more than the honor of my Maker. And I
esteem the joys and pleasures of this life more highly than the never ending
joys and pleasures of the life to come. All the torments of hell you tell so
much about, do not appear so dreadful to me as to live such a dull, melancholy
life as you do. Though the Lord tells me in his word, if I disregard his calls,
he will laugh at my calamity, and mock when my fear comes, yet I had rather run
the venture of enduring that, than to have my companions laugh at me for being
religious. Therefore I should be glad if you would let me alone, that I may go
on easy in the broad road, let it lead where it will.

Believer. O what folly and stupid blindness sin has brought upon rational
beings, which they discover by daily practice if not in plain words. If this is
your choice you must go on in your own way, it is beyond my power to help you.
If you choose the slavery of Satan, rather than liberty, you must do his
drudgery and receive his wages. If you think it your wisdom to spend all your
days in treasuring up wrath against the day of wrath, and preparing fuel for
your own eternal burning, you must forever blame yourself therefore. The Lord
gives you many invitations to come to him and enjoy eternal life; but hitherto
you have refused, and grieved his Holy Spirit and despised his Bride, by whom
he sends word to you to come. The Spirit and the Bride say come. Though his
patience holds out to give you this one invitation to come after so long a
time, who can tell but that if you now refuse to accept, he will say you shall
not taste of his supper. Therefore if you have any love for yourself do not
neglect the great salvation any longer. Though you desire me to let you alone,
yet I cannot bear to leave you yet. O that I could persuade you to come to
Jesus and have all your wants supplied, and be happy in time and forever. You
are much mistaken if you think religion makes my life dull and melancholy, for
there is such solid pleasure, joy ^e^^^^, and ^rue^ tentment to be found in the
w^^s of God, (...) no words can convey a proper idea thereof. (...) herefore
come. taste and see how good the Lord is, or else you will never know. Truly I
lived a dull, melancholy life before i found the way of peace; though I vainly
imagined I took some pleasure in my sins, yet when I came to know what true
pleasure was, I found my mistake. I found that word true in Isa.xlviii.22.
There is no peace says the Lord unto the wicked. When I feel dull and
melancholy it is for want of more true religion. We may be sober and yet
cheerful; sorrowful, and yet exceeding joyful; weeping for sin, and yet the
soul singing for joy of heart. I can wish you no greater happiness than to
leave the ways of sin, death and darkness, and to walk with pleasure in the
bright and shining way that leads to more bright and shining palaces of
infading glory above. If you say you cannot come, search your heart and see if
it is not more proper to say you will come to Jesus that you might have life,
than that you had rather go on in sin a little longer. Why cannot you now
resolve to seek the Lord, and spend each breath in your life, earnestly begging
the Lord would take you out of the horrible pit and the miry clay, into which
you are daily sinking deeper and deeper. And who can tell but that he who hears
the ravens and young lions when they cry, (...) hear and pity you. The Lord
looks from heaven to hear the groanings of the prisoners, and to loose them
that are appointed to death.

Unbeliever. These things strike my mind a little; but I must wait a while to
see whether you hold out in this way before I give much heed to your talk. I
have known many that in time past were all for religion, crying out against
sin, and inviting me and others to come to Christ; recommending his ways,
saying they took more comfort in one hour than they did in all their life
before; but now they tell me no such thing, their exhortations are all ended;
and many have turned to their old way again, which makes me think there is no
such pleasure in religion, nor no such danger in sin as they pretended. I keep
a very strict watch over those who have prosessed to be Christians, and if I
see them commit a little sin, it makes me feel very easy, though I should
commit a greater one; for it cannot be expected that those who never made
profession should be as strict as those that have. If I am in company with any
of them, if they appear with a solemn countenance, it gives me a gentle
reproof; if they give me warning by words, I feel a sting in my conscience,
though I sometimes shake it off with laughter and scorn; but if they join with
me in my foolish talking and jesting, or in any thing contrary to the
profession of godliness, that pleases me well, and gives me more liberty to go
on in sin, and takes of all the weight of their former warnings and
exhortations, or the warning of others.

Believer. I acknowledge that some fell out by the way, not enduring to the
end; but this may prove to you the truth of the scriptures. Christ tells of
some who receive the word with joy, but not having root in themselves (or not
being rooted and groundded in love) they endure but a little while; in time of
temptation they fall away. We are also informed by the scriptures, that the
righteous sometimes fall through infirmity, and are liable to sin; but when the
righteous fail they shall rise again, and if they sin they have an advocate
with the Father. But what good will their fall do you? The word of God stands
against you, and that shall stand though all creatures should fall. Therefore
pray regard that sure word, and if I speak anything contrary to that, regard it
not; but what I say agreeable to that, is worthy of your notice, whether I
stand or fall. Every one of us shall give an account of himself to God. We
shall all be judged according to our works. Those who eat the sin of God's
people will find it to bitterness in the end. While you are waiting to see
whether I stand or fall, perhaps you fall into the bottomless pit, from whence
you can never rise. Why will you be glad to find a stumbling block, to stumble
over, into the flames of hell? If you should see a person fall into the mire,
it would be your wisdom so take warning thereby, and escape that evil: But
instead of that you take example by the fall of others to He down and wallow in
the miry pit of sin. If thou art wise, thou art wise for thyself; but if thou
scornest, thou alone must bear it.

Unbeliever. There is one excuse more that I can make, and that is, my
inability to help myself. This Shields off conviction, and makes me easy to go
on sin; for I think that if I should try ever so much I could not convert
myself, and so I do not see but that I had as good be content, and take my
liberty to do whatsoever is right in my own eyes as any way.

Believer. This is an argument of satan's devising. O do not give heed to this,
and take the advice of your worst enemy, who seeks your ruin, rather than to
hearken to the good counsel of Christ, who is the only friend that can save
your soul. The light that is come into the world by the great Redeemer, shines
to the very place where you are, and you will be condemned if you shut your
eyes against it, and you must blame yourself for your condemnation. The call of
Christ comes to your rational mind, and you freely accept thereof, or else
refuse it. The Lord calls, but you will not hear: He streches out his hand for
your help, but you will not regard.

Though you cannot convert yourself, do you do ^s well as you can? Hear what
conscience says. Do you try with all your power to walk according to the
command of God in every thing? Don't you spend some time to no profit for soul
or body, that you might spend in searching the scriptures and and trying to
pray to God for help? It would sure^y be your wisdom to consider your ways and
do our utmost endeavor to turn to the Lord. I be^ieve by the scriptures if you
could know that you should go to hell at last, it would be your best way to
commit as little sin as you possibly could in his world; for every sin you
commit will make our hell the hotter. Especially if you sin against ^ght, doing
what you know is wrong, and neglect^ng what you know is right; this will afford
you ^any stripes. Can you take pleasure enough in ^he drudgery, of satan to
balance eternal misery? Now I desire for your soul's sake that you would make
no more excuses; but set out now in earnest ^o seek the kingdom of God and his
righteousness. Let this be the first thing you seek after, according to the
command of him who knew what was for your best good. Search the scriptures and
see what threatenings and curses are pronounced against the wicked, which fall
with pain upon the head of such as go on still in their trespasses. Can you
think that it will be no aggravation to your guilt and punishment to rise in
open rebellion against the King of Kings, under pretense that you cannot have
our own will? It is as contrary to right reason to (...) on in your sins
wilfully, as it would be wilfully to run into a fiery Game. Strive to enter
into the straight gate, for many shall seek to enter in and shall not be able.
Therefore strive with all your might; let nothing hinder you in this business.
IF sinners entice thee consent thou not. Be valiantly set against every sin and
temptation that would hinder your pursuit after the kingdom of heaven. But when
you have done your best, take heed that you do not make a God of your own
works; but remember that your soul will be justly condemned, unless Jesus
becomes your Surety, your Savior, and your All. The best of your duties are
full of sin, and cannot merit the least favor. Therefore never rest upon
anything you can do, yet neglect not to do all that you know is right; and do
nothing that is wrong; for so the word and spirit of God reaches. And never
rest until you are enabled to come as a poor, perishing, lost, hell-deserving
sinner, to the Lord Jesus Christ, who is an all-sufficient Savior, and delight
to save sinners who come to him for all they need O come to Jesus and obtain
eternal life, for why will you die? Stay not to see what others do, but come to
Jesus, and be a happy creature yourself while you live, happy at death, and
more abundently happy at an endless eternity.

Dear soul accept tbt call to day,
Why will you any longer thy?
O do not grive the Holy Dove,
Who comes to draw you with his love.
Why will you any longer go
In paths of darkness, sin and woe?
Come walk the shining paths of grace,
And see the smiles of Jesus' face.
O come and taste, and see and know
The love which from the Lord does show,
His beauty shines forever bright,
And fills his children with delight.
PART II.
Briefly showing some of the Language of a Sinner under Conviction, until he
finds Christ and becomes a Believer.

Unbeliever. I BEGIN to see that none of my excuses will do my turn. Surely the
way I am in will lead me to hell if I pursue; and what will profit me if I
should gain the whole world and ^ose my own soul? I will try to live better
than I ^ave done: My former sins sting my conscience, so ^at I cannot willingly
repeat them. There is a ^lemn thought upon my mind, which damps my ^ourage.
Death appears nearer to me than it did: (...) am afraid I shall be soon out
down, and then where shall I be? If what I have been hearing is ^ue I am in a
dangerous state. What shall I do to ^e saved?

Believer. I can tell you of no way to be saved, ^ut to look unto God. Believe
on the Lord jesus Christ, and you shall be saved.

Unbeliever. I cannot believe on Jesus. My will too stubborn to bow, and my
heart is as hard as a ^one. My eyes are so blind that I cannot look unto Christ,
and yet I must perish if I don't. O what a polish wretch I have been to spend
so ^uch time (...) preparing myself for hell! What have I been doing? I have
done nothing all my days but sin against God. How many calls have I slighted!
How often I have grieved away the Holy Spirit! Why did I go into vain company,
by that means shake off the conviction that was on my mind sometime ago! Then I
believe the Spirit of God was at work with me, but I grieved it away by my
folly and now I am afraid my day is past. Many times have been warned of my
danger and invited to come to Christ: Then I might come, but now I fear its all
over, and I must be lost. Do pray for me for I am in an evil case.

Believer. I am willing to try to pray for you, but don't trust to any prayers,
for salvation is only (...) God. I cannot pray one breath, except the Lord
gives me a spirit of prayer. You have destroyed yourself, but in the Lord is
your help. Men not Angels cannot help you. Therefore try to pray yourself to him
that is able and willing to save all that call on him in truth. Never give over
as long as life remains, unless Jesus appears as your friend Though you have
done evil as you could, yet despair not of the mercy of God. The merits of the
great Redeemer are sufficient for the chief of sinners.

Unbeliever. What shall I do? Can I find no help from creatures? Is there none
to look to for relief but only to that God, against whom I have sinned whose
wrath is out against me? O whither shall I fly? I am a monster of iniquity: I
have been in open rebellion against the God that made me. I have despised his
children for his sake) and now grow worse and worse. The corrupt fountain of
iniquity is continually sending sorth polluted streams. -- All I act, speak, or
think, is corrupted with sins I dare not look up to God, against whom I have
committed such horrid crimes; but my distress drives me to smite upon my breast
in token that (...) acknowledge I deserve to be smitten, saying, God merciful
(...) to me a sinner. My case looks desparate ^^ deed! The law of God which I
have broken is ^t against me. The bible is full of curses against ^e. The
saints say they cannot help me. The ^cked have no desire to help me. Every
thing I ^hold frowns upon me. Heaven's gates are shut ^^ainst me. The mouth of
hell is open for me; ^d I am in danger every moment of ^ropping ^erein.

Believer. Your case is sad indeed; but not worse ^an it was when you was
careless and stupid, think^g all was well. Thanks to God that your eyes, ^at
were blind, begin to see. Fly to Jesus, the ci^ of refuge, and the avenger of
blood cannot hurt ^u. A door of hope is opened for such as you. ^urn to the
strong hold, to Jesus Christ, and then ^one of the curses in the bible can
reach your soul. ^ome wash in the fountain the Lord has opened, and you shall
be purified from sin and from unclean^^ess. Behold the Lamb of God that takes
away the (...) of the world. Though ^ou have been led cap^ve ^cy the devil at
his will, yet the Lord has as^ended on high and led captivity captive. Though
you have been rebellious, yet he has received gifts ^r the rebellious. Then
cast yourself at the feet ^^ the blessed Jesus: Come to him as unworthy as ^ou
are, and he will in no wise cast you out. Look (...) where else for help, for
all other refuge will fail ^ou. If you feel and see yourself to be lost, you
are ^uch a one as Jesus came to seek and save.

Unbeliever. You re^^ of a Savior for lost sinners; ^ut I can find no Savior
for me. Nothing but ^errible curses belong to me. What an undone wretch I am!
And all my ruin I brought on myself. I wonder I was not in hell long ago! I
have sinned against God, and broken his commands in such manner, that I dare
not venture myself in his hands for if I do I see nothing but that he must in
justice send me to hell. How can I fall into the hands of an angry God!

Believer. You are now as much in the hands of God as you can be if you
willingly yield. If you continue where you be your will die; but if you (...)
yourself on the arms of Jesus, who can tell but he will save you alive, and
make you a monument of mercy? He is able to save to the uttermost all that come
in God by him.

Unbeliever. I can find no comfort. Woe is me, I am undo^^; I am just ready to
sink, and I find nothing to rest my soul upon. I see no remedy for me. I will
turn my eyes from all creatures. None can do me any good. My prayers and duties
can do me no good. My breath is corrupted with sin. I am justly condemned. The
word of God condemns me. ^ly own conscience is a swist witness against me; and
here I stand as a guilty condemned rebel, expecting, every moment to be
executed. What can I do? To go back I dare not, for hell is behind me. To go
forward I cannot, for the sword of an angry God is before me, and how can I
stand sill when the terrors of hell are flashing upon me? O Lord have mercy on
my soul! Though I have sinned against heaven and in thy sight, yet I beg for
one d^op of mercy, if mercy can reach as low as I am sunk Lord I bow at thy
feet, confessing my sins. I yield myself into thy hands, acknowledging that thy
justice will shine without any blemish I perish forever. But O how can I bear
eternal torments? How can I lie forever under this ^eight of sin and guilt that
lies so hard on my conscience! Lord save me, I am sinking! O eternity,
eternity! How doleful it sounds. A long eternity (...) misery is all the refuge
I can find. But hark! (...) hear a still small voice. Listen O my soul to the
^easant sound; it speaks forgiveness! My load of ^ilt removes: A pleasant
calmness comes into my ^ind. Behold the Lamb of God! O I see him; (...) take
away my sin, and speaks peace to me the ^orst of rebels! O what a beautiful
sight I behold (...) his lovely face! There I see mercy and truth ^ave me
together, righteousness and peace have ^issed each other. O wonderful. I see my
heinous (...) were laid on the harmless Son of God. He ^re the punishment which
I deserved, and I the ^uilty criminal am set at liberty.

O lovely Christ what have thou done,
Was it not for	me thy blood did run?
This love no bottom has nor bound,
Nor can the height be ever found.
O way I never sin again,
Since Jesus for my sins was slain;
Ye murdering sins from me depart,
I hate you from my very heart.
O glory, glory to the Lord,
Who worthy is to be adored;
It Is be alone that gives me peace,
O may praises never cease.
O may God, thou art altogetherly. My soul (...) ravished with thine excellent
perfections, all shining bright in the face of the Lord Jesus Christ. -- Lord
what will thou have me to do? Here am I, send me where thou ple^s^st. I (...)
to give myself wholly to thee, and spend (...) and all that I possess entirely
and constantly in the service. O bless the Lord ye saints! (...) all ye
inhabitants of heaven and earth! (...) the Lord O my soul!

Believer. O how my heart rejoices to hear thing sweet language. Glory to God
that another sinner has repented. Another child is born into our heavenly
Father's family. Another subject has submitted to our heavenly King. I will no
longer call you an Unbeliever, but you may now be called a saint of jesus: One
of the excellent of the earth; Sin heir of God, and a joint heir with Christ. I
hope you will be one that may adorn those noble names by which you are called.
One that may ever stand fast in the liberty wherewith Christ has made you
free, and constantly persevere unto the end, and at last enter through the
gates into the glorious city above. Glory to God alone.

FINIS.

