MR. STONE's ELECTION-SERMON, MAY 10th, 1792.

A SERMON, PREACHED BEFORE HIS EXCELLENCY SAMUEL HUNTINGTON, ESQUIRE. L.L.D.
GOVERNOR, AND THE HONORABLE THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY OF THE STATE OF CONNECTICUT,
CONVENED AT HARTFORD, ON THE DAY OF THE ANNIVERSARY ELECTION.

MAY 10th, 1792.

BY TIMOTHY STONE, A. M. PASTOR OF A CHURCH IN LEBANON.

PRINTED AT HARTFORD, BY HUDSON AND GOODWIN, MDCCXCII.

At a General Assembly of the State of Connecticut, holden at Hartford, in said
State, on the second Thursday of May, A. D. 1792.
ORDERED, That the Hon. WILLIAM WILLIAMS, and Mr. ELKANAH TISDALE, return the
Thanks of this Assembly to the Rev. TIMOTHY STONE, for his Sermon delivered
before this Assembly at the General Election on the 10th of May instant, and
desire a Copy of the same that it may be printed.

A true Copy of Record. Examined, by GEORGE WYLLYS, Sec'y.

ELECTION SERMON.
DEUTERONOMY IV. 5, 6. Behold, I have taught you statutes and judgments, even
as the Lord my God commanded me, that ye should do so in the land whether ye go
to possess it.

Keep therefore, and do them; for this is your wisdom and your understanding in
the sight of the nations, which shall hear all these statutes, and say, Surely
this great nation is a wise and understanding people.


WE are not left in doubt, concerning the wisdom and salutary nature of that
constitution under which the Hebrews were placed, as it proceeded immediately
from GOD; and, in reference to the particular circumstances of that people, was
the result of unerring perfection. It was a free constitution, in which, all
the valuable rights of the community were most happily secured. The public
good, was the great object in view, and, the most effectual care was taken to
preserve the rights of individuals. Proper rewards were promised to the
obedient, and righteous punishments allotted for the disobedient. GOD designed,
for special reasons, that the seed of Abraham, should be distinguished in a
peculiar manner from all other nations; he therefore undertook the government
of them himself, in all matters respecting religion, civil policy, and that
military establishment, which he saw to be necessary for their happiness and
defense. We find Moses, who received this constitution from GOD, and delivered
it to his people, frequently exhorting them, to maintain a sacred regard for
this divine institution, and to pay a conscientious obedience to all its laws:
in doing of which, they might secure to themselves national prosperity, and
enjoy, the unfailing protection of Almighty GOD.

To deter them from disobedience, he called up their attention to that solemn
scene which opened to their view, when they stood before the LORD their GOD in
Horeb: when there were thunders, and lightnings, and a thick cloud upon the
mount, and the voice of the trumpet exceeding loud; so that all the people that
was in the camp trembled. And the LORD commanded, saying, gather me the people
together, and I will make them hear my words, that they may learn to fear me
all the days that they shall live upon the earth, and that they may teach their
children. For the LORD thy GOD, is a consuming fire, even a jealous GOD.

THE argument made use of in the text, to excite in that people, a spirit of
obedience to their constitution and laws, was this, that it would raise their
character in the sight of the nations: who from thence would be led, to
entertain a veneration for them, as a great nation, a wise and understanding
people. This sacred passage, in connection with the important occasion, which
has called us to the house of GOD, this morning, may direct our attention to
the following enquiry.

IN what, does the true wisdom of a people, a civil community, consist?

THE general answer to this question, may not be difficult; it will no doubt,
be readily admitted, that the highest wisdom of a community of intelligent
beings, must consist, in pursuing that line of conduct, which shall have the
most direct and sure tendency to promote the best good of the whole, both in
time, and eternity. What ever creatures, may conceive to be a good, either,
through imperfection of understanding, or degeneracy of heart; yet, if that
which they call good, is inseparably connected with more pain than pleasure,
taking in the whole of their existence; then it cannot with propriety be styled
good, certainly not the best good, consequently wisdom will not choose it. The
province of wisdom, is, to discover and elect the most valuable objects; and,
to adopt the best means to obtain them. These observations, apply with equal
force, to individuals, and communities; to all classes of men, whether in the
higher, or, lower walks of life. Communities, most certainly, as well as
individuals, under the guidance of wisdom, will pursue that conduct which shall
be productive of their highest happiness, in every period of their existence.
But the question returns, what is that conduct, which shall have the desired
tendency, and will effect the highest good? This question, as it respects
mankind at large in their present state, might admit, a great variety of
answers: some of which, may demand particular notice on the present occasion.
As,

1. WISDOM will direct a community, to establish a good system of government.
It may be a question, whether the all wise GOD ever designed, that any of his
intelligent creatures, even in a state of perfection, should exist without some
kind of government, and subordination amongst themselves. All creatures, have
not the same capacities; neither are they placed under equal advantages; and,
if those may be found, whose capacities are equally extensive, still they are
different; and seem to be designed for different purposes, and stations, in the
great system. We read, of thrones, dominions, principalities, and powers
amongst the angelic hosts: which titles, denote various stations among those
sinless beings, that they are differently employed, in degrees of subordination
to each other, in the government of that holy family of which, GOD, is the
father. But, however this may be, as our acquaintance with that world of glory,
is very imperfect -- yet it is beyond a doubt, that government was designed,
and is absolutely necessary for men on earth, in their present state of
degeneracy.

CREATURES, who have risen in rebellion, against the holy and perfect
government of JEHOVAH; have partial connections, selfish interests, passions
and lusts, which often interfere with each other, and which, will not always be
controlled by reason, and the mild influence of moral motives, however great:
but these in their external expressions, must be under the restraint of law, or
there can be no peace, no safety among men. Some kind of government, is
therefore indispensibly necessary for the happiness of mankind, that they may
partake of the security, and other important blessings resulting from society;
which cannot be enjoyed in a state of nature. Without any consideration, of the
various forms of government which have been adopted, in different ages and
countries; that, may be the best for a particular people, which in the view of
all their circumstances, affords the fairest prospect of promoting
righteousness, and of securing the most valuable privileges of the community,
in its administration.

CIVIL liberty is one of the most important blessings which men possess of a
temporal nature, the most valuable inheritance on this side heaven. That
constitution may therefore be esteemed the best, which does most effectually
secure this treasure to a community. That liberty consists in freedom from
restraint, leaving each one to act as seems right to himself, is a most
unwise mistaken apprehension. Civil liberty, consists in the being and
administration of such a system of laws, as does bind all classes of men,
rulers and subjects, to unite their exertions for the promotion of virtue and
public happiness. That happy constitution enjoyed by the Hebrews, of which, the
Supreme Law giver was the immediate author, was no other, than a system of good
laws, and righteous statutes: which limited the powers and prerogatives of
magistrates, designated the duties of subjects, and obliged each to that
obedience to law, and exchange of services, which tended to mutual benefit.
Deuteronomy. iv. 8.
"And what nation is there so great, that has statutes and judgments so
righteous, as all this law which I set before you this day." A state of society
necessarily implies reciprocal dependence in all its members; and ra^^onal
government, is designed to realize and strength^^ this dependence, and to
render it, in such sense equal in all ranks, from the supreme magistrate, to
the meanest peasant, that each one may feel himself bound to seek the good of
the whole: when individuals do this, whether rulers or subjects, they have a
just right to expect the favor and protection of the whole body. The laws of a
state, should equally bind every member, whether his station be the most
conspicuous, or, the most obscure. Rulers in a righteous government, are as
really under the control of law, as the meanest subject: and the one equally
with the other, should be subjected to punishment, when ever he becomes
criminal, by a violation of the law. Rewards and punishments, should be equally
distributed to all, agreeably to real merit or demerit, without respect of
per^^^s. A constitution, founded upon the general and immutable laws of
righteousness and benevolence, and corresponding to their particular
circumstances, will therefore become a primary object with a wise and
understanding people.

2. THE wisdom of a people will appear, in their united exertions to support
such a system of government, in its regular administration.

ENACTING salutary laws, discovers the wisdom and good design of legislators:
but the liberty and happiness of the community, essentially depend upon their
regular execution. The best code of laws can answer no good purposes, any
further than it is executed. Every member in society is bound, in duty to the
community, himself, and posterity, to use his endeavors that the laws of the
state be carried into execution.

LAWS, point out the existing offices, relations and dependancies of the
community: they serve for the direction, support and defense of all characters;
but considered as restraints, they more especially respect the unruly members.
1. Tim. i. 9, 10.
"Knowing this, that the law is not made for a righteous man, but for the
lawless and disobedient, for the ungodly and for sinners, for unholy and
profane, for murderers of fathers, and murderers of mothers, for manslayers,
for whoremongers, for them that defile themselves with mankind, for liars, for
perjured persons, and if there be any other thing that is contrary to sound
doctrine." It is unreasonable to expect, that the vices of man which are
inimical to society, will be restrained by silent laws existing upon paper:
they must be carried into execution, and be known to have an active existence,
that such as contemn the law, may not only read, but feel the resentment of the
community.

IT is not within the reach of human understanding, to look with precision into
futurity, to discover all the circumstances and contingencies which may take
place among a people: neither is it certain, that every person who may possess
a fair character for ability and integrity, and who may be called into public
life, will be governed in all his actions, by public and disinterested motives.
Through necessary imperfection, or corrupt design, statutes may be enacted,
which may not prove salutary in their execution; but greatly prejudicial to the
common good: hence arises the necessity of alterations and amendments, in all
human systems.

CHANGES however, should be few as possible; for the strength and reputation of
government, does not a little depend upon the uniformity and stability observed
in its administration. Laws while they remain such, ought to be executed, when
found to be useless or hurtful, they may be repealed: to have laws in force and
not executed, or to obstruct the natural course of law in a free state, must be
dangerous; will have many hurtful tendencies, will greatly weaken government,
and render all the interests of the community insecure. Liberty, property and
life, are all precarious, in a state where laws cease in their execution. When
known breaches of law pass with impunity, and open transgressors go unpunished;
when executive officers grow remiss in their duty, especially, when they
connive at disobedience: all distinctions betwixt virtue and vice will vanish,
authority will sink into disrepute, and government will be trampled in the dust
-- for which reasons, with others that might be named, it must be the wisdom,
the indispensible duty of all characters in society, to unite their exertions,
for the support of righteous laws, in their regular administration. As it would
be exceedingly unreasonable to expect, that any people, can ever realize the
benefits of good government, under a weak, or a wicked administration -- in
which, persons destitute of abilities, or, of stable principles of
righteousness and goodness, fill the various departments of the state. Hence,

3. THE wisdom of a people will appear in the election of good rulers.

THE peace and happiness of communities, have a necessary dependence, under
GOD, upon the character and conduct of those who are called to the
administration of government. A bad constitution, under the direction of wise
and pious rulers, who have capacity to discern, disposition and resolution to
pursue the public good, may become a blessing; being made to subserve many
valuable purposes. But the best constitution, committed to rulers of a contrary
description, may be subverted; or so abused, as to become a curse: and be
rendered productive of the most mischievous consequences. The understanding, or
folly, of a people in reference to their temporal interests, is in nothing more
conspicuous, than in the choice of civil rulers. In free states the body of
electors have it in their power to be governed well; if faithful to themselves
and the public, in raising those to offices of trust and importance, who are
possessed of abilities and have merited their confidence by former good
services.

KNOWLEDGE and fidelity, are qualifications indispensibly necessary to form the
character of good magistrates. No man, ever possessed natural or acquired
abilities, too great for the discharge of the duties constantly incumbent upon
those, who act as the representatives of the Most High GOD, in the government
of their fellow creatures: multitudes however well disposed, are totally
incapable of such trust. The interests of society are always important, they
are many times involved in extreme difficulty, through the weakness of some,
and the wickedness of others; and there is need of the most extensive
knowledge, wisdom and prudence, to direct the various opposing interests of
individuals into one channel, and guide them all to a single object, the public
good. Woe to that people, to whom GOD by his providence in judgment shall say;
"I will give children to be their princes, and babes shall rule over them. And
the people shall be oppressed, every one by another, and every one by his
neighbor: the child shall behave himself proudly against the ancient, and the
base against the honorable. And judgment is turned away backward, and justice
stands afar off: for truth is fallen in the street and equity cannot enter;
and he that departs from evil makes himself a prey." Isa. iii, 4. 5. and
lix: 1^* 1^.


BUT knowledge alone, will qualify no person to fill a public station with
honor to himself, or advantage to others. The greatest abilities the most
extensive knowledge are capable of (...) when misapplied to selfish ambi^^^^^
p^^poses, may be improved to the destruction of every thing valuable in society.

FIDELITY therefore, is another essential characteristic in a good ruler. This
is a qualification so absolutely essential, that when known to be (...), no
conceivable abilities can atone for its absence. Fidelity has no sure unshaken
foundation, but in the love and fear of the one true GOD: that love, which
extends its benign influence to all the creatures of GOD. This is a branch of
that benevolent religion, which the Son of GOD came down from Heaven to
establish, in the hearts of men on earth: this when seated in the soul of man,
becomes a stable principle of action, and will have an habitual influence in
all his conduct, whether in public or private life -- this will enable rulers
to maintain the dignity of their elevated stations, amidst the strong
temptations with which they may be assaulted -- feeling their just
accountableness to those of their fellow men, who have placed such confidence
in them, as to entrust them with all their valuable temporal interests: and
what is infinitely more, feeling their accountableness to GOD; they will labor
to discha^^^ the important duties of their office: remembering that the day is
fast approaching, when, notwithstanding, "they are gods, and children of the
Most High, yet they shall die like men, an^ fall like one of the princes." Able
pious magistrates, who wish to answer the end of their appointment, will not
wish to hide their real characters from the public eye -- they will come to the
light that their deeds may be manifest.

IT is the interest and privilege of an enlightened free people, to be
acquainted with the characters of their most worthy citizens, who are
candidates for public offices in the community; and, it is equally their
interest and privilege, to make choice of those only to be rulers, who are
known among their tribes, for wisdom and piety. Following the salutary counsel
of the prince of Midian, they will provide out of all the people, able men,
such as fear GOD, men of truth, hating covetousness.

FREE republicans, as observed above, have it in their power to be governed
well: but they are in the utmost danger through a wanton abuse of this power.
Actuated, by noble public spirited motives, and a primary regard to real merit
in their elections; they will have the heads of their tribes, as fathers to
lead them in paths of safety and peace: under the guidance of such rulers, who
consider their subjects as brethren, and children, and all the interests of the
community as their own; a people can hardly fail of all that happiness of which
societies are capable in this degenerate state.

BUT when party spirit, local views, and interested motives, direct their
suffrages, when they loose sight of the great end of government the public
good, and give themselves up, to the baneful influence of parasitical
demagogues, they may well expect to reap the bitter fruits of their own folly,
in a partial wavering administration. Through the neglect, or abuse of their
privileges, most states have lost their liberties; and have fallen a prey to
the avarice and ambition of designing and wicked men. "When the righteous are
in authority, the people rejoice: but when the wicked bears rule, the people
mourn." This joy, or mourning, among a people, greatly depends on their own
conduct in elections -- bribery here, is the bane of society -- the man who
will give or receive a reward in this case, must be extremely ignorant, not to
deserve the stigma of an enemy to the state -- and should he have address to
avoid discovery, he must be destitute of sensibility, not to feel himself to be
despicable. All private dishonorable methods to raise persons to office, convey
a strong suspicion to the discerning mind, that merit is wanting: real merit
may dwell in obscurity, but it needs not, neither will it ever solicit, the
aids of corruption to bring itself into view. When streams are polluted in
their fountain they will not fail to run impure -- offices in government
obtained by purchase, will always be improved to regain the purchase money with
large increase: and a venal administration will possess neither disposition nor
strength to correct the vices of others, but will lose sight of the public
happiness, in the eager pursuit of personal emolument.

4. WISDOM will lead a people to maintain a sacred regard to righteousness, in
reference to the public, and individuals.

MORAL righteousness is one of those strong bonds by which all public societies
are supported. Heathen nations ignorant of divine revelation, and the
particular duties and obligations which are enlightened and enforced by the
word and authority of GOD; have nevertheless been sensible, of the great
importance of moral righteousness. Greece and Rome, in the beginning of their
greatness, before they sunk into effeminacy and corruption, were careful to
encourage and maintain public and private justice: they labored to diffuse
principles of righteousness among all ranks of their citizens. Many of their
writings on this subject, deserve attention so far as the observance of moral
duties respect civil communities, and the well-being of mankind in the present
world. As all civil communities have their foundation in compacts, by which
individuals immerge out of a state of nature, and become one great whole,
cemented together by voluntary engagements; covenanting with each other, to
observe such regulations, and perform such duties as may tend to mutual
advantage: hence arises the necessity of righteousness, this being the basis
on which all must depend. When this fails, compacts will be disregarded, men
will loose a sense of their obligations to each other, instead of confidence
and harmony, will be a spirit of distrust and fear, every man will be afraid of
his neighbor; jealousies will subsist betwixt rulers and subjects, the
strength of the community will be lost in animosity and division, all ability
for united exertion will be destroyed, and, the bonds of society being broken
it must be dissolved. It was long since observed, by one of the greatest and
wisest of kings, and will for ever remain true; "That righteousness exalts a
nation: but sin is a reproach to any people." The truth of this divine maxim
does not depend upon any arbitrary constitution, or, positive system of
government: but flows from the reason and nature of things.

THERE is in the constitution of heaven, an established connection, between the
practice of righteousness and the happiness of moral beings united in society.
Public faith, and private justice, lay a foundation, for public spirit and
vigorous exertion to rest upon; in such a state, every one will receive a
proper reward for his service, let his station be what it may: and every
delinquent, will realize such punishment, as his offense, or neglect of duty
may deserve. In a fixed regular course of communicative and distributive
justice, all may know before hand, what the reward of their conduct will be.
What the apostle has said concerning the natural body, and applied to the
church of CHRIST: may with equal propriety and little variation, be applied to
political societies. These bodies are composed of various members, the members
have various offices, but all of them are necessary, for the well being of the
whole; there is something due from the body to every member, and from every
member to the body: every part is to be regarded, and righteousness maintained
throughout the whole.

THE members of a well organized civil community, under an equal and just
administration, have no more reason to complain of the station alloted to them
in providence; than the members of the natural body, have of the place, by GOD
assigned them in that. "The eye cannot say unto the head, I have no need of
thee; nor again the head to to the feet, I have no need of you. But that the
members should have the same care one for another. And whether one member
suffer, all the members suffer with it: or one member be honored, all the
members rejoice with it." No member of the natural body, of a civil community,
or of GOD's moral kingdom, can be required to do more, than observe the proper
duty of its own station: when this is performed, all is done which can
reasonably be demanded, it has done well, and may expect the approbation and
protection of the whole body.

MEN may indeed complain, because they are not angels; and do it with as much
propriety, as to feel discontented, because they are not all placed at the head
of civil communities. The allwise GOD, has given us our capacities, and fixed
our stations, and when righteousness is observed by us, and the community of
which we are members, we shall then do, and receive, what belongs to us, and
this is all we can reasonably desire.

5. THE wisdom of a people essentially consists, in paying an unfeigned
obedience to the institutions of that religion, which the Supreme Lawgiver has
established in his church on earth.

THAT religion, which GOD has enjoined upon rational beings, is not only
necessary for his glory, but essential to their happiness. To establish a
character as being truly religious, under the light of divine revelation, it is
by no means sufficient, that men should barely acknowledge the existence and
general providence of one supreme DEITY. From this heavenly light, we obtain
decided evidence, that the Almighty Father, has set his well beloved Son the
blessed IMMANUEL, as King upon his holy hill of Zion. This DIVINE person, in
his mediatorial character, "is exalted, far above all principality, and power,
and might, and dominion, and every name that is named, not only in this world,
but also, in that which is to come. And all things are put under his feet. That
at the name of JESUS, every knee should bow, of things in heaven, and things in
earth, and things under the earth; and that every tongue should confess, that
JESUS CHRIST is LORD, to the glory of GOD the Father."

IN vain, do guilty mortals worship the great Jehovah, and present their
services before him, but, in the name, and for the sake of this glorious
Mediator. For it is his will "that all men should honor the Son, even as they
honor the Father."

COMMUNITIES, have their existence in, and from, this glorious personage. The
kingdom is his, and he rules among the nations. Through his bounty, and
special providence, it is, that a people enjoy the inestimable liberties and
numerous advantages of a well regulated civil society: through his influence,
they are inspired with understanding to adopt, with strength and public spirit
to maintain, a righteous constitution: HE gives able impartial rulers, to guide
in paths of virtue and peace; or sets up over them the basest of men. By his
invisible hand, states are preserved from internal convulsions, and shielded by
his Almighty arm from external violence: or, through his providential
displeasure, they are given as a prey to their own vices; or to the lusts and
passions of other states, to be destroyed.

THUS absolutely dependant, are temporal communities, and all human things,
upon HIM who reigns King in Zion. "Be wise now therefore, O ye kings; be
instructed, ye judges of the earth. Kiss the Son lest he be angry, and ye
perish from the way, when his wrath is kindled but a little: blessed are all
they that put their trust in him."

THE holy religion of the Son of GOD, has a most powerful and benign influence
upon moral beings in society. It not only restrains malicious revengeful
passions, and curbs unruly lusts; but will in event, eradicate them all from
the human breast -- it implants all the divine graces and social virtues in the
heart -- it sweetens the dispositions of men, and fits them for all the
pleasing satisfactions, of rational friendship -- teaches them self denial --
inspires them with a generous public spirit -- fills them with love to others,
to righteousness and mercy -- makes them careful to discharge the duties of
their stations -- diligent and contented in their callings -- this, beyond any
other consideration, will increase the real dignity of rulers -- will give
quiet and submission to subjects -- this is the only true and genuine spirit of
liberty, which can give abiding union and energy to states -- and will enable
them to bear prosperity without pride -- and support them in adversity without
dejection -- this will afford all classes of men consolation in death, and
render them happy in GOD, their full eternal portion, in the coming world.

RELIGION, therefore is the glory of all inteligent beings, from the highest
angel, ^o the meanest of the human race: and will for ever happify its
possessors, considered, either individually, or, as connected in society: for
this assimulates the hearts of creatures, to the great fountain of being in the
exercise of general and disinterested affection; and is, the consumation of
wisdom.

IF the preceding observations, have their foundation in reason, and the word
of GOD: we see the happy connection between religion and good government. The
idea that there is, and ought to be, no connection between religion and civil
policy, appears to rest upon this absurd supposition; that men by entering into
society for mutual advantage, become quite a different class of beings from
what they were before, that they cease to be moral beings; and consequently,
loose their relation and obligations to GOD, as his creatures and subjects: and
also their relations to each other as rational social creatures. If these are
the real consequences of civil connections, they are unhappy indeed, as they
must exceedingly debase and degrade human nature: and it is readily
acknowledged, these things being true, that religion can have no further
demands upon them. But, if none of the relations or obligations of men to their
Creator, and each other are lost by entering into society; if they still remain
moral and accountable beings, and, if religion is the glory and perfection of
moral beings, then the connection, between religion and good government is
evident -- and all attempts to separate them are unfriendly to society, and
inimical to good government, and must originate in ignorance or bad design.

RELIGION essentially consists in friendly affection to GOD, and his rational
offspring; and such affection, can never injure that government which has
public happiness for its object.

ATTEMPTS have been made to distinguish between moral and political wisdom --
moral and political righteousness -- as tho there were two kinds of wisdom and
righteousness, distinct in their nature, and applicable only to different
subjects: that which is moral, belonging to the government of men as subjects
of GOD's dominion; and that which is political, to men as jubjects of civil
rule -- But, if wisdom and righteousness, are the same in the fountain, as in
the streams, in GOD, as in his creatures; differing not in nature and kind, but
only in degree, then all such distinctions are manifestly without foundation.
We read it is true, of a particular kind of wisdom, the fruit of which is
"bitter envying and strife and every evil work: and that this wisdom, is
earthly, sensual, and devilish." But, until it is made to appear, that this is
more friendly to civil government, than the wisdom "from above, which is pure
and peaceable, full of mercy and good fruits, without partiality, and without
hypocrisy:" Jam. xiv. -- 18
the supposed distinction, will not apply to human governments with advantage
-- nor, destroy the connection between religion and good government.

RELIGION and civil government, are not one and the same thing: though both may,
and are designed to embrace some of the same objects, yet the former, extends
its obligations and designs immensely beyond what the latter can pretend too:
and it has rights and prerogatives, with which the latter may not intermeddle.
Still, there are many ways, in which civil government may give countenance,
encouragement, and even support to religion, without invading the prerogatives
of the Most High; or, touching the inferior, tho sacred rights of conscience:
and in doing of which, it may not only show its friendly regard to
christianity, but derive important advantages to itself.

THE friends of true happiness, whether ministers of state, or ministers of
religion, or, in what ever character they may act, will therefore exert
themselves to promote that cause, which aims at no less an object, than the
glory of JEHOVAH, and the highest felicity of his unlimited and eternal kingdom.

A CIVIL community, formed, organized, and administered, agreeably to the
principles which have been suggested, will possess internal peace and energy;
its strength and wealth may easily be collected for necessary defense,
consequently will ever be prepared to repel foreign injuries: it will enjoy
prosperity within itself, and become respectable amongst the nations of the
earth.

COULD this, and the other states in the American Republic in their separate
and united capacities, be established upon the principles of true wisdom, that
righteousness and goodness, which have their foundation in the nature of
things, and are essential parts, of the christian system -- could we build upon
this foundation, we might set forth a good example, and become a blessing to
mankind -- in this way we might establish our character as a wise and
understanding people -- become Solomon's Song vi. 4. and 10.
"beautiful as Tirzah, comely as Jerusalem" -- we should "look forth as the
morning, fair as the moon, clear as the sun, and terrible as an army with
banners."

THOSE deserve well of their brethren, who have devoted their time and superior
abilities to the public, in the establishment and administration of civil
constitutions, which are calculated to answer purposes, importantly beneficial
to mankind.

THESE thoughts, may call our grateful attention, to the honorable and
venerable characters, collected this morning in the house of GOD. Some
respectful, serious addresses, to the different characters here present may
conclude this discourse.

MAY IT PLEASE YOUR EXCELLENCY,

SEATS of dignity in free republics are truly honorable, where merit, and the
voice of uncorrupted citizens are the only causes of elevation. The first
Magistrate in such a state, is more respectable than the most powerful Monarch,
who obtains his throne, either by arbitrary usurpation, the arts of venality,
or even the fortunate circumstance of hereditary succession. In either of the
instances supposed, the throne may be filled without personal worth, may be
supported by the same means by which it was at first obtained, and may be
improved for the purposes of idleness and dissipation: or what is worse, to
consume the wealth, destroy the liberties, and even sport with the lives of
subjects. By means of such abuse of power, a people will be rendered vastly
more wretched, than they would have been in a state of nature; and yet find it
extremely difficult, to extricate themselves from these complicated evils. But
such abuse of power cannot so easily take place, or be continued, in free
republican governments: where places of honor are inseparably connected with
important duties; duties which must be performed, otherwise such places will
not long be supported, under the jealous inspection of a people, possessed of
the knowledge, and love of liberty, together with the means of its preservation.

THESE considerations, add to the merit, and increase the luster of those
worthy characters, which have been repeatedly called by the united voice of
their brethren to preside in this State. The understanding of this people and
their knowledge of worth, have been conspicuous, in the attention generally
paid, to deserving personages in the election of their rulers: especially in
the long succession of wise religious governors, whose eminent talents, and
pious examples, have been so extensively beneficial to this community. May your
Excellency's name, in this honorable catalogue, remain a lasting memorial, of
the many services which you have rendered to this people, as a public testimony
of the respect of your enlightened fellow citizens: and may your unremitted
exertions for their prosperity be continued, and all your benevolent endeavors
to promote their temporal and eternal interests, meet the divine blessing --
may you never bear that sword in vain, which the exalted MEDIATOR, through the
instrumentality of men, has put into your hand; let this be a shield to the
innocent, the widow, and the orphan, in their oppressions; while it remains a
terror, to all such as do evil: you will if possible, scatter the wicked with
your eyes, but when coercion becomes necessary, you will bring the wheel over
them. Sensible of the weighty cares, and strong temptations of your exalted
station, may your dependence, be increasingly fixed on that glorious and
gracious Being, who has called you to office; esteeming his approbation
infinitely superior to the applause of mortals. By the weight of your example,
and the influence of that authority with which you are clothed, may you, sir,
do much for the honor of GOD the Redeemer, for the advancement of his holy
religion among men -- for the promotion of righteousness and peace, in this,
and the United States of America -- for the abolition of slavery and every
species of oppression -- for the increase of civil and religious liberty, in
the earth -- And when, by the Supreme Disposer of all events, you may be
called, to relinquish the honors, and cares of this mortal life, our prayer to
Almighty GOD, is, that in that solemn hour, you may enjoy the supports of
conscious integrity, meet with the approbation of your Judge, and be graciously
received to the society of the blessed.

THE public address, may now, be respectfully presented, to his Honor the
Lieutenant Governor, the Council, and House of Representatives.

HONORED GENTLEMEN,

THE trust, which GOD, and this respectable commonwealth, have reposed in you
is truly important. All the temporal interests of this people, in a sense, are
put into your hands and committed to your management, for the general good.
Children place strong confidence, in the wisdom and tender care of their
natural parents; so, do this people in you, gentlemen, as their civil fathers:
this confidence is not only implied, but expressed, in the designation of your
persons to those offices which you hold, in the government of your fellow
citizens. Civil liberty, is an inheritance descending from the Father of
Lights, a talent which, individuals may not despise, or misimprove without
guilt: how vastly important then, must this, with its connected blessings in
society, be, to a large community? The extensive views, and patriotic feelings,
of wise and virtuous magistrates, cannot fail, deeply to impress their minds
with the weight and solemnity of the trust reposed in them. Great anxiety for
preferment, betrays a weak mind, or a vicious heart. Those only, deserve the
honors of an elevated station, who are willing to bear the burdens, and perform
the duties which belong to it: and to reap the rewards which righteousness and
benevolence will bestow: and who, in the ways of well doing, can meet with
calmness, the temporary ingratitude, of a misguided misjudging people. Not that
the preacher would be understood to mean, that great esteem, with an ample
pecuniary recompense, are not due, to those, whose time, and superior talents
are employed, in promoting the happiness of their fellow men.

You, gentlemen, are vested with an authority, which men of wisdom and virtue
will ever revere; which properly exercised, none can resist, without resisting
the ordinance of GOD: and persevering in their resistance "must receive to
themselves damnation." May you ever exercise such authority, in the meekness of
wisdom, for the best good of your brethren: agreeably to those unchangeable
laws of righteousness and goodness, which the Supreme Lawgiver has established
in his moral kingdom. Eccl. iii. 16 -- Ps ci. 6.
"That no iniquity, be found in the place of righteousness, or, wickedness, in
the place of judgment; your eyes will be upon the faithful of the land, that
they may dwell with you: these who walk in a perfect way," will be designated
by you for all important executive trusts. Viewing yourselves, in the light of
truth, as the ministers of GOD, to this people for good, you will realize the
important connection between the moral government of JEHOVAH, and those
inferior governments which he has ordained to exist among men. In this light,
you will esteem it your highest glory, to manifest a personal, supreme regard,
to the benevolent institutions of the Son of GOD: by the weight of your
example, and the force of all that influence you possess, you will study to
commend his holy religion to all men; that you may be instrumental, in
promoting the temporal peace and eternal happiness of this people. Public
sentiments have a vast influence upon the conduct of mankind; public sentiments
receive their complexion from public men; the rulers of a people can do more
than some may imagine, to promote real godliness: if this, is recommended in
their conversation, and exemplified in their lives, it will attract the
attention of multitudes; it may lead some to a happy imitation, and will not
fail, to give strong support, to all the friends of GOD. But men, sufficiently
disposed at all times to cast off the fear of GOD, need slender aid, from
public influential characters, to become professed advocates, for infidelity
and licentiousness. How exceedingly interesting, gentlemen, to yourselves and
the community, is the station assigned you in providence? May unerring wisdom
guide all your steps, and the God of Abraham be your shield, and exceeding
great reward.

THE Ministers of GOD's sanctuary, will accept some thoughts addressed to them,
not indeed for their instruction, but, to "stir up their pure minds by way of
remembrance."

REVEREND FATHERS and BRETHREN,

OUR character as christians, obliges us to be righteous before GOD, walking
in all the commandments and ordinances of the Lord blameless: not forgetting
that, of civil magistracy, as one of the wise and gracious appointments of
heaven, which, rightly improved, will extend its happy influence beyond the
present life. And, our office as ministers, calls us to exhort all the
disciples of Jesus, that they "submit themselves to every ordinance of man for
the Lord's sake: unto kings and governors as unto them that are sent by him for
the punishment of evil doers, and for the praise of them that do well. For so
is the will of GOD, that with well doing ye may put to silence the ignorance of
foolish men." The ignorance and folly of that principle, that there is no
connection between religion and civil policy, is most happily refuted, when the
followers of JESUS act in character, and demonstrate to the world, that real
christians are the best members of society in every station. We are not then
acting out of character, when pointing out the advantages of a righteous
government, and the necessity of subjection to magistrates. This however, is
not the principal object of our ministry: our wisdom and understanding will
eminently appear, in converting sinners from the error of their ways -- in
winning souls to CHRIST. To effect which our speech and our preaching must not
be with enticing words of man's wisdom, but in demonstration of the spirit and
of power.

CONFIDING, in the unerring wisdom, and boundless goodness, of GOD, we need not
be ashamed, nor afraid, to declare all his counsel -- being well assured, that
no doctrine, or duty, can be found in his revealed will, but such as are
profitable for men to believe and practice. The great comprehensive design of
the christian ministry, is the glory of GOD, in the salvation of sinners,
through JESUS CHRIST. In pursuing this noble all important design, we shall
labor to exhibit, the divine excellency of the christian religion, in the
holiness of our lives and conversation, as well, as in the simplicity, and
uncorruptness of our doctrines: that our example and our preaching, may unite
in their tendency, to persuade sinners, to become reconciled to GOD. "How
beautiful upon the mountains are the feet of him that brings good tidings;
that publishes peace, that says unto Zion, thy GOD reigns!" and how is this
beauty increased? when the spiritual watchmen upon the walls of Zion, "sing
together with the voice, and see eye to eye." Isa. lii. 7. 8.


THAT this beauty may appear and shine, in all the ministers and churches of
CHRIST; let us become more fervent, and united, in supplications, to our Father
in Heaven, that he may shed forth plentiful effusions of that spirit of love,
and of a sound mind, which is the only abiding principle of union, between
moral beings. Under the influence of this holy spirit, awakened to activity and
renewed diligence, by the repeated instances of mortality, among the
ministering servants of GOD, in the past year; may we all pursue the sacred
work ^^^^gned us, with increasing joy, and success, until called from our
labors, to receive the free rewards of faithful servants, in the kingdom of our
Lord and Savior JESUS CHRIST.

A brief address, to the numerous audience present on this joyful anniversary,
will close this discourse. --

BRETHREN AND FELLOW CITIZENS,

LET us not vainly boast, in our truly happy constitution -- nor in the number
of wise, and pious personages, whom GOD has called to preside in its
administration. We have abundant occasion indeed, to bless, and praise, the GOD
of Heaven; for all our distinguisting privileges, both civil and religious --
few of our lapsed race, enjoy immunities, equal to those which we possess: but
we do well to remember, that profaneness and irreligion, infidelity and
ungodliness, when connected with such advantages, will exceedingly enhance the
guilt of men, and without repentance will awfully increase the pains of
damnation. Would we become a wise understanding people, we must learn the
statutes, and judgments, which the LORD our GOD, has commanded, and obey them
-- we must be a religious, holy people, "for without holiness, no man shall see
the LORD." Let all be exhorted, to become wise to salvation, through says,
which is in CHRIST JESUS. -- AMEN.


