Some modern Directions FOR THE Culture and Manufacture OF SILK, TAKEN FROM A
MANUSCRIPT As it was wrote by a Gentleman in Italy. CONTAINING, The most
necessary Instructions FOR THE Culture and Manufacture of Silk, From the
hatching of the worm, till the Silk is prepared for the loom.

TRANSCRIBED BY A FRIEND TO THE PUBLIC.

WINDHAM: Printed for Mess. SAMUEL STORES, and LEMUEL ELDREDGE of Mansfield.
M,DCC,XCII.

Some modern Directions, etc.
THE SILKWORM is an infect too well known to need any description: neither
were it necessary, should I be able to enter into all the particulars of its
construction. I shall content myself with what you require of me, in giving you
an account of its birth from the egg, its several stations, and the manner of
turning to advantage, the wealth nature has lavished on so small a creature, as
used in Piedmont. In order to which I have divided this small treatise into
heads, and those heads into sections, as follows:

CHAP. I.
Of the SILKWORM.
Sect. 1. THE person who purposes raising a quantity of Silkworms, and
preserving good eggs or seed, must begin a year before hand. He must choose a
certain number of good cocons, or silk cods, the superficies of which he
pierces slightly with a needle and thread, and in this manner strings a
convenient number of them, which done, he hangs them up in a proper room, as
children do birds' eggs. After the moths or butterflies have eaten their way
through their natural in closure, Remark. It happens sometimes that the
butterfly is longer before his birth, that is, from fifteen to twenty days,
when the weather is chilly. They generally are born in the morning. When the
eggs are fresh, they are about the bigness of a common pin's head, of a straw
color, and by degrees turn black.
(which is generally about four days after the cocon is finished) you must
place them on sheets of paper deposited in a box or drawer safe from harm,
where they couple and are joined together, during 24 hours; this over, the
female lays her eggs on the paper, which stick to it by means of a gummy
substance they are covered with; after which, she dies, as does the male. Thus
their second life, if I may so call it, is only 24 hours in all.

When you have thus received your eggs laid on your paper, you must keep them
till the next spring, in a cool damp place; on the arrival of the spring, you
must observe when the mulberry-tree begins to shoot out its leaves, and then
you are to expose your eggs in a very warm place, that they may all hatch at
the same time, otherwise they would only hatch by little and little, and in
proportion as each individual should be on the point of his natural maturity.
To hatch your eggs more effectually, you may carry them about you nine or ten
days, in your bosom, or other parts of your body, in a paper, and in the night
you may put them between the mattress of your bed; you may likewise hatch them
by the heat of an oven, but this method is dangerous, because you may easily
burn them.

Sect. 2. The worm is quite black after its birth; as long as an ant, he is
rolled up in the egg, which otherwise could not contain him; he preserves this
black color 8 or 9 days. After your worms are hatched you must put them on
wicker or oakboard shelves, which are covered first with papers, and afterward
with a bed of the tenderest mulberry leaves. You may place several ranges of
them in the same chamber: but you must observe that there be at least one foot
and a half distance between each range, and that your scaffolds are in the
middle of the room, so that you may go round them, and lastly, that your wicker
shelves be not too broad, but just so as to reach conveniently from each side
to the middle. By degrees as the worm grows, he requires more room; it must be
your care to thin them, and keep those of the same size as near together as you
can; for which reason you must always leave some shelves vacant for that
purpose.

The worm continues to eat during eight days after his birth, at which time he
is three lines in length, or the part of an inch. He is then attacked with his
first sickness, which consists in a kind of lethargic sleep, for three days,
Remark. When the weather is cold, their sicknesses are much longer, and last
seven, eight or more days.
during which space, he changes his skin, still retaining the same volume. This
sleep being over, he begins to eat again, during five days, at which time he is
increased to seven lines in length; after which follows a second sickness; in
every respect like the former, as well as the succeeding; after wards he feeds
during other five days, and is then about ten lines in length, when he is
seized with his third sickness, which over, he continues to eat again five days
more, which are followed by his fourth sickness; at which time he is at his
full growth, which is about fourteen lines in length, and two in diameter. He
then eats during five days with great voracity; after which he leaves his food,
becomes transparent, a little on the yellowish cast; he leaves his silky tracy
on the leaves as he passes. These symptoms denote that he is ready to begin his
cocon. You must then furnish him with little bushes of heath broom, or other
like twigs, which you stick upright betwixt your shelves, forcing them a
little, that they may not fall. He remains still two days climbing up the
twigs, and settling himself in a good place; after which time he begins to lay
the foundation of his lodge, and is five days in spinning his cocon. Thus from
his birth, to the construction of the cocon, he lives the space of forty-seven
days.

Sect. 3. You must keep your worms in a dry place, sheltered from all cold
winds, and the doors and windows always shut, provided it be not too hot. If
the weather be cold, you may make a small fire. Those who are accustomed to
this business, have no need of a rule; but to give you a just notion of the
degree of heat, you may place a thermometer in the room (according to the
construction of Mr. Reaumer) and keep up as equal as possible to the 19th
degree, which is 19/80 hotter than the point of frost, and 61/80 colder than
boiling water. I recommend this thermometer to explain the degree of heat,
because the dimensions of it do not signify, provided it be on the principle of
Mr. Reaumer, in which every line is the 1000th part of the liquor contained in
the ball.

You must give them the leaves, taking care that they be dry, strewing them
lightly over them, and you must mind to take away their dung, which is under
them, as often as you find a certain quantity. When the worms are ready to
mount, in order to spin, if the weather be stifling hot, attended with thunder,
you will see them in a languishing condition. Your care must then be to revive
them, which is thus effected: take a handful of wormwood, and dip it in
vinegar, brush your shelves therewith. It is surprising to see how this smell
revives them, it excites those who have not done feeding to eat, and makes the
others who are ready to spin, climb up the twigs. These little creatures
require a great deal of care in the management; one or other must attend them
night and day. You must be very nice and gentle in handling them, and I may say
the whole success depends on the pains you take. The worm cannot sustain strong
smells, such as tobacco, or the like; for which reason you must keep all such
smells out of the room.

In many parts of Italy, amongst others, Romagna, and the March of Ancona,
they have two silk harvests or recoltos in the year; after the first is over,
having kept part of their eggs, in very cool places, when the mulberry tree
begins to sprout again, (for during the first recolto it is stripped of its
leaves for food for the worms) they expose their eggs to be hatched. Sometimes
they give the leaves of the rose-bush to the young worms, for the want of young
mulberry leaves. The cocons of this second recolto are rather inferior to those
of the first. The silkworm is generally 14 lines in length, 2 in diameter, and
6 2/7 in circumference. He is either of a pearl color, or blackish; the latter
sort is the best. His body is divided into seven rings, to each of which, are
joined too very short feet; he has a short point like the thorn, above the
anus; the substance which forms the silk, is in their stomach, which is very
long wound upon two distaffs, as it were, and surrounded with a gum commonly
yellow, sometimes white, and others greenish. When the worm spins his cocon, he
winds off a thread from each of the distaffs, and joins them afterward by
means of two hooks he has in his mouth, so that the cocon is composed of a
double thread. Having opened a silkworm, you may take out these distaffs, which
are folded up in three plaits; you may afterward extend them to near two else
in length. If you then scrape the thread so stretched out, you will scrape off
the gum, (which is very much like beeswax, and which serves the same purpose
for the silk it covers, as the gold leaf does to the in got of silver on which
it is applied by the wiredrawer) the silk then remains of a pearl color. This
thread, which is about the thickness of a very fine hair, is extremely strong
and even. Three things remarkable in this infect are, 1st. He describes a
semicircle in eating; 2d. His excrement has perfectly the shape of a mulberry;
3d, They have no sex before their metamorphosis.

CHAP. II.
Of the COCONS.
Sect. 1. It is almost a general rule to wait six or seven days after all the
cocons seem to be formed, before they take them off the bushes or boughs, in
order to give the worm time to bring his work to perfection. It is proper from
that time to give some air to the room, that you keep them in to dissipate a
considerable dampness which the worm sex exhale on their mounting (when they
have not been well fed and kept, for when they have been properly nursed, this
dampness does not show itself) and which is of great detriment to the cocons,
either by rotting them, rendering them soft, or covering them with spots.

The Cocons may be divided into, or under two general heads or classes -- the
white and the yellow. In the yellow you meet with all the shades, from a bright
yellow, diminishing at last to white. Some few are of a pale green. We may
reckon nine different sorts of Cocons, which are met with in all filatures,
more or less.

The good Cocons, are those which are brought to their perfection strong, and
little or not at all spotted.

2. The pointed Cocons, are those, one of whose extremities rises up in a
point; after having afforded a little silk, the point which is the weakest
part, breaks or tears, and it is impossible to continue to wind that cocon any
longer, because, when the thread comes round to the hole, it is of consequence,
broke, and the whole contains nothing but ends.

3. The Cocalons are a little bigger than the others; yet they do not contain
more silk, because their contexture is not so strong; in winding they are to be
separated from the rest, because they require to be wound in cooler water,
otherwise they furze out in the winding.

4. The Doubions, or Double Cocons, are so called, because they contain two and
sometimes three worms, who join together to form one single cocon; they
interlace their threads, for which reason they are to be kept asunder from the
rest; they make the silk we call Doubion.

5. The Soufflons, are cocons very imperfect, whose contexture is loose,
sometimes to that degree that they are transparent, and bear the same
proportion to a good cocon, as a gauze to a satin; these cannot be wound.

6. The perforated Cocons, are so called, because they have a hole at one end,
for which reason they cannot be wound.

7. The calcined Cocons, are those whose worm after the formation of the cocon,
is attacked with a sickness, which sometimes petrifies him, and other times
reduces him to a fine white powder, without in the least damaging the silk: on
the contrary, these cocons produce more silk than the others, because the worm
is lighter. They are to be distinguished by the noise the petrified worm makes
when you shake the cocon. In Piedmont, they sell for half as much again as the
others. It is very scarce to see a parcel of 25lb. of them at a time; 6lb. 3 of
these cocons, have produced 1lb. 1 fine silk, of 5 and 6 cocons.

8. The good Choquette, consists in those cocons whose worm dies before he has
bro't it to perfection; they are to be known by the worm's sticking to one side
of the cocon, which is easily to be perceived, when on shaking it, you do not
hear the chrysalis rattle. These cocons are of as fine a silk as the others,
but they are to be wound separately, because they are subject to furze out, and
the silk has not so bright a color, nor is it so strong and nervous.

9. The bad Choquette, is composed of defective cocons, sported or rotten. They
wind many of these cocons together. It makes a very soul, bad, qualified silk,
of a blackish color.

Sect. 2. To judge whether a cocon be good, you must observe if it be firm and
found, if it has a fine grain, and the two ends round and strong. The cocons of
a bright yellow, yield more silk than the others, because they have more gum;
but this advantage accounts to the winder only, because all the gum is lost in
the dying, for this reason the pale silk is preferred, because having less gum,
they loose less in winding, and take a better white, or pale blue. -- Amongst
the cocons you buy, there ought not to be either soufflons or perforated
cocons; because the seller in justice is obliged to keep them apart, not with
standing which, you may always reckon 1 per cent. of these two sorts amongst
your other cocons, and if to these you add douboins and choquetts, you may
calculate at 10 per cent. waste. -- The cocons of the mountains are better than
those of the plain; there is a greater quantity of white amongst them; it is
true, they are not so large as those of the plain, but the worm is likewise
less in proportion: the reason of which is, the air of the mountains being
lighter, the worm labors with greater vigor. They succeed better likewise in
the dry plains, than in damp low grounds, because the leaf is more nourishing.

Five or six days after the cocons have been detached from the branches, it is
your business to prevent the birth of the worm, who would otherwise pierce his
way through the shell, and thereby render your cocon useless; to obviate which,
you must put your cocons in flat long baskets, and fill them within an inch of
the top; you then cover them with paper, and a wrapper over that: these baskets
are to be disposed in an oven, whose heat must be as near as possible to that
of an oven, from which the bread is just drawn out after being baked. After
your cocons have remained therein near an hour, you must draw them out, and if
you would know whether all your worms be dead, draw out a doubion from the
middle of your baskets, and open it, if your worm be dead, you may conclude all
the rest are so, because this contexture of the doubion being stronger than
that of the other cocons, it is consequently less easy to be penetrated by the
heat: you must mind and take it from the middle of the basket, because in that
part the heat is the least perceptible. After you have drawn your basket out of
the oven, you must cover them with a thick woollen cloth, leaving the wrapper
as it was; you then pile them one on the other. If your baking has succeeded,
you will see the woollen cloth covered over with drops of water, the thickness
of your little finger; if there be less, it is a sign your cocons have been
baked too much or too little; if they are too much baked, the worm cannot
transpire a humor he no longer contains, and your cocon is then burnt; if they
are not enough baked, the worm has not been sufficiently penetrated by the
heat, to distill the liquor it contains, your worm in that case is not dead: you
must let your basket stand thus covered five or six hours, if possible, in
order to keep in the heat, which makes an end of stifling those worms which
might have resisted the first impressions of the fire: you must take great care
to let your cocons stand in the oven, the time that is necessary; for if they
do not stand long enough, your worm is only stunned for a while, and afterward
comes to life. If on the other hand you leave them too long in the oven, you
burn them; instances of these two ways are frequently met with, therefore you
cannot take too much care to avoid each extreme. It is a good sign when you see
some of the butterflies spring up from among the cocons which you baked,
because you may be content, or certain the rest are not burnt; for if you would
pretend to kill the very last worm, you might burn many of the cocons, which
might be more exposed to the heat than that very particular worm.

Sect. 3. When you put your cocons into the oven, you must be very careful in
picking out all the spotted ones, otherwise they will communicate those spots
to the next, by the great perspiration the heat occasions in them. If you have
a parcel of strong cocons, and a number of weak ones, and the time will not
admit you to wind them off fresh, (that is, without baking) give the preference
to your weak cocons for winding, and bake your strong ones, because these
latter, containing more gum, supports the baking much better, and suffers less
than the weak ones.

As fast as the cocons you buy are brought in, put them in baskets, and set
them in the fun (if it shines) in case your oven be full, in order to stun at
least the worm, and prevent him from working to pieces the cocon during that
time. It is very proper likewise for your cocons to be a little in the air
before you put them in the oven, because the country people bring them in
panniers, heaped one on the other, which heats them, and renders them extremely
soft, but the air brings them to their proper tone again. Sometimes the country
people sell you the cocons ready baked, when they have been obliged to keep
them some time; it is easy to know them, because the worm when baked, being
dry, rattles louder in the shell than when it is fresh. When your cocons are
thoroughly baked, you must spread them half a foot thick on large offer
shelves, which are to be distributed into as many stories as the height of
your chamber will permit, two or three feet distance, one above another, taking
care to turn your cocons every day, and to change their place, for otherwise
there would many inconveniences arise from the neglect of so doing, they would
become moldy and the moths would eat them; besides, this is absolutely
necessary, to separate the spotted cocons, or the bad choquette, which would
spread to all the cocons that are near them; these must be wound immediately,
to prevent their growing worse. The building where you spread the cocons, is
called the coconiere, and consists of one or more large rooms, through which
are distributed as many ranges of shelves as you can conveniently place, taking
care that the supporter does not touch the roof or wall, (I can represent
nothing nearer to give you a notion of these ranges, than a bottle rack,
several of which may be placed in a room, so as to go round them) because of
the rats who otherwise come down by the poles, and destroy your cocons, they
being very greedy of the worm contained in them. If you perceive any rats in
the room, use your utmost endeavor to destroy them.

A midling cocon, has about 13 lines in its greatest diameter, by 8 lines in
the lesser diameter, some are larger, some less, but this is the general size.
The doubion has generally 15 lines great diameter, by 9 the less diameter. The
cocon is composed of several strata or surfaces, applied one on the other, not
withstanding which, they all communicate, otherwise it would be impossible to
wind them off. It is an easy matter to take off one or more of these surfaces,
the uppermost of which are coarser, less gumed, and higher colored than the
undermost. These surfaces are composed of a fine sort of saliva, whose texture
something resembles the thin skin you find joined to the inside of the
egg-shell of a hen. The cocon produces a thread of very unequal lengths, you
may find from 200 to 1200 else in length in some of them; upon an average you
may calculate the product of a cocon from 5 to 600 else in length.

Sect. 4. The worm or crysalis as enclosed in his cocon, is shrunk up into
himself, so that he is but half as long as before, but twice as thick; he is of
a cinnamon color, and full of a liquor rather clearer, which composes the seed
in the males, and the eggs in the females. Although he seems insensible in that
state, yet you may perceive he is not wholly so, for on pricking him slightly
with a pin, you will see him give signs of life; and this experience is made
use of to know whether they have been killed in the oven. The worm drys the
older it grows, so that the same quantity or number of cocons decrease daily in
weight. The cocons which enclose the male butterfly, have more silk at the
extremities than those which contain the female butterflies, but it is very
difficult to perceive the difference, the most skilful person will mistake at
least 20 in an 100, that is, amongst an 100 he shall have set aside as males,
you will find at least 20 females.

When the worm wants to break his way through, he pierces the cocon, first
wetting it a little, in order to gnaw it more easily; he strips off his upper
coat, under which he has another quite white, with wings, when he comes out;
his wings, which at first appear very small, open and display themselves by
little and little, and are entirely at liberty in an hour or two. The male as
soon as born, seeks a female, and one would imagine he is born again merely to
propagate his species, for he expires in a very little time after he has
performed his function.

CHAP. III.
Of ROYAL COCONS, PERFORATED COCONS, and SOUFFLONS.
THE Royal Cocons are those you have kept for eggs. The worm makes a hole in
them for his passage, so that they cannot be wound, being in the same class
with the perforated cocons; neither can the soufflons be wound, because their
thread being the produce of a weak sick worm, has not the gum it ought to have;
besides, they cannot be wound off, their thread being interlaced and entangled,
you may reap advantage from them as follows:

Sect. 1. The Soufflons. You must let them boil half an hour in common water,
after which you must dry them, when they are quite dry, you must thresh them on
the floor with a flail, to bring out the worm, which is reduced to powder by
the fire and the air. Afterward you must put them on a distaff, and spin them,
to effect which, you must take the soufflon by the two ends, and open it by
stretching it out at arms length, you may then fasten it on your distaff.

Sect. 2. The Perforated Cocons. You must observe the same method as for the
soufflons, excepting that you must let them boil three quarters of an hour,
instead of half an hour, because they contain a greater quantity of gum.

Sect. 3. The Royal Cocons. As it is natural to suppose that you keep the cream
and flour of your cocons for seed, they are fuller of gum than the others, for
which reason you must let them boil an hour, after which you must not thresh
them as the two former, because they do not contain a worm, neither is it
necessary to stay till they be quite dry before you spin them, because they
open more easily when damp.

The produce of these three sorts of cocons makes what we call Flewrett. After
you have boiled these cocons, and threshed them well, to shake out the worm
they contain, you may card them instead of opening them as above, you will make
a much more beautiful flewrett and of a brighter color, but it will be much
dearer because of the waste in carding. A good spinstress if she can spin an
ounce of flewrett in a day has done a very reasonable day's work.

To sum up the whole, and to indicate the value of these three sorts of cocons,
you may calculate as follows:

If the good cocons, are worth 100 The perforated are worth 33 1/3 The
Soufflons, 25 And the Royal Cocons, 250
But if your Royal Cocons are not picked out of the best for eggs, they are
worth but 200. The best flewrett is that which is made with Royal Cocons,
afterward that of perforated Cocons, unchosen, and the most inferior is that
of the Soufflons.

CHAP. IV.
Of the Filature, or winding from the worm.
ALTHOUGH the fresh cocons (that is to say) those that have not been baked in the
oven, yield a brighter silk than those that are baked, and at the same time
produce better weight, by reason of their containing a greater part of their
gum, which they have not as the others lost by the fire; yet, not withstanding,
most people prefer those that are baked, in order to have a silk more even in
color, unless they could have a considerable quantity of fresh cocons, and
time to wind them; for otherwise it is undeniable that the fresh would be much
more advantageous, not only for the reasons abovementioned, but also because
they are easier to wind when they have not been dried in the oven. -- Before
you begin to wind, you must prepare your cocons,

1. In stripping them of their outward coat, or that waste silk that surrounds
them, and which serves to fasten them to the twigs. This burr or tow is proper
to stuff quilts with, or other such uses; you may likewise spin it to make
stockings, but they will be very coarse and ordinary.

2. You must sort your cocons into different classes, in order to wind them
separate. These classes are the good white cocons, the good cocons of all the
other colors, the doubions, the cocalons, among which are included the weak
cocons, and lastly, the good choquette, and the bad choquette.

In sorting the cocons, you will always find some perforated amongst them,
whose worm is already born; these you must set by for flewrett, as I have
described above. You will likewise find some soufflons, but very few, for which
reason you may put them among the bad choquetts, and they run up into waste or
knittings. The good cocons, as well white as yellow, are the easiest to wind;
the cocons which require the greatest pains, are the cocalons; you must wind
them in cooler water than the others, and if you take care to give them to a
good windster, you will have as good silk from them as the rest. You must
likewise choose good windsters for the doubions and choquetts; these two
articles require hotter water than the common cocons.

The good cocons are to be wound in the following manner: you must choose an
open and convenient place for your filature, the longer the better, if you
propose to have many coppers. This building should be high and open on one side
(to prevent the smoke and steam from being troublesome and spoiling the colors
of your silk) and walled on the other to screen from the cold and wind, so as
to enjoy at the same time the sun and air.

Your coppers should if possible be disposed in a row on each side your
building, being most convenient in that manner, because on walking up and down,
you see what all your windsters are about. These basins or coppers are two and
two together, with a funnel or chimney, numbered from one to fifty, sixty, or
an hundred, according to the number of your coppers, by which means you may
always know which windster is in fault, or to be commended, because on taking
the silk off each reel, you tie a little note of the number and windster's name.

Having prepared your reels, (mark well every copper requires its reel,
windster and turner, or the person that turns the reel must be very careful)
and your fire being lighted under your coppers, your windster must stay till
the water is as hot as it can be, without boiling: when your water is ready,
you throw into your coppers two or three handfuls of cocons, which you gently
brush over with a whisk or bunch of mulberty twigs, of about six inches long,
which is cut stumpy like a brush, by this means the threads of the cocons stick
to the whisk, you must then loosen them, and purge them by drawing these ends
through your fingers, till they come off entirely clean: the operation is called
the battice. When the threads of your cocons are entirely clean, you pass four
of them, if you would wind fine silk, through each of the two holes, in a thin
iron-bar that is placed horizontally at the edge of your copper; afterward you
twist these two ends (which consists of four cocons each) round each other,
twenty or twenty five times, that the four ends of each thread may the better
join together, crossing one another that your silk may be plump which would
otherwise be flat; thus you wind two separate skeins on the same reel at the
same time. Your windster must always have a bowl of cold water by her, to dip
her fingers in, and to sprinkle very often the iron-bar through which the two
threads pass, otherwise its heat would burn the thread.

Your threads being thus crossed, or twisted, go up two iron hooks, called
rampins, which are placed higher, and from thence they go upon the reel. Now at
the end of the reel is a cogg-wheel, which moves the rampin from right to left,
so back again, and the two threads that are on it of consequence; so that the
silk crosses on the reel, and your two threads form two hanks of about four
fingers broad.

The mechanism of these reels is so very simple, that any one that has seen a
filature, may explain them to you. You shall likewise have a few of my rude
sketches of the principal parts.

As often as the cocons you wind are finished, or break, or diminish only, you
must join fresh ones, to keep up the number requisite, or the proportion, I say
the proportion, because as the cocon winds off, the thread being finer, you
must join two cocons half wound, to replace a new one; thus you may wind three
new ones, and two halfwound, or four new ones, and your silk is then from four
to five cocons.

To join fresh threads, you must take one end on your finger, which you throw
lightly on the other threads that are winding, and it joins in with them
immediately, and runs up with the rest. You must not wind off your cocons too
bare, or to the last, because when they are near at an end, they bouvre, as we
call it, that is, the husk joins in with the other threads, and makes your silk
foul and gouty.

When you have finished your first parcel, you must clean your copper, taking
out all the stripped worms, as well as the cocons on which there is a little
silk, which you first open and take out the worm, and throw it in a basket by
you, into which you likewise cast the silk that comes off in making battice;
you then proceed as before, with other two or three handfuls of cocons, you
make a new battice, you purge them, and continue to wind the same number of
cocons, or the proportion, and so to the end. As I said above, your windster
must always have a bowl of cold water by her to sprinkle the bar, to cool her
fingers every time she dips them in the hot water, and to pour into her copper
when it is necessary, that is, when her water begins to boil. You must be
careful to cross or twist your threads a sufficient number of times, about
twentyfive, otherwise your silk remains flat instead of being round and full,
besides, when the silk is not well crossed, it never can be clean, because a
gout or knob that comes from a cocon will pass through a small number of these
twists, though a greater will stop it, and your thread then breaks, and you pass
what foulness there may be in the middle of your reel, between the two hanks,
which serves for a head-band to tie them.

You must mind that your water be just of a proper degree of heat; when it is
too hot, the thread is dead, and has no body, and when it is too cold, the ends
which form the thread do not join well, and form a harsh silk.

You must change the water in your copper, four times a day for your doubions
and choquetts, and twice only for your good cocons, when you wind fine silk,
but three or four times when you wind coarse, for if you were not to change
your water, the silk would not be so bright and glossy, because the worms which
are in the cocons, soul the water very considerably. You must endeavor as much
as possible to wind with clear water, for if there be too many cocons in it,
your silk is covered with a kind of dust which attracts a moth which destroys
your silk. You may wind your silk of what size you please, that is, from one
cocon to an hundred; but it is difficult to wind more than thirty cocons in a
thread, tolerably even. The nicety, and that in which consists the greatest
difficulty, is to wind even, because as the cocon winds off the end is finer,
and you must then join other cocons to preserve the proportion. This difficulty
of keeping the silk even is so great that (excepting a thread of two cocons) we
do not say a silk of 3, of 4, or of 6 cocons, but a silk of 3 and 4, of 4 and
5, of 6 to 7, and if you proceed to a coarser silk, you do not calculate so
nicely, as one cocon more or less, we say, for example, from 12 to 15, from 15
to 20 cocons. It is easy to conceive that it is more difficult to wind a coarse
silk even, than a fine silk, because it is harder to keep a great number of
cocons always equal, than a small one. Four hundred else of the thread of a
cocon, supposed to be always of the same size, weighs three grains, and as this
thread is doubled when thrown in organzine, you must calculate six grains per
cocon. Thus a silk of five to six cocons, will make an organzine of thirtythree
deniers, taking the middle term of five and six, which is five and half. This
is a general rule, almost without exception. Thus a silk of ten to twelve
cocons, will make an organzine of sixty-six.

The doubions which you design for Rondelette, or ordinary sewing silk, are to
be wound from fifty to twenty cocons. The rest you may wind as coarse as
possible, that is, from forty to fifty cocons. These serve to cover and fill up
in coarse stuffs, and are likewise used for sewing silk.

The good choquette is to be wound according to the uses you intend to put it
to, however, not finer than from seven to eight. The bad choquette, you may
wind from fifteen to twenty.

In winding the good cocons, you will always find some defective amongst them,
which will not wind off, or are full of gouts and knobs, these you must take
out of your copper and keep by themselves: they are called Bassinats, and are
to be wound apart as coarse as you can; they make a foul dirty silk.

To have a good silk you must wind in fine weather; if the wind be high, it
shakes, your silk and prevents it from laying smooth on the reel and forms
strings of threads which render it very difficult to wind on bobbins; if the
weather be rainy, the silk is damp and has not that luster it ought to have, or
which it has when it dries as it goes up on to the reel. You must likewise take
care not to hank it when damp, but let it dry on the reel, otherwise it will be
furzy.

The motion of the rampins which places the thread zigzag on the reel, is very
essential, because if your silk was to be wound in parallel lines on the reel,
it is very certain the undermost threads would be much shorter than the
uppermost, and render it very difficult to wind; whereas by the motion of the
part rampin your hank is much broader, and your thread is in a different
position every instant, yet the motion being always the same, your hank is as
regular in in its breadth as if the thread went directly on the reel in a
straight line, of a quarter of an inch broad. I have now only to speak of the
waste that comes from the battice, and the cocons that have still some silk
upon them, which as I said before you throw into your basket, which are what we
call Moresques; these you tharsh and afterward card or spin them to make
flewrett, the uses of which I have already explained; but as it is merchandise
you have no idea of in England, I refer you to those who are acquainted with
it. You thus see in beginning a filature, how necessary it is to know how to
make the most use of the very refuse of your cocons, and that you must
establish a manufacture of stuffs made of your flewrett and other waste. After
all, in Piedmont, which is a very cheap country, where the greatest economy is
practiced in the filature, and where neither theory or practice are wanting to
render the enterprise successful, yet how many ruin themselves, tho it be the
only staple commodity of the country; judge then, of the many hazards you (...)
beginning such a project; besides, if you consider, that sometimes a minute
more or less in the ovens, renders your cocons useless, and that all the theory
in the world is not sufficient without a long practice to screen you from such
accidents; again, the pains you must take to instruct your windsters, which
requires experienced persons, and the uncertainly of success: I think you will
hardly conceive an affair of this importance feasible, unless conducted by
persons of great experience, and large capitals. It would be impossible for me
to enumerate the fourth part of the many little circumstances that may casually
happen: I believe, what I have already said, will show a part at least of the
danger that attends this undertaking. Since I am thus far advanced, I shall
proceed however, till I have carried your silks from the windsters' to the
throwsters' hands, and from thence into the merchants.

One hundred and fifty ounces of good cocons, yield about eleven ounces of silk
from five to six cocons; if you wind coarser, they will yield something more.
You may wind about twelve ounces of silk from five and six cocons, in fourteen
hours.

The silk which is made of the bassinats and bad choquette, serves to make
stockings and coarse heavy stuffs, such as damasks, etc.

CHAP. V.
Of the working or throwing of Silk.
BEFORE you can work your silk, you must wind it off on bobbins: in London,
(and till lately, all over England, except at Derby) silk is wound by hand; but
at present, many new mills in the country have the convenience of winding by
water. In Piedmont, all the good silks are wound by engines which go by water,
and the bad only by hand.

Before you begin to wind your silk, you must prepare it for the wheel,
breaking the gum at the four corners, which lay upon the reel, on winding from
the worm; this you effect, by rubbing the silk in those places, between your
fingers, till the threads are entirely separated. You then open and spread it
out upon the wheel, and you must mind to cut short all the straggling ends that
appear, except the right one. If there be any gouts, clear them away. Your silk
being wound, you apply it to the different uses; and,

Sect. I. For ORGANZINE.
If you purpose throwing your silk into Organzine, you must give it the first
throw or spinning, by twisting the thread from right to left; the silk in
twisting, turns off on other bobbins, something larger than the first. After
your silk has received the first throw, you must give it the steam, in order to
double it more easily. To steam these bobbins, you must have a large copper,
with a fire under it, which you fill with water, and you add thereto about two
ounces of soap, eighteen ounces oil of olives, and fifty-four ounces wood
ashes; when your water boils, you cover your copper with a kind of cullender,
the bottom of which is pierced full of small holes, to let the steam come
through; on this you set your bobbins, which have already been on the spinning
mill, and you cover them with a thick woollen cloth, to keep in the steam; when
your bobbins are damp, so as that the silk begins to swell, and detach from the
bobbin, you take them away, and give them to the doublers. The water which is
in the copper, may serve many days; you need only fill it up as it evaporates;
but you must change the ashes every day, and add a fresh dose of oil and soap.
If you were to steam your silk with pure water only, the dampness which the
silk might receive, would presently be evaporated, whereas the particles of oil
and soap with which the water is impregnated, will by retaining its force a
longer time, make your silk much more easy to double. The steam adds about two
per cent, to the weight of your silk.

It may not be improper here to remark that incertitude of the knowledge many
people pretend to have of organzine, on smelling it; it is true a good silk ought
to have the fragrance of a violet, but it is likewise as true, that you may
give your silk what smell you please, by putting proper ingredients into your
copper when you steam it.

After the steam, comes to doubting; you may double your silk by water or by
hand, but the latter method is always to be preferred, because in doubting by
hand you may clean your silk, which cannot be done when you double by water. In
Piedmont, the former method is only in use; you double your silk on bobbins of
the same size with those on which you wind it.

After the silk is thus doubled, you give it the second throw or twist, which
is just to the contrary of the first, that is, from left to right; the
combination of these two throws is called the pearl, that is, your organzine
seems like a string of small pearls or beads; it is easy to know if the second
throw be as it should be, it is more difficult to judge of the first, to this
end you untwist the organzine and when it is thus open, on slackening your hand
a little, each thread twists round itself in obedience to the first throw or
spin, which it hard, the thread twists very much; if flack but very little.
Besides the two thread organzines, you may make organzines of three or four
threads in the same manner, all the difference consists in doubling three or
four threads together, instead of two, and that you do not give them so smart a
throw.

When your silk has been taken wet off the reel and has afterward dried in the
hank, the threads stick together and make a kind of a cord, which renders it
very difficult to wind, you may then steam it as above before you wind it,
which makes the thread separate more easily.

As the organzines require the greatest care, as well for their cleanliness as
the throw, and the workmanship being the dearest, you must always choose the
best of your silk to work in that manner; an organzine is much stronger than an
orsoy of equal size, because the first is spun, the latter not, the spinning is
likewise the reason that the organzines do not cotton as do the trams, tho if
your trams are made of well wound silk, that is, well crossed or twisted in
winding, they do not purge so much.

Sect. 2. Of ORSOYS, TWO-THREAD TRAMS and SINGLES.
Singles are generally first wound by hand, to clean the silk more effectually,
after which you give them the throws. To throw orsoys, it is not necessary to
wind them by hand, because you clean them in the doubling; after it is wound on
bobbins, you double it and mount it on your mill, and give it as hard a throw
as organzine; you do the same for two-thread trams, except that you give them a
very slack throw; by rights, your silk for trams should not be steamed, yet
when the weather is very hot, you are obliged to do it, as well as steam your
bobbins for organzine a second time before you give it the throw, especially if
your mill be not damp and cool as it ought to be.

As an orsoy has as hard a throw as an organzine, it is no unealy matter to be
mistaken by it, if it had the same luster, but as it wants the first throw, it
falls short, besides, if you break a thread of orsoy the two ends untwist till
they are entirely asunder; whereas if you break a thread of organzine the ends
remain twisted, because the spin or first throw acts in opposition to the
twist, and by that means preserves an equilibrium which cannot have place in
the former: by this means you have an infallible mark to distinguish organzines
from orsoglios. Many throwsters in Italy, pass a wet sponge over their tram as
it is upon the reels, which renders, it is true, the silk of a brighter color
and more easiy to skein, but it does not turn to account to the proprietor. The
custom is forbid in Piedmout, yet is practiced too often on trams tho not on
organzines.

CHAP. VI.
Of the Essay or Proof of Organzine.
ORGANZINE is the only silk, whose title is fixed by a determined standard. --
The new method of making these essays, has been invented and introduced but a
few years only at Turin. Formerly the silk merchants did not give themselves
the trouble of making a trial of it, but contented themselves with judging it
on a careful inspection; after which, the weaver, who is sometimes the dupe of
the affair, took another method of finding out the precise and just size and
weight of the organzine, he worked by one length of a warp, of a whole piece,
having agreed amongst themselves to keep always to the small length, which is
sixty else French.

At least, the silk merchants, in order to act with a greater certainty in
buying or selling organzines, endeavored to ascertain a just and exact measure
or standard for their true title.

The length of the warp of a silk stuff consists of 160 threads, each of which,
as I said before, are 60 else long, (after the piece is wove, or 63 in the
warp) which make in all 9600 else. If they had been obliged to measure and
weigh these 9600 else, the operation would be something tedious; to avoid
which, it was agreed to take the 24th part of 9600, equal to 400 else; and the
24th part of a penny weight or denier, equal to one grain. To make the essay of
your organzine; you measure then 400 else, by means of one or more reels, whose
circumference is just an ell, which you turn 400 times. These turns are
measured by a kind of dial plate, which contain 200 degrees, with an index,
like that of a clock: so that when your index has gone twice round, your essay
is finished, you then weigh this or these essays, and instead of fixing its
weight in grains, as in fact they are, you say so many deniers or penny
weights, because you have weighed the 24th part only of 9600 else, equal to
400, which would consequently weigh 24 times as much, and by the same reason,
the weight you find in grains, is in deniers.

Thus I have finished the task you set me, and if it can ever be of any
advantage, I shall estimate my time in writing it as valuably and usefully
spent.

FINIS.

