CONSIDERATIONS ON THE INJUSTICE AND IMPOLICY OF PUNISHING MURDER BY DEATH.
EXTRACTED FROM THE AMERICAN MUSEUM. WITH ADDITIONS.

BY BENJAMIN RUSH, M. D. PROFESSOR OF THE INSTITUTES, AND OF CLINICAL MEDICINE,
IN THE UNIVERSITY OF PENNSYLVANIA.

PHILADELPHIA: FROM THE PRESS OF MATTHEW CAREY. MAY 4 -- M. DCC. XCII.

CONSIDERATIONS, etc.
IN an essay upon the effects of public punishments upon criminals and upon
society, published in the second volume of the American Museum, I hinted, in a
short paragraph, at the injustice of punishing murder by death. I shall attempt
in the following essay, to support that opinion, and to answer all the
objections that have been urged against it.

I. Every man possesses an absolute power over his own liberty and property,
but not over his own life. When he becomes a member of political society, he
commits the disposal of his liberty and property to his fellow citizens; but as
he has no right to dispose of his life, he cannot commit the power over it to
any body of men. To take away life, therefore, for any crime, is a violation of
the first political compact.

II. The punishment of murder by death, is contrary to reason, and to the order
and happiness of society.

1. It lessens the horror of taking away human life, and thereby tends to
multiply murders.

2. It produces murder, by its influence upon people who are tired of life, and
who, from a supposition, that murder is a less crime than suicide, destroy a
life (and often that of a near connection) and afterward deliver themselves up
to justice, that they may escape from their misery by means of a halter.

3. The punishment of murder by death, multiplies murders, from the difficulty
it creates of convicting persons who are guilty of it. Humanity, revolting at
the idea of the severity and certainty of a capital punishment, often steps in,
and collects such evidence in favor of a murderer, as screens him from justice
altogether, or palliates his crime into manslaughter. If the punishment of
murder consisted in long confinement, and hard labor, it would be proportioned
to the measure of our feelings of justice, and every member of society would be
a watchman or a magistrate, to apprehend a destroyer of human life, and to
bring him to punishment.

4. The punishment of murder by death, cheeks the operations of universal
justice, by preventing the punishment of every species of murder. Quack doctors
-- frauds of various kinds -- and a licentious press, often destroy life, and
sometimes with malice of the most propense nature. If murder were punished by
confinement and hard labor, the authors of the numerous murders that have been
mentioned, would be dragged forth, and punished according to their deserts. How
much order and happiness would arise to society from such a change in human
affairs! But who will attempt to define these species of murder, or to
prosecute offenders of this stamp, if death is to be the punishment of the
crime after it is admitted, and proved to be wilful murder? -- only alter the
punishment of murder, and these crimes will soon assume their proper names, and
probably soon become as rare as murder from common acts of violence.

5. The punishment of murder by death, has been proved to be contrary to the
order and happiness of society by the experiments of some of the wisest
legislators in Europe. The empress of Russia, the king of Sweden, and the duke
of Tuscany, have nearly extirpated murder from their dominions, by converting
its punishment into the means of benefiting society, and reforming the
criminals who perpetrate it.

III. The punishment of murder by death, is contrary to divine revelation. A
religion which commands us to forgive and even to do good to our enemies, can
never authorize the punishment of murder by death. "Vengeance is mine," said
the Lord; "I will repay." It is to no purpose to say here, that this vengeance
is taken out of the hands of an individual, and directed against the criminal
by the hand of government. It is equally an usurpation of the prerogative of
heaven, whether it be inflicted by a single person, or by a whole community.

Here I expect to meet with an appeal from the letter and spirit of the gospel,
to the law of Moses, which declares, that "he that kills a man shall surely
be put to death." Forgive, indulgent heaven! the ignorance and cruelty of man,
which by the misapplication of this text of scripture, has so long and so often
stained the religion of Jesus Christ with folly and revenge.

The following considerations, I hope, will prove that no argument can be
deduced from this law, to justify the punishment of murder by death. On the
contrary, that several arguments against it, may be derived from a just and
rational explanation of that part of the levitical institutions.

1. There are many things in scripture above, but nothing contrary to reason.
Now, the punishment of murder by death, is contrary to reason. It cannot,
therefore, be agreeable to the will of God.

2. The order and happiness of society cannot fail of being agreeable to the
will of God. But the punishment of murder by death, destroys the order and
happiness of society. It must therefore be contrary to the will of God.

3. Many of the laws given by Moses, were accommodated to the ignorance,
wickedness, and "hardness of heart" of the Jews. Hence their divine legislator
expressly says, "I gave them statutes that were not good, and judgments whereby
they should not live." Of this, the law which respects divorces, and the law of
retaliation, which required "an eye for an eye, and a tooth for a tooth," are
remarkable instances.

But we are told, that the punishment of murder by death, is founded not only
on the law of Moses, but upon a positive precept given to Noah and his
posterity, that "whosoever sheddeth man's blood, by man shall his blood be shed."
In order to show that this text does not militate against my proposition, I
shall beg leave to transcribe a passage from an essay on crimes and
punishments, published by the reverend mr. Turner, in the second volume of the
Manchester memoirs. "I hope," says this ingenious author, "that I shall not
offend any one, by taking the liberty to put my own sense upon this celebrated
passage, and to enquire, why it should be deemed a precept at all. To me, I
confess, it appears to contain nothing more than a declaration of what will
generally happen; and in this view, to stand exactly upon the same ground with
such passages as the following: "He that leads into captivity shall go into
captivity." "He that takes up the sword, shall perish by the sword Rev. xv, 10.
." -- The form of expression is exactly the same in each of the texts; why,
then, may they not all be interpreted in the same manner, and considered, not
as commands, but as denunciations? and if so, the magistrate will be no more
bound by the text in Genesis, to punish murder with death, than he will by the
text in the Revelations, to sell every Guinea captain to our West India
planters; and yet, however just and proper such a proceeding might be, I
suppose no one will assert that the magistrate is bound to it by that, or any
other text in the scriptures, or that that alone would be admitted as a
sufficient reason for so extraordinary a measure."

If this explanation of the precept given to Noah, be not satisfactory, I shall
mention another. Soon after the flood, the infancy and weakness of society
rendered it impossible to punish murder by confinement. There was therefore no
medium between inflicting death upon a murderer, and suffering him to escape
with impunity, and thereby to perpetrate more acts of violence against his
fellow creatures. It pleased God in this condition of the world to permit a
less in order to prevent a greater evil. He therefore commits for a while his
exclusive power over human life, to his creatures for the safety and
preservation of an infant society, which might otherwise have perished, and
with it, the only stock of the human race. The command indirectly implies that
the crime of murder was not punished by death in the mature state of society
which existed before the flood. Nor is this the only instance upon record in
the scriptures in which God has delegated his power over human life to his
creatures. Abraham expresses no surprise at the command which God gave him to
sacrifice his son. He submits to it as a precept founded in reason and natural
justice, for nothing could be more obvious than that the giver of life had a
right to claim it when and in such manner as he pleased. 'Till men are able to
give life, it becomes them to tremble at the thought of taking it away. Will a
man rob God? -- Yes -- he robs him of what is infinitely dear to him -- of his
darling attribute of mercy, every time he deprives a fellow creature of life.

4. If the Mosaic law with respect to murder, be obligatory upon christians, it
follows that it is equally obligatory upon them to punish adultery, blasphemy,
and other capital crimes that are mentioned in the levitical law, by death. Nor
is this all: it justifies the extirpation of the Indians, and the enslaving of
the Africans; for the command to the Jews to destroy the Canaanites, and to
make slaves of their heathen neighbors, is as positive as the command which
declares, "that he that kills a man, shall surely be put to death."

5. Every part of the levitical law, is full of types of the Messiah. May not
the punishment of death, inflicted by it, be intended to represent the demerit
and consequences of sin, as the cities of refuge were the offices of the
Messiah?

6. The imperfection and severity of these laws were Probably intended farther
-- to illustrate the perfection and mildness of the gospel dispensation. It is
in this manner that God has manifested himself in many of his acts. He created
darkness first, to illustrate by comparison the beauty of light; and he permits
sin, misery, and death in the moral world, that he may hereafter display more
illustriously the transcendent glories of righteousness, happiness, and
immortal life. This opinion is favored by St. Paul, who says, "the law made
nothing perfect," and that "it was a shadow of good things to come."

How delightful to discover such an exact harmony between the dictates of
reason, the order and happiness of society, and the precepts of the gospel!
There is a perfect unity in truth. Upon all subjects -- in all ages -- and in
all countries -- truths of every kind agree with each other.

It has been said, that the common sense of all nations, and particularly of
savages, is in favor of punishing murder by death.

The common sense of all nations is in favor of the commerce and slavery of
their fellow creatures. But this does not take away from their immorality.
Could it be proved that the Indians punish murder by death, it would not
establish the right of man over the life of a fellow creature, for revenge we
know in its utmost extent is the universal and darling passion of all savage
nations. The practice moreover, (if it exist) must have originated in
necessity; for a people who have no settled place of residence, and who are
averse from all labor, could restrain murder in no other way. But I am
disposed to doubt whether the Indians punish murder by death among their own
tribes. In all those cases where a life is taken away by an Indian of a foreign
tribe, they always demand the satisfaction of life for life. But this practice
is founded on a desire of preserving a balance in their numbers and power; for
among nations which consist of only a few warriors, the loss of an individual
often destroys this balance, and thereby exposes them to war or extermination.
It is for the same purpose of keeping up an equality in numbers and power, that
they often adopt captive children into their nations and families. What makes
this explanation of the practice of punishing murder by death among the Indians
more probable, is, that we find the same bloody and vindictive satisfaction is
required of a foreign nation, whether the person lost, be killed by an
accident, or by premeditated violence. Many facts might be mentioned from
travelers to prove that the Indians do not punish murder by death within the
jurisdiction of their own tribes. I shall mention only one which is taken from
the rev. mr. John Megapolensis's account of the Mohawk Indians, lately
published in mr. Hazard's historical collection of state papers. -- "There is
no punishment, (says our author) here for murder, but every one is his own
avenger. The friends of the deceased revenge themselves upon the murderer until
peace is made with the next akin. But although they are so cruel, yet there are
not half so many murders committed among them as among christians,
notwithstanding their severe laws, and heavy penalties."

It has been said, that the horrors of a guilty conscience proclaim the justice
and necessity of death, as a punishment for murder. I draw an argument of
another nature from this fact. Are the horrors of conscience the punishment
that God inflicts upon murder? why, then, should we shorten or destroy them by
death, especially as we are taught to direct the most atrocious murderers to
expect pardon in the future world? no, let us not counteract the government of
God in the human breast: let the murderer live -- but let it be to suffer the
reproaches of a guilty conscience: let him live, to make compensation to
society for the injury he has done it, by robbing it of a citizen: let him live
to maintain the family of the man whom he has murdered: let him live, that the
punishment of his crime may become universal: and lastly let him live -- that
murder may be extirpated from the list of human crimes!

Let us examine the conduct of the moral Ruler of the world toward the first
murderer: see Cain returning from his field, with his hands reeking with the
blood of his brother! Do the heavens gather blackness, and does a flash of
lightning blast him to the earth? no. Does his father Adam, the natural
legislator and judge of the world, inflict upon him the punishment of death? --
No; the infinitely wise God becomes his judge and executioner. He expels him
from the society of which he was a member. He fixes in his conscience a
never-dying worm. He subjects him to the necessity of labor; and to secure a
duration of his punishment, proportioned to his crime, he puts a mark or
prohibition upon him, to prevent his being put to death, by weak and angry men;
declaring, at the same time, that "whosoever slays Cain, vengeance shall be
taken on him sevenfold."

Judges, attorneys, witnesses, juries and sheriffs, whose office it is to
punish murder by death, I beseech you to pause, and listen to the voice of
reason and religion, before you convict or execute another fellow creature for
murder!

But I despair of making such an impression upon the present citizens of the
united states, as shall abolish the absurd and unchristian practice. From the
connection of this essay with the valuable documents of the late revolution
contained in the American Museum, it will probably descend to posterity. To
you, therefore, the unborn generations of the next century, I consecrate this
humble tribute to justice. You will enjoy in point of knowledge, the meridian
of a day, of which we only perceive the twilight. You will often review with
equal contempt and horror, the indolence, ignorance and cruelty of your
ancestors. The grossest crimes shall not exclude the perpetrators of them from
your pity. You will fully comprehend the extent of the discoveries and precepts
of the gospel, and you will be acquired, I hope, by its gentle and forgiving
spirit. You will see many modern opinions in religion and government turned
upside downwards, and many new connexions established between cause and effect.
From the importance and destiny of every human soul, you will acquire new ideas
of the dignity of human nature, and of the infinite value of every act of
benevolence that has for its object, the bodies, the souls, and the lives of
your fellow creatures. You will love the whole human race, for you will
perceive that you have a common Father, and you will learn to imitate how by
converting those punishments to which their folly or wickedness have exposed
them, into the means of their reformation and happiness.

SOON after the above enquiry was published in the American Museum, a reply to
it made its appearance in the Pennsylvania Mercury, under the signature of
Philochoras; which produced the following answer. The principal arguments in
favor of punishing murder by death, contained in the reply, are mentioned in
the answer, for which reason it was not thought necessary to re-publish the
whole of the reply in the order in which it appeared in the news paper.

FROM THE AMERICAN MUSEUM.
MR. CAREY,
I HAVE read a reply subscribed Philochoras, to an enquiry into the justice and
policy of punishing murder by death, published some time ago in the Museum. The
author of it has attempted to justify public and capital punishments, as well
as war, by the precepts of the gospel. -- Let not my readers suppose that this
author is a skeptic -- or a heathen -- or that he is in any degree unfriendly
to christianity. Far from it -- he is a minister of the gospel -- and a man of
a worthy private as well as public character.

Our author begins his reply by asserting, that the objection to the punishment
of death for murder, proceeded originally from the socinian objection to the
great doctrine of the atonement. Here I must acknowledge my obligations to our
author for having furnished me with a new argument in favor of my principles.
I believe in the doctrine of the atonement, not only because it is clearly
revealed in the old and new testaments, but because it is agreeable to nature,
and reason. Life is the product of death, throughout every part of the animal
creation. Reason likewise establishes the necessity of the atonement, for it
has lately taught us in the writings of the marquis of Beccaria, that in a
perfect human government there should be no pardoning power: and experience has
taught us that where certainly has taken the place of severity of punishment,
crimes have evidently and rapidly diminished in every country. The demands of
the divine law which made the shedding of blood necessary to the remission of
sin, is a sublime illustration of the perfection of the divine government, and
of the love of the Supreme Being to his intelligent creatures. But in the
demand of life for disobedience, let the divine law stand alone. Men stand in a
very different relation to each other, from that which God sustains to men.
They are all fallible, and deficient in a thousand duties which they owe to
each other. They are bound, therefore, by the precept of doing to others, as
they would have them do them, to forgive, without a satisfaction, inasmuch as
they constantly require the same forgiveness to be exercised toward
themselves. To punish murder, therefore, or any other crime, by death, under
the gospel dispensation, is to exalt the angry and vindictive passions of men
to an equality with the perfect law of God. It is to place imperfect
individuals and corrupted human governments, upon the throne of the righteous
judge of the universe: nay, more -- it is to make the death of Christ of no
effect; for every time we punish murder by death, we practically deny that it
was a full expiation for every sin, and thereby exclude ourselves from deriving
any benefit from it, for he has made the forgiveness of injuries, without any
exceptions, whether committed against us in our private capacities, or as
members of a community, the express condition of our title to the forgiveness
which he has purchased for us by his death.

The arguments against the punishment of murder by death, from reason, remain
on an immovable foundation. Our author has contradicted -- but has not refuted
one of them. I affirmed in my former essay, that the punishment of murder by
death had been abolished in several of the European nations. I wish for the
honor of our author's profession, he had doubted of this assertion with more
of the meek and gentle spirit of a christian. To satisfy him upon this subject,
I shall subjoin the following extracts from authorities which are now before
me. -- In the instructions to the commissioners appointed to frame a new code
of laws for the Russian empire, by Catharine II. the present empress of Russia,
I find the following passage. I take great pleasure in transcribing it, as the
sentiments it contains do so much honor not only to the female understanding,
but to the human mind.

"Proofs from facts demonstrate to us, that the frequent use of capital
punishments, never mended the morals of a people. Therefore, if I prove the
death of a citizen to be neither useful nor necessary to society in general, I
shall confute those who rise up against humanity. In a reign of peace and
tranquillity, under a government established with the united wishes of a whole
people, in a state well fortified against external enemies, and protected
within by strong supports; that is, by its own internal strength, and virtuous
sentiments, rooted in the minds of the citizens, there can be no necessity for
taking away the life of a citizen. It is not the excess of severity, nor the
destruction of the human species, that produces a powerful effect upon the
hearts of the citizens, but the continued duration of the punishment. The death
of a malefactor is not so efficacious a method of deferring from wickedness, as
the example continually remaining, of a man who is deprived of his liberty,
that he might repair, during a life of labor, the injury he has done to the
community. The terror of death excited by the imagination may be more strong,
but has not force enough to resist that oblivion which is so natural to
mankind. It is a general rule, that rapid and violent impressions upon the
human mind, disturb and give pain, but do not operate long upon the memory.
That a punishment, therefore, might be conformable with justice, it ought to
have such a degree of severity as might be sufficient to deter people from
committing the crime. Hence I presume to affirm, that there is no man who, upon
the least degree of reflection, would put the greatest possible advantages, he
might flatter himself from a crime, on the one side, into the balance against a
life protracted under a total privation of liberty, on the other."

In a British review for the present year, I find a short account of the code
of penal laws lately enacted by the emperor of Germany. This enlightened
monarch has divided imprisonment into mild -- severe -- and rigorous. For the
crime of murder, he inflicts the punishment of rigorous imprisonment -- which
from its duration, and other terrifying circumstances that attend it, is
calculated to produce more beneficial effects in preventing murders, than all
the executions that have ever taken place in any age or country.

I derived my information of the abolition of capital punishment in Sweden and
Tuscany, from two foreigners of distinction, who lately visited the united
states. The one was an Italian nobleman, the other was a captain in the Swedish
navy -- both of whom commanded every where respect and attachment for their
abilities and virtues.

It is true, this happy revolution in favor of justice and humanity, in the
instances that have been mentioned, did not originate in a convocation or a
synod. It may either be ascribed to the light of the gospel shining in
"darkness, which comprehended it not" -- or to the influence of sound and
cultivated reason -- for reason and religion have the same objects. They are in
no one instance opposed to each other. On the contrary, reason is nothing but
imperfect religion, and religion is nothing but perfect reason.

It becomes christians to beware how far they condemn the popular virtue of
humanity, because it is recommended by deists, or by persons who do not profess
to be bound by the strict obligations of christianity. -- Voltaire first taught
the princes of Europe the duty of religious toleration. The duke of Sully has
demonstrated the extreme folly of war, and has proved that when it has been
conducted with the most glory, it never added an atom to national happiness.
The marquis of Beccaria has established a connection between the abolition of
capital punishments, and the order and happiness of society. Should any thing
be found in the scriptures, contrary to these discoveries, it is easy to
foresee that the principles of the deists and the laws of modern legislators
will soon have a just preference to the principles and precepts of the gospel.

Our author attempts to support his sanguinary tenets by an appeal to
revelation. And here I shall make two preliminary remarks.

1. There is no opinion so absurd or impious, that may not be supported by
solitary texts of scripture. To collect the sense of the bible upon any
subject, we must be governed by its whole spirit and tenor.

2. The design of christianity at its first promulgation was to reform the
world by its spirit rather than by its positive precepts.

Our Savior does not forbid slavery in direct terms -- but he indirectly bears
a testimony against it, by commanding us to do to others what we would have
them in like circumstances to do to us. He did not aim to produce a sudden
revolution in the affairs of men. He knew too well the Power and efficacy of
his religion for that purpose. It was unnecessary, therefore, to subject it to
additional opposition, by a direct attack upon the prejudices and interests of
mankind, both of which were closely interwoven with the texture of their civil
governments.

After these remarks, I shall only add, that the declaration of St. Paul before
Festus, respecting the punishment of death "For if I be an offender, and have
committed any thing worthy of death, I refuse not to die." Acts 25 and 11.
and the speech of the dying thief on the cross "We indeed" suffer "justly, for
we receive the due reward of our deeds." Luke 23 and 41.
, only prove that the punishment of death was agreeable to the Roman law, but
they by no means prove that they were sanctioned by the gospel. -- Human life
was extremely cheap under the Roman government. Of this we need no further
proof than the head of John the baptist forming a part of a royal
entertainment. From the frequency of Public executions, among those people, the
sword was considered as an emblem of public justice -- but to suppose from this
appeal to a sign of justice, or from our Savior's parable of the destruction
of the husbandmen, that capital punishments are approved of in the new
testament, is as absurd as it would be to suppose that horseracing was a
christian exercise, from St. Paul's frequent allusions to the Olympic games.

The declaration of the barbarians upon seeing the snake fasten upon St. Paul's
hand proves nothing but the ignorance of those uncivilized people. I deny the
consent of all nations to the punishment of death for murder -- but if it were
true -- it only proves the universality of the ignorance and depravity of man.
Revenge, dissimulation, and even theft, prevail among all the nations in the
world, -- and yet who will dare to assert, that these vices are just, or
necessary to the order or happiness of society.

Our author does not distinguish between the sense of justice so universal
among all nations, and an approbation of death as a punishment for murder. The
former is written by the finger of God upon every human heart, but like his own
attribute of justice, it has the happiness of individuals and of society for
its objects. It is always misled, when it seeks for satisfaction in punishments
that are injurious to society, or that are disproportioned to crimes. The
satisfaction of this universal sense of justice by the punishments of
imprisonment and labor, would far exceed that which is derived from the
punishment of death; for it would be of longer duration, and it would more
frequently occur, for, upon a principle laid down in the first essay upon this
subject, scarcely any species of murder would escape with impunity. A scale of
punishments by means of imprisonment and labor might easily be contrived, so
as to be accommodated to the different degrees of atrocity in murder. For
example -- for the first or highest degree of guilt, let the punishment be
solitude and darkness, and a total want of employment. For the second, solitude
and labor, with the benefit of light. For the third, confinement and labor.
The duration of these punishments should likewise be governed by the atrocity
of the murder, and by the signs of contrition and amendment in the criminal.


The conduct and discourses of our Savior should outweigh every argument that
has been or can be offered in favor of capital punishment for any crime. When
the woman caught in adultery was brought to him, he evaded inflicting the
bloody sentence of the Jewish law upon her. Even the maiming of the body
appears to be offensive in his sight, for when Peter drew his sword and smote
off the ear of the servant of the high priest, he replaced it by miracle, and
at the same time declared, that "all they who take the sword, shall perish with
the sword." He forgave the crime of murder, on his cross; and after his
resurrection, he commanded his disciples to preach the gospel of forgiveness
first at Jerusalem, where he well knew his murderers still resided. These
striking facts are recorded for our imitation, and seem intended to show that
the Son of God died, not only to reconcile God to man, but to reconcile men to
each other. There is one passage more, in the history of our Savior's life,
which would of itself overset the justice of the punishment of death for
murder, if every other part of the bible had been silent upon the subject. When
two of his disciples, actuated by the spirit of vindictive legislators,
requested permission of him to call down fire from heaven to consume the
inhospitable Samaritans, he answered them "the Son of man is not come to
destroy men's lives, but to save them." I wish these words composed the motto
of the arms of every nation upon the face of the earth. They inculcate every
duty that is calculated to preserve -- restore -- or prolong human life. They
militate alike against war -- and capital punishments -- the objects of which
are the unprofitable destruction of the lives of men. How precious does a human
life appear from these words, in the sight of heaven! Pause, legislators, when
you give your votes for inflicting the punishment of death for any crime You
frustrate, in one instance, the design of the mission of the Son of God into
the world, and thereby either deny his appearance in the flesh, or reject the
truth of his gospel. You moreover strengthen by your conduct the arguments of
the deists and socinians against the particular doctrines of the christian
revelation. You do more -- you preserve a bloody fragment of the Jewish
institution. "The Son of man came not to destroy men's lives, but to save
them." Excellent words! I require no others to satisfy me of the truth and
divine original of the christian religion, and while I am able to place a
finger upon this text of scripture, I will not believe an angel from heaven,
should he declare that the punishment of death for any crime was inculcated, or
permitted by the spirit of the gospel.

It has been said, that a man who has committed a murder, has discovered a
malignity of heart, that renders him ever afterward unfit to live in human
society. This is by no means true in many, and perhaps in most of the cases of
murder. It is most frequently the effect of a sudden gust of passion, and has
sometimes been the only stain of a well spent or inoffensive life. There are
many crimes which unfit a man much more for human society, than a single
murder, and there have been instances of murderers who have escaped or bribed
the laws of their country, who have afterward become peaceable, and useful
members of society. Let it not be supposed that I wish to palliate by this
remark, the enormity of murder. Far from it. It is only because I view murder
with such superlative horror, that I wish to deprive our laws of the power of
perpetrating and encouraging it.

Our author has furnished us with a number of tales to show that the providence
of God is concerned in a peculiar manner in detecting murder, and that the
confessions of murderers have in many instances sanctified the justice of their
punishment. I do not wish to lessen the influence of such vulgar errors as tend
to prevent crimes, but I will venture to declare, that many more murderers
escape discovery, than are detected, or punished. Were I not afraid of
trespassing upon the patience of my readers, I might mention a number of facts,
in which circumstances of the most trifling nature have become the means of
detecting theft and forgery, form which I could draw as strong proofs of the
watchfulness of providence over the property of individuals, and the order of
society, as our author has drawn from the detection of murder. I might mention
instances, likewise, of persons in whom conscience has produced restitution for
stolen goods, or confession of the justice of the punishment which was
inflicted for theft. Conscience and knowledge always keep pace with each other,
both with respect to divine and human laws. A party of soldiers in the duke of
Alva's army, murdered a man and his wife with six children. They roasted the
youngest child, and dined upon it. One of them after dinner clapped his hands
together, and with great agitation of mind cried out "good God -- what have I
done?" -- What? said one of his companions -- "why" said the other "I have
eaten flesh in lent time." Here conscience kept pace with his degrees of
knowledge. The same thing occurs upon different occasions every day. The
acquiescence of murderers in the justice of their execution, is the effect of
prejudice and education. It cannot flow from a conscience acting in concert
with reason or religion -- for they both speak a very different language.

The world has certainly undergone a material change for the better within the
last two hundred years. This change has been produced chiefly, by the secret
and unacknowledged influence of christianity upon the hearts of men. It is
agreeable to trace the effects of the christian religion in the extirpation of
slavery -- in the diminution of the number of capital punishments, and in the
mitigation of the horrors of war. There was a time when masters possessed a
power over the lives of their slaves. But christianity has deposed this power,
and mankind begin to see every where that slavery is alike contrary to the
interests of society, and the spirit of the gospel. There was a time when
torture was part of the punishment of death, and when the number of capital
crimes amounted to one hundred and sixty-one. Christianity has abolished the
former, and reduced the latter to not more than six or seven. It has done more.
It has confined in some instances capital punishments to the crime of murder
only -- and in some countries it has abolished it altogether. The influence of
christianity upon the modes of war has been still more remarkable. It is
agreeable to trace its progress.

1st. In rescuing women and children from being the objects of the desolations
of war in common with men.

2dly. In preventing the destruction of captives taken in battle, in cold blood.

3dly. In protecting the peaceable husbandman from sharing in the carnage of
war.

4thly. In producing an exchange of prisoners, instead of dooming them to
perpetual slavery.

5thly. In avoiding the invasion or destruction, in certain cases, of private
property.

6thly. In declaring all wars to be unlawful but such as are purely defensive.

This is the only tenure by which war now holds its place among christians. It
requires but little ingenuity to prove that a defensive war cannot be carried
on successfully without offensive operations. If this be true, then this last
degree of it, upon our author's principles, must be contrary to the spirit of
the gospel. Already the princes and nations of the world discover the struggles
of opinion or conscience in their preparations for war. Witness, the many
national disputes which have been lately terminated in Europe by negotiation,
or mediation. Witness, too, the establishment of the constitution of the united
states without force or bloodshed. These events indicate an improving state of
human affairs. They lead us to look forward with expectation to the time, when
the weapons of war shall be changed into implements of husbandry, and when
rapine and violence shall be no more. These events are the promised fruits of
the gospel. If they do not come to pass, the prophets have deceived us. But if
they do -- war must be as contrary to the spirit of the gospel, as fraud, or
murder, or any other of the vices which are reproved or extirpated by it The
spirit of christianity which our author describey as a vulgar deistical species
of humanity, has found its was into schools and families, and has abolished, in
both, corporal and ignominious punishments. In the instructions to the masters
and mistresses of the sundry schools, I observe with great pleasure a direction
"to use corporal punshments as seldom as possible."
.

I cannot take leave of this subject without remarking that capital punishments
are the natural offspring of monarchical governments. Kings believe that they
possess their crowns by a divine right: no wonder, therefore, they assume the
divine power of taking away human life. Kings consider their subjects as their
property: no wonder, therefore, they shed their blood with as little emotion as
men shed the blood of their sheep or cattle. But the principles of republican
governments speak a very different language. They teach us the absurdity of the
divine origin of kingly power. They approximate the extreme ranks of men to
each other. They restore man to his God -- to society -- and to himself. They
revive and establish the relations of fellow-citizen, friend, and brother. They
appreciate human life, and increase public and private obligations to preserve
it. They consider human sacrifices as no less offensive to the sovereignty of
the people, than they are to the majesty of heaven. They view the attributes of
government, like the attributes of the deity, as infinitely more honored by
destroying evil by means of merciful than by exterminating punishments. The
united states have adopted these peaceful and benevolent forms of government.
It becomes them therefore to adopt their mild and benevolent principles. An
execution in a republic is like a human sacrifice in religion. It is an
offering to monarchy, and to that malignant being, who has been styled a
murderer from the beginning, and who delights equally in murder, whether it be
perpetrated by the cold, but vindictive arm of the law, or by the angry hand of
private revenge.

THE END.

