The PATH to RICHES. AN INQUIRY INTO THE ORIGIN and USE of MONEY; AND INTO THE
PRINCIPLES of STOCKS and BANKS. TO WHICH ARE SUBJOINED SOME THOUGHTS RESPECTING
A BANK FOR THE COMMONWEALTH.

BY A CITIZEN OF MASSACHUSETTS.

Where is the upright man, with skill refined,
To check their rage, and cure the public mind,
With honest zeal, to plead a People's cause,
And guard their equal rights, by equal laws?
PRINTED AT BOSTON, BY P. EDES, FOR I. THOMAS and E. T. ANDREWS, FAUST's
Statue, No, 45, Newbury Street. MDCCXCII.

PREFACE.
THE liberties of a country, depend upon the light and information possessed by
the people.

Where the established forms of worship are wrapped in mystery, there can be no
freedom of conscience. Where the principles of government are dark and
intricate, there can be no civil liberty. When attention to business, fair
dealing, and upright conduct, are not considered as the only reputable means
for acquiring estates, there can be no proper and steady incitement to
industry, no solid happiness in the possession of wealth, or true enjoyment of
a competency.

There happens to be a rage in the present day, for acquiring property by
accident. Some men are supposed to have made large fortunes by speculations in
the stocks and banks: And they who have not been thus fortunate, can discover
no reason, why their neighbors should be thus favorably distinguished from
them. And too many are ready to lay aside their ordinary business, to pursue
chance as the only goddess worthy of human adoration.

If the following inquiries can have a tendency to cure the evils arising from
this source, the Writer will be fully compensated for his trouble.

To understand the principles of stocks, and banks, it is necessary to
understand the nature and use of money; I have therefore, selected a number of
thoughts from the best writers on that subject.

The history of the Bank of England, I have taken from acts of the British
Parliament respecting it. That of Paris, is taken from Voltaire's works. And
the hints respecting the other European Banks, are taken from good writers. The
whole is attempted with a plain conciseness.

Where the measures of any government are criticized upon, it is done with a
decent respect, but with the confidence of a free citizen.

THE AUTHOR.

AN INQUIRY, etc.
POSSESSIONS, however extensive they may be, are incapable of yielding
happiness. The wants of men are, for the most part, factitious, and increase in
proportion to their acquisitions of property. Nevertheless, by a desire of
dominion over external things, and a thirst for that superiority which arises
from wealth, we are urged on to exertion. Almost every one, who can achieve a
fair prospect, will exert all his ability to gather the fruit of it. This
propensity, has a manifest tendency to the advancement of the public interest;
and will produce the prosperity of the community, where it is exerted; unless
the public mind is so corrupted, as to embrace wealth, in preference to virtue,
by making property a qualification to the public confidence, superior to those
of integrity, industry, learning, and ability.

EVERY member of civil society, has a clear right to gain all the property
which vigilance and industry, regulated by the laws of the state, can bestow
upon him. Every thing he acquires in this way, advances the interest of the
public, and shows him to be deserving of applause. Such a man, is the just man
spoken of in the sacred writings. He is not, perhaps, the good man, for whom
"one would dare to die;" but he is a character which no one need to fear, and
which must gain the approbation of his fellow citizens: But the good man, who
loves his neighbor as himself; who wishes to do good unto all; who relieves the
distresses of the poor, in proportion to his ability, and wishes the prosperity
of all men, as he does his own, is another character. Such men are not every
where to be found; and where they are seen, they are trusted with caution;
because their character is frequently counterfeited, for base and vile purposes.

THE divine Author of the human race, has seen fit to place us under various,
and very different situations. Some men appear, as if they were formed for
successful enterprise; and others, as if disappointment was given them, as the
fruit of every undertaking. This is, no doubt, wisely ordered by HIM whose
plans are incomprehensible to us, and whose measures are all founded in the
most perfect wisdom. But the rules and regulations, adopted by civil society,
ought always to be such, as not to afford to any individual, or particular
company of men, an accidental opportunity, or a superior privilege, for the
acquirement of property. Mankind are naturally emulous, and it is sometimes
very difficult to find the line where justifiable emulation ends; giving place
to the deadly, and corrosive passion of envy.

WHEREVER the laws, or the measures of state policy, give to one man, or one
order of men, an exclusive right to acquire property, or a greater and more
advantageous opportunity to improve his, or their talents, than is given to
all, there is a just cause of complaint.

BY a measure, which is not founded in perfect equality, a few men may
frequently derive great advantages to themselves, and accumulate great wealth;
while others, who are fully as deserving as they are, remain under the ordinary
advantages arising from industry and frugality. This tends greatly to the
disquiet and unhappiness of civil society; because men, who, before they
observed such an undue and unusual increase of their neighbor's property, were
contented with their own possessions, become very uneasy. They have new and
factitious wants upon them; and what they before enjoyed as a competency, they
now esteem as only the dreadful tokens of inferiority, and the marks of
comparative poverty. This is clearly wrong in a free and equal government.
There are some men, who will live idly, and repine at that prosperity of their
neighbor, which is produced by industry and attention to business; these ought
to be pitied: but their malady can never be remedied by human laws.

GREAT estates are not originally acquired, unless it be by conquest, or by
commerce. The conquest of countries, we hope, will no more deluge the world in
blood, or be ever more suffered to make the innocent and unoffending
inhabitants of newly discovered regions, the unhappy victims of cruel avarice.
But commerce is intended to give great and beneficial advantages to mankind. It
is the life and support of civilized states; and the great medium of
communication between the people of different climates. It gives the various
nations of the terraqueous globe, a friendly intercourse with each other; and
will finally, form a chain of confidence and friendship throughout the world.
To hasten this important and glorious event, nothing is needed but a spirit of
commercial enterprise, conducted with fairness, and unshaken integrity.

COMMERCE had its origin in the superfluous produce of countries, aided by a
prevailing taste of the inhabitants of each particular climate, for the produce
of foreign soils. This important negotiation, no doubt, began by exchanging one
article for another: a desire of gain, promoted and supported by a curiosity,
existing naturally in the bosom of the people of all nations, brought it to
that height of perfection where we now contemplate it.

AGRICULTURE, and the arts, pursued with unabating industry, must give support
to commerce; for, without this, there never can be a superfluous produce to
export, or an enticing mixture of the arts, with the exported articles of
produce, to tempt foreign nations to a consumption of them.

ORIGINALLY, there could be no settled rule for the measure of exchanging one
commodity for another, or for appreciating or settling a fixed value upon the
articles offered in exchange. Their value was founded in the necessity of the
receiver, and the abundance of the deliverer's stock on hand, with the probable
prospect of plenty, or scarcity of the article, and the expenses of preserving
it to a future period. The value of each article was estimated by the eyes,
which gave the measure of quantity, upon a view of the bulk of the commodity
under the power of the transfer. This may be fairly concluded from the practice
of uncivilized nations more recently discovered. Recuial, in his history of the
voyages of the Dutch East India company, assures us, that in the island of
Formosa, when first discovered, the inhabitants had no other way of traffic;
and travelers, who may be relied upon, tell us, that in Ethiopia, the commerce
of gold is carried on so at the present day.

THE extension and benefits of commerce, could never have been very great under
such intolerable disadvantages, and clogged with so many embarrassments; it
therefore became absolutely necessary, to find out something which would serve
as the acknowledged representative of property, and as the established standard
of the value of the articles passing in commerce; for there was no way to bring
the articles offered in exchange, to an exact, or even value with each other,
and they were not always, or perhaps frequently, capable of being divided
without being injured, or destroyed by it.

METALS offered themselves, as the most suitable substance for this important
purpose. As they could not be well subjected to liquid, or lineal measure, the
use of weights and balances, were necessarily resorted to. Shells, pieces of
particular wood, salt, grains, fruits, and other substances, had been used as
money, or as the agreed representative of the articles of commerce, and some of
them are, in various countries, used in that way at the present time.

THESE signs were very inconvenient and troublesome, and therefore the moment
metals were discovered, it was easily seen that they were well suited to this
use. They were found in all climates where civilization was introduced. Their
hardness and solidity, raise them, generally, above the accidents to which
other kinds of money are liable. They may be divided without diminishing their
value. Their scarcity also, contributed to raise their value in the estimation
of the world; and the common consent of commercial people, gave them a currency
as the representative and measure of the value of things in the market.

IN some countries, their institution was very ancient. Abraham brought gold
and silver from Egypt; and, according to the account given by Moses, he
returned very rich from that country. And we find, that in those days,
Abimelech gave Abram one thousand pieces for a trespass committed against him.

WHEN metals were first introduced into commerce as money, their value was
determined by their weight alone. There was no stamp of public authority upon
them, expressive of their relative value arising from their weight and
fineness. Abraham gave an hundred shekels of silver for a sepulcher, and
weighed them before all the people. In some countries, where gold and silver
are used as money to this day, they are cut in pieces and passed by weight.
This is practiced in some parts of China, in Tonquin, and in Abyssinia.

THE weighing metals, as money, where commerce is extensive, must be very
inconvenient; and therefore it has become necessary to fix a sign, or mark,
upon each piece, expressive of its true value, according to its weight and
fineness. If this was to be done by each individual at his pleasure, there
could be no confidence in dealing in them; and therefore it has been considered
as the prerogatives of government alone, to fix the standard of alloy, and the
weight of all pieces of metal established as current money. There is no danger
of fraud or deception in this way, for the honor, and almost the existence of
each nation, depends upon their rectitude on this point.

AS antiquarians are much divided in their opinions, respecting which nation it
was who first coined money, I shall not attempt to settle it in this essay.
Herodotus ascribes it to the Lydians, and others to Ithonus the son of
Ducaliver. Some say it was the Assyrians; and Diodorus gives it to the
Egyptians, because he finds that counterfeiting of it in their country, was
very early punished with the amputation of the hand of the offender.

THE practice of coining money, introduced what is called imaginary money, or
money of account. There are no pieces of money now, agreeing with our pounds,
shillings and pence, or with the French livres, sols and deniers. But this mode
of computation is intended to facilitate the stating of accounts, and for
keeping them on a regular footing. When money becomes scarce, the articles of
commerce are lowered proportionably in their price, and they rise as money
grows plenty. But still, the nominal standard used in accounts, is not altered.
Sometimes, when a nation is involved in a war, and the public debt is too great
for the public resources, the imaginary, or nominal price or value has been
raised, to the great injury of public or private characters, who are in such
cases defrauded. Such measures are generally evidences of public or private
insolvency, and are seldom attempted.

AS coined metals were established in the commercial world, as the
representative sign of the articles of commerce, if each country possessed an
equal proportion of money, according to the quantity of property offered for
sale in it, there would exist no other difference of price in the same article
in different countries, excepting what would arise from the transportation of
it from one country to another, and from the demand for it in the market.
Whereas, at present, the quantity of money existing in a country, has a great
effect upon the price of every article. Money is always like water, seeking a
level; and when it becomes plenty in one country, or place, it is necessarily
urged away to another. He therefore, who involves himself in debt, when money
is plenty, is sure of being injured or ruined, if his debt rests upon him,
until it grows scarce.

THE burden and risque of transporting metals from one place to another, as a
general medium of commerce, rendered it necessary, to select the most valuable
of them for that purpose. If gold and silver were as plenty as other metals, it
would be very difficult, if not impossible, to raise their value, separately,
so much above that of the others, as it now is. There is a fineness and beauty
in them, which originate and support a preference in their favor; but this
would not give them the rank they now sustain, if their comparative scarcity
did not yield a powerful aid in their cause.

THE transporting metals, however precious they may be, from one country to
another, for the use of commerce, cannot be effected without risque and
expense. This difficulty, though small in its appearance, has been sufficient
to produce one other sign, or evidence of wealth, which may be called a
secondary representative of the articles in commerce. The ideas of a paper
medium for this purpose, is of very ancient date.

THE origin of bills of exchange has employed the curious inquirers much in the
same way as they have been employed upon other ancient matters, which had their
birth from accident, or necessity, and which were thought to be of but little
consequence, when they were at first produced. It is generally agreed, that the
Jews, when they were banished from France, or the Gibelins, when they were
banished from Italy, by the faction of the Guelphs, invented this method of
exchange to save their effects from confiscation: thus, by delivering their
effects and money to a friend, and taking his bill for a delivery of an
equivalent from his effects or credits, in the country where they were to seek
an asylum from persecution, they found the means of an invisible, easy, and
sure mode of procedure, to place their estates beyond the reach of the extended
hand of tyranny.

THE doctrine of exchange was encouraged by laws made in England, in the reign
of Edward the third. When it was abused, by being used as an engine of
oppression, it was prohibited; but the facility it afforded to the then dawning
commerce of that country, again revived, and gave it a legal standing.

THIS idea of exchange, by a paper medium, introduced diverse other species of
paper, as the representatives of real money, which assumed a value upon the
assurance they afforded, of the possessors having the money on demand; or of
the certainty of his receiving it at a future day, with a premium for the use
of it, until it should be paid.

ONE species of this paper, is commonly called stocks. This word, generally,
means a capital used in commerce, where a number are concerned in a common
enterprise, and have a capital arising from their contributions in shares. But
the appellation, when applied to the funded credits of a government, is
entirely arbitrary, and needs an explanation before it can be understood: for
in this kind of business, there is no existing stock, unless the plighted
public faith may have that appellation.

THE foundation of this kind of paper, has lately become very familiar to the
people of America. The republic has stood in need of aids and supplies. The
individuals, who form the nation, have afforded these supplies upon the credit
and faith of government. The republic cannot, from its resources, satisfy the
demands with real money; they are not possessed of metals in quantities
sufficient for that purpose, and therefore a reasonable and equitable use ought
to be engaged, for the delay; and the payment of the debt assured upon a future
day. The premium upon one part of the debt is at six per cent. per annum,
another at three per cent. and on another there is no provision yet in actual
execution; but a dependence upon the justice and resources of the nation, is
such, as to give the deferred stock a value to the possessors, and a ready
exchange in the market, for money, at a certain rate of discount.

WHILE the nation of united America, shall be able to pay an annual interest
with punctuality, upon their public debt, and shall convince the possessors of
the public securities that the public resources are finally equal to the
discharge of the principal, these evidences of a right to receive money will
hold a firm and permanent value; and the possessor can at all times exchange
them for gold and silver, because there will be at all times men in the
country, who will wish to have a part of their property in the hands of others,
from whom they may derive a use for it, and from whom they may be assured to
receive it again at a future period.

THIS project has furnished a large, an active capital, for commerce in this
country, and answers as extensive a purpose as to internal commerce, as would
be answered by real money: and so far as foreigners are concerned in our public
debt, it answers the purposes of real money for foreign commerce. Nevertheless,
it is a great grievance and burden to the people; because, while it answers
some of the purposes of real money in commerce, the people have to pay a
certain rate of interest for it, by which those who are in possession of the
public securities, derive great pecuniary advantages from the toil and labors
of them, who have none. And though the rate of interest appears small, yet it
is an involuntary contribution, and deprives the people who pay it, of a great
share of their profits in trade: I cannot therefore agree with those who
consider a public debt, as a public benefit.

BESIDES this, there is another consideration which ought to have weight; it is
very possible that America may be so unfortunate as to be engaged in another
war. Large supplies may be called for, by which the exigencies of the
government may exceed its national resources, and the payment of principal and
interest may be necessarily deferred to a future day. Should this ever happen,
the stocks will sink in the hands of the proprietors. Stockjobbers will be
multiplied, and public securities be again made the engines of cruelty and
oppression. The transactions of our own age exhibit a variety of examples of
this kind, and our integrity ought to urge us to every exertion that can have a
tendency to prevent a repetition of them. It will therefore certainly be well
to use every means which industry, economy, and frugality can point us to, for
the sinking of our public debt. If there is any thing in the observation, that
a public debt is a security to a government, it can be only where a government
founded on a revolution, is in danger from a counter revolution. Perhaps the
idea was introduced into Great Britain upon the large debt contracted to
support the war which expelled the house of Stuarts: If there had been a
counter revolution there, the men who had aided William with money, would have
lost their property; it was therefore, in that instance, their interest to
support the government under the revolution. We are very apt to borrow maxims
from a nation from whom we derive our common language, without examining their
origin, or inquiring strictly into their application to the circumstances of
our own country.

WHILE there are stocks transferable by their constitution, there will be
stockjobbers, or men who will buy and sell stocks for themselves and others.
While this business is conducted with truth, sincerity and fairness, it may be
considered as reputable and honorable; but when in this, or in any other
business, chicane, cunning, deceit and fraud, are adopted as the ordinary means
of making a good bargain, the men, who practice in this way, renouncing the
principles of truth, honor and honesty, are contemptible and dangerous in
society.

IN Europe there are a great number of men who devote themselves to this kind
of traffic, and who avail themselves of every art and accident to rob the
unwary and necessitous part of the community. News of victories won by armies
which had never seen an enemy, of wars raging where nothing but peace prevails,
and of treaties of peace between nations which had never considered of
preliminary articles, furnish but a small part of the vile means used to
deceive and defraud the less attentive and more industrious part of the people.

IN our own country, and at the present day, stock-jobbing has not been carried
to such a height as it has been in England; but we have no reason to conclude
that all who have concerned themselves in the business have, in every instance,
taken the same care of their neighbors' interest as they have done of their own.

WE have other kinds of paper which we call bank stock. It may be well,
therefore, to say something on the nature of banks in general.

THE word bank is derived from the Italian word banco, or banca; because those
of that nation who used to exercise themselves in this kind of business in the
public places of trading cities, seated themselves upon forms with benches to
write their letters, count their money, or to draw their bills of exchange.
When they failed, and became unable to pay their debts, their benches were
broken as a mark of infamy: from which the word bankrupt is derived.

A BANK now signifies a public office for keeping or circulating money, to be
employed in exchanges, discounts, the loans of government, etc.

BANKS are kept by private men on their own account, or by public bodies
incorporated by an act of government for that purpose.

PRIVATE bankers are generally men of large property; their business is
lucrative according to their stocks and reputation. By obtaining a credit, and
by creating a confidence in the public mind, they induce men who have their
property in cash, to deposit it in their hands for security; for which the
banker gives a paper evidence of the property, assuring the punctuality of its
being redelivered on demand. This paper being, by its tenor, transferable, the
possessor of it can immediately, if his banker is known, exchange it for money
or for any article in commerce, without any discount or depreciation; and
derives all the benefits from it which he could derive from real money, without
a liability to those accidents which would attend the keeping a large quantity
of coin by him. But the value of this paper is founded altogether upon the
assurance that the money is ready when called for. While this assurance exists,
the bill will continue to circulate with all the credit of real specie; but the
moment there arises a doubt on this point, it falls into a useless, worthless
state.

TWO principal advantages result to the banker from such deposits. Having ready
money by him, he can exchange money for private securities payable at a short
but future day, receiving a reasonable premium for advancing the ready money.
Thus if A, who lives in America, draws a bill of exchange upon B, who lives in
Europe, requesting him to pay to C, or order, one thousand pounds at sixty days
after the bill shall be presented to him; C, or his assignee or indorser,
presents the bill to B, and gives his acceptance of it; but as C wants the
money immediately, he may go to a banker, and if the drawer, acceptor and
indorser, or either of them, can be relied on, the banker will pay the money
for a reasonable discount or premium, for waiting the sixty days. If there is
any hazard in the business, the premium will be increased in proportion to the
risque attending it, and whether it exceeds the legal rate of interest or not,
there is no law to control it: because the idea of a hazard upon the principal,
takes off the idea of illegal usury.

THE plan of depositing money with a banker, necessarily led to that of
rendering bank notes a currency in the medium of trade. From this idea the
banker derives great advantage, because, that by his business, there is a
constant stream of cash issuing through his chest; by means of which he is
enabled to issue notes for a much larger sum than what he holds as his own
private property: and thus by premiums on discounts he accumulates a profit
proportioned to the reputation he sustains, and the opinion the public holds of
his integrity and responsibility. But this opinion depends for its support
altogether on the security he takes for the notes he emits: should the
securities he discounts upon, prove in frequent instances, to be bad, it will
destroy his credit, and ruin his business. The idea he issues his notes upon
is, that the money is at the command of the possessor of them; and the
securities he takes constitute a part of the stock wherein this assurance is
grounded; and in proportion as they fail in their punctuality, the stock fails
on which he issues his notes. It is very extraordinary and curious, to see how
far the men concerned in this kind of business in England, France and Holland,
are capable of deciding instantly, upon the credit of the drawer and acceptor
of every bill of exchange offered to them for a discount: it shows also, in a
very convincing manner, what great proficiency men can make in a business to
which nature has fitted them, and to which alone they pay all their attention.

PUBLIC banks are corporations established by legislative authority, with an
expectation in the government of deriving certain aids and supplies from them.

THE bank of England, from the nature of its constitution, cannot be considered
as a public national bank, because the nation owns no part of the stocks which
compose it, although the public derive great advantages from it, by way of
loans given upon the discount of certain and fixed annuities. Where there is a
national bank the interest of every considerable private banker is quite
incompatible with it: hence in England, because of the national advantages
derived from the established bank, the parliament have laid private bankers
under certain restrictions; and, amongst others, that contained in a statute
made in the reign of Ann, which provides that there shall be no association of
more than six persons, in their private capacity, for the business of banking.
The number of separate private bankers in that country, is, however, very
great; but the sums they discount are not considerable enough to interfere with
the business of the public bank, which could not frequently attend to small
discounts without great inconvenience.

THE convenience of placing specie in banks, where it is secured by strong bars
and faithful guards from thieves, and by deep vaults from the ravages of the
flames, is found to be so great in commercial countries, that it is universally
adopted. The possession of paper which bears a demand for an immediate exchange
of gold and silver, without a possibility of denial, gives it all the
advantages as a circulating credit which the imagination can conceive of. Such
paper embraces all the articles of commerce; and in countries where public
faith and private banks are well established in the commercial opinion, there
is but very little real money used as the measure of trade.

IN a commercial country it is of but very little consequence to have a bank in
credit with the people of the country where it exists, unless it possesses the
faith of foreigners coming there to trade.

PUBLIC banks are of two kinds; those of the first are wholly instituted on the
public account, and placed under the direction of magistrates, or officers of
the government, who are to take care of the bullion or specie deposited in them
for the use of the proprietors, and by their order to be managed for profit or
advantage. Such is the famous bank in Amsterdam, which is conducted with so
much fidelity and exactness, that one of the magistrates was executed for
appropriating a small sum, although he returned it in a short space of time,
and before the fact was discovered. The regulation of that bank is such as
gives it the highest public confidence, by means of which there is scarcely an
instance of any money which has once been there deposited, having been taken
out. Convinced, that the money is always ready when demanded, the man who is to
receive a payment from another, is contented to appear at the bank, and to be
credited the sum in bargain, on the bank books; and he again transfers it in
the same way to another; so that the same sum will be passed in a thousand
payments without being seen, weighed or counted by any one, excepting him who
first deposited it in the bank. Thus millions are negociated in a week, without
weighing or counting money. This easy mode of doing business is supported by an
unshaken confidence, that the money is ready at all times, when called for by
the person in possession of the paper evidential of its being deposited. Should
this confidence be once brought into doubt, all the authority of a most
arbitrary government, exerted by a most vindictive and independent magistracy,
would not be able to maintain the character of the bank, or to give currrency
to its credits for one day.

IT is confidently asserted by writers, that the money deposited in this bank
amounts to three thousand tons of gold, or as some say twenty eight millions
sterling. Sir William Temple, who examined that bank with the prejudice of an
incredulous Englishman, tells us, that the place where the treasure of this
celebrated bank is lodged, is a great vault under the town house, provided with
doors, locks, and every other security necessary to the preservation of the
contents. And that whoever goes there will discover a vast treasure in bars and
ingots of silver plate, and also an incredible quantity of sacks full of metal,
said to be gold and silver; but as there are none but the Burgomasters who have
the direction of this bank, and as there are none who keep an account of what
is brought in, or carried out, it is impossible to know, or even to guess, with
exactness, the proportion there is between the real and imaginary treasure of
it. It does not solely depend upon the effective gold and silver actually
deposited for its credit, but is supported by the credit of the city and of the
states; of which the funds and revenues are as great as those of some kingdoms.

BY the constitution of this bank and the laws of the state, all the payments
on bills of exchange, and for wholesale goods, are to be made at the bank only,
unless the sum is not so high as three hundred guilders; so that the debtor is
obliged to carry his money into the bank, and the creditor is obliged to go
there to receive it.

WRITERS say that the city of Amsterdam is supported in the real magnificence
in which it appears, by the profits of this institution, while all the people
are fondly willing to lodge their money where it will safely rest secured from
every possible accident, and where they can use it without the trouble of
telling or of weighing it.

THIS bank makes no negociable bills, but gives receipts for money deposited,
which are good to the possessor for the sum mentioned, and which may be
transferred by certain established forms.

THE profits of this bank are immense, though the sources of them are concealed
with the usual secresy and silence of the Dutch people. But it may be easily
seen that they give receipts for deposits, which exist only in securities, and
on which they receive unlimited premiums for their discounts.

THE bank of Paris was erected upon the scheme of Mr. Law, a Scotchman, in the
year 1716; and in its history gives a striking instance of the impracticability
of supporting a paper medium without an unfailing assurance of a ready exchange
for specie.

THIS attempt was made during the regency of the Duke of Orleans, and has been
very severely treated by English writers; but the account here given of it is
taken from Voltaire's works, and may be relied on.

THERE are two classes or characters of men who are naturally avaricious; the
one is composed of them who heap up wealth with an ambitious view to excel
their neighbors in point of property; the other of them, who have no regular
bounds to their expenditures, and are therefore always streightened in their
finances, let their income be what it may. The regent of France was in the
latter class. His demands for money in his private and in his public capacity,
were insatiable; a project, therefore, for affording ample supplies, was very
flattering to him.

MR. Law projected his plan upon principles which, if they had been strictly
pursued, would have been an improvement on all the preceding plans in Europe;
but he wished to flatter the court. He proposed that he and his associates
should supply the funds that should be administered by the authority of the
government; and that the bank should have the appellation of the bank royal.
This plan was approved by the council, and was finally adopted.

THE bank thus organized, effected all the purposes which were expected from
it. The quantity of circulating medium was exceedingly increased. The people
had a great facility in the payment of imposts. Commerce received new life, and
derived new vigor from the aid of the institution. In the second year of its
existence, the government ordained that the bank notes should be received as
cash in every branch of the revenue.

THE success of the bank was so astonishing, that in the second year the
government wished to be the sole proprietor, as well as the only director of
it, and accordingly purchased all the stock.

THE power of this government being uncontrolable, the plan of urging into
circulation a medium by the voice of sovereign authority, without adequate
funds for the support of it, was conceived. The event was such as might be
expected. The bank notes were discovered to exceed the real specie deposited
and the funds provided as a constituent for them, and they therefore
depreciated with great rapidity. In the year 1722, they were thrown out of
circulation; and one writer observes that they were not finally worth the value
of the paper on which they were printed. Commerce in that country received a
shock from which it has never been recovered. The finances of the nation became
deranged, and the ability of the government was exceedingly disgraced.

THERE were men then who made great estates from the public calamity; and by
the splendour of their fortunes intoxicated the people in England and in the
Netherlands. Hence arose the South Sea bubble in Great Britain, diverse mad
schemes in Holland, and the famous land bank in New England, which for several
years controled the elections of the province, created incuraable confusion,
and finally ruined a great number of families.

THE emission of paper bills of credit in the New England states was first no
other than the anticipation of particular taxes; but as the specie could not be
produced to be exchanged for them at all times when demanded, they could not
avoid a depreciation. This depreciation virtually lessened the quantity of
medium, and created a necessity for a further emission; whence it has happened
that there never has been an instance of emitting bills but where they have
been redeemed at a depreciated value, if redeemed at all.

NEW HAMPSHIRE had paper money at all times before the year 1768. The situation
and character of the people were changed for the better, almost immediately on
their having a regular, unfluctuating medium of commerce.

RHODE ISLAND being more out of the control of the government of the mother
country, has always had a paper medium, or a bank without stock. The effects
are too easily seen to need a comment.

THE bank of Genoa is the most ancient bank in Europe; the date of its
institution is not certainly known. This bank was first constituted from
certain branches of the public revenue, upon which, sums were borrowed during
the exigencies of the commonwealth, and which, for a long time, were not
violated through any perplexities. But by their state being involved in the
wars of the last and present centuries, they exhausted their treasury, went
beyond their public resources, and for ever destroyed the credit of their bank.
The commerce of their country died with it. The state lost, and has never yet
regained its importance.

THESE are not the only instances which history affords of the extreme folly of
attempting to support the credit of a paper representative of money by the mere
authority of government, without being able to command real money, promptly, to
support the credit of it.

THE situation of all the states severally in 1775, and of all conjointly
represented at that time in Congress, produced instances where the most
determined patriotism, struggling for what was justly considered as the
foundation of all that could render life and property worthy of possessing,
attempted in vain to support a paper credit upon the mere authority of law.
Severe penalties were annexed to even speaking against the value of the
currency. Very singular and terrible tribunals were instituted, with summary
and arbitrary processes, to punish those who dared to consider the signs of
money, which never existed, as unequal to gold and silver; but all was
ineffectual, the depreciation became exceedingly rapid. It was with great
address suggested, that the money did not fall, but that the articles of
commerce rose in consequence of the war. And the two last remedies attempted,
were stopping the auctions and regulating prices by laws. Had the laws of
nature admitted of paper bills of credit, where there was no real money to
exchange for them, being capable of representing the money of the world, these
efforts could not have failed of success, more especially when the greatest
penalty of all was the stigma of a want of patriotism, and the unhappy
offender's being held up to the people, by committees, as an enemy to his
country's liberty.

I DO by no means condemn the extraordinary measures above mentioned; they were
indispensibly necessary to the salvation of the greatest cause which the world
has seen; but I conclude, that they are inadmissible, unless it is on some
great and similar occasion.

THERE are other public banks in Europe; but there is no necessity of paying a
particular attention to them in this essay, excepting that which is established
by authority in London. For by the observations already made upon others, and
which shall be made on that, the general principles, as well as the public
utility of banks, under proper limitations, will be seen.

IN former times, the idea of improving the public credit, as an active
efficient capital, with all the advantages of a full, circulating medium, was
never conceived. The kings of the nations in Europe, when pressed by the
exigencies of the state, used to borrow money on pledging the jewels of the
crown, or on mortgaging the lands of the royal domain, or by some other pledges
of valuable property.

THE Jews are remarkable for strong traits of national character, but for none
more than their ability and adroitness in managing money. When they were
banished France, and Italy, they resorted to Germany, and to the Netherlands;
where they were cordially received, and where their invention for turning money
to advantage, increased their own wealth, and instructed their neighbors to
increase theirs.

WHEN William the third, had expelled James from the throne of England, and
had, by the war through which that revolution was effected, involved the nation
in a heavy debt, he had recourse to the principles, and the practices of the
children of Israel for relief. Under the exigencies of his affairs, his
ministers introduced plans, which other nations, as well as America, have been
glad to imitate. Amongst which was that of the famous bank of England. One
Mortimer, who wrote in the year 1761, supposes that William had been initiated
into the principles of state banking, at Amsterdam, by his friends of that city.

THIS bank was erected in the year 1693, to commence in June 1694. The king and
queen, by an act of parliament, were empowered to issue their commission, under
the great seal, appointing commissioners to take subscriptions by any persons,
natives or foreigners, for raising one million two hundred thousand pounds: and
the parliament agreed to raise one million five hundred thousand pounds upon
certain annuities, and to pay the governor and company of the bank one hundred
thousand pounds annually. The bank loaned the government one million six
hundred thousand pounds. The one million two hundred thousand pounds was the
stock in real money, deposited by the subscribers, and the debt due from the
government on the above loan, and for which was pledged the faith of parliament
upon the above stipulated annuities, constituted another part of the stock. The
bank stock has been increased by new subscriptions, according to diverse acts of
parliament, and the charter of the bank continued during the existence of the
annuities pledged by government for the money borrowed. The last act of
parliament for that purpose was made in the year 1781, in consideration of a
loan of two millions to pay off a debt of the navy department.

THE acts regulating the bank, provide that their debts shall never exceed
their capital stock, and that if they should, at any time, exceed the capital,
the individual members shall be liable, of their own private estates, for such
excess. The money lent to the government being on the credit of the nation,
that credit is considered as good stock, because certain duties are
irrepealably pledged; and there can be no reason to believe that any possible
exigency would induce them to violate their faith in a matter upon which the
credit and commerce of their nation so much depends. A failure in that bank
would derange the finances of the government, destroy their commerce for a time
at least, and involve the nation in a great and almost irretrievable calamity.
To prevent this, the parliament guarantees the credits of the bank, by
providing that their notes or bills, drawn to the amount of one hundred
thousand pounds, originally payable by the government annually, and the
increase of that sum, by subsequent acts on loans, shall be distinguished from
the others; and if they shall be demanded at the bank on days of discount,
between the hours of nine and twelve in the forenoon, and not paid, then, on
affidavit being made of the fact, they shall be immediately paid in the
exchequer, without any further process or delay, and without any other warrant.
The sums so paid, are to be charged to the one hundred thousand pounds, and the
increase of it annually payable by the nation to the bank. The other credits
are warranted by act of parliament, providing, that when judgment shall be
rendered against the governor and company of the bank, and the money not paid
on producing the execution, that the same shall be brought into the exchequer,
and be there discharged by the public treasury without any further warrant or
delay. This provision is absolutely necessary to the credit of the company,
because their private estates are not liable for any thing more than what their
debts shall exceed their capital, and their corporate property cannot become at
to be taken in execution.

THE interest originally allowed by the nation to the bank, was four pounds for
the annual loan of one hundred pounds; but it was afterward, on other loans,
altered to four and an half per cent. on others again to four; and on the loan
of 1781 it was reduced to three per cent.

THUS we see, that this mighty piece of machinery, on which almost all the
national movements of Great Britain depend, is supported by the certainty which
the creditors realize, that they can receive, when they shall call for it, the
real money for their paper, evidential of the deposit. Some of their writers
have advanced principles which no sober man will agree in, that a nation has a
right to establish what they please for a medium of commerce, and that it is
quite immaterial what that medium is composed of. If by this assertion they
mean, that a people, by their unconstrained, common consent, have a right to
receive what they please in exchange for articles of commerce, they are right;
and this medium, or measure of appreciation, is money to all who receive and
can pass it. But there is no government, however forcible it may be in other
matters, which can impose any thing besides the precious metals, on the people,
as money, for any considerable time together. The paper of the bank of England
is the money of that country, but it is not established as such, by legal
authority. It was never attempted as a tender for debts, but has rested on the
voluntary consent of the commercial people, as receivable on the idea, that it
represented money which is at all times ready to be produced.

SOME of their writers bestow the most extravagant encomiums on this
institution; while others, who are apparently as patriotic, as learned, and as
candid, condemn it as a bubble which will finally burst; as an engine of
oppression and cruelty which tends to tyranny, and will finally ruin the nation.

THE bank of the United States of America, is on principles of the same class
with those on which the bank of England is established, but depends upon the
credit of the government for a greater proportion of its stock. There is only
one quarter part of that stock in real money; the other three quarters are in
public securities of the public funded debt at six per cent. interest, and
three per cents. at half the nominal value. The value of them securities
depends upon the assurance of their final payment, and on the punctual payment
of the interest stipulated. Should there be an expectation of a failure in
either of these, the credit of the bank would be proportionably injured; but
them securities are, by the economy of the treasury, so blended with that of
the bank, and that of the bank with the existence of the government, that they
must be the last pillars which will be suffered to be overturned by a public
calamity. Whether it was either fair or necessary to give, in the operation of
this system, particular holders of a part of them kind of public securities
this great advantage, is not necessary now to be decided: but the advantages
resulting from a part of the stock, being composed of them, is so immense, that
the bank cannot fail of a support, as far as the proprietors are able to
support it.

SEVEN millions and an half of dollars, three quarters of the stock which
arises from the subscription of individuals, is composed of them securities; so
that this three quarters of the stock, are a loan to government, upon six per
cent. interest, and the stockholders have a right to issue bank notes to the
full amount of their capital, at the same rate of interest, by means whereof
the proprietors of the bank, have a legal right to receive twelve per cent.
upon that part of their stock; and this makes a use of ten and an half on the
whole, including the part which consists in hard money. Upon this idea, the
subscribers to the bank would have been glad to have sunk the interest to three
per cent. if they could not have become subscribers without. The advantage
arising from their having a right to extend their credits to the amount of all
the money deposited for safekeeping; and the determination of the treasury to
deposit all the moneys arising from the revenue in their hands, is so
exceedingly great, that this would have been a good bargain on the side of the
stockholders at three per cent. for their securities.

THE debts due from the corporation are never to exceed their capital, and the
money actually deposited in the bank for safekeeping. They are not to trade, or
to buy or sell any thing but bills of exchange, and silver and gold; and should
their debts ever exceed there capital, and the specie in deposit for
safekeeping, in such case the directors who issue the notes, and all the
proprietors who shall be then present, and shall not enter their dissent to the
measure, shall be liable in their persons and in their private estates.

BY the above provision, the creditors of the bank are completely secured,
provided that the directors and acting proprietors are either faithful, or of
sufficient ability. Should this precaution be inadequate, there are other
checks provided, which are able to afford the highest assurances that can be
raised on the principles of banking upon public credit.

THE officer at the head of the treasury department, has, by the act of
incorporation, full authority to demand a state of the debts, and credits; an
account of their stock actually existing in effective money, and of the
deposits in their hands; moreover, the act provides, that their notes shall be
received in the payment of all duties and revenues, in the room of real money.
This will give the bank a credit as extensive as the quantity of money in
demand, for all imposts, excises and duties, and fully guarantees their credit,
unless they shall swell it beyond the limits of the revenue. Upon every view of
this corporation, we must conclude, that while so great a part of their stock
shall consist of public securities, and the credit of them shall be fully
supported, the advantages of the bank will be exceedingly great to the
proprietors. The United States further guarantee the seven million and an half
of dollars, by allowing them to be in public securities. The advantages of this
corporation by far exceed any thing of the kind which has heretofore been
attempted, excepting the Parisian bank: that was attempted as a public, this is
a private advantage.

THERE can be no wonder that the opening a subscription, which offered such
immense and unprecedented profits to the people who should be lucky enough to
be concerned, should raise such a bustle among the speculators in paper
securities, and finally afford so much chagrin at the disappointment of the
unsuccessful part of the community. If the members of congress had been men of
like passions with the other citizens of America, possessing the same jealousy
in regard to private interest which men generally have in private life, we
might have wondered that they should suffer a few men to embrace such
extraordinary privileges in exclusion of all others, and to ravish very great
estates from the public exigency, which others were as fairly entitled to as
they were. Congress seemed to have been aware of what was to be expected upon
opening the subscription; for they attempted what, perhaps, some of them
thought to be a sure and salutary preventative, by the supplementary act. By
that it was provided, that no one person should subscribe more than thirty
shares in one day; but no provision was made against subscribing in false or in
unauthorized names. It was clearly evident that the subscribers would throng on
the occasion; and yet no effectual measures were adopted to prevent monopoly,
frauds and impositions.

THESE advantages were foreseen by nearly all the people; but the members of
congress did not discern them in their public capacity. The house appropriated
to receive subscriptions, was, as soon as the auspicious day dawned, crowded by
an incredible number of people: if a golden mountain had been kindled, emitting
from its crater a lava of the purest gold, liquid, yet tangable, the crowd
would not have been greater, or exhibited more intense eagerness to share in
the plunder.

THOSE who appeared on this occasion, were not all of them patriots, who had
saved their country, or the most deserving part of the community of united
America. The men who had risqued their lives in the war, or who had parted with
their patrimonies or hard earned estates, to save the public liberty, stood at
a distance, and with astonishment beheld the singular and unexpected
phenomenon. The securities which they received for their services and
properties, in the place of gold or silver, and had sold at two shillings and
six pence in the twenty shillings, resumed their pristine value in the hands of
their new possessors, and greatly enlarged their new and unexpected value by
the machinery of the American bank.

AS an apology for such undue advantages to a part of civil society, it is
said, that it is of no consequence to the government which of the citizens
possesses the property. This is not true: a great part of our wants are
factitious, arising from what we see in the possession of others; and
therefore, when a few men, by an inequality of operation in the laws of the
ruling power, accumulate fortunes, and live in unequalled splendour, it corrupts
the taste of the other part of the community, and draws their attention from
their ordinary means of business. It produces a spirit of envy, and renders
those unhappy, who before had been quite contented with their situation. There
are but a small part of mankind who can look with contentment, like David, on
the greatness of wicked men, and console themselves, that they are only like a
green bay tree, which flourishes for a little time, and then is not to be found.

GOLD and silver is the acknowledged representative of property of every kind;
but paper is the representative of nothing but money; and where the money is
not actually existing, ready to be exchanged for the paper, then the paper
represents nothing but public or private credit, and the credit may be good or
bad, according to a variety of different circumstances, accidents and events.

I SHOULD not do justice to my readers if I did not transcribe a page from a
pamphlet written by Dr. Price, on the nature of civil liberty, in the year 1776.

SPECIE represents some real value in goods or commodities; on the contrary,
paper represents immediately nothing but specie; it is a promise or obligation,
which the emitter brings himself under to pay a given sum in coin; and it owes
its currency to the credit of the emitter, or to an opinion that he is able to
make good his engagement, and that the sum specified may be received upon being
demanded. Paper, therefore, represents coin; and coin represents real value,
that is, the one is a sign of wealth, the other is the sign of that sign. But
farther, coin is a universal sign of wealth, and will procure it every where,
it will bear any alarm, and stand any shock; on the contrary, paper, owing its
currency to opinion, has only a local and imaginary value. It can stand no
shock. It is destroyed by the approach of danger, or even of the suspicion of
danger. In short, coin is the basis of our paper credit, and were it either
destroyed, or were only the quantity of it reduced beyond a certain limit, the
paper circulation of the kingdom would sink at once.

FROM this account it follows, that, as far as in any circumstances specie is
not to be procured in exchange for paper, it represents nothing, and is worth
nothing. The specie of this kingdom is inconsiderable, compared with the amount
of the paper circulating in it. This is generally believed, and therefore it is
natural to inquire how its currency is supported. The answer is easy: it is
supported in the same manner with other bubbles. Were all to demand specie in
exchange for their notes, payment could not be made; but at the same time that
this is known, every one trusts that no alarm will happen while he holds the
paper he is possessed of; and that if it should happen he will stand a chance
to be first paid, and this makes him easy: but let any event happen that
threatens danger, and every one will become diffident. A run will take place,
and a bankruptcy follow.

THE account I have given of paper circulation, implies, that nothing can be
more delicate or hazardous; it is an immense fabric with its head in the
clouds, that is continually trembling with every adverse blast and fluctuation
of trade; and which, like the baseless fabric of a vision, may, in a moment,
vanish and leave not a wreck behind.

KING William's wars drained the kingdom of specie: they sunk the revenue and
distressed the government. In 1694 the bank was established, and the kingdom
was provided with a substitute for specie; ever since that period our paper and
taxes have been increasing together and supporting one another.

IT was expected at that time, that Doctor Price's pamphlet would have had some
tendency to prevent the ministry of Great Britain from prosecuting the American
war: but as we had nothing ourselves to depend upon but bills of public credit;
and these too without any specie, or any public stipulated funds whereon to
found them; the argument was stronger against us, than against our enemies. We
had however, been in some measure used to a paper medium, and enthusiasm
supplied the place of faith, and confidence: and whilst the people parted with
their property to defend their rights, they considered all as a necessary
sacrifice to liberty.

MANKIND have a natural disinclination to labor and exertion. In a state of
nature, hunger is a stimulous to the savage, or he would continue idle and
inactive. In society, ambition, that natural, and avarice, that artificial
passion, urge men to exertion; but nevertheless, labor is irksome, and all they
who can devise some other method of gratifying their inclinations, and obeying
the commands of their passions, will most certainly do it: hence it is, that we
find every one, who can drive a bargain to advantage, forsaking the plough to
do it.

MONEY is scarce or plenty in a country, according to the demand for it. As it
represents the articles exposed to commerce, and as commerce increases in
proportion to the quantity of money found to pursue it with, there can never be
a very long space of time together in which money can be plenty in comparison
with the demand for it.

THE public securities of the United States of America were a dead, inactive
kind of property, previous to the establishment of the constitution of the new
government; they then became at once the object of avarice. They before had an
existence, as to value, on the slender hope of having something done for them
at some distant future period; and obtained a motion only from the sagacity of
a few, who happened to be right in their conjectures respecting the then future
events of American financiering. Upon the adoption of the new system of
government, they assumed all the properties of a rising credit, and became an
immense active capital for commerce; but not for such a commerce as was
advantageous to the people; their activity centered in themselves; and while
they swelled the medium, they created proportionably a demand for more. The
apparent success of some speculators, increased the number engaged in that kind
of traffic, until the great towns and cities were filled with that kind of
gentry.

THE plan of the bank still gave a new force to this kind of traffic, for it
gave an opportunity to some part of the community to turn their speculations to
immense and unexpected advantage. While all the public securities might be
considered as an active medium, the constitution of the bank gave the
proprietors authority to add seven millions and an half of dollars to the
whole: besides this, their having authority to issue notes in proportion to the
money actually deposited for safekeeping, will prevent the dormancy in effect
of any real money.

WE owe specie for all the paper which is now in circulation, and yet the
specie in fact in the country, bears no proportion to it. This has been the
case with us before; for we have once and again crowded the specie out of the
country by floods of paper money, and have passed through two or three states
of national bankruptcy with all the calmness of a company of philosophers.

SOLOMON tells us that the rich have many friends; but our Secretary of the
Treasury, by making others rich, has obtained money; and his reputation derives
support, as well from the greatness of his character for enterprise, as from
the pecuniary interest which so many rich men have in the support of it. But
the game he has played is very deep, as well as very splendid, and the whole
fabric he has raised with so much eclat, may be at once overthrown by a run
upon the bank. He will therefore guard, with the utmost caution, the emitting
quality of it; for should it ever be induced by the exigencies of the public,
or by any other means, greatly to exceed its capital, he may have to follow Mr.
Law to Venice, in order to find an asylum from the public resentment. When he
shall be removed from office, it will be difficult to find a successor who
shall obtain the confidence which he has acquired, and the day of succession
will, no doubt, be a day of hazard, expectation and anxiety.

THE bank of the United States must be maintained, if it can be done, by the
means of credit. But while the bank of England, which owes no more than sixteen
millions sterling more than its specie capital stock, has the support of a
nation which has in circulation sixty millions; the bank of the United States,
which will owe seven, perhaps eleven millions of dollars more than its capital
stock in specie, is supported by a nation in which there is not existing more
than eight millions of dollars in specie; its situation must deserve great
attention, and its economy be taken care of with great circumspection.

THE government of Great Britain, in order to secure their bank, are under a
necessity of restraining and of regulating even private bankers, while all the
governments in united America are vieing with each other in establishing
private banks, or banks for the benefit of private companies. In fact, the idea
of a paper currency is so familiar with us, that we seem incapable of resisting
any one temptation that is offered to us for the emission of paper bills of
credit. If this spirit continues to prevail, according to the ideas and on the
principles at present advocated, our bank bills will very soon be on a par with
the old continental money. The bank of the United States, on which the honor
and safety of the nation so effectually depends, will be exceedingly injured,
if not rendered insecure and useless.

AMIDST the various schemes which have been adopted for giving a currency to
paper bills, that of establishing the corporation called the Massachusetts
Bank, is the one which deserves the most attention. When nations have been
pressed with expensive wars, or other intolerable calamities, they have had
recourse to their public credit; in the support of which, every member of the
civil community has been in some measure interested. But the idea of giving a
few men a corporate capacity to issue, regulate, and control the medium of
commerce among a great trading people, was before unprecedented, and serves
rather to evince the inattention than the skill of those who established it.

THIS plan was conceived in the year 1785, in a time of profound peace, and
without any view to sink a public debt, or to procure a public convenience; it
was an indulgence to a few men in the state, who happened to ask the
legislature to grant it to them, without the proffer of any kind of reward. By
means of this authority, the proprietors of that bank have had it in their
power to govern the medium of commerce in and about the metropolis of the
state. By emitting large sums they have raised the price of public securities,
and of other articles in the market; and by refusing again to loan, have
brought on an artificial scarcity of money, and sunk the price of the same
articles; this has given them all the advantages which could be gathered from
the most enormous monopolies. Trade has been perplexed by a capricious and
unsteady medium; great quantities of property, more especially public
securities, have been sacrificed to a punctuality, to a corporation which never
had it in its power to be punctual itself if there had been a run upon it.

THE subscribers to this bank, with their associates, were incorporated without
any limitation of time or credits. Their stock is never to exceed five hundred
thousand pounds; but, upon this, they had a right to issue as much paper as
they could obtain a market for, and were under no obligation as to the quantity
of capital, only that it should not exceed the sum abovementioned; and let them
issue as much as they will, the public, or the holders of their notes, have no
remedy against their private estates. This is an agreed point, for the shares
being transferable in their nature, it is quite impossible to know who the
proprietors are. The act of congress for establishing the bank of the United
States, has provided, that the directors and the proprietors actually present,
when there shall be an agreement to issue more than their capital and deposits,
shall be held liable in their natural capacity. The same provision is made by
parliament respecting the bank of England; from all which we may conclude, that
the proprietors are not liable by law in their natural capacities, without such
provision; for if they were so liable for all the debts of the corporation,
there could be no necessity for the special provision in the institution of a
bank.

THE notes issued by the Massachusetts' bank are not by force of any law
receivable in taxes or revenues, or a tender in any case as money; neither are
they in any other manner warranted to the possessors by the government. They
are issued under the authority of the government, and yet the state is not
responsible for their credit.

THE corporation of the Massachusetts' bank then amounts to nothing more than
an authority delegated to a few men, in exclusion of all others, to make as
much paper money as they shall please to issue, and to draw an interest upon it
from the borrower at six per cent.

THEY have not failed to improve an authority so very singular and
advantageous, for they have had nearly one million of dollars in circulation at
a time, when they had no pretensions to have in their vault more than two
hundred thousand dollars. This gave them an interest of thirty per cent. upon
their real money, if they had the sum abovementioned actually deposited in
stock, while the rest of the community were under heavy penalties if they
should take more than six per cent. for the loan of their moneys.

THE General Court, in their session of the winter 1792, became alarmed at the
operation of this bank; but, perhaps, the alarm was given by the men who were
interested in the northern branch of the American bank. They sent a committee
who inquired, but never explicitly reported upon the credits and debts of that
corporation. It seemed to be understood in the house of representatives that it
was a matter which ought not to be spoken upon, and a bill was passed,
limitting the issues of their credits to double their capital.

THIS measure was much more extraordinary than the original institution;
because that, in 1785, the subject was new in the country; but the principles
of banking had been under a free discussion in the year 1791, while the
American bank was in consideration; and the General Court took up the matter of
the Massachusetts' bank, expressly, to inquire into and to regulate it; and yet
they set it down again upon principles which were never adopted in any other
part of the world.

ALL other banks are confined in their credits to the stock actually deposited,
and to the deposits of private individuals; but this bank is allowed to issue
double its capital without any assurance or guarantee from the public, that
their credits shall be maintained. Their capital may be five hundred thousand
pounds, of consequence they may have in circulation, and draw interest upon
five hundred thousand pounds which does not exist, upon a paper currency which
in fact represents nothing, upon a representative which has no constituent.
Thus they are incorporated with power to make thirty thousand pounds a year,
without making any consideration for it. The interest upon their loans they
anticipate by taking it at the time of the loan, and thus raise a compound
interest, which pays all their charges, and leaves them twelve per cent. upon
their capital besides. But if this was not the case, they are not at so much
expense in loaning, and in collecting the money they loan, as individuals would
be at in managing the same quantity of property.

THEY pretend, that there can be no want of security, because, when they issue
their notes, they draw good security from the borrowers. Upon this idea, their
notes are so far from being the representative of real money, that they are
nothing more than the representative of the credit of men, with whom the
possessor has no acquaintance, and of whose circumstances he is totally
ignorant.

THESE men have led the government into the disreputable idea of giving a
corporation authority to act as private bankers, without their private estates
being liable for their debts. The notes of private bankers are issued upon the
credit of their reputation and private estates. It is a matter between them and
their creditors, and the public have no concern in the business. If they fail,
the state is under no necessity, by equity or honor, to warrant their credits.

NO doubt, there are some gentlemen of that corporation, whose honor and
conscience would oblige them to pay their dividend, out of their private
estates, if there should be a failure; but they would not consider themselves
as held for more than their own shares. And even this resource, precarious as
it is, may soon fail; for these men are mortal, and we know not who will hold
the shares a few years hence which they now hold.

BY this institution this company has taken six per cent. upon nearly all the
commerce in and about Boston. And what is more extraordinary, they have had it
in their power to swell and lessen the medium of the country when they pleased,
and consequently, to raise or fall the price of articles in commerce as they
saw fit. We have seen so much misery in our own age, arising from the bad
economy of paper money, that we are called upon by every principle of honor and
justice to avoid it in future. If we sin again we must do it against the
strongest light and the clearest information.

THE increase of the number of banks in other states, is no reason for their
being multiplied in this. We have been long in the habits of a paper medium: in
the year 1745 we issued a large sum, which, after a rapid fall, was redeemed at
a great depreciation by a grant from the mother country. We were then obliged
to prohibit the paper money issued in the other New England states, from being
received in this. For this purpose all persons elected to any kind of office,
and all those who wished to take an execution for a debt, were obliged,
previously, to take an oath that they had not taken any bills of credit of the
other provinces within this.

IF bank notes are valuable, only as they represent specie ready to be
exchanged for them, we ought to be very careful of our conduct respecting banks.

THERE is a natural propensity in mankind to obtain property by art, by
accident, and by any thing besides labor and industry: when peculiar advantages
are proposed from a plan which will gratify them, however preposterous it may
be, or however incompatible with the public interest, it cannot fail of
obtaining votaries. The accumulation of wealth by the proprietors of the
American bank, and of those who are proprietors of the Massachusetts' bank,
have intoxicated a great part of the community; and it may be well to examine
the principles which ought to move the legislature in this business. The people
of Salem have petitioned for a bank, and have obtained the sanction of one
branch of the legislature in favor of it. Another bill for establishing a
tontine has been arrested in its career, only by a majority of one in the
senate. If the Salem people, and the tontine association, or either of them,
should finally prevail, there are many other people in the state who have an
equal claim with them, and who will openly, and with good reason, charge the
government with granting exclusive privileges to one set of citizens in
preference to the others, unless they are indulged in the same way. The great
complaint is, that the favors of the government are partially bestowed, and the
advantages of the laws unequally distributed. The complaint will gain strength
by each act of government in this way, until all are benefited to their own
satisfaction, or in a way to convince them, that the weakness of a government
is the destruction of the subjects.

THE true idea of erecting corporations is to enable them more easily and
advantageously to improve the property which they have; but the idea of giving
them corporate powers to gain money by taking an interest on a capital which
does not exist, is creating a property for them. It amounts to a gift from the
state, and is quite inadmissible; yet the proposed Salem bank, the tontine, and
the Massachusetts' bank, are all calculated on this idea.

THE creation of banks gains exceedingly in the public opinion, in the same way
that emissions of paper money have heretofore obtained in this state, obtain
now in some others, and lately in Rhode Island. But if paper currency is the
representative of specie, where is the specie to be found? The specie now
active in the country bears no proportion to the paper in circulation. As the
paper increases, the silver will grow scarce. Our commerce is with foreign
countries, who will very soon, if our banks are multiplied, refuse our paper
currency, and our mighty bubbles may burst upon us.

IT will be doing nothing more than justice to this subject to give the reader
Dr. Price's opinion upon it in his own words.

PUBLIC banks are, undoubtedly, attended with great conveniences; but they
also do great harm: and if their emissions are not restrained and conducted
with great wisdom, they may prove the most pernicious of all institutions, not
only by substituting fictitious for real wealth; by increasing luxury; by
raising the prices of provisions; by concealing an unfavorable balance of
trade; and by rendering a kingdom incapable of bearing any internal tumults or
external attacks, without the danger of a dreadful convulsion; but particularly
by becoming instruments in the hands of ministers of state, to increase their
influence, to lessen their dependence on the people, and to keep up a delusive
show of public prosperity, when perhaps ruin is near.

THE plan of a public bank for private emolument is still more dangerous. If it
is given to a few only, they will be able to command the markets, monopolize by
themselves, or their confidential connections, what articles they please, to
fix a capricious estimate upon every thing, and unduly to influence all the
measures of the government. If it is general, then we must have a flood of
paper medium, which, like our former paper currency, will sink in the hands of
the possessors.

SINCE the taste of the public is raised insatiably for a bank, it may be
necessary to have one; but it ought to be upon such a plan as will allow a
great number of the people to participate of its advantages, and to be for the
good and benefit of all the citizens in the state.

THERE is one objection generally made to this plan, that a paper currency will
give us an overflowing medium, and finally do great injustice. There is great
weight in this objection; but we are to take mankind as we find them. To
contend against all the follies and weakness of the people would be but a poor
way to govern them. If there is no other bank than the two now in Boston, the
people, the trade, and the regulation of the medium, will be wholly given up to
their caprice and humor. They will emit all the paper which they can lend upon
good security, without any regard to the sufferings of the people, and at such
times only as shall tend to their own emolument in another way. They will act
in concert, for the proprietors of each are generally interested in both banks.

I THEREFORE venture to propose another bank, in which all the people, as
members of the state, shall be interested, and a great number more, as private
proprietors.

THIS plan ought to originate with the General Court, without any regard to
private petitions, or associations; for why should a number of men, merely
because they associate and petition, have superior or exclusive privileges to
gain advantages, alike due to all? Upon the expectations of such associations,
speculations have been set on foot, and large sums of money have been made upon
a mere sporting with the weakness and condescension of the government. We are
all on the same grade of privileges, and nothing can induce our representatives
to divide us from our equal rights of free citizens.

SHOULD the state erect a bank, that one called the Massachusetts' Bank ought
to be immediately repealed, or if the state does not erect one, still that bank
ought not exist; or if that bank exists upon the restriction in the late act
respecting it, all laws against excessive usury ought to be repealed; for to
give one part of the community a legal right to take twelve per cent. upon the
loans of their moneys, while others are severely punished for taking more than
six for theirs, is making a cruel and an inviduous distinction between the
people, and ought never to be allowed in a free country.

THERE is no lawyer in the state, who is disinterested, that will give it as
his opinion, that the legislature has not a right to repeal the act of
incorporation of that society. It is by no means a charter of privilege; if it
is, the General Court had no right to grant it, because the constitution
expressly provides, that no exclusive privilege shall be granted to any man, or
body of men. It is not like an incorporation to build a bridge, or to cut a
canal, because, in the first case, the government grants a property in a river,
which belongs to the state; and in the last it is only a grant of power to use
the property and soil which they have bought, or may buy of others. But the
incorporation of this bank is an open, express privilege of taking more
interest for their money than other people have a right to take. If it is not a
grant of exclusive privilege, it is on the same foot of other legislative acts,
sush as incorporating towns and proprietors, which laws may be repealed at
pleasure. Here was no contract between these people and the government, nor did
the latter receive any reward or consideration for the grant.

WHEN I say that there never was any other public bank established on
principles similar to those of the Massachusetts' bank, I do not take into
consideration the several banks established in America by the legislatures of
the several states. I have not attended to their several institutions, and
should not hold myself obliged to regard them, if their principles are now in
the theory of banking. It is one of the defects of free and popular
governments, that the ruling power being dependent by frequent elections, upon
the will of the people, and that people being liable to be influenced by party
interests, many measures obtain which do not tend to the public good. The
several banks in this country may have been obtained by fair means, but yet
may, in themselves, be wrong. There is, as Cicero says, no power on earth
capable of making that right in itself which is naturally pernicious, or to
make injury a lawful act.

IT is necessary to take notice of a measure adopted in congress in December
1781. Robert Morris, Esquire. had proposed a plan for a bank of the United States.
This bank was established by an ordinance, as far as congress had power to do
it; but not on principles so extensive as those contained in the plan proposed.
In the plan it was provided that the bank notes should be received in payment
of all taxes and duties in all the states: This would have given the
proprietors of the bank full power to have emitted a paper currency for the
whole union, and to have drawn an interest of six per cent. upon the whole
annually. Congress did not in their ordinance, even provide that the bank notes
should be received by the federal treasury. But the General Court of
Massachusetts, in their act passed in March 1782, made provision that all debts
due to the confederated states should be receivable in the notes of this
company; and that no other bank should be erected in the state.

THIS company were, by the ordinance of congress, restricted as to the quantity
of property they should hold, but not as to the debts they might owe. They
therefore might issue notes to as large an amount as they pleased; and there
was no provision for making the directors or proprietors liable in their
natural capacities for what should exceed their capital.

SOME of the states did not agree to this extraordinary attempt for money
making; and it is rather difficult to find where it now is, or what was the
final settlement of it.

THAT I may be better understood in my ideas of a bank for the commonwealth, I
take the freedom to mention the outlines of it, without having an idea that the
principles offered are perfect, but only hoping to suggest some useful thoughts
on the subject.

THERE are several reasons which plead in favor of the measure.

THE commonwealth being a sovereign state, ought to possess resources
independent of any other state or government. Should the state, by an
insurrection, or by any accident or adventitious distress, be under a necessity
of anticipating a tax by the loan of money, a state bank would be very useful,
and prevent the necessity of an application to an office where it might be
rejected.

THE establishment of a state bank will form an interest strongly opposed to
the incorporation of any other. It will be the best of all interests, the
interest of all the people: and the bank can, from time to time, be extended,
when it shall be necessary, by new subscriptions; and a proper proportion of
the spare specie may he improved in that way.

THIS method, if there can be any trust or confidence in the governing power of
the commonwealth, will prevent the incorporation of a number of banks which
otherwise will be applied for and obtained. It will prevent a flood of paper
money which will otherwise be issued on the credit of private men, under the
sanction of the government, without any specie to be represented by it. By
this, individuals will be prevented from raising or falling the medium of
commerce to answer particular purposes of speculation; and the measure of trade
will be rendered permanent, certain and steady.

THERE is a complaint, that money is not plenty enough to answer the purposes
of trade. There never was a long time together when this complaint did not
exist. Gold and silver represent all other property; and when they abundantly
increase in a country, the nominal value of every thing which is offered to
sale, or compared with them as with the measure of real value, will rise in
proportion to their abundance, and there will be still a complaint for money,
though silver and gold should be as plenty as stones on the earth,

SPAIN experienced a scarcity of money when gold and silver had become as
plenty there as lead or any other common metal; and the influx of bullion
ruined the nation.

IF our commerce was an interior commerce, paper, shells, iron, brass, salt, or
any thing else, might do as the sign of wealth; but as the money which we want
is to carry on our traffic with other nations, we must have those signs of
wealth for a medium which the world has agreed to receive as such; and we may
issue paper as frequently as we please, but if that paper cannot command the
silver and gold when called for, it must depreciate. Every instance of
depreciation gives a new demand for more emissions, in the same manner as if a
part was sunk or struck out of circulation.

I KNOW that the English writers pretend that there is not in the bank of
Amsterdam, one quarter part in gold and silver of the value of the sum
represented by the paper issued from thence. I doubt the truth of the
assertion: but if it is true, the people who receive the paper believe the real
money to be there; and as none but the magistrates have access to the books, it
cannot be contradicted by evidence. But we live in a country, in an age, and
are a people where no such deception can take place. If we were ignorant enough
to be thus practiced upon, we should be incapable of possessing a free
government.

PRINCIPLES of an ACT for a BANK.
SIX persons to be appointed to direct the receiving subscriptions for raising
one million of dollars for a public bank for the Commonwealth of Massachusetts;
one commissioner to be an inhabitant of the county of Suffolk, one of the
county of Plymouth, one of the county of Essex, one of the county of Worcester,
one of the county of Hampshire, and one of the county of Cumberland.

THE bank to contain ten thousand shares.

THE papers for subscriptions to be lodged in the shire town of every county in
the state, in the hands of such persons as the commissioners shall appoint,
they being first duly sworn to conduct the business fairly and impartially.

NO person to be allowed to subscribe, or cause to be subscribed, more than ten
shares in one week.

ALL persons subscribing for others to file a power under hand and seal, and
acknowledged before a Justice of the Peace, expressing the number of shares to
be subscribed for.

EACH person to have from the commissioners a certificate of the number of
shares subscribed for by him; but them certificates not to be transferable.

IF any difficulty shall arise respecting subscriptions, it shall be settled by
the commissioners after the subscription papers are returned in.

THE act to provide the number of shares to be subscribed for in each county;
and no subscription to be made by any person belonging to one county in another.

ALL bargains, sales and transfers, and all agreements for the sale or transfer
of any share, or part of a share, which shall be made before the stocks are
actually deposited, and before all the shares are paid in, to be null and void.

THE treasurer of the commonwealth to be allowed at any time within three
years, to subscribe such sum, not exceeding five hundred thousand dollars, as
the legislature shall direct.

ONE fifth part of the money subscribed by the treasurer to be paid down on the
subscription, and the residue be secured, to be paid on four instalments, by a
direct tax on polls and estates, unless paid before. And the act directing the
treasurer to subscribe to be considered as a sacred irrepealable contract,
which shall never, upon any exigency whatever, be dispensed with.

THE corporation to be a body politic by the name of "The President and
Directors of the Bank of the Commonwealth of Massachusetts."

THE president and directors to be elected by ballot, in which election the
commonwealth, by their agents, shall have a voice, according to the
constitution of the bank, in proportion to their stock.

THE bank to continue fifty years as a corporation; to have a common seal; to
make bylaws, subject to the rules and regulations of the act.

ONE share to have one vote, for every ten shares two votes, for every thirty
shares three votes, for every sixty shares four votes, and every hundred shares
five votes. Those who have a right to vote on the higher numbers to have no
more votes than are given in the highest number they hold.

OFFICERS to be chosen annually.

THE corporation never to owe more than one million of dollars over and above
the amount subscribed in behalf of the commonwealth, and the moneys actually
deposited in the bank for safekeeping.

THE directors and proprietors to be liable in their natural capacities for any
excess.

THE corporation never to trade in any thing but gold, silver, bullion, or
bills of exchange, and promissory notes.

TO be precluded from buying any public stock, or public securities of any
kind, under heavy penalties.

THE corporation never to loan money to any other state or government but the
commonwealth, and never to that a sum which shall be more than -- hundred
thousand dollars, nor more than what shall make -- hundred thousand dollars,
including what shall be due on the subscription of the treasurer.

ALL notes and bills issued by the bank to be receivable in the treasury of the
state, and by collectors of all taxes, imposts, and excises.

THE state to guarantee the credits of the bank; and the supreme executive to
inquire once in three months into the state of the bank, and to communicate the
situation thereof to the General Court, when the governor, with advice of
council, shall think it necessary. No officer of the bank to be of the supreme
executive.

THE corporation to never receive a greater premium than six per cent. for
discounts upon notes, or bills of exchange.

NO other bank or corporation for banking to be allowed.

NO number of persons to be allowed to associate for the purpose of banking.

SOME men imagine that banks will always owe more money than their capital
stock and the moneys deposited for safekeeping; that is, that they will, by
connivance of the directors, issue notes far beyond their property. But this is
a kind of cunning and chicane which never ought to be allowed of. If the bank
established in a country, can, without injuring the public, loan more money
than they have a right to loan, their capital stock ought to be increased by a
new subscription, otherwise they will draw an interest on a capital which does
not exist.

THIS will never be the case, unless there is a greater demand for money in
trade than there is in agriculture; for banks can never supply the farmers with
loans; and if all the spare money is vested in bank stocks, there never can be
a sufficient quantity in the hands of private persons to supply those who wish
to take on land security.

WITH many prudent and wise men, it is a question far from being settled,
whether an easy acquirement of money on loan, is for the advantage of the
farmers. Where new lands are purchased at a low price, the increase of their
value from their own improvement, and the improvement and settlement of the
lands round them, may render them able to pay an interest of six per centum per
annum on their purchase money. But it is very evident, from every calculation,
that an old farm will never afford such an interest on the purchase money given
for it.

BESIDES this, where money is offered on loan for security by mortgages, there
will be frequently moments when farmers, from a variety of inducements, will
unnecessarily run in debt and lay the foundation of their own ruin. A son wants
a settlement, or a daughter her portion on marriage; the pride of the family
predominates over prudence, the mother urges to a gratification of the
children, and the father, upon the same motive, or from a wish of ease and
quiet, complies. The whole are made happy for one year, and then all involved
in ruin and distress.

BANKS are not intended for loaning on land securities; and if all the
superfluous money is used in banks, the farmers will not obtain any. It will
all be used in that way if such enormous and unprecedented advantages are
offered as we have seen in the national and Massachusetts' banks. The only
method, therefore, is to have only one bank besides the branch of the United
States' bank: to give the government an interest in that, by which we shall all
be benefited, and to let the advantages be so moderate that there will not be a
crowd pressing to be admitted. By this method, there will be a proper
proportion of money improved in banks to facilitate trade, and a proper
proportion remaining to be loaned to farmers by individuals.

THE destiny of man, is to acquire his bread by toil and labor. But there is
almost a universal reluctance to a compliance with this decree of our Maker.
The wishes of men, are boundless as the wide extension of eternity: and no
place, no possessions, and no acquisitions are competent to the factitious
wants of the human race. The law which annexes want, sufferings, and disgrace,
to idleness, is not more opposed to the inclinations of men, than some others
are. There is no time, season, climate, or weather, which gives satisfaction to
all the subjects of it, in short, man is at war with his own nature, and with
his natural necessities.

THERE is something very instructive in the fable of Midas, whose avarice urged
him to petition, that whatever he touched might be changed into gold. His
wishes being complied with, he had nothing to eat, drink, or wear, but what was
disqualified for those uses. People are generally wishing to turn almost every
substance into money, without considering, that this would render gold and
silver of as little consequence to the world, as the stones in the street. In
fact, it would bring them to distress and destruction, like the man in the
fable, if they could obtain the grant of what they wish.

DR. Robinson gives the world a very striking account of the misfortunes which
Spain derived from the excess of gold and silver procured from South America.
He represents that kingdom as the most commercial in Europe, when their fleet
first entered the river de la Plata. But when they had acquired an abundance of
the precious metals, they lost their consequence and prosperity. Under the
reigns of Ferdinand and Isabella, and Charles the Fifth, Spain was one of the
most industrious countries in Europe. Her manufactures in wool, and flax, and
silk, were so extensive, as not only to furnish what was sufficient for her own
consumption, but to support a surplus for exportation. In the beginning of the
sixteenth century, Spain is said to have possessed above a thousand merchant
ships; a number probably far superior to that of any nation in Europe.

THEN, after describing her mode of trade, he goes on to observe, that wealth
which flows in with moderate increase, feeds and nourishes that activity which
is necessary to commerce, and calls it forth into vigorous, and well conducted
exertions; but when opulence pours in suddenly, and with too full a stream, it
overturns all sober plans of industry, and brings along with it a taste for
what is wild and extravagant, or daring in business or action. Such was the
great and sudden augmentation of power and revenue, that the possession of
America brought to Spain, and some symptoms of its pernicious influence upon
the political operations of that monarchy soon begun to appear. Her flourishing
manufactures, early in the seventeenth century, were fallen into decay. Her
fleets, which had been the terror of all Europe, were ruined. Her extensive
foreign commerce was lost. The trade between different parts of her own
dominions was interrupted, and the ships which attempted to carry it on were
taken and plundered by enemies whom she once despised. Even agriculture, the
primary object of industry in every prosperous state, was neglected, and one of
the most fertile countries in Europe hardly raised what was sufficient for the
support of her own inhabitants.

THIS is a most solemn lesson to nations, and if attended to, will strongly
urge them not to wish an overgrown medium of commerce, even though it should be
composed of gold and silver. But when we see the people of a country zealously
engaged in pursuit of an overflowing medium which has no credit beyond certain
limits, and there, only from positive laws, which has no value in its own
composition, or in the estimation of the world; and which is offered only as
the representative of specie which does not actually exist, we may, without
breach of candor, conclude, that the calamity of such a people, and their final
catastrophe, as to public prosperity, is founded in, and much accelerated by
their own folly and madness.

THERE is a wide difference between the principles of issuing a paper medium on
a bank stock, and issuing one on the common ideas and principles heretofore
practiced upon in this country. The one is the representative of money actually
deposited, and ready to be paid when called for, and the other is only the
representative of an intention to pay by a future tax, when the people are
willing to bear one. The former will always be equal to real money; the latter
must, as it always has done, undergo a rapid depreciation.

SHOULD the government of the commonwealth erect a bank, they will never do it
on the idea of issuing sums larger than their capital stock, and the sums
deposited for safekeeping; because, so far as they dispense with this
principle, so far they will in effect make a paper currency upon the principles
of public credit alone. While this is concealed, if a depreciation shall
happen, it will not be confessed, but pretended that demands for specie raise
the price of gold and silver, and the articles of commerce may rise in their
nominal value, but this rise will be ascribed to a thousand causes before it is
charged upon the true one.

BUT it will be asked, what benefit will result from banking, if there can be
no more money issued in bills than there is actually deposited in stock? The
answer I make has been before repeated. The government cannot incorporate a
set, or number of men, with a gift of property, but may give them corporate
powers to improve the property which they have in possession, or which they may
acquire. By an act of incorporation they can loan their money with more ease,
at less expense, and with greater security, than they could do it in their
private, natural capacities; and the advantages arising from deposits for
safekeeping, will be what would very lately have been called great enough to
induce the undertaking.

THE government, by such an incorporation, can, from time to time, on all cases
of sudden emergency, have aids of money without applying to any other
government, and by having one bank in which all the people have an interest,
they will prevent the operation of applications which will otherwise establish
a great variety of banks under different denominations; for if one association
is indulged with corporate powers, why should not another? And if the
Massachusetts' bank has a legal right to issue one million of pounds lawful
money in notes, and to draw six per centum per annum on that sum, when they may
not have more than one half of it in their vault, why should not the
associations for the tontine, and for the Salem bank, and all others who will
associate for establishing other funds in money, have the same privilege? And
if the Massachusetts' bank has this enormous benefit, why should the Salem bank
be incorporated under privileges inferior to theirs? What have the proprietors
of that bank done for the public to purchase so much preeminence and those
exclusive privileges? Why should the rest of the citizens be under pains and
penalties for taking more than six pounds for the loan of one hundred pounds
for one year, and these men have a legal right to take twelve for theirs?

THESE are very serious questions; the public mind labors with them, and if
even the men interested in this extraordinary scheme, can answer them, it is
high time it was done. The public expect a discussion of them, and are
anxiously waiting the event.

IF the abundance of the precious metals will forfeit their comparative value
in the opinion of the world, how much more will a paper currency, representing
nothing but a credit, or a promise of money to be paid at some future day, lose
its estimated value, when it shall be abundantly increased? The gold and silver
torn from the bowels of the earth, are of no more consequence to the first
possessor than the corn or wheat produced by labor is to the husbandman. The
labor attending the taking the metals from the mines, and refining them, is
hardly paid by the produce, unless the owner employs slaves in the service; and
these might be as profitably employed in agriculture.

THE idea of the people who want banks, is to spring a mine of wealth without
labor. They wish to draw double the income from their property by creating a
bank, than could be obtained in any other way of improvement. But the
constitution of our commonwealth, as well as that of the United States,
contains a solemn compact, that no man, or company of men, shall have any legal
exclusive right or privilege; and therefore, if a bank for the commonwealth is
erected, the private subscribers can have no privilege but what shall arise
from the stock actually deposited, and from the money deposited for security
and safekeeping. The bank, therefore, will be composed by proprietors who have
specie which they wish to employ in that way, and not by men who wish to
accumulate wealth by peculiar and exclusive advantages.

THE idea of a loan of money by banks to farmers upon mortgages of real
estates, is inadmissible. It was never attempted in any country, excepting in
one instance; I mean the land bank in Massachusetts. That bubble was produced
by the circulation of Law's scheme in Paris. The intoxication occasioned by the
method in which that plan was managed, made its way into Holland and England,
and finally operated in the province of Massachusetts Bay. About the year
thirty, a company was incorporated for the purpose, as was ostensibly held out,
to encourage agriculture and manufactures. Some of the greatest men in the
government were of the corporation, and the influence of it pervaded every
thing. Elections were governed by it. The legislature was under its control,
and its power was exceeded by nothing but the misfortunes and calamities which
were introduced by it. The notes issued by the company could not be paid,
because the company had no funds for that purpose. There were moneys due to
them on mortgages, but that money could not be collected, and therefore the
securities were sold at a discount, and a rapid depreciation took place. A
great variety of acts and laws were made in order to bring this business to a
close. The general import of them all was, to levy money from the private
estates of the proprietors, to pay the debts due from the corporation; the last
of these acts was made in 1759.

AFTER this, Apthorp and Wheelwright were engaged in a contract with, or under
others, to supply the British army in America, and issued notes on their own
credit, arising from their connection with the British treasury. But these very
soon began to go under par, and had but a very short run in commerce; the
reason was very plain: if the money was ready, there was no need of notes; if
the money was not ready, then the notes represented credit only, and not money.

THERE was something plausible in the proposition of the tontine association
for loaning money to farmers on mortgages. They were either not sincere, or
they were ignorant of the principles of banking. If a bank was to issue no more
notes than what would represent the specie on hand, it could not be done on
mortgages; because, upon banking principles, the gold and silver is always
supposed to be ready when called for; but when notes are made representing
specie, and yet depending upon moneys arising from mortgages for payment, and
delays are great, and an equity of redemption of the lands mortgaged extended
to the space of three years, it will be impossible to support the credit of the
bank.

THE tontine association were quite right, however, in making an application;
they petitioned for no greater privileges than had been granted to their fellow
citizens by this and the general government; and they are unable now to
discover the reason why one part of the people are thus distinguished from the
other.

IF there are evils resulting from the multiplication of banks, and from
speculations in public securities, those evils ought to be avoided. But we are
frequently told, that they will cure themselves; the same may be said of all
other natural, moral, and political evils; and if the argument proves any
thing, it will prove that there is no need of providing any checks against
wrong doers. Fevers generally cure themselves by their own rage, if they do not
destroy the subject of them: but we do not conclude from thence, that there is
no injury in a fever. Conflagrations cease when the city is consumed, but the
distress of their operations remains in a lasting calamity. Moral evils cure
themselves frequently by bringing offenders to the halter; they are
nevertheless intolerable, because they injure and distress the members of the
community where they are perpetrated. The observation, that evils cure
themselves, is nigh akin to that of the stoics, that there is no evil at all:
and not very distant in relation from the doctrine of universal indiscriminate
happiness, as well to the wicked as to the righteous, in another state of
existence. Political evils cure themselves; but they very frequently deluge a
country in blood in their progress, and frequently leave a nation overborne
with a heavy debt, if the liberties of the people are preserved; and the widows
and orphans of deceased patriots and warriors, are for a long time the numerous
witnesses of the preceding calamity.

OUR old paper money schemes and public debt were evils, and they have cured
themselves; but not until they had placed it in the power of one part of the
community to make vast estates upon the distresses and misfortunes of the other.

THE assurance that good may come out of evil, is no excuse for doing wrong.
Government ought to move uniformly, on fixed, rational, honest, and regular
principles. It is intended to preserve the equal rights of all the citizens,
and to protect the weak against the powerful, and the poor against the rich.
But these important ends can never be accomplished where the measure of wealth,
and medium of trade, is unsteady and capricious, or where the powers of
government, by an undue influence, are made subservient to the gratification or
emolument of particular associations, or of individuals in the civil community.

WHATEVER apologies may be formed by men in power, satisfactory to their own
consciences, from local situations, from examples in the same, or in any other
government, or from the pressure of men pursuing their own interest* yet there
will be an hour when these can form no plea; a day, when what has been right,
and what has been wrong, in morals and politics, will appear with an
indisputable certainty.

FINIS.

