AN ACCOUNT OF THE SUGAR MAPLE-TREE, OF THE UNITED STATES, And of the methods
of obtaining Sugar from it, together with Observations upon the Advantages both
public and private of this Sugar. In a Letter to Thomas Jefferson, Esquire.
Secretary of State of the United States, and one of the Vice-Presidents of the
American Philosophical Society.

READ IN THE AMERICAN PHILOSOPHICAL SOCIETY, ON THE 19, OF AUGUST, 1791, AND
EXTRACTED FROM THE THIRD VOLUME OF THEIR TRANSACTIONS NOW IN THE PRESS.

BY BENJAMIN RUSH, M. D. Professor of the Institutes and of Clinical Medicine
in the University of Pennsylvania.

PHILADELPHIA: PRINTED BY R. AITKEN and SON, MARKET STREET, FOR A (...)

AN ACCOUNT OF THE SUGAR MAPLE-TREE OF THE UNITED STATES, And of the Methods of
obtaining SUGAR from it, together with Observations upon the Advantages both
public and private of this Sugar. In a Letter to THOMAS JEFFERSON, Esquire.
Secretary of State of the United States, and one of the Vice-Presidents of the
American Philosophical Society, by BENJAMIN RUSH, M.D. Professor of the
Institutes and of Clinical Medicine in the University of Pennsylvania.
Extracted from the Third Volume of the Transactions of the American
Philosophical Society, now in the Press, and published at the request and for
the use of a number of respectable Citizens in the different States.
DEAR SIR,
IN obedience to your request, I have set down to communicate to our Society
through the medium of a letter to you, a short account of the Sugar Maple-tree
of the United States, together with such facts and remarks as I have been able
to collect, upon the methods of obtaining Sugar from it, and upon the
advantages both public and private of this Sugar.

The Acer Sacharinum of Linnaeus, or the Sugar Maple-tree, grows in great
quantities in the western counties of all the Middle States of the American
Union. Those which grow in New York and Pennsylvania yield the Sugar in a
greater quantity that those which grow on the waters of the Ohio* -- These
trees are generally found mixed with the Beech, (...)
Hemlock, (...)
White and Water Ash, (...)
the Cucumber tree, (...)
Linden, (...)
Aspen, (...)
Butter Nut, (...)
and Wild Cherry trees (...)
. They sometimes appear in groves covering five or six acres in a body, but
they are more commonly interspersed with some or all of the forest trees which
have been mentioned. From 30 to 50 trees are generally found upon an acre of
ground. They grow only in the richest soils, and frequently in stony ground.
Springs of the purest water abound in their neighborhood. They are when fully
grown as tall as the white and black oaks, and from two to three feet in
diameter. Baron La Hontan, in his voyage to North America, gives the following
account of the Maple-tree in Canada. After describing the black (...)
They put forth a beautiful white blossom in the Spring before they show a
single leaf. The color of the blossom distinguishes them from the acer rubrum,
or the common maple, which affords a blossom of a red color. The wood of the
Sugar Maple-tree is extremely inflammable, and is preferred upon that account
by hunters and surveyors for firewood. Its small branches are so much
impregnated with sugar as to afford support to the cattle, horses, and sheep of
the first settlers during the winter, before they are able to cultivate sorage
for that purpose. Its ashes afford a great quantity of pot ash, exceeded by
few, or perhaps by none of the trees that grow in the woods of the United
States.

The tree is supposed to arrive at its full growth in the woods in twenty years.

It is not injured by tapping; on the contrary, the oftener it is tapped, the
more syrup is obtained from it. In this respect it follows a law of animal
secretion. A single tree has not only survived, but flourished after forty-two
tappings in the same number of years. The effects of a yearly discharge of sap
from the tree in improving and increasing the sap is demonstrated from the
superior excellence of those trees which have been perforated in an hundred
places, by a small wood-pecker which feeds upon the sap. The trees after having
been wounded in this way distill the remains of their juice on the ground, and
afterward acquire a black color. The sap of these trees is much sweeter to
the taste than that which is obtained from trees which have not been previously
wounded, and it affords more sugar.

From twenty-three gallons and one quart of sap procured in twenty hours from
only two of these dark colored trees, Arthur Noble, Esquire. of the state of
New York obtained four pounds and thirteen ounces of good grained sugar.

A tree of an ordinary size yields in a good season from twenty to thirty
gallons of sap, from which are made from five to six pounds of sugar. To this
there are sometimes remarkable exceptions. Samuel Low, Esquire. a Justice of Peace
in Montgomery county, in the state of New York informed Arthur Noble, Esquire. that
he had made twenty pounds and one ounce of sugar between the 14th and 23d of
April, in the year 1789* from a single tree that had been tapped for several
successive years before.

From the influence which culture has upon forest and other trees, it has been
supposed, that by transplanting the Sugar Maple tree into a garden, or by
destroying such other trees as shelter it from the rays of the Sun, the
quantity of the sap might be increased, and its quality much improved. I have
heard of one fact which favors this opinion. A farmer in Northampton county in
the state of Pennsylvania, planted a number of these trees above twenty years
ago in his meadow, from three gallons of the sap of which he obtains every year
a pound of sugar. It was observed formerly that it required five or six gallons
of the sap of the trees which grow in the woods to produce the same quantity of
sugar.

The sap distills from the wood of the tree. Trees which have been cut down in
the winter for the support of the domestic animals of the new settlers, yield a
considerable quantity of sap as soon as their trunks and limbs feel the rays of
the Sun in the spring of the year.

It is in consequence of the sap of these trees being equally diffused through
every part of them, that they live three years after they are girdled, that is,
after a circular incision is made through the bark into the substance of the
tree for the purpose of destroying it.

It is remarkable that grass thrives better under this tree in a meadow, than
in situations exposed to the constant action of the Sun.

The season for tapping the trees is in February, March, and April, according
to the weather which occurs in these months.

Warm days and frosty nights are most favorable to a plentiful discharge of
sap. The influence of the weather in increasing and lessening the discharge of
the sap from trees is very remarkable.

Dr. Tongue supposed long ago (Philosophical Transactions, No. 68) that changes
in the weather of every kind might be better ascertained by the discharge of
sap from trees than by weather glasses. I have seen a journal of the effects of
heat, cold, moisture, drought and (...)


The quantity obtained in a day from a tree, is from five gallons to a pint,
according to the greater or less heat of the air. Mr. Low, informed Arthur
Noble, Esquire. that he obtained near three and twenty gallons of sap in one day
(April 14, 1789.) from the single tree which was before mentioned. Such
instances of a profusion of sap in single trees are however not very common.

There is always a suspension of the discharge of sap in the night if a frost
succeed a warm day. The perforation in the tree is made with an axe or an
auger. The latter is preferred from experience of its advantages. The auger is
introduced about three-quarters of an inch, and in an ascending direction (that
the sap may not be frozen in a slow current in the mornings or evenings) and is
afterward deepened gradually to the extent of two inches. A spout is
introduced about half an inch into the hole, made by this auger, and projects
from three to twelve inches from the tree. The spout is generally made of the
Sumach Rhus.
or Elder, Sambucus canadensis.
which generally grow in the neighborhood of the sugar trees. The tree is
first tapped on the South side; when the discharge of its sap begins to lessen,
an opening is made on its North side, from which an increased discharge takes
place. The sap flows from four to six weeks, according to the temperature of
the weather. Troughs large enough to contain three or four gallons made of
white pine, or white ash, or of dried water ash, aspen, linden, poplar,
Liriodendron Tulipifera.
or common ^^ple, are placed under the spout, to receive the sap, which is
carried every day to a large receiver, made of either of the trees before
mentioned. From this receiver it is conveyed, after being strained, to the
boiler.

To preserve the sap from rain and impurities of all kinds, it is a good
practice to cover the troughs with a concave board, with a hole in the middle
of it.

It remains yet to be determined whether some artificial heat may be applied so
as to increase the quantity and improve the quality of the sap. Mr. Noble
informed me, that he saw a tree, under which a farmer had accidentally burnt
some brush, which dropped a thick heavy syrup resembling melasses. This fact
may probably lead to something useful hereafter.

During the remaining part of the spring months, as also in the summer, and in
the beginning of autumn, the maple tree yields a thin sap, but not fit for the
manufactory of sugar. It affords a pleasant drink in harvest, and has been used
instead of rum, in some instances by those farmers in Connecticut, whose
ancestors have left to them here, and there a sugar maple tree, (probably to
shade their cattle,) in all their fields. Mr. Bruce describes a drink of the
same kind, prepared by the inhabitants of Egypt, by infusing the sugar cane in
water, which he declares to be "the most refreshing drink in the world." Baron
La Hontan, gives the following account of the sap of the sugar maple-tree, when
used as a drink, and of the manner of obtaining it. "The tree yields a sap
which has a much pleasanter take than the best lemonade or cherry water, and
makes the wholesomest drink in the world. This liquor is drawn by cutting the
tree two inches deep in the wood, the cut being made sloping to the length of
ten or twelve inches, at the lower end of this gash a knife is thrust into the
tree slopingly, so that the water runs along the cut or gash, as through a
gutter and falls upon the knife which has some vessels placed underneath to
receive it. Some trees will yield five or six bottles of this water in a day,
and some inhabitants of Canada; might draw twenty hogsheads of it in one day,
if they would thus cut and notch all the maple trees of their respective
plantation. The gash does no harm to the tree. Of this sap they make sugar and
syrup which is so valuable that there can be no better remedy for fortifying
the stomach, it is but few of the inhabitants that have the patience to make
them, for as common things are slighted, so there are scarce any body but
children that give themselves the trouble of gashing these trees."


There are three methods of reducing the sap to sugar.

1. By freezing it, this method has been tried for many years, by Mr. Obediah
Scott, a farmer in Luzerne county in this state, with great success. He says
that one half of a given quantity of sap reduced in this way, is better than
one-third of the same quantity reduced by boiling. If the frost should not be
intense enough, to reduce the sap to the graining point, it may afterward be
exposed to the action of the fire for that purpose.

2. By spontaneous evaporation. The hollow stump of a maple-sugar tree, which
had been cut down in the spring* and which was found sometime afterward filled
with sugar, first suggested this method of obtaining sugar to our farmers. So
many circumstances of cold and dry weather, large and flat vessels, and above
all so much time are necessary to obtain sugar, by either of the above methods,
that the most general method among our farmers is to obtain it.

3. By boiling. For this purpose the following facts which have been
ascertained by many experiments, deserve attention.

1. The sooner the sap is boiled, after it is collected from the tree, the
better. It should never be kept longer than twenty four hours before it is put
over the fire.

2. The larger the vessel in which the sap is boiled, the more sugar is
obtained from it.

3. A copper vessel affords a sugar of a fairer color than an iron vessel.

The sap flows into wooden troughs from which it is carried and poured into
store troughs or large cisterns in the shape of a canoe or large manger made of
white ash, linden, bass wood, or white pine, from which it is conveyed to the
kettle in which it is to be boiled. These cisterns as well as the kettle are
generally covered by a shed to defend the sap from the rain. The sugar is
improved by straining the sap through a blanket or cloth, either before or
after it is half boiled. Butter, hogs lard or tallow are added to the sap in
the kettle to prevent its boiling over, and lime, eggs or new-milk are mixed
with it in order to clarify it. I have seen clear sugar made without the
addition of either of them. A spoonful of slacked lime, the white of one egg,
and a pint of new-milk are the usual proportions of these articles which are
mixed with fifteen gallons of sap. In some samples which I have lately seen of
maple-sugar clarified with each of the above articles, that in which milk alone
was used, had an evident superiority over the others, in point of color.

The sugar after being sufficiently boiled, is grained and clayed, and
afterward refined, or converted into loaf sugar. The methods of conducting
each of these processes is so nearly the same with those which are used in the
manufactory of West India sugar, and are so generally known, that I need not
spend any time in describing them.

It has been a subject of inquiry whether the maple sugar might not be improved
in its quality and increased in its quantity by the establishment of boiling
houses in the sugar maple country to be conducted by associated labor. From the
scattered situation of the trees, the difficulty of carrying the sap to a great
distance, and from the many expenses which must accrue from supporting
laborers and horses in the woods in a season of the year in which nature
affords no sustenance to man or beast, I am disposed to believe that the most
productive method both in quantity and profit of obtaining this sugar will be
by the labor of private families. For a great number of years many hundred
private families in New York and Pennsylvania have supplied themselves
plentifully with this sugar during the whole year. I have heard of many
families who have made from two to four hundred pounds in a year; and of one
man who sold six hundred pounds, all made with his own hands in one season. The
following receipt published by William Cooper, Esquire. in the Albany Gazette (...)
establishes this fact.

"Received Cooper's Town, April 30th, 1790, of William Cooper, sixteen pounds,
for six hundred and forty pounds of sugar made with my own hands, without any
assistance in less than four weeks, besides attending to the other business of
my farm, as providing fire wood, taking care of the cattle, etc. John Nicholls.
Witness R. Smith.

A single family, consisting of a man and his two sons, on the maple sugar
lands between the Delaware and Susquehannah made 2800 lb. of (...)




Not more knowledge is necessary for making this sugar than is required to make
soap, cider, beer, sour trout, etc. and yet one or all of these are made in
most of the farm houses of the United States. The kettles and other utensils of
a farmer's kitchen, will serve most of the purposes of making sugar, and the
time required for the labor, (if it deserve that name) is at a season when it
is impossible for the farmer to employ himself in any species of agriculture.
His wife and all his children above ten years of age, moreover may assist him
in this business, for the profit of the weakest of them is nearly equal to that
of a man, when hired for that purpose.

A comparative view of this sugar has been frequently made with the sugar which
is obtained from the West India sugar cane, with respect to its quality, price,
and the possible or probable quantity that can be made of it in the United
States, each of which I shall consider in order.

1. The quality of this sugar is necessarily better than that which is made in
the West Indies. It is prepared in a season when not a single insect exists to
feed upon it, or to mix its excretions with it, and before a particle of dust
or of the pollen of plants can float in the air. The same observation cannot be
applied to the West India sugar. The insects and worms which prey upon it, and
of course mix with it, compose a page in a nomenclature of natural history. I
shall say nothing of the hands which are employed in making sugar in the
West Indies but, that men who work for the exclusive benefit of others, are not
under the same obligations to keep their persons clean while they are employed
in this work, that men women and children are, who work exclusively for the
benefit of themselves, and who have been educated in the habits of cleanliness.
The superior purity of the maple sugar is farther proved by its leaving a less
sediment when dissolved in water than the West India sugar.

It has been supposed that the maple sugar is inferior to the West India sugar
in strength. The experiments which led to this opinion, I suspect have been
inaccurate, or have been made with maple sugar, prepared in a slovenly manner.
I have examined equal quantities by weight of both the grained and the loaf
sugar, in hyson tea, and in coffee, made in every respect equal by the minutest
circumstances that could affect the quality or taste of each of them, and could
perceive no inferiority in the strength of the maple sugar. The liquors which
decided this question were examined at the same time, by Alexander Hamilton,
Esquire. Secretary of the Treasury of the United States, Mr. Henry Drinker, and
several Ladies, who all concurred in the above opinion.

2. Whoever considers that the gift of the sugar maple trees is from a
benevolent Providence, that we have many millions of acres in our country
covered with them, that the tree is improved by repeated tappings, and that the
sugar is obtained by the frugal labor of a farmer's family, and at the same
time considers the labor of cultivating the sugar cane, the capitals sunk in
sugar works, the first cost of slaves and cattle, the expenses of provisions
for both of them, and in some in (...) market, in all the West India Islands,
will not hesitate in believing that the maple sugar may be manufactured much
cheaper, and sold at a less price than that which is made in the West Indies.

3. The resources for making a sufficient quantity of this sugar not only for
the consumption of the United States, but for exportation, will appear from the
following facts. There are in the states of New York, and Pennsylvania alone at
least ten millions of acres of land which produce the sugar maple-tree, in the
proportion of thirty trees to one acre. Now supposing all the persons capable
of labor in a family to consist of three, and each person to attend 150 trees
and each tree to yield 5lb. of sugar in a season, the product of the labor of
60,000 families would be 135*000,000 pounds of sugar, and allowing the
inhabitants of the United States to compose 600,000 families each of which
consumed 200 pounds of sugar in a year, the whole consumption would be
120,000,000 pounds in a year, which would leave a balance of 15,000,000 pounds
for exportation. Valuing the sugar at 6/90 of a dollar per pound, the sum saved
to the United States would be 8,000,000 dollars by home consumption and the sum
gained by exportation would be 1,000,000 dollars. The only part of this
calculation that will appear improbable is, the number of families supposed to
be employed in the manufactory of the sugar, but the difficulty of admitting
this supposition will vanish when we consider, that double that number of
families are employed every year, in making cider, the trouble, risks and
expenses of which are all much greater than those of making maple-sugar.

But the profit of the maple tree is not confined to its sugar. It affords a
most agreeable melasses, and an excellent vinegar. The sap which is suitable
for these purposes is obtained after the sap which affords the sugar has ceased
to flow, so that the manufactories of these different products of the maple
tree, by succeeding, do not interfere with each other. The melasses may be made
to compose the basis of a pleasant summer beer. The sap of the maple is
moreover capable of affording a spirit, but we hope this precious juice will
never be prostituted by our citizens to this ignoble purpose. Should the use of
sugar in diet become more general in our country, it may tend to lessen the
inclination or supposed necessity for spirits, for I have observed a relish for
sugar in diet to be seldom accompanied by a love for strong drink. It is the
sugar which is mixed with tea which makes it so generally disagreeable to
drunkards. But a diet consisting of a plentiful mixture of sugar has other
advantages to recommend it which I shall briefly enumerate.

1. Sugar affords the greatest quantity of nourishment in a given quantity of
matter of any substance in nature; of course it may be preserved in less room
in our houses, and may be consumed in less time, than more bulky and less
nourishing aliment. It has this peculiar advantage over most kinds of aliment,
that it is not liable to have its nutritious qualities affected by time or the
weather, hence it is preferred by the Indians in their excursions from home.
They mix a certain quantity of maple sugar, with an equal quantity of Indian
corn, dried and powdered, in its milky state. This mixture is packed in little
baskets, which are frequently wetted in traveling, without injuring the sugar.
A few spoons full of it mixed with half a pint of spring water, afford them a
pleasant and strengthening meal. From the degrees of strength and nourishment,
which are conveyed into animal bodies by a small bulk of sugar, I conceive it
might be given to horses with great advantage, when they are used in places or
under circumstances which make it difficult or expensive to support them, with
more bulky or weighty aliment. A pound of sugar with grass or hay, I have been
told, has supported the strength and spirits of an horse, during a whole day's
labor in one of the West India Islands. A larger quantity given alone, has
fattened horses and cattle, during the war before last in Hispaniola, for a
period of several months, in which the exportation of sugar, and the
importation of grain, were prevented by the want of ships.

2. The plentiful use of sugar in diet, is one of the best preventatives that
has ever been discovered of the diseases which are produced by worms. The
Author of Nature seems to have implanted a love for this aliment in all
children, as if it were on purpose to defend them from those diseases. I know a
gentleman in Philadelphia, who early adopted this opinion, and who by indulging
a large family of children, in the use of sugar, has preserved them all from
the diseases usually occasioned by worms.

3. Sir John Pringle, has remarked that the plague has never been known in any
country where sugar composes a material part of the diet of the inhabitants. I
think it probable, that the frequency of malignant fevers of all kinds has been
lessened by this diet, and that its more general use would defend that class of
people, who are most subject to malignant fevers, from being so often affected
by them.

4. In the numerous and frequent disorders of the breast, which occur in all
countries, where the body is exposed to a variable temperature of weather,
sugar affords the basis of many agreeable remedies. It is useful in weaknesses,
and acrid defluxions upon other parts of the body. Many (...) only one, which
from the venerable name of the person, whose case furnished it, cannot fail of
commanding attention and credit. Upon my inquiring of Dr. Franklin, at the
request of a friend, about a year before he died, whether he had found any
relief from the pain of the stone, from the Blackberry Jam, of which he took
large quantities, he told me that he had, but that he believed the medicinal
part of the jam, resided wholly in the sugar, and as a reason for thinking so,
he added, that he often found the same relief, by taking about half a pint of a
syrup, prepared by boiling a little brown sugar in water, just before he went
to bed, that he did from a dose of opium. It has been supposed by some of the
early physicians of our country, that the sugar obtained from the maple tree,
is more medicinal, than that obtained from the West India sugar cane, but this
opinion I believe is without foundation. It is preferable in its qualities to
the West India sugar only from its superior cleanliness.

Cases may occur in which sugar may be required in medicine, or in diet, by
persons who refuse to be benefited, even indirectly by the labor of slaves. In
such cases, the innocent maple sugar will always be preferred Dr. Knowles, a
physician of worthy character in London, had occasion to recommend a diet to a
patient, of which sugar composed a material part. His patient refused to submit
to his prescription, and gave as a reason for it, that he had witnessed so much
(...) the oppression and (...) which were exercised upon the slaves, who made
the sugar, that he had made a vow never to taste the product of (...)
.

It has been said, that sugar injures the teeth, but this opinion now has so
few advocates, that it does not deserve a serious refutation.

To transmit to future generations, all the advantages which have been
enumerated from the maple tree, it will be necessary to protect it by law, or
by a bounty upon the maple sugar, from being destroyed by the settlers in the
maple country, or to transplant it from the woods, and cultivate it in the old
and improved parts of the United States. An orchard consisting of 200 trees,
planted upon a common farm, would yield more, than the same number of apple
trees, at a distance from a market town. A full grown tree in the woods yields
five pounds of sugar a year. If a greater exposure of a tree to the action of
the sun, has the same effects upon the maple, that it has upon other trees, a
larger quantity of sugar might reasonably be expected from each tree planted in
an orchard. Allowing it to be only seven pounds, then 200 trees will yield 1400
pounds of sugar, and deducting 200 from the quantity for the consumption of the
family, there will remain for (...) 1200 pounds, which at 6/90 of a dollar per
pound will yield an annual profit to the farmer of 80 dollars. But if it should
be found that the shade of the maple does not check the growth of grain any
more than it does of grass, double or treble that number of maple trees may be
planted on every farm, and a profit proportioned to the above calculation be
derived from them. Should this mode or transplanting the means of obtaining
sugar be successful, it will not be a new one. The sugar cane of the
West Indies, was brought originally from the East Indies, by the Portuguese,
and cultivated at Madeira, from whence it was transplanted directly or
indirectly, to all the sugar Islands of the West Indies

It were to be wished, that the settlers upon the sugar maple lands, would
spare the sugar tree in clearing their lands. On a farm of 200 acres of land,
according to our former calculation, there are usually 6,000 maple trees. If
only 2,000 of those original and ancient inhabitants of the woods were suffered
to remain, and each tree were to afford only five pounds of sugar, the annual
profit of such a farm in sugar alone, at the price formerly mentioned, would
amount to 666 dollars, 150 dollars of which would probably more than defray all
the expenses of making it, and allow a plentiful deduction for family use.

According to the usual annual profit of a sugar maple tree, each tree is worth
to a farmer, two dollars and 2/^ of a dollar; exclusive therefore of the value
of his farm, the 2000 sugar maple trees alone confer a value upon it of 5333
dollars and 30/90 of a dollar.

It is said that the sugar trees when deprived of the shelter and support they
derive from other forest trees are liable to be blown down, occasioned by their
growing in a rich, and of course a loose soil. To obviate this, it will only be
necessary to cut off some of their branches so as to alter its center of
gravity, and to allow the high winds to have an easy passage through them.
Orchards of sugar maple trees, which grow with an original exposure of all
their parts to the action of the sun will not be liable to this inconvenience.

In contemplating the present opening prospects in human affairs, I am led to
expect that a material share of the happiness which Heaven seems to have
prepared for a part of mankind will be derived from the manufactory and general
use of maple sugar, for the benefits which I flatter myself are to result from
it, will not be confined to our own country. They will I hope extend themselves
to the interests of humanity in the West Indies. With this view of the subject
of this (...) help contemplating a sugar maple tree with (...) myself to behold
in it the happy means of rendering the commerce and slavery of our African
brethren in the sugar Islands as unnecessary, as it has always been inhuman and
unjust This letter was written before the account of the war, which has lately
taken place in Hispaniola, between the white people and their slaves, had
reached the city of Philadelphia.
.

I shall conclude this letter by wishing that the patronage which you have
afforded to the maple sugar, as well as the maple tree, by your example (...)
may produce an influence in our country as extensive as your reputation for
useful science and genuine patriotism.

From Dear Sir, your Sincere Friend and Obedient Servant, BENJAMIN RUSH.
P. S. Since writing the above letter, I have procured through the friendship
of Mr. Henry Drinker, a copy of Mr. Botham's account of the method of
manufacturing sugar in the East Indies. It is extracted from the report of the
committee of the British privy council for trade, on the subject of the slave
trade. I shall insert in this postscript only such parts of it as will throw
light upon the method of manufacturing the maple sugar which has been
mentioned, and to show how much it is to be preferred in point of economy, to
that which is used in the West Indies.



Extract from the report of the Commit of Privy Council for trade on the
subject of the African Slave trade, etc. To the King, Part 3. No. 3. Mr. Botham
on the mode of cultivating a sugar plantation in the East Indies, etc.
"HAVING been for two years in the English and French West-Indian Islands, and
since conducted sugar estates in the East Indies; before the abolition of the
slave trade was agitated in parliament, it may be desirable to know that sugar
of a superior quality and inferior price, to that in our Islands, is produced
in the East Indies; and that the culture of the cane, the manufacture of the
sugar and arrack, is with these material advantages, carried on by free people.
China, Bengal, the coast of Malabar, all produce quantities of sugar and
spirits; but as the most considerable growth of the cane is carried on near
Batavia, I shall explain the improved manner in which sugar estates are there
conducted. The proprietor of the estate is generally a wealthy Dutchman, who
has erected on it substantial mills, bailing and curing-houses. He rents this
estate to a Chinese, who resides on it as a superintendant; and this renter
(supposing the estate to consist of 300 or more acres) re-lets it to freemen in
parcels of 50 or 60 on these conditions.

That they shall plant it in canes, and receive so much per pecul of 133 lbs.
for every pecul of sugar that the canes shall produce.

When crop time comes on, the superindant collects a sufficient number of
persons from the adjacent towns or villages, and takes off his crop as follows.

To any set of tradesmen who bring their carts and buffaloes he agrees to give
such a price per pecul to cut all his crop of canes, carry them to the mill and
grind them.

A second to boil them per pecul.

A third to clay them and basket them for market per pecul.

So that by this method of conducting a sugar estate, the renter knows to a
certainty what the produce of it will cost him per pecul. He has not any
permanent or unnecessary expense; for when the crop is taken off, the taskmen
return to their several pursuits in the towns and villages they came from; and
there only remains the cane planters who are preparing the next year's crop.
This like all other complex arts by being divided into several branches,
renders the labor cheaper and the work more perfectly done. Only clayed sugars
are made at Batavia: these are in quality equal to the best sort from the
West Indies, and are sold so low from the sugar estates as eighteen shillings
sterling per pecul of 133 lbs. This is not the selling price to the trader at
Batavia, as the government there is arbitrary, and sugar subject to duties
imposed at will. The Shabander exacts a dollar per pecul on all sugar exported.
The price of common labor is from 9d to 10 pence per day. By the method of
carrying on the sugar estates, the taskmen gain considerably more than this not
only from working extraordinary hours, but from being considered artists in
their several branches. They do not make spirits on the sugar estates. The
melasses is sent for sale to Batavia where one distillery may purchase the
produce of an hundred estates. Here is a vast saving and reduction of the price
of spirits; not as in the West Indies, a distillery, for each estate; many (...)

The improvement in making the cane into sugar at Batavia keeps pace with that
in its culture. Evaporation being in proportion to the surface, their boilers
are set with as much of it as possible; the cane juice with temper sufficient
to throw up its impurites is boiled down to the consistence of a syrup; it is
then thrown up into vats calculated to hold one boiling, then sprinkled with
two buckets of water to subside its foul parts; after standing six hours, it is
let off by three pegs of different heights into a single copper with one fire.
It is there tempered again boiled up and reduced to sugar, by a gentle fire. It
granulates, and the sugar boiler dipping a wand into the copper strikes it on
the side, then drops the sugar remaining on it into a cup of water, scrapes it
up with his thumb nail, and is by this means able to judge to the utmost
necessity of the sugar having its proper degree of boiling: the vats or
receivers I mentioned are placed at the left hand of a set of coppers; after
running off for boiling all that is clear, the remainder is passed through a
strainer, on the outside of the boiling house; what is fine is put into the
copper for sugar; the lees are reserved for distilling."

FINIS.

