MR. TAPPAN's ELECTION SERMON.

MAY 30, 1792.

COMMONWEALTH of MASSACHUSETTS. In the House of Representatives, May 30, 1792.
ORDERED, That Mr. EMERY, Mr. THORNDIKE, and Mr. HOW, be a Committee, to wait
on the Reverend DAVID TAPPAN, and thank him in the name of the HOUSE, for the
SERMON delivered by him this day, before His Excellency the GOVERNOR the
COUNCIL, and the two Branches of the GENERAL COURT; and also to request of him,
a copy thereof for the Press.

Attest. HENRY WARREN, Clerk.

A SERMON PREACHED BEFORE HIS EXCELLENCY JOHN HANCOCK, Esquire. GOVERNOR; HIS
HONOR SAMUEL ADAMS, ESQUIRE. LIEUTENANT-GOVERNOUR; THE HONORABLE THE COUNCIL,
SENATE, AND HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES, OF THE COMMONWEALTH OF MASSACHUSETTS, MAY
30, 1792.

BEING THE DAY OF GENERAL ELECTION.

By DAVID TAPPAN, A. M.

PASTOR OF A CHURCH IN NEWBURY.

PRINTED IN BOSTON, MASSACHUSETTS: AT THE State Press, BY THOMAS ADAMS, PRINTER
TO THE HONORABLE, THE GENERAL COURT.

M,DCC,XCII.

AN Election SERMON.
PSALM 77, VERSE 20, THOU LEDDEST THY PEOPLE LIKE A FLOCK, BY THE HANDS OF
MOSES AND AARON.
HOW various and transcendent are the excellencies of the sacred writings! They
combine all the different species of literary composition in their highest
perfection, and consecrate them to the moral improvement, the present and
future happiness of man. They furnish the best summary precepts, models, and
incentives, for producing the good citizen and statesman, for effecting an
orderly and prosperous state of things in the civil and temporary combinations
of this world: Whilst their primary object is, to prepare men for the far
nobler, the everlasting community of the blessed.

THESE observations are eminently illustrated by that part of the inspired
volume, which relates to GOD'S ancient people. The words just recited, look
back to the infancy of that favored nation. They introduce the GOD of Israel
under the beautiful figure of a Shepherd leading his flock; which expresses in
a very lively and endearing manner, the singular tenderness and care, with
which Heaven had conducted that people from the bondage of Egypt, to the
promised Canaan. The latter part of the verse, presents the subordinate and
united agency of Moses and Aaron, in accomplishing that memorable series of
events. These two celebrated characters had been early and closely linked
together, by the ties of nature, of religion, and of common sufferings. They
were afterward united by the more awful bond of a divine commission, which
constituted them Plenipotentiaries from JEHOVAH, the King of Israel, to the
Egyptian Court, which employed them as instrumental saviors of their oppressed
countrymen, as their guides and protectors through the dangers of the
wilderness, and the prime Ministers of their civil and ecclesiastical polity.
Whilst the one was Chief Magistrate in the Commonwealth, the other was High
Priest, or first officer in the Church. And the institution and combined
influence of these two orders in that community, were a most wise and salutary
provision both for its public and individual happiness.

THE divine appointment, then, and concurrent agency of the civil and
ecclesiastical ruler, in leading the ancient people of GOD, naturally invite
our attention to the importance and utility of political and religious guides
in a christian state, and to that union of affection and of exertion for the
common good, which ought to characterize and cement them. To explain and
enforce this union, without confounding the Church and the Commonwealth, or
blending the different provinces of their respective Ministers, is a truly
delicate task. The Speaker hopes, however, that his well-meant endeavors to
explore such a field, before an audience so respectable, will not be deemed
either vain, or impertinent to the occasion. He flatters himself that the
seasonable and momentous complexion of the subject, which cannot fail to strike
every intelligent eye, will procure to the discussion and application of it a
candid reception.

THIS joyful anniversary collects our civil and sacred leaders from various
parts of the State, to one consecrated spot. It unites them, methinks, into one
happy brotherhood. It brings them together to the altar of GOD, their common
Founder, Master, and Judge. It makes them joint partakers in a kind of yearly
festival, sacred to liberty and to religion -- a festival, which seems to renew
and to seal mutual friendship, and their harmonious ardent affection to the
general interest. Is it not congenial then with the spirit of the day, as well
as decent and useful on other accounts, that these two orders should sometimes
be the united object of its public addresses from the word of GOD; that their
reciprocal influence, and their conjunct operation to the common good, should
be clearly defined, and forcibly urged?

UNDER the solemn impression of these ideas, we will endeavor to mark out the
two different provinces of Moses and Aaron, or of the Ruler and the Priest; the
beneficent influence of each upon the public welfare; and the several ways, in
which they may and ought to befriend and assist each other in leading the
people of GOD.

THE discriminating genius of the two departments may be thus defined. The one
has for its immediate object, the temporal interest of mankind; the other,
their spiritual and everlasting. The one aims to regulate their outward
behavior, so far as to restrain them from injuring one another or the public,
and engage their contributions to the common welfare: The other contemplates
the due regulation of the heart, as well as the overtacts which issue from that
source. The one enforces its addresses by sanctions merely civil and worldly;
the other by motives which chiefly respect the soul and the life to come.

LET us now turn our attention to the important and happy influence of each
department upon the public interest.

THE importance of such an officer in society as the ci^^^ Magistrate, is
immediately seen and felt by all. It grows out of the present weakness and
corruption of mankind. It is suggested by the social feelings belonging to our
frame, joined with a sense of mutual dependence and common danger. Accordingly,
when such officer possesses the spirit of his station, and with intelligence
and fidelity pursues its leading design, the effects on the community will be
equally benign and diffusive. A ruler of this character, like the central orb
of the planetary world, enlightens and animates, cements and beautifies the
whole political system. With a skilful, steady, yet gentle hand, he moulds a
confused mass of discordant materials into one regular and harmonious compound,
and holds it together with a silken, yet invincible chain. By a strictly
righteous, equal, and paternal administration, he spreads the blessings of
justice, freedom, tranquillity, public and private prosperity, through all
classes of the people. The advantages of such a magistracy transcend
description. To use the delicate and splendid figures of inspiration. It
resembles "the light of the morning, when the sun rises, even a morning
without clouds; like the tender grass springing out of the earth by clear
shining after rain."

BUT it is needless to expatiate on this branch of our subject. The beneficent
influence of good civil rule stands confessed to the eye of reason. It is
inscribed, as with a sunbeam on the face of our happy country. It has been
delineated with superior ability and address, on these anniversary solemnities.

LET us then direct our attention to the other object before us, namely, the
importance and benefit to society, of the CHRISTIAN PRIESTHOOD, or of public
religious instructors. To set this point in a just and easy light, let us
consider at large, the necessity of religion to the well-being of a community,
and then inquire, what are the best means of diffusing and maintaining it.

THE necessity of religion to public order and happiness, has been generally
acknowledged by discerning minds in all countries and ages, yea, by enlightened
infidels and atheists. But a set of philosophers and free-thinkers, who boast
of their superior reason and liberality, have appeared on the stage, in these
days of modern refinement, who have employed all the powers of metaphysical
sophistry and licentious ridicule to shake the foundations of religion: And
some of them have even denied its political importance and utility, and have
proposed in its stead a kind of philosophical or civil morality, as fully
competent to the purposes of general order and security. A system of ideas, or
at least of practical feelings, very similar to this, seems growing into
fashion in various parts of the American Union; a system, which considers all
religious principles, observances and instructors, as the remains of old
monkish ignorance, superstition and bigotry, or the antiquated offspring of
worldly policy, begotten in the early and ruder stages of society; but which
are wholly unsuitable and useless, if not a heavy tax upon the public, in this
more enlightened and mature period of human affairs! But let us meet these
refined politicians upon their own ground; and ask them, what they have to
substitute in the room of religion, as an adequate prop to their own favorite
scheme of morality.

WILL they say, that civil laws and institutions, planned with wisdom, and
executed with vigor, will completely answer the purpose? But these human
provisions can embrace only the visible actions of the subject. They can
prevent or punish those offenses only, which may be known and legally proved.
They consequently, leave out of their jurisdiction all secret crimes; as well
as those numberless immoralities, which human laws can never distinctly define,
but which operate as the poison both of private and social felicity. Civil
regulations proclaim their own incompetency, even in the judicial procedures
submitted to their authority: For no general rule can accommodate itself to an
infinite diversity of circumstances: And therefore the aid of religious
principle seems absolutely necessary to supply the defect. This will teach the
Legislator to construct, and the Judge to interpret and apply the laws, upon so
just and liberal a plan, as will present the best advantages in every case, for
discovering the truth, and so for protecting the innocent, as well as
chastising the wilful offender. This will induce a conscientious, a filial and
generous obedience, on the part of the subject, to the reasonable authority of
the Magistrate and the laws. At the same time it will prevent a cowardly,
degrading submission to the claims and measures of imperious despots, or a
fawning, idolatrous, prostration at the feet of a dignified fellow-worm. In
short, whilst human laws punish criminal actions, it is the glory of religion
to prevent them, to tear up the roots from which they grow. Whilst law is deaf
and unrelenting to the cries of penitent guilt, religion pardons and comforts
the suppliant, returning offender, and hereby encourages and fortifies his
purposes and efforts of future obedience. Whilst the one enforces strict
justice only, the other inculcates the whole train of gentle and beneficent
virtues: It inspires an intercourse of humane, generous kindness, and grateful
attachment and fidelity, between the higher and lower classes in society; an
intercourse, which like the vital fluid diffuses cheerful health through the
whole political body. Thus civil institutions and measures, even in their best
state, require the succors of religion, to supply their deficiencies, to
soften their rigor, to enforce and to sweeten their observance.

"BUT a sense of honor, the desire of esteem and praise, and fear of their
opposites, joined to the efficacy of salutary laws, will certainly form a
sufficient security of the general order and welfare." We answer, the good
influence of this principle will not bear a comparison with that of religion.
For the praise or censure of the world, exerts its principal force within a
very small circle, upon more splendid or public characters; whilst the great
majority of the people, concealed under humble roofs, feel little of its
efficacy. But religion applies its stimulating or withholding influence to the
ignorant, the obscure, and the weak; as well as to the wise, the noble and the
mighty. The world does not bestow its palm, till men have almost reached the
goal; but religion applauds and cherishes the first virtuous desire, intention,
or, effort. The world often mistakes in its judgment of characters and actions;
but religion places an unerring witness and judge in our very bosoms. In a
word, even the esteem of men in the case before us, ultimately derives its
force from religion. For if the social or moral virtues of mankind, were once
stripped of the luster, the stability, and the majesty, which religious
principles communicate, the respect paid to them, would suffer an immediate
shock: The idea of honor and disgrace, connected with their performance or
omission, would be greatly enfeebled: And the opinion of the world, left
without a steady guide, would grow too fluctuating and capricious, to restrain
or to actuate human conduct.

"BUT the connection between the interest of the public and of individuals, lays
a sufficient bond upon the latter to contribute to the order and welfare of the
former." We reply, this connection is not always so immediate and striking, as
to influence the unthinking, the poor and the wretched, to pay homage to the
order and beauty of the social system, whilst there is nothing for them
individually, but apparent deformity and misery; whilst those very principles
and rules, which secure harmony to the public, wealth, power and magnificence
to some of their fortunate neighbors, seem to bind them down to perpetual
poverty and toil; and when a violation of these laws promises instant relief or
benefit to themselves, and at the same time, perhaps threatens no direct injury
to the community at large. There are some cases too, in which the more opulent
ranks, or the governing powers of the State, may with reason consider the
public interest and their own, as separate objects: And if their minds are not
enlightened and regulated by religion, they will often view these two interests
as distinct, when they really unite. They will also be supremely inclined to
pursue private advantage, at the expense of every rival claim. In such
instances, what is there effectually to restrain such elevated characters from
sacrificing the public, at the shrine of their adored, though paltry idol?
There is nothing which promises a sure and perpetual guard against these evils,
but religious principles* the sentiment of a Deity, and of a future state of
recompense, early planted in the minds, and deeply rooted in the hearts both of
the high and the low.

"BUT some infidel and irreligious characters have conducted well in a social
and political view." We answer, religious ideas early taught and imbibed, will
secretly influence the conscience and practice, long after the understanding
has begun to question, and even to reject the arguments, on which they are
founded. Besides, a habit of order and propriety in conduct, once formed, is
not easily subdued by after speculations; especially when an adherence to it is
connected with the marks of public esteem and favor, or enforced by the
commanding motive of private interest. Not to add, that there are some, who
affect a superiority to the common mass of mankind, by talking like infidels,
who yet feel themselves constrained to think and act, in many instances, like
vulgar believers.

"BUT if religion be the main prop of social order, why does not the latter
always relax and decline with the former?" The answer is, religion still keeps
her hold of men, through the medium of natural conscience, of early habit, and
some awful controlling impression of a future retribution, even when their
hearts do not feel her transforming power, nor their lives display her peculiar
and most attractive charms. If then religious principles have such salutary
effects on society, even when their influence is feeble, and when they manage
the human mind by the inferior and precarious handle of fear; what would be
their fruits, if they reigned in full glory, and commanded the free and steady
services of love? If love to GOD and men, which is the life of religion,
pervaded all classes in the community, what a copious and excellent harvest
would it quickly produce! This would ensure the universal practice of all those
virtues, which nourish and exalt a nation; whilst it directly promoted the
interest and comfort of all ages, conditions and stations; it would, as the
great law of moral attraction, draw the affections and efforts of all to one
common center, the good of the whole. Must not such a spirit and conduct
immediately advance the respectability, the vigor, the temporal and spiritual
prosperity of a people? Must they not draw down the approving smiles, the
guardian care, the rewarding munificence of the SUPREME Ruler of nations? On
the other side, must not irreligion, and its natural offspring, vice, equally
tend, both by a direct and a judicial operation, to disjoint, to enfeeble, to
destroy a community? Does not the universal experience of public bodies from
the beginning to this day, seal the truth of these observations? Is it not one
mighty practical demonstration of the salutary fruit of piety and virtue, or
the baneful influence of their opposites, upon the order, the liberty, the
general welfare of nations?

THE necessity of religion to public happiness being sufficiently proved, an
interesting question arises; what are the best means of diffusing and
maintaining in a community this precious and fundamental blessing? This inquiry
brings up to view the importance of public religious instructors. The political
necessity of such an order of men, directly results from that of religion
itself, when compared with the ignorance, dullness, and depravity of the human
mind, the spiritual and sublime nature of religious truths, the want of leisure
as well as ability in the bulk of mankind, for studying and familiarizing them,
and the influence of surrounding objects of worldly cares and amusements to
intercept their view, to efface or weaken their impression. In this dark and
impure region," how apt are even the most contemplative and virtuous characters
to lose sight of moral and spiritual objects, and to get out of the sphere of
their attractive and regulating influence! How greatly then do we all need the
friendly voice of STATED MONITORS, to recall our forgetful, wandering feet; and
to enlighten and warm our hearts afresh with the divine principles and motives
of religion! Those in high station need to be frequently reminded, that there
is a BEING above them, to whom they are accountable, equally with the lowest of
the people. Persons of great genius and learning, require to be often
admonished that their obligations to serve GOD and the public, are proportioned
to their superior talents. The worthy and good in society, need a frequent and
lively inculcation of those truths, which tend to nourish and fortify their
virtues, to enliven and extend their efforts of usefulness. How much more
needful, then is public religious instruction to the inferior members of the
community, to the numerous class of laborious poor, to the grossly ignorant,
the careless, and the vicious! Without this, how shall they obtain a competent
knowledge, or an abiding practical impression of their various relations and
duties to GOD, to man, to civil society?

IN this view, the public worship of the DEITY, and stated instructions in
religion and morality, appear as necessary and beneficial to the State, as they
are to the souls of individuals: And the institution of a WEEKLY SABBATH,
devoted to those purposes, is the offspring of profound and generous policy, if
viewed merely in its aspect upon our present social condition. For the decent
and united observation of it, by the Members of each Corporation, is, an
eminent mean of promoting useful knowledge, civilization and good
neighborhood; of strengthening the cords both of political and christian
union; of bringing seasonable rest and refreshment to the body and mind, after
the fatigues of worldly care and toil; and of keeping alive in the minds of all
ranks, an awful commanding sense of DEITY, of moral and religious obligation:
Agreeably, the public benefits of this institution are distinctly visible on
the face of those communities, which carefully support and observe it; whilst
the contrary features equally distinguish those, which despise or neglect it.

THE preacher cannot do full justice to this part of his theme, or to his own
profession as a Gospel Minister, without adding, that the CHRISTIAN RELIGION,
properly stated and enforced by its teachers, has a peculiarly favorable
influence upon the present social state of mankind: For, it is the volume of
revelation only, that fully illustrates and confirms, and with due authority
presses, those great religious principles, which we have shown to be the basis
of virtue and of order. At the same time it superadds a new scheme of truth,
suited to the lapsed state of mankind, which at once encourages, directs,
assists and constrains to universal goodness; it presents the DEITY, in the
full orbed luster of his perfections; it displays the matchless philanthropy,
the generous expiation and intercession of his Son; it offers and conveys the
needed succors of his spirit; it ascertains and describes the future joys and
sorrows of immortality. Must not these discoveries, suitably realized*
powerfully tend to check transgression -- to kill the seeds of vice, (...) to
produce, to enoble, and improve every branch of a virtuous character? The moral
system too, which christianity builds upon these principles, is an eminent
friend to our present felicity. For it inculcates the most extended, the most
active, the most self-denying benevolence; it links us to the great brotherhood
of man; yea, it unites us to the universe, to eternity, and to GOD, the head
and sum of both. It levels all the haughty feelings of superior rank or
abilities, and places true greatness in humble, condescending, elevated
goodness. By this, as well as by constantly pointing us to those two great
levellers, death and an endless retribution, it introduces a kind of generous
republican equality among the different orders and conditions in society. It
equally regards and secures the interest of all the members of the community,
by that great rule of equity, "whatever ye would that men should do unto you,
do ye even so to them." By presenting the same motives and rewards of virtue to
the weak and the strong, and by urging both to secret acts of goodness, from a
regard to the approving eye, and final recompense of the SUPREME JUDGE; it
provides a steady support, a constant opportunity, a universal engagement to
the practice of virtue. We may add, it regulates and refines those important
social connexions and duties, the conjugal, parental and filial, in a manner
highly favorable to the order and happiness of human society. In a word, the
spirit of our religion, is uniting and peaceable: It is loyal, patriotick, and
free: It is the life and support of good government and of rational liberty.
Even the positive, ceremonial rites of christianity, properly administered, are
important outworks, which guard the public welfare: For by striking upon the
senses and imaginations of men, they bring affecting truths with peculiar force
to their hearts, and hereby operate to produce a decent and regular outward
deportment.

WHAT an engine of public usefulness, then, does the christian institution put
into the hands of its Ministers! And how important is it to the common good,
that such an order of men should be spread out over the whole community! What
unspeakable aid may they afford to, as well as receive from, the civil
Magistrate! Whilst the people at large reap a plentiful harvest from the united
labors of both! Which brings us more distinctly to point out out the several
ways in which the Ruler and Priest may and ought to combine their influence, or
to assist each other, in leading the people of GOD.

WE mean not to advocate such a union or cooperation of the two orders, as
involves a heterogeneous mixture of civil and spiritual objects; as places the
Magistrate upon CHRIST'S throne, in the Church, and invests the christian
Minister with the honors and the powers of the State: Such motley alliances are
the offspring of political and priestly ambition, aided by equal cunning; are
the main pillar both of civil and religious tyranny; and the source of infinite
mischiefs to the intellectual and moral character as well as the temporal
condition of mankind. They infect the best religion under Heaven, its
Professors and Ministers, with the spirit of this world, with a proud, cruel,
persecuting and immoral disposition. As a celebrated writer observes,
"persecution is not an original feature in any religion; but is always the
strongly marked feature of all law, religion, or religions established by law.
Take away the law-establishment, and religion re-assumes its original
benignity. In America a Catholic Priest is a good citizen, a good character,
and a good neighbor; an Episcopalian Minister is of the same description; and
this proceeds from there being no law-establishment in America."

BUT whilst we execrate such treasonable conspiracies between Rulers and
Priests, against the dearest rights and interests of man, we may consistently
recommend to the two orders, a liberal and patriotick combination for the
general good. There is indeed, in many respects, a natural alliance between
intelligent, virtuous Magistrates and Ministers, in a free and christian State.

AND first, the Magistrate may and ought to cooperate with the christian
instructor, by throwing the weight of his personal example and private
influence into the scale of christian piety and virtue. The efficacy of
example, when arrayed in all the splendor of high office, is not to be
described. As religion adds grace and dignity to the most exalted station, so
she derives a superior charm and majesty from it.

WHEN the great political characters in a community, give their uniform
sanction to religion, by exhibiting her fairest features in their daily
deportment; when they openly revere the name, the sabbaths, the temple, and all
the sacred institutions of the Most High; when they liberally and zealously
contribute to the settlement and support, the reputation and success of a
learned and virtuous Priesthood, to the extensive propagation of christian
knowledge, and to the pious education of the rising age; when they are eminent
patterns of virtue themselves, and are careful to cherish and honor it in
others; how unspeakably do such examples confirm and extend the credit and
influence of religion! What animation and confidence, what superior
respectability and success, do they give to its teachers! What authority and
energy must the inward consciousness, and open luster of such virtue impart to
Rulers themselves, in their official proceedings; especially those which have
for their object, the suppression of wickedness, and the encouragement of the
opposite interest! Which leads us to observe, that Rulers e^^icaciously concur
with christian Ministers, when they carry the spirit of religion into their
public conduct: When all their political measures are regulated by the
everlasting maxims of natural justice, of christian equity and benevolence:
When they accordingly distribute the burdens, apply the resources, fulfill the
engagements and discharge the debt of the public, with the scrupulous fairness,
the exact economy, the assiduous attention required by those rules, in the
similar transactions of private citizens: When they detest and scorn the idea
of sanctioning by their public authority, any measure, which they would blush
to avow or to practice in their individual capacity: In short, when the whole
system of their public conduct appears to be prompted and guided by a SUPREME
regard to the example and laws, the approbation and honor of the infinite
RULER and the good of his moral family: What a glorious attestation is here of
the reality, the commanding force of religious obligation! Such a train of
political measures is pregnant with various and almost inconceivable good. It
inculcates various sentiments upon the public mind, with all the authority and
force of the highest, the most conspicuous, and unequivocal example. It also
directly and efficiently contributes to the general prosperity: For it proceeds
upon principles, which are as essentially necessary and conducive to social
union and happiness, as the laws which govern the material world, are to the
harmony and welfare of nature.

FURTHER, the Magistrate may greatly strengthen the christian Teacher, by
directing his public attention to the advancement of religion and virtue as an
immediate and primary object; by so arranging his measures for the increase of
temporal good, as to render them in the best manner subservient to that which
is spiritual and eternal; by enacting and executing laws for the prevention or
punishment of profaneness and immorality; by promoting virtuous characters to
offices of honor and usefulness; by neglecting and dispising the vicious; by
lessening and removing the temptation to iniquity; by augmenting and
multiplying the encouragements to goodness; by giving birth and efficacy to
public and private means of learning, so essential to rational piety; by
effectually providing for the support and decent observance of public religious
worship and instruction so necessary, as we have seen, to the virtue, the
civilization, and happiness, of the community. Such a legal provision for the
maintenance of religious institutions, obviously falls within the province of
the Magistrate, on account of their transcendent importance to civil government
and society: Nor does such provision adjusted upon an equal and liberal plan,
make the least approach to a political establishment of any particular
religious profession, nor consequently invole any invasion of the prerogative
of CHRIST, or the sacred rights of conscience. On the other hand,

SECONDLY. The christian Minister may and ought to strengthen the hands of the
civil Ruler. If he possesses those qualities of head and heart, which suit his
benevolent and comprehensive office, he must have the most tender and ardent
feelings for the interest of the State, as well as the Church. He must perceive
an important connection between them, as well as the friendly aspect of the
christian doctrine upon both. He must consequently feel a double stimulus to a
prudent and faithful discharge of his trust. He therefore endeavors, both in
his public ministrations, and in his private conversation and example, so to
represent and enforce the christian system, as that it may, under the divine
blessing, have its full effect upon the character and condition of mankind, in
reference to this world and the next. He takes particular care not to make this
beneficent and peaceable religion, an engine of civil or spiritual tyranny,
confusion, malignant strife, or in any respect, an instrument of increasing,
instead of lessening human depravity and wretchedness. He feels himself
peculiarly united to the worthy Magistrate, by the ties of personal esteem and
public affection. He studies that his whole deport^^nt respecting the Rulers
and the laws, may express and promote a spirit of decent subjection and
obedience, and he enforces such submission by all the authority and sanction of
religion. His social intercourse with his family and flock, his daily prayers
in private and in public, tend to kindle and to nourish the sentiments of
loyalty and patriotism. He loves to mention in the ears of the rising race, the
names and services of patriot Rulers, of eminent public benefactors; and hereby
to charm the tender mind to the love of virtue, of country, of mankind, as well
as to a due veneration for, and grateful submission to such Ministers of divine
benevolence. His public discourses too, all tend either directly or remotely,
to form his hearers into good citizens and subjects, as well as holy
christians. That such a reciprocation of services between the two orders, falls
within the line of propriety and important duty, is too obvious to the eye of
discernment, to require a formal illustration.

IT is with great satisfaction, that we appeal to the historic page of our own
country, for a striking comment upon the preceding discourse. Our fathers were
led out of the house of bondage in Britain, into the wilderness of America, and
planted here, as in the land of promise, by the same divine Shepherd, who led
ancient Israel from deep oppression and misery, to the joys of freedom and
plenty. The same good spirit, which inspired Moses and Aaron, to undertake and
conduct so arduous an enterprise, evidently guided and animated the leaders in
that great attempt, which gave birth to New England. The same union of
friendship, of counsel and exertion in the public cause, which characterized
the Hebrew Lawgiver and High Priest, distinguished the political and religious
Fathers of Massachusetts. The rulers of the State, were at the same time
Members and pillars of the Church. The religion which they thus solemnly
professed, was the rule of their public and private conduct, and the
advancement of its interests, a main object of both. For this purpose, they
readily co-operated with the schemes and endeavors of worthy clergymen, and
contributed their best efforts for their comfort, reputation and success.

THE advice and influence of the priesthood were likewise ever at hand, to aid
and succeed the operations of the Magistrate, and to promote the civil, as well
as religious interests of the people. It is granted, indeed, that our ancestors
carried this union of Church and State, to an unwarrantable length. But this
was not their peculiar fault: It was the complexion of the age. And shall we,
their children, who owe so much to their generous services and sufferings,
shall we, like undutiful and cursed Ham, take pleasure in exposing their
nakedness? No, my fellow-citizens; whilst we spread a veil of filial, piety
over their imperfections, let us with the most grateful emotions, celebrate
that united agency of Moses and Aaron, which, under GOD, laid such early and
noble foundations of freedom and order, of science and religion; which in the
feeble infancy, and great poverty of the settlement gave birth to a public
seminary of learning; a seminary, which from its foundation, to this day, has
borne on its front the united inscription of the Ruler and the Priest, in the
names of its Founders, and Benefactors, of its Governors and Sons! But passing
over the intermediate stages of our history; you will permit me modestly to
ask, does not the inscription just mentioned, appear very conspicuous on the
face of our late glorious revolution? Did not these two orders remarkably unite
their efforts to keep the public mind in a posture of vigilance, of
information, of patriotic ardour? In those times which tried men's souls, did
not the public prayers and discourses, the private infl^ence and example of the
great body of the clergy, firmly and successfully cooperate with the civil and
military measures of the country? Did not the same zealous concurrence of the
two departments, procure the adoption of the excellent constitution of
Massachusetts, and of the present federal system, which gives union, order, and
happiness to America? Did not the same virtuous and unshaken combination
eminently mark that perilous and alarming crisis, which a few years since
passed over this Commonwealth? Do not these striking facts evince, that the
spirit of the clerical office at least, in this enlightened and free country,
is an important friend to the liberty, government and happiness of society? On
the other hand, it becomes us gratefully to acknowledge the support which
religion and its Ministers have received from the civil government of this
State, from the authority and example of some of the first political characters
in it; the additional reputation and success which they have instrumentally
derived from that source; and the consequent face of superior union and order,
civilization and virtue, which adorns a great part of our community. These
advantages would strike us with much greater force, were we allowed to contrast
our situation in these respects, with that of some other parts of the Union:
But decency forbids the invidious comparison.

WHEN we look over this numerous and respectable assembly, a cloud of witnesses
rushes upon our senses and hearts, in support of the ideas now advanced.

OUR eye is first caught by the CHIEF MAGISTRATE of this Commonwealth, who has
had a large share in the great political drama, that has been acted on the
stage of the new world, and covered it with glory. The presence of his
Excellency restrains the lips of delicacy from paying him a formal tribute of
praise. But while his distinguished political services are engraven on every
American bosom, justice to a different part of his character, constrains us to
observe, that he has ever treated religion, its institutions and Ministers,
with a respect becoming the enlightened, consistent patriot, and Ruler, in a
christian State. The clergy within his jurisdiction, feel the animating
influence of his attention and patronage, and wish him in return, a large
experience of the comforts of our divine religion, amidst that trying scene of
bodily infirmity, with which he has so long been afflicted. It is also our
united prayer to GOD, that his Excellency may ever form his whole private and
public conduct upon the divine model proposed in the life and precepts of the
christian lawgiver. That so his personal example and official measures may
unite their influence to spread piety and virtue as well as every temporal
blessing, through the community. To this, he will feel himself urged by every
motive, which can operate upon a heart of sensibility; in particular, by the
interesting prospect of death and endless retribution, to which the highest
earthly god is equally bound with the lowest of his subjects. May conscious
fidelity cheer the solemn hour of dissolution, inspire boldness before the
decisive tribunal, and be crowned with superior glory in the kingdom of Heaven.

HIS Honor, the Lieutenant-Governour, merits our tribute of respect, on
account of that distinguished union of political wisdom, patriotic virtue, and
christian piety, which has long dignified his character. Notwithstanding the
eminence of his reputation among the civilians of the age, he has not been
ashamed of the cross of Christ, but has long been inlisted under that despised,
but heavenly banner. May he still continue an ornament and pillar, both of the
Church and Commonwealth, till his hoary head shall come down to the grave in
peace.

THE Honorable Council claim our regards, on account of their important share
in the executive department, and worthy personal qualities, which pointed them
out to the suffrages of their enlightened fellow-citizens. Whilst their
elevation to this office reflects on them a ray of glory, it obliges them to a
correspondent dignity of sentiment and conduct: It invites them to a noble
imitation of the governing wisdom, justice and mercy of HIM, who is the
wonderful Counselor, the King of righteousness and of peace. It particularly
calls them to advise and consent to the appointment of such characters only, to
interpret and execute the laws, as are exemplary themselves for the observance
of human and divine injunctions, and endowed with talents and dispositions
suited to the important trust. In this way they may unspeakably promote the
civil and moral interests of all parts of the Commonwealth.

THE Gentlemen who compose the two Branches of the Honorable Legislature, will
permit our congratulations on the fresh mark of esteem and confidence, with
which their constituents have honored them. They will likewise remember that
the trust, with which they are charged, is very solemn and momentous; that it
is rendered still more awful, by the declarations and oaths, with which they
have recently entered on its execution. As we cannot doubt their sincerity in
those professions and appeals to Heaven, we entertain a cheerful hope that all
their transactions on this day and through the year, will be regulated by the
excellent principles of that religion, and of those civil constitutions which
they have publicly taken for their guide. We reasonably expect that all their
laws and proceedings will be so many branches growing out of the stock of equal
justice and comprehensive benevolence; that they will be strongly marked with
the same integrity, virtue and honor, which suit and adorn the rational and
christian character in a private capacity. They will ever remember that the
same practical principles, must form the basis both of public and individual
happiness and glory; and that the policy of those who would rear he fabric of
national prosperity upon a different foundation is equally unphilosophical and
iniquitous. As human art, in order to produce certain useful effects must
conform to the principles of nature, or the established laws of its great
Architect; so the politician must build the order and welfare of society upon
those moral principles and connexions, which the same ALMIGHTY RULER, has
instituted in the rational system. If he act an opposite part, he virtually,
attempts a new creation: Yea, like the man of sin, he exalts himself above all
that is called GOD; for it is the glory of the DEITY himself, though he be an
absolute ALMIGHTY SOVEREIGN, that he cannot govern upon any other plan than
that of inviolable truth, justice, and goodness; that he cannot lie to any of
his subjects, or trifle with their reasonable petitions, expectations or
claims. It will be the glory of our Rulers, to copy after this divine original.
No idea therefore of omnipotence or uncontrolled Sovereignty, will be permitted
to infect their deliberations and decisions; but their whole conduct, as it
respects particular citizens, the Commonwealth in general, and the great
American Republic, will, we trust, exhibit a fair picture of honest, enlarged
and Federal policy.

HONORED FATHERS: As you do not remove out of the sphere of religious
obligation, by entering the circle of politics; as you, have all this day
professed the christian belief, and many of you are complete visible members of
the Redeemer's family; you will feel under the most sacred ties, to devote the
superior powers and advantages of your present stations, to the christian
interest. Whilst therefore you tenderly guard the rights of conscience, and
afford equal protection to all peaceable citizens, you will make and enforce
every needful provision for the general diffusion of religious and moral
sentiments, and for the maintenance and observation of those christian and
literary institutions, which are requisite to that end. Among such
institutions, the neighboring University has a distinguished claim to your
liberal patronage. It has been one of the grand nurseries of civilization,
liberty, good government and religion. Our very existence, as a respectable
community, is, under GOD, greatly derived from that source. Filial gratitude
then, as well as every sentiment of public virtue, press our Rulers to nurse
and cherish this their ancient parent, with a tender and generous care.

IN a word, let me respectfully call upon all our civil officers, in every
department, to consecrate their authority, influence and example to the
greatest good of the community. You, Gentlemen, collectively considered, are
the moving and regulating principle of the whole political machine. If you
jointly and strenuously pursue a virtuous train of conduct, it will operate
like a powerful charm upon all parts of the system, and call up a new creation
of beauty, virtue and happiness. Let it then be your first ambition and
endeavor, to make mankind wiser, better and happier; to raise up the drooping
head of virtue; to tread down irreligion and vice; to enlarge the empire of
knowledge and righteousness; to augment as much as possible, the sum of created
good, and of creating and redeeming glory.

AND since the advancement of these great interests lies very much between you
and the standing teachers of religion, let gentlemen in these different orders
cultivate a friendly and patriotic alliance, by all the methods which prudence
and generous virtue suggest.

YE venerable leaders of our civil and ecclesiastical tribes; how many and how
forcible are the ties which bind you together! In this land of political and
religious freedom, you both derive your election to office from one source; you
are fellow laborers in one great and benevolent cause; you are important
members of one civil body, and by visible profession and sacred obligation, of
one christian family; in the due performance of your several offices, you
display the same leading excellent talents and virtues, and mutually give and
receive the most important support. Certainly then, there can be no strife, no
jealous distance between you; for ye are brethren. We congratulate the people
of Massachusetts, on the liberal and virtuous union, which at this moment
subsists between you, and which is particularly exemplified in those numerous
laudable incorporations, which embrace many of your first characters; and which
have for their object, the interests of science, of arts, of education, of
humanity, of christian knowledge and piety. To perpetuate this union and render
it still more operative to the general good, and not the low selfishness or
vanity of exalting and strengthening his own profession, considered as a
separate interest, has been the preachers governing motive in this discourse;
and with a view to the same grand object, he modestly submits to the candor of
both departments, a few monitory hints, suggested by the present aspect of
society and of religion.

IN the first place: Our leading characters in the civil and the literary line,
will feel the peculiar importance, at this degenerated period of animating
their clerical brethren, in every method dictated by wisdom and virtue; and
particular, by encouraging them to calculate their public ministrations upon
principles of the most extensive usefulness. They will consider, that many of
us are connected with societies, which are chiefly composed of the laboring
and more illiterate class; that these peculiarly need the privileges of a
weekly sabbath and public religious instruction; and that many of them require
very plain, and very pungent applications, in order to enlighten their
ignorance, to rouse their stupidity, or to check their vicious career. Our
christian patriots, therefore far from despising, will generously aid those
teachers, who frequently endeavor, by all the methods of familiar, pathetic,
or alarming address, to reach and refine these rougher parts of the community.
The enlarged knowledge and experience of our learned civilians will also
inspire sentiments of candor toward the priesthood, in regard to that variety
of speculation, of gifts, and address, by which it is diversified; they will
view this diversity as naturally resulting in great measure from the spirit of
free inquiry and improvement, which characterizes the present day. They will
consider too, that it furnishes public teachers suited to the various
capacities, tastes and prejudices, and all the grades of character and
condition, which at this period mark the face of society. They will further
consider, that the operation of republican equality and religious freedom, will
sometimes introduce a christian instructor not perfectly agreeable to the
relish or the speculations of a few superior members of a corporation, but
perhaps very acceptable and beneficial to the general mass of the people. In
such cases, does not a regard to social order, to equal rights, to the greatest
moral and political good, require a generous and peaceable acquiescence?

ON the other hand* it becomes the clergy at this day studiously to hold up
their office, and the religion which they teach, in the most respectable and
pleasing light. A special attention to this object, is rendered important, by
the present improved state of society; by the learning and politeness, which
adorn many of our religious assemblies; by the rapid progress of loose
sentiments and manners, and the consequent disrelish or contempt of christian
doctrines, institutions, and teachers. To check these spreading evils it
becomes the sacred order to pay great attention both to the private and public
duties of their function; it becomes them, in the performance of the latter, to
display a force of reasoning, a propriety of thought, of method and expression,
a decency of style and address, which may at once bear down the scoffs and the
sophistry of libertinism, justly please the taste of literary refinement, and
at the same time exhibit the plain, the affectionate, the evangelical preacher.
It becomes them both in their ministrations and personal example, to represent
the christian institution and ministry, as friendly to human happiness in both
worlds; as breathing a social and courteous, a candid and forbearing, a loyal,
uniting, and public spirit; a spirit, which whilst it supremely attaches us to
the service and rewards of the life to come, cherishes a proper sensibility of
our rights, duties, and enjoyments as inhabitants of the earth. It becomes them
in every consistent method, to support the civil interests of the community,
the respectability of its Rulers, and the efficacy of its Laws. And whilst law
speaks to the public ear, in one uniform, inflexible tone, it is ours, my
Reverend Fathers and Brethren, to bring home the addresses of religion to the
bosoms of individuals; and by a pertinent and forcible application of her
peculiar truths and sanctions, to seize their consciences, their imaginations,
their hearts; to possess and command their inmost feelings. By this process,
under the influence of the all creating spirit; we are first to mould them into
good men, and then by an easy transition into good citizens, rulers and
subjects. Above all, let us ever keep in our own realizing view, and endeavor
to enforce upon our people, the primary, the infinitely weighty object of our
religion and ministry, viz. the spiritual, everlasting salvation of immortal
beings, and the glory of GOD and his SON, shining forth in the wondrous
contrivance, and accomplishment of it. Whilst our Rulers are pushing forward
our temporal prosperity and glory, let us labor to establish and to complete
that glory, by a corresponding advancement of this most important object. Into
this channel let us endeavor to draw all the civil and literary, as well as
religious advantages, which come within our reach. Let the united efforts of
the clergy and laity, be especially employed in diffusing christian knowledge
and virtue, through those vast territories of our country, whose poverty, and
remote situation have precluded the stated enjoyment of religious institutions;
and in promoting a more general and effectual attention to the private means of
education, in various parts of the Commonwealth. By such a union of public
exertion, our leading characters in Church and State, will resemble the two
olive trees, which the Prophet saw in vision, emptying their golden oil into
the candlestick of Zion.

Fellow-Citizens of this great Assembly,

I felicitate you and our common country, on the natural, civil and religious
advantages, by which we are so eminently exalted; and especially on the
prosperous train of our national affairs, under the auspices of indulgent
Heaven, and its favorite Minister, the PRESIDENT OF THE UNITED STATES. When we
mention this beloved citizen and benefactor of America, every bosom present,
feels the endearing and forcible illustration, which his example gives to the
leading sentiment of this discourse. For the charm of his piety, of his public
and private virtue, as well as political wisdom, has been a principal cement of
our national union, and so a prime source of all its attendant blessings. What
then is wanting to complete the glory and happiness of our country? Nothing but
the general prevalence of the same excellent spirit; a spirit of sublime
virtue, corresponding to the natural grandeur and extent of America, and to its
noble constitutions of government and religion. Virtue enlightened and
invigorated by political and christian knowledge, is eminently the soul of a
republic. It is necessary to direct, to enliven, to guard the election of its
Rulers, and to secure to them, the generous confidence, submission and
cooperation of the people. It is peculiarly requisite in a community like
ours, spread out over such an immense continent, divided by so many local
governments, prejudices and interests: A people so circumstanced, can never be
firmly and durably united, under one free and popular government, without the
strong bands of religious and moral principle, of intelligent and enlarged
patriotism. Liberty planted in such a soil, will be perpetually tending to
unbridled licentiousness, distracting jealousies, and popular confusion. Let us
then set up a vigilant guard against these encroaching evils. Let us not
imagine that the exercise of civil liberty, consists in ignorant or envious
abuse of public characters and measures; nor that religious freedom will
justify careless neglect or wanton contempt of the truths, the ordinances, and
ministers of that religion, which was sent down from Heaven to guide us, to
present and future happiness. Though we are not accountable to the civil
Magistrate for our religious sentiments and worship; yet we certainly are to
the DEITY; and he has given us no liberty in this enlightened country, either
to think with Deists and Skeptics, or to live like Atheists; nor will the
prostitution of his Sabbaths, to idleness or amusements in defiance of human
and divine laws, pass in his account for a mark of superior politeness or
liberality. In opposition to these wicked, but too modish abuses of liberty,
let us remember that energetic government, is the guardian of freedom, and that
religion, especially the christian, is the pillar of both. Let us then properly
respect, support, and concur both with our civil and religious Ministers. Let
us exercise the most scrupulous care in the election of both, and be rationally
satisfied, that their heads and hearts, their principles and morals, comport
with the spirit of their several offices. But having chosen them, let us treat
their persons and administrations with that confidence and honor, which become
a wise and magnanimous people, and which may, by the blessing of GOD, give the
greatest effect to their benevolent labors.

FINALLY: As the crown of all, let us become pious toward GOD, humble and
obedient believers in his SON, conscientiously submissive to the government and
laws of our country, sober, frugal, and diligent in our several employments,
just and kind to one another, unitedly and zealously attached to the great
interests of America, and of the whole human fraternity. Then we shall hold out
an inviting example to all the world, of the propitious operation of a free
government; we shall encourage and accelerate the progress of reason, and of
liberty, through the globe. Already has the new world diffused the light and
warmth of freedom across the Atlantic, into the old; which has given birth to a
surprising and glorious revolution. Let us be nobly ambitious, by our future
conduct, to feed and extend the generous flame; and thus to realize the wishes
and hopes of all benevolent spirits in Heaven and earth. Let us especially
labor and pray, that these political struggles and changes, may, under the
divine agency, introduce new and brighter scenes of christian knowledge and
piety, till the whole world shall be covered with divine glory and human bliss.
And may we in particular, after having filled our departments in society here,
with usefulness and honor, be united to the more glorious community of the
righteous; where the official distinctions of Moses and Aaron, are known no
more; where all the followers of the LAMB, shall form one royal priesthood, one
mighty combination of perfect and happy immortals; and GOD the originial source
of being and blessedness, shall be ALL in ALL.

AMEN.

