REPORT OF THE SECRETARY OF THE TREASURY RESPECTING THE REDEMPTION OF THE
PUBLIC DEBT; AND THE REIMBURSEMENT OF THE LOAN MADE OF THE BANK OF THE UNITED
STATES.

PUBLISHED BY ORDER OF THE HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES.

PRINTED BY CHILD'S AND SWAIN.

TREASURY DEPARTMENT, Nov. 30 th, 1792. SIR,
I have the honor to transmit herewith a Report, pursuant to two resolutions of
the House of Representatives, one of the 21st instant, respecting the
Redemption of the Public Debt; the other of the 22d instant, respecting the
Reimbursement of the Loan made of the Bank of the United States, pursuant to
the eleventh section of the act by which it is incorporated; and to be, with
the most perfect respect,

SIR, Your most obedient, and most humble servant, ALEXANDER HAMILTON,
Secretary of the Treasury,
The Honorable the SPEAKER of the House of Representatives.
IN obedience to two resolutions of the House of Representatives, one of the
21st instant, directing the Secretary of the Treasury to report a plan for the
redemption of so much of the Public Debt, as by the Act, entitled, "An Act
making provision for the debt of the United States," the United States have
reserved the right to redeem -- the other of the 22nd instant, directing him to
report the plan of a provision for the reimbursement of the Loan made of the
Bank of the United States, pursuant to the 11th section of the Act, entitled,
"An Act to incorporate the Subscribers to the Bank of the United States," --
The said Secretary respectfully submits the following Report.
THE expediency of taking measures for the regular redemption of the Public
Debt, according to the right which has been reserved to the government, being
wisely predetermined, by the resolution of the House of Representatives
referring the subject to the Secretary, nothing remains for him, but to
endeavor to select and submit the most eligible means of providing for the
execution of that important object.

With this view, the first enquiry, which naturally presents itself, is,
whether the existing revenues are, or are not, adequate to the purpose? --

The estimates which accompany the report of the Secretary of the 14th inst.
will show, that during the continuance of the present Indian war, the
appropriations for interest and the demands for the current service are likely
to exhaust the product of the existing revenues; though they afford a valuable
surplus beyond the permanent objects of expenditure, which, it is hoped, may
ere long be advantageously applied to accelerate the extinguishment of the debt.

In the mean time however, and until the restoration of peace, the employment
of that resource, in this way, must of necessity be suspended -- and either the
business of redemption must be deferred, or recourse must be had to other
expedients.

But did no such temporary necessity, for resorting to other expedients, exist,
the doing of it would still be recommended by weighty considerations. It would
appear, in the abstract, advisable, to leave the surplus of the present
revenues free, to be applied to such casual exigencies as may from to time
occur -- to occasional purchases of the debt when not exhausted by such
exigencies, to the payment of interest on any balances, which may be found due
to particular states, upon the general settlement of accounts, and finally to
the payment of interest on the deferred part of the debt, when the period for
such payment arrives. There is a reasonable prospect, that if not diverted, it
will be found adequate to the two last important purposes.

Relinquishing then the idea of an immediate application of the present
revenues to the object in view -- it remains to examine what other modes are in
the option of the Legislature.

Loans, from time to time, equal to the sums annually redeemable, and bottomed
on the same revenues, which are now appropriated to pay the interest upon those
sums, offer themselves as one expedient, which may be employed with a degree of
advantage. As there is a probability of borrowing at a lower rate of interest,
a material saving would result; and even this resource, if none better could be
devised, ought not to be neglected.

But it is obvious, that to rely upon this resource alone would be to do little
toward the final exoneration of the nation. To stop at that point would
consequently be neither provident nor satisfactory. The interests as well as
the expectations of the Union require something more effectual.

The establishment of additional revenues is the remaining resource. This, if
the business is to be undertaken in earnest, is unavoidable. And a full
confidence may reasonably be entertained, that the community will see with
satisfaction the employment of those means, which alone can be effectual, for
accomplishing an end, in itself so important, and so much an object of general
desire. It cannot fail to be universally felt, that if the end is to be
attained, the necessary means must be employed.

It can only be expected that care be taken to choose such as are liable to
fewest objections, and that in the modifications of the business in other
respects, due regard be had to the present and progressive circumstances of the
country.

Assuming it as the basis of a plan of redemption, that additional revenues are
to be provided, the further enquiry divides itself into the following branches:
I. Shall a revenue be immediately constituted, equal to the full sum which may
at present be redeemed, according to the terms of the contract? II. Shall a
revenue be constituted from year to year, equal only to the interest of the sum
to be redeemed in each year, coupling with this operation an annual loan,
commensurate with such sum? -- Or, III. Shall a revenue be constituted each
year, so much exceeding the interest of the sum to be redeemed, as to be
sufficient, within a short definite term of time, to discharge the principal
itself; coupling with this operation also, an annual loan, equal to the sum to
be annually redeemed, and appropriating the revenue created to its discharge,
within the term which shall have been predetermined?


The first plan, besides being completely effectual, would be eventually most
oeconomical; but considering to what a magnitude the revenues of the United
States have grown in a short period, it is not easy to pronounce how far the
faculty of paying might not be strained by any sudden considerable
augmentation, wheresoever immediately placed; while the rapid progress of the
country in population and resource seems to afford a moral certainty, that the
necessary augmentation may be made with convenience, by successive steps,
within a moderate term of time -- and invites to temporary and partial
suspensions, as capable of conciliating the reasonable accommodation of the
community with the vigorous prosecution of the main design. For these, and for
other reasons which will readily occur, the course of providing immediately the
entire sum to be redeemed, is conceived not to be the most eligible.

The second plan, though much more efficacious than that of annual loans,
bottomed on the revenues now appropriated for the payment of interest on the
sums to be redeemed, does not appear to be sufficiently efficacious. The
schedule A. will show the effect of it to the 1st of January 1802, when the
deferred debt will become redeemable in the proportions stipulated. Supposing
the investment of the interest which is each year liberated, together with that
which has been, and will be released by purchases, pursuant to provisions
heretofore made, in the purchase of 6 per cent. stock; a sum of principal equal
to 2,043,837 dollars and 7 cents would be sunk, and a clear annuity, equal to
459,212 dollars and 82 cents would be created, toward further redemptions; but
the fund then necessary for the future progressive redemption of the debt,
according to the right reserved, would be 1,126,616 dollars and 44 cents,
exceeding by 667,! 403 dollars and 62 cents, the amount of the redeeming fund.
-- Something more effectual than this is certainly desirable, and appears to be
practicable.

The last of the three plans best accords with the most accurate view, which
the Secretary has been able to take of the public interest.

In its application, it is of material consequence to endeavor to accomplish
these two points: 1st. The complete discharge of the sums annually redeemable,
within the period prefixed, and the reimbursement, within the same period, of
all auxiliary loans, which may have been made for that purpose. -- 2ndly. The
constituting, by the expiration of that period, a clear annual fund competent
to the future redemption of the debt, to the extent of the right reserved.

The period, to which it is conceived the plan ought to refer, is the 1st day
of January 1802; because then the first payment, on account of the principal of
the deferred debt, may rightfully be made.

In conformity to these ideas, the following plan is most respectfully
submitted; premising, that the sum redeemable for the first year of the 6 per
cent. stock, bearing a present interest, is computed at 550,000 dollars.

Let an annual fund be constituted during the present session, equal to 103,199
dollars and 6 cents, to begin to accrue from the (...) of January 1793. Let the
sum of 550,000 dollars be borrowed upon the credit of this annuity,
reimburseable within five years, that is, by the 1st of January 1799. The sum
borrowed to be applied, on the 1st of January 1794, to the first payment on
account of the principal of the debt.

The proposed annuity will reimburse the sum borrowed with interest, by the
first of January 1799, and will thenceforth, be free for any further
application.

The sum redeemable the second year, that is, on the 1st of January 1795, is
computed at 583,000 dollars.

Let an annual fund be constituted, during the second session after the
present, equal to 109,391 dollars and 60 cents, to begin to accrue from the 1st
of January 1794. Let the sum of 583,000 dollars be borrowed upon the credit of
this annuity, reimburseable within five years, that is, by 1st of January 1800.
The sum borrowed to be applied, on the 1st of January 1795, to the second
payment on account of the principal of the debt.

The proposed annuity will reimburse the sum borrowed with interest, by the 1st
of January 1800, and will be thenceforth free for any further application.

The sum redeemable the third year, that is, on the 1st of January 1796, is
computed at 617,980 dollars.

Let an annual fund be constituted, during the third session, after the
present, equal to 115,955 dollars and 17 cents, to begin to accrue from the 1st
of January 1795. Let the sum of 617,980 dollars be borrowed upon the credit of
this annuity, reimburseable within five years, that is, by the 1st of January
1801. The sum borrowed to be applied, on the 1st of January 1796, to the third
payment on account of the principal of the debt.

The proposed annuity will reimburse the sum borrowed with interest, by the 1st
of January 1801.

The sum redeemable the fourth year, that is, on the 1st of January 1797, is
computed at 655,058 dollars and 80 cents.

Let an annual fund be constituted during the fourth session after the present,
equal to 122,912 dollars and 48 cents, to begin to accrue from the 1st of
January 1796. Let the sum of 655,058 dollars and 80 cents, be borrowed upon the
credit of this annuity, reimburseable within five years, that is, by the 1st of
January 1802. The sum borrowed, to be applied on the 1st of January 1797, to
the fourth payment on account of the principal of the debt.

The proposed annuity will reimburse the sum borrowed with interest, by the 1st
of January 1802.

The sum redeemable the fifth year, that is, on the 1st of January 1798, is
computed at 694,362 dollars and 33 cents.

Let an annual fund be constituted, during the fifth session after the present,
equal to 152,743 dollars and 12 cents, to being to accrue from the 1st of
January 1797. Let the sum of 694,362 dollars and 33 cents, be borrowed upon the
credit of this annuity, reimburseable within four years, that is, by the 1st of
January 1802. The sum borrowed to be applied on the 1st of January 1798, to the
fifth payment on account of the principal of the debt.

The proposed annuity will reimburse the sum borrowed with interest, by the 1st
of January 1802.

The sum redeemable the sixth year, that is, on the 1st of January 1799, is
computed at 736,024 dollars and 7 cents.

Let an annual fund be constituted during the sixth session, after the present,
equal to 197,680 dollars and 20 cents, to begin to accrue from the 1st of
January 1798. Let the sum of 736,024 dollars and 7 cents, be borrowed upon the
credit of this annuity, reimburseable within three years, that is, by the 1st
of January 1802. The sum borrowed to be applied, on the 1st of January 1799, to
the sixth payment on account of the principal of the debt.

The proposed annuity will reimburse the sum borrowed with interest, by the 1st
of January 1802.

The sum redeemable the seventh year, that is, on the 1st of January 1800, is
computed at 780,185 dollars and 52 cents.

Let an annual fund be constituted during the seventh session after the
present, equal to 272,848 dollars and 38 cents, to begin to accrue from the 1st
of January 1799. Let the sum of 780,185 dollars and 52 cents, be borrowed upon
the credit of this annuity, reimburseable within two years, that is, by the 1st
of January 1802. The sum borrowed to be applied, on the 1st of January 1800, to
the seventh payment on account of the principal of the debt.

The proposed annuity will reimburse the sum borrowed with interest, by the 1st
of January 1802.

The sum redeemable the eighth year, that is, on the 1st of January 1801, is
computed at 826,996 dollars and 65 cents.

Let an annual fund be constituted, during the eighth session after the
present, equal to 423,583 dollars and 64 cents, to begin to accrue from the 1st
of January, 1800. Let the sum of 826,996 dollars and 65 cents be borrowed upon
the credit of this annuity, reimburseable within one year, that is, on the 1st
of January, 1802. The sum borrowed to be applied, on the 1st of January, 1801,
to the eighth payment on account of the principal of the debt.

The proposed annuity will reimburse the sum borrowed with interest, on the 1st
of January, 1802.

The sum redeemable the ninth year, that is, on the 1st of January, 1802, is
computed at 1,126,616 dollars and 44 cents.

The then existing means for the discharge of this sum, arising from the
operation of the plan, will be --

1st. The amount of the annuity constituted the third year, which will have
been liberated by reimbursement of the third loan. 2d. The arrears of interest
not previously appropriated, and which are computed at 200,000 dollars.

There will consequently be a deficiency this year of 810,661 dollars and 27
cents, which will require to be supplied by a temporary loan, to be reimbursed
out of the surplus of the fund, which, on the 1st of January, 1802, will exist
for future redemptions, and which surplus will be sufficient to reimburse this
temporary loan in about thirteen years and a half.

It may be proper to remark, that this deficiency upon one year is suffered to
exist, to avoid an unnecessary augmentation of revenue, materially beyond the
sum permanently requisite. No inconvenience ensues, because this temporary
deficiency is made up by the surplus of the permanent fund, within the period
mentioned. And that fund, from the 1st of January, 1802, is adequate to all
future redemptions, in the full proportion permitted by the contract.

The table in the schedule B, herewith submitted, will show in one view the
principles and operation of this plan.

The schedule C will exhibit the means of constituting the several annuities
proposed to be established. From it, will be seen, that the proposed annuities
are to be composed, partly of taxes to be successively laid, at the respective
periods of creating them, partly of the surplus-dividend to be expected on the
stock belonging to the government, in the bank of the United States, beyond the
interest to be paid on account of it, and partly of the funds heretofore
pledged for the payment of interest, which will have been liberated upon so
much of the debt, as will have been extinguished.

The respective amounts of the taxes to be severally laid, will be -- In the
first year 43,199 dollars and 6 cents. In the second year 109,391 dollars and
60 cents. In the third year 115,955 dollars and 17 cents. In the fourth year
102,912 dollars and 48 cents. In the fifth year 102,743 dollars and 12 cents.
In the sixth year 107,680 dollars and 20 cents. In the seventh year 109,649
dollars and 32 cents. Making together 691,530 dollars and 95 cents.

The sum, which will have been redeemed prior to the 1st day of January, 1802,
will be 5,443,607 dollars and 37 cents. The sum redeemable on the 1st of
January, 1802, will be 1,126,616 dollars and 44 cents; and the fund, which will
thenceforth exist for the purpose of future redemption, (as is particularly
shown by the schedule D) will be 1,210,744 dollars and 34 cents, exceeding the
sum strictly necessary by 84,127 dollars and 90 cents; a fund, which including
the interest from year to year liberated, will, as already intimated, be
completely adequate to the final redemption of the whole amount of the 6 per
cent. stock (as well the deferred as that bearing a present interest) according
to the right, which has been reserved for that purpose.

In the mean time, a further impression will be made upon the debt by the
investment of the residue of the funds, heretofore established, in the purchase
of it; and it is hoped, that the restoration of peace with the Indians will
enable the application of the surplus of the existing revenues, together with
the proceeds of the ceded lands in our Western Territory, to the same object.
These, whenever they can be brought into action, will be important aids,
materially accelerating the ultimate redemption of the entire debt -- The
employment of these resources, when it can be done, by increasing the
interest-fund, will proportionably lessen the necessity of using the resource
of taxation for creating the proposed annuities; -- if the government shall
judge it advisable to avail itself of the substitute, which may accrue from
that circumstance.

Having now given a general view of the plan, which has appeared upon the whole
the most eligible, it is necessary in the next place to present to the
consideration of the House the requisite funds for commencing the execution of
it. These will embrace a provision for the first annuity only; that alone
requiring by the plan immediate provision. With regard to a provision for the
subsequent annuities, which is proposed to be successive, the Secretary will
content himself with this general observation, that he discerns no intrinsic
difficulty in making provision for them, as fast as shall be necessary, with,
due convenience to the people, and consistently with the idea of abstaining
from taxing lands and buildings (with the stock and implements of farms)
reserving them as a resource for those great emergencies, which call for a full
exertion of all the contributive faculties of a country.

The following means for constituting the first annuity, are respectfully
submitted, viz.

Annual surplus of the dividend on the stock of government in the bank of the
United States, beyond the interest to be paid out of the said dividend,
estimated at 60,000 dollars.

Tax on horses, kept or used for the purpose of riding, or of drawing any
coach, chariot, phaeton, chaise, chair, sulkey or other carriage for conveyance
of persons; excepting and exempting all horses, which are usually and chiefly
employed for the purposes of husbandry, or in drawing wagons, wains, drays,
carts or other carriages, for the transportation of produce, goods, merchandise
and commodities, or in carrying burdens in the course of the trade or
occupation of the persons to whom they respectively belong, and the horses of
persons in the military service of the United States, viz.

For every horse, not above excepted and exempted, at the rate of one dollar
per annum -- where only one is used or kept by the same person, with an
addition of fifty cents per annum per horse, where more than one and not more
than two horses are kept or used by the same person -- with an addition of one
dollar per annum per horse, where more than two, and nor more than four are
kept or used by the same person, and with an addition of one dollar and a half
dollar per horse, per annum, where more than four are kept or used by the same
person: Provided that this addition shall not be made in respect to horses
usually employed in public stages for the conveyance of passengers.

This progressive increase of rates on the higher numbers has reference to the
presumption of greater wealth, which arises from the possession of such higher
numbers.

The products of this tax will probably be about equal to the residue of the
proposed annuity, which is 43,199 dollars and 6 cents. How near the truth this
estimate may prove, experiment alone can, in so untried a case, decide. -- An
aid to this fund may be derived from the surplus dividend on the bank stock,
for the half year ending the last of December next, which it is presumed will
be not less than 20,000 dollars. Should a deficiency appear upon trial, it can
be supplied by a future provision.

Proper regulations for the collection of this tax will, it is believed, be
found not difficult, if the tax itself shall be deemed eligible. Its simplicity
has been a considerable recommendation of it. Qualified as it is, it is not
likely to fall on any but such who can afford to pay it. The exemption from the
tax, in regard to horses which are appropriated to the purposes of husbandry,
or of any trade or occupation, or to the transportation of commodities, seems
to obviate all reasonable objection.

If, however, there should appear to the legislature, reasons for preferring a
tax on carriages for pleasure, which, it may be observed, will operate on
nearly the same description of persons, the sum required may, it is believed,
be produced from the following arrangement of rates, viz. Upon every coach, the
annual sum of four dollars. -- Upon every chariot, the annual sum of three
dollars. -- Upon every other carriage for the conveyance of persons, having
four wheels, the annual sum of two dollars; -- and upon every chair, sulkey or
other carriage for the conveyance of persons, having less than four wheels, the
annual sum of one dollar.

The collection of this tax will be as simple and easy, and perhaps more
certain, than that which has been primarily submitted.

With regard to the second object referred to the Secretary, namely, the plan
of a provision for the reimbursement of the loan made of the bank of the United
States, pursuant to the XIth section of the act by which it is incorporated; --
the following is respectfully submitted, (to wit,) That power be given by law
to borrow the sum due, to be applied to that reimbursement; and that so much of
the dividend on the stock of the government in the bank as may be necessary, be
appropriated for paying the interest of the sum to be borrowed.

From this operation, it is obvious, that a saving to the government will
result, equal to the difference between the interest which will be payable on
the the new loan, and that which is payable on the sum now due to the bank. If
the proposed loan can be effected, at the rate of those last made in Holland,
the nett saving to the government may be computed at the annual sum of 35,000
dollars; which saving, whatever it may be, is contemplated as part of the means
for constituting the proposed annuities.

The benefit of this arrangement will be accelerated, if provision be made for
the application of the proceeds of any loans, heretofore obtained, to the
payment suggested on the condition of re-placing the sums which may be so
applied out of the proceeds of the loan or loans, which shall be made pursuant
to the power above proposed to be given.

It will also conduce to the general end in view, if the legislature shall
think proper to authorize the investment of the funds, destined for purchases
of the debt, in purchases of 6 per cent. stock at the market price, though
above par. The comparative prices of the several kinds of stock have been, and
frequently may be, such as to render it more profitable to make investments in
the 6 per cents, than in any other species of stock.

All which is humbly submitted. ALEXANDER HAMILTON, Secretary of the Treasury.
Treasury Department, November 30 th, 1792.
-- A -- TABLE showing the effect of a sum annually created, equal to the
interest of the sum to be redeemed within each year, for a period of nine
years, commencing from the 1st of January, 1793 -- on the supposition that the
interest on the sum annually redeemed be invested, as it is liberated, in the
purchase of 6 per cent. stock, at the price of 22 shillings on the pound.
Periods of redemption. Sums annually redeemable. Interest annually liberated.
Sums annually purchased. Dollars. Cents. Dollars. Cents. Dollars. Cents.
January 1st, 1794 550,000 33,000 291,172. 04 ditto 1795 583,000 34,980 262,523.
05 ditto 1796 617,980 37,078. 80 231,916. 56 ditto 1797 655,058. 80 39,303. 52
199,233. 86 ditto 1798 694,362. 33 41,661. 73 164,349. 20 ditto 1799 736,024.
07 44,161. 44 127,129. 15 ditto 1800 780,185. 52 46,811. 13 87,432. 33 ditto
1801 826,996. 65 49,619. 79 45,108. 90 ditto 1802 1,126,616. 44 67,596. 41
61,451. 28 Interest on debt paid in and purchased 65,000 573,520. 70 459,212.
82 2,043,837. 07

TREASURY DEPARTMENT. Nov. 30, 1792. ALEXANDER HAMILTON, Secretary of the
Treasury.

-- B -- TABLE EXHIBITING A VIEW OF THE PROPOSED PLAN OF REDEMPTION.
Periods of Redemption or Payment. Sums Redeemable. Temporary Loans. Amount of
Sums borrowed, with compound Interest to the respective Periods of
reimbursement. Years when Annuities begin to accrue. Years Annuities.
Annuities. Times of Reimbursement. Years duration. Dollars. Cts. Dollars. Cts.
Dollars. Cts. January 1st, 1794 550,000. Jan. 1st, 1799 5 701,954. 1793 6
103,199.06 N. B. All the Calculations in this Table, proceed upon a Rate of
Five per Cent, Interest. ditto 1795 583,000. ditto 1800 5 744,071.24 1794 6
109,391.60 ditto 1796 617,980. ditto 1801 5 788,715.51 1795 6 115,955.17 ditto
1797 655,058.80 ditto 1802 5 836,038.44 1796 6 122,912.48 ditto 1798 694,362.33
ditto 1802 4 843,997.41 1797 5 152,743.12 ditto 1799 736,024.07 ditto 1802 3
852,021.46 1798 4 197,680.20 ditto 1800 780,185.52 ditto 1802 2 860,154.53 1799
3 272,848.38 ditto 1801 826,996.65 ditto 1802 1 868,346.48 1800 2 423,583.64
ditto 1802 1,126,616.44 Total Sum redeemed by the 1st of January, 1802.
6,570,223.81

TREASURY-DEPARTMENT, November 30, 1792. ALEXANDER HAMILTON.

-- C. -- MODE OF CONSTITUTING THE PROPOSED ANNUITIES.
1793. Surplus dividend of bank stock, beyond the interest which will be
payable estimated at 60,000 Dols. Cts. Tax 43,199.06 103,199. 06 1794. Tax
109,391. 60 1795. Tax 115,955. 17 1796. Part of annual interest converted into
annuity 20,000 Tax 102,912.48 122,912. 48 1797. Part of annual interest
converted into annuity 50,000 Tax 102,743.12 152,743. 12 1798. Part of annual
interest converted into annuity 90,000 Tax 107,680.20 197,680. 20 1799. Part of
annual interest converted into annuity 60,000 Annuity of the first year now
liberated by reimbursement of 1st loan 103,199.06 Tax 109,649.32 272,848. 38
1800. Part of annual interest converted into annuity 220,000 Annuity of second
year now liberated by reimbursement of 2nd loan 109,391.60 Part of arrears of
interest to be applied for balance of annuity of this year 94,192.04 423,583.
64 But a supplementary provision will be to be made for the second year, equal
to the sum of 94,192 dollars and 4 cents, as the fund in that particular is not
annual. This may also arise from the arrears of interest. The payment to be
made on the 1st of January 1802, may proceed from the following funds. Amount
of annuity of 3d year liberated by reimbursement of 3d loan 115,955.17
Unappropriated arrears of interest 200,000 Temporary loan 810,661.27 1,126,616.
44

Treasury Department, November 30, 1792. ALEXANDER HAMILTON.

-- D -- VIEW of REDEEMING FUND to and upon the 1st January, 1802.
Dols. Cts. INTEREST which will have been liberated by purchases and payments
into the Treasury, exclusive of Redemptions according to the proposed plan
65,000 Jan. 1st, 1794, by redemption of 550,000 dols. rate 6 per cent. 33,000
ditto 1795, by ditto of 583,000 at ditto 34,980 ditto 1796, by ditto of 617,980
ditto 37,078. 80 ditto 1797, by ditto of 655,058.80 ditto 39,303. 52 ditto
1798, by ditto of 694,362.33 ditto 41,661. 73 ditto 1799, by ditto of
736,024.07 ditto 44,161. 44 ditto 1800, by ditto of 780,185.52 ditto 46,811. 13
ditto 1801, by ditto of 826,996.65 ditto 49,619. 79 ditto 1802, by ditto of
1,126,616.44 ditto 67,596. 98 459,213. 39 TAXES which will have been laid. 1793
dollars 43,199.6 1794 -- 109,391.60 1795 -- 115,955.17 1796 -- 102,912.48 1797
-- 102,743.12 1798 -- 107,680.20 1799 -- 109,649.32 691,530. 95 Surplus
dividend of bank stock beyond the interest which will be payable out of it
60,000 Dollars 1,210,744. 34

Amount of INTEREST converted into ANNUITIES.
1796 dollars 20,000 1797 50,000 1798 90,000 1800 2^0,000 Annual sum at the end
of 1800 380,000 dollars.

TREASURY DEPARTMENT, Nov. 30, 1792. ALEXANDER HAMILTON.


