Thoughts concerning the GOSPEL.

DEDICATION.
AS an expression of unfeigned Thanksgiving, for the exceeding Riches of DIVINE
GRACE, exhibited in the Gospel, the following Pages are dedicated by the
Writer, to the Honor and Glory of the AUTHOR and FINISHER of our Faith;
praying his Blessing may accompany them to the Benefit and Comfort of that Part
of the purchased Possession, that may have opportunity to read, or hear them.

AMEN.

THE GOSPEL CONSIDERED; AND THE MANNER IN WHICH IT SHOULD BE PREACHED; WITH AN
ENDEAVOR to show from the SCRIPTURES, THAT ELECTION DOES NOT MILITATE WITH
PREACHING THE GOSPEL TO EVERY CREATURE: SEVERAL OTHER OBJECTIONS CONSIDERED.

BY SHIPPIE TOWNSEND.

GO ye therefore into all the World, and preach the Gospel to every Creature.
NOT in Words which Man's Wisdom teaches, but which the Holy Ghost teaches.
NOT with Wisdom of Words, least the Cross of CHRIST should be made of none
effect. PRINTED AT BOSTON, FOR THE AUTHOR, BY THOMAS ADAMS, AND SOLD AT HIS
PRINTING-OFFICE, IN COURT-STREET. M, DCC, XCII.

THOUGHTS CONCERNING THE GOSPEL, andC.
IN attending to a sermon, some things occurred which brought a passage in the
Epistle to the Collosians, to remembrance, 'say to Archippus, take heed to the
ministry that thou have received in the Lord, that thou fulfill it;' which
produced an inquiry, who Archippus was; and comparing the Epistle to the
Collosians, with that to Philemon, it appeared probable, that Philemon,
Epaphras and Archippus were ministers of the church of Christ, gathered from
among the Collosians, which then met in Philemon's house; both Epistles appear
to be wrote and sent at the same time; however, Archippus was a minister of the
church of Christ, who received his ministry in the Lord, and yet was the
subject of this exhortation: Hence it was concluded that no minister of Christ
is above receiving a similar exhortation from the brethren.

The next inquiry was, what was the ministry he received in the Lord, or which
the ministers of Christ receive in the Lord; supposing they receive the same
now, as the ministers of the first Churches did?

In answer, it may be said, that their commission was, 'to go into all the
world, and preach the gospel to every creature.' It is agreed that the word
gospel, signifies good news, glad tidings: The Prophet and Apostles agree
herein. The Prophet Isaiah says, 'O Zion that brings good tidings, get thee
up into the high mountain; O Jerusalem, that bring good tidings, lift up thy
voice with strength, lift up, be not afraid: Say to the cities of Judah,
behold you God. How beautiful are the feet of him that brings good tidings,
that publishes peace, that brings good tidings of good; that publishes
salvation; that says unto Zion, thy God reigns.' And similar is the word
which God sent to the children of Israel; with which Peter was sent to the
Gentiles, 'preaching peace, by Jesus Christ, he is Lord of all.'

The scriptures do not leave us at a loss, respecting these glad tidings, 'for
the scriptures foreseeing that God would justify the heathen The heathen that
had no claim as being of the stock of Israel that had no worthiness, nothing to
recommend them.
through faith, preached before the gospel unto Abraham, saying in thy seed
shall all the nations of the earth be blessed;' the same gospel is repeated to
Isaac, and confirmed to Jacob, and is proclaimed from the top of Jacob's
ladder, where the Lord stood above it, and said, 'I am the God of Abraham, thy
father, and the God of Isaac;' this was also shown to Moses at the bush, and
when he was sent to the children of Israel, he was directed to say unto them,
'I am the God of Abraham, the God of Isaac, and the God of Jacob; this is my
name forever, and my memorial unto all generations. It is my unchangable name,
the unchangable name; of the unchangable God; insuring blessedness in Christ
Jesus, to all the nations, kindreds, and families of the earth. And a believer
of this gospel preached to Abraham, enters into rest; although he is in himself
a poor, lost, wretched, miserable sinner, and understanding himself blessed in
Christ Jesus, can rejoice in him, though he has 'no confidence in the flesh.'

The prophet Isaiah speaking of the Gentiles, in his 54th chapter, says to
them, 'fear not for thou shall not be ashamed, neither be thou confounded, for
thou shall not be put to shame, for thou shall forget the shame of thy youth,
and shall not remember the reproach of thy widowhood any more: FOR thy Maker is
thy husband, and thy Redeemer the Holy One of Israel, the God of the whole
earth shall he be called.' The Prophet Jeremiah, in his 3d chapter, speaking of
Judah and Israel, says 'turn O backsliding children, says the Lord, for I am
married unto you.' And the Prophet Isaiah, appears to be speaking both of Jews
and Gentiles, when he says 'as the bridegroom rejoiceth over the bride, so
shall thy God rejoice over thee.'

If the nations, kindreds and families of the earth are blessed in Christ
Jesus, and both Jews and Gentiles acknowledged as married unto him, then he is
'the God of the whole earth.'

Again, the whole earth are repeatedly called to sing a new song unto the Lord,
as we see in Psalm, 96 1, 98 1, Isaiah, 42, 10, 11. This new song is described,
Rev. 5, 9, 'thou art worthy for thou wast slain and have redeemed us to God, by
thy blood, out of every nation, and kindred, and tongue, and people:' If all
the earth are called to sing this new song, surely all the earth are interested
in the subject matter of it.

Again, the most opposed to the salvation of the gospel, and the preaching of
it, are the subjects of prayer. The Psalmist, speaking in the person of Christ,
in the 42d Psalm, where he complains of his reproachers, saying 'my tears have
been my meat, day and night, while they continually say unto me, where is thy
God?' And adds, 'when I remember these, I pour out my soul in me.' This we see
verified when they said 'he trusted in God, let him deliver him if he will have
him;' and hear Jesus Christ pour out his soul in him, in that prayer 'father
forgive them for they know not what they do;' he also directs his Disciples 'to
love their enemies, and pray for them that despitefully use them.' Did he
direct them to love those whom he did not; did he not die that his enemies
might be reconciled by his death; was not he always heard, and did he bid his
disciples pray for what should not be granted?

Then surely the gospel also is to be preached to them, and this good news is
to be published as a truth among such characters, 'that God was in Christ
reconciling the world unto himself, not imputing their trespasses unto them;'
agreeable to the prophet Isaiah, 'I have blotted out thy transgressions as a
cloud, and thine iniquities as a thick cloud, return unto me for I have
redeemed thee.'

Designed brevity, forbids the taking notice of many considerations that offer
themselves, to prove and illustrate this truth, that Christ's ministers,
commission is, 'to preach the gospel to every creature.' Two or three things
offer themselves as inquiries or objections, as

1st. If the nations are blessed in Christ Jesus, both (...) and Gentiles, so
that they are married unto him, and he is the God of the whole earth, whence is
it such a place of sin and misery?

It may be said, if the woman interested in the estate and honors of her
husband, treacherously depart from him, every step of her way, must be going
further into the sink of sin and misery.

That this was the case with ancient Israel, is plain from Jeremiah 3, 20,
'surely as a wife treacherously departs from her husband, so have you dealt
treacherously with me O house of Israel,' which will be evident to any one that
reads the beginning of the chapter, to the 12 verse, and Ezekiel, 16, 32, 45;
and as this was the cause of the distress and misery, that befell ancient
Israel, so it is the cause of all the calamities that befall us all, in copying
after their wretched example. Certainly there is no want of blessedness in
Christ Jesus; no want of power, riches, loving kindness and mercy, in our
Maker, our Husband, the God of the whole earth; but all our unhappiness arises
from our alienation from him, and the further we pursue that path, the greater
our misery and calamity, whether we know the cause or not.

Now if the husband of the treacherously departing wife, own her to be his
wife, call after her to return, is willing and ready to receive her on her
return, without upbraiding her, she is certainly blessed in a husband The
gospel, the Apostles preached was, 'that God was in Christ, reconciling the
world unto himself, not imputing their trespasses unto them, 1 Corinthians, v,
19. Agreeable to the gospel preached to Abraham, that' in thy seed shall all
the nations of the earth be blessed, Galatians, iii, 8, 16. The Psalmist says,
'men shall be blessed in him, Psalm, lxxii, 17. The prophet says, 'the nations
shall bless themselves in him, and in him shall they glory,' Jeremiah, iv, 2.
By the Apostle we are said to be 'chosen in him,' Ephesians, i, 4. 'To be
justified in him, 1 Corinthians, vi, 11. 'To be gathered together in him.'
Ephesians, i, 10. 'To be rooted and built up in him,' Collossians, ii, 7. 'To
be sanctified in Christ Jesus,' 1 Corinthians, i, 2. 'To be blessed with all
spiritual blessings in Christ Jesus, Ephesians, i, 3. 'To be made to sit
togethed in heavenly places, in Christ Jesus,' Ephesians, ii, 6. 'All the
promises of God are in him, yea and in him amen.' 2 Corinthians, i, 20. 'And
yea are complete in him,' Collosians. ii. 10. 'And we are in him, that is true
in his son Jesus Christ,' 1 John, v, 20. Being blessed in him, denotes union as
members to their head 'all men being drawn to him when he was lifted up; and so
one dying for all, all died; he tasting death for every man.' Therefore this
gospel preached to Abraham, and preached by the Apostles is to he preached to
those that are the most remote from blessedness in themselves and when it is
believed they are led to rejoice in Christ Jesus, though altogether destitute
in themselves, unbelief and alienation, being the source of all our misery,
believing the truth as it is in Jesus, we see our blessedness in him.
though she forsakes her own mercies for lying vanities, and is most forlorn
and miserable in herself, while persisting in her alienation,

I need only repeat two passages of scripture, to lead our minds from the
similitude just mentioned up to divine mercy. Jeremiah, iii, 1, 'but thou have
played the harlot with many lovers, yet return unto me says the Lord', verse
12, 'return thou backsliding Israel, says the Lord, It is not return and I
will not cause mine anger to fall upon you as a condition; the and is supplied
by the translators, it is return I will not cause mine anger to fall upon you.
I will not cause mine anger to fall upon you. Isaiah xlii, 22, 'I have blotted
out as a thick cloud, thy transgressions, and as a cloud thy sins; return unto
me, for I have redeemed thee.' Thus gospel ministers have the testimony of God,
by his Prophets, as well as the commission given to the Apostles, 'to preach
the gospel to every creature.'

2dly. It may be inquired, are not ministers to preach the law? Answer, 'by the
law is the knowledge of sin, for what things the law says, it says to them
that are under the law, that every mouth may be stopped and all the world may
become guilty before God, having no hope but in the righteousness of God, by
faith of Jesus Christ, revealed in the gospel.' The direction therefore, is 'to
preach the gospel to every creature.'

There were some in the Apostles' day, that desired to be teachers of the law,
understanding neither what they say nor whereof they affirm. The Apostle says,
'the law was our schoolmaster unto, or until Christ,' (to bring us, is
supplied by the translators) 'that we might be justified by faith; but when
faith is come, we are no longer under a schoolmaster.' When faith is come,
that is when Christ is come, who is the object of faith, and has sent forth
his servants to preach the gospel, which is called the hearing of faith:
'Received ye the spirit by the works of the law,' or by the hearing of faith?
That is by the hearing of the gospel preached.

Objection. But does not the scripture say, 'cursed is every one that
continues not in all things written in the book of the law to do them?

Answer. Yes, this is the language of the law, but the language of the gospel
is, 'Christ has delivered us from the curse of the law, being made a curse for
us,' and Christ's ministers are to preach the gospel; perhaps some one will
say, they are to preach it to the prepared subjects that are awakened by the
terrors of the law, to seek salvation by Christ Jesus; they are to preach it to
every creature, to tell every creature 'Christ has delivered us from the curse
of the law, being made a curse for us.' To tell it as a truth; what! to
unbelievers? Yes, to unbelievers; what constitutes a man an unbeliever, but not
believing the report of the gospel. He that believes this truth is saved from
the tormenting fear of the curse of the law, believing the report of the
gospel; while he that does not believe this truth, remains under self
condemnation or damnation, being in his own apprehension under the law, and
under the curse: Man is denominated an unbeliever as not believing the truth.

If Christ's ministers wish to help unbelievers, let them keep close to their
direction, tell the truth that is to be believed: Let them preach the 'ministry
of reconciliation, that God was in Christ reconciling the world unto himself,
not imputing unto them their trespasses: That he has made him sin for us, who
knew no sin, that we might be made the righteousness of God in him,' and set
forth the evidences of it in the resurrection of Jesus Christ, from the dead,
that if God please to accompany the evidence to their minds, they may believe.

Earnest repeated exhortations to believe, are lost, only tending to confuse
the mind that understands not what is to be believed, but when the truth to be
believed, is understood, and the evidences appear undeniable, it gains credit
in the mind, and what we give full credit to is believed; therefore let the
gospel be preached to every creature, tell the good news even to unbelievers,
for 'it is glad tidings of great joy to all people, tidings of a Savior, which
is Christ the Lord.'

3dly. Does not the doctrine of election, militate with the gospel's being
preached to every creature? If the elect are only to obtain salvation to the
rejection or reprobation of all others, how is it possible to preach the gospel
to every creature?

For answer, it may be said, that this connecting of final rejection or
reprobation with the doctrine of election, has no foundation in the scriptures.
Election among men, chooses men to certain offices for the benefit of those
that are not elected; and if we consider election in the sense of the
scriptures, it will appear that it is designed for the benefit of others. If we
turn our attention, first to Jesus Christ, it will lead our minds to Isaiah,
xlii, 1, ushered in with a note of attention 'behold! behold my servant whom I
uphold, mine elect in whom my soul delights,' why is Jesus Christ called
God's elect, see verses, 6, 7, 'I the Lord have called thee in righteousness
and will hold thine hard, and will keep thee and give the for a covenant of the
people, for a light of the Gentiles, to open the blind eyes, to bring out the
prisoners from the prison, and them that sit in darkness out of the
prisonhouse.'

Question. But is it not said in the same prophesy, that he shall be a 'stone
of stumbling and rock of offense to both houses of Isreal;' and Peter 'speaks
of him as a stone of stumbling and rock of offense, to them that stumble at the
word, being disobedient, whereunto they were appointed.' Surely, Peter does not
intend to militate with the doctrine of 'the restitution of all things, spoken
of by the mouth of all God's holy Prophets since the world began,' their thus
stumbling, is to fulfill the purpose of God, 'who has concluded them all in
unbelief that he may have mercy on all, and thus open the blind eyes, and bring
the prisoners from the prison and those that sit in darkness, out of the
prisonhouse.' Agreeable to the prophesy of Simeon, in his address to Mary,
'behold this child is set for the fall and rising again of many in Israel, and
for a sign that shall be spoken against.' The Apostles were chosen witnesses of
the resurrection of Jesus Christ, and sent to the Jews; the 70 Disciples were
chosen after, and sent to the Gentiles, to every place whether he himself
should come. 'The Apostles were chosen to be Christ's witnesses,' chosen to
this end, 'to go into all the world, and preach the gospel to every creature;'
Jesus Christ tells them, 'ye are the lights of the world;' lights are to guide
travelers in the way; for this end, the 70 were chosen and sent forth. It Is
expressly said of Paul, 'he is a chosen vessel unto me, to bear my name before
Gentiles and Kings; and the children of Israel;' and this chosen vessel was
'sent unto the Gentiles, to open their eyes, and to turn them from darkness to
light, and from the power of satan unto God.'

Which evidences that their election was for the benefit of others. Even in the
xi of Romans, where the Apostle speaking of the Israelites says, 'the election
has obtained, and the rest were blinded,' and speaking of the stumbling of the
blinded, says, 'have they stumbled, that they might fall; God forbid! and
shows it was to bring about the purposes of God, respecting the Gentiles, which
being accomplished, 'all Irael shall be saved as it is written;' and speaking
of these stumbling Jews, he says 'as concerning the gospel, they are enemies
for your sakes, but as touching the election, they are beloved for the fathers
sake, for the gifts and calling of God are without repentance;' shows them,
'concluded in unbelief, that God may have mercy on all.'

So when the Apostle, to the Ephesians speaks of their being predestined to
the adoption of children by Jesus Christ, according to the good pleasure of his
will, to the praise of his glory, he shows the divine design herein, that in
the dispensation of the fullness of time, he might gather together in one, all
things in Christ, both which are in Heaven and on earth in him. The view that
has been taken of election, being for the benefit of others, and not for their
destruction, might be illustrated from the old testament scriptures. When it
pleased God to select Abraham from among those that served other gods, and
bless him, others were not excluded, for his blessing shines most illustriously
in that part of it thus expressed, in thy seed shall all the nations of the
earth be blessed. The choice of Moses and Aaron, the Levites the 70 Elders and
the 12 princes, were all for the benefit of all Israel, and the blessing they
enjoyed were conveyed to them, through the faithful attention of those various
characters and officers, to their appointments, by whom they were led forward
to the typical rest or land of Canaan. So are Gods elect under the gospel
dispensation chosen as instruments, in their places, to bring to view from the
scriptures, the glad tidings of the gospel, the wing Jesus as the way to the
heavenly Canaan, the rest that remains to the people of God, where the leaves
of the tree of life shall heal the nations, and there shall be no more curse
but the throne of God and the Lamb, shall be in it, and his servants shall
serve him and they shall see his face agreeable to the prayer of Jesus Christ,
John, xvii, 24, 'father, I will, that they also whom thou have given me, be
with me where I am; that they may behold my glory.'


It is said by the Apostle James, 'of his own will begat he us, by the word of
truth that we might be a kind of first fruits of his creatures;' now the first
fruits are not the whole harvest, only an earnest of it, as we see by 'the
hundred forty and four thousand, that are sealed in the Revelations, and stand
with the Lamb on the mount Zion, with the harps of God,' these first fruits are
the 'elect redeemed from among men, that follow the lamb, whethersoever he
goes.

Now it is observable both in the 7th and 14th chapters, that the sealed, the
first fruits, or the elect, were not the whole of the saved; for the hundred
forty-four thousand sealed, being mentioned, we read in the 9th verse, 'after
this I beheld, and lo a great multitude which no man could number, of all
nations and kindreds, and people, and tongues, stood before the Throne, and
before the Lamb clothed with white robes, and palms in their hands, and cried
salvation to our God, and to the Lamb.'

This was so wonderful, to see this innumerable multitude, beside the sealed,
the elect, the first fruits, that the inquiry is, what are these and whence
come they? The answer is, 'these are they that come out of great tribulation,
and have washed their robes and made them white in the blood of the Lamb,
therefore are they before the throne, etc. These are they that came out of
great tribulation: What greater tribulation can we suppose, can besal the
children of men, than what arises from an apprehension of a possibility of
being reprobated to eternal damnation? And being on this account, all their
lifetime subject to bondage through fear of death; for such to find themselves
before the throne, in virtue of the blood of the Lamb, no wonder they cry with
a loud voice, salvation, etc. no wonder they feel their obligations to serve
him day and night in his temple, 'having him that sits on the throne, to
dwell among them, delivered from hungering or thirsting any more, and having
God to wipe away all tears from their eyes.' If we look into the 14th chapter,
after the description of the hundred forty-four thousand, standing with the
Lamb, on the mount Zion, with the harps of God, and singing the new song, we
find verse 6, another angel 'fly in the midst of Heaven, having the everlasting
gospel to preach unto them that dwell on the earth; even to every nation
tongue, and people:' Thus I think if the doctrine of election were rightly
understood, it can be no objection to preaching the gospel to every creature.

The Apostle Paul gives the sum of the gospel which he preached in the
beginning of the 15th chapter of the first Epistle to the Corinthians,
contained in the death and resurrection of Christ with the evidences of it, and
speaking of the other Apostles, he (...) verse 11, 'whether I or they, so we
preach and so ye believed.

Not so we preached, but so we preach, they continue to preach the same
doctrine, in their (...) handed down to us, and blessed be God, we have the
fulfillment of that prophesy, (in that we have the free use of the scriptures of
truth) recorded in Isaiah, xxx, 20, 'yet shall not thy teachers be driven into
a corner any more, but thine eyes shall see thy teachers, and thine ear shall
hear a word behind thee, saying this is the way;' the gospel always finds us
with our backs to it, pursuing another way, and points out the way into which
we are to return, is not this turning, repentance unto life. Is not the
preaching the gospel, included in Paul's exhortation to Timothy, 'my son be
strong in the grace, that is in Christ Jesus;' the same Apostle tells us what
this grace is, 'ye know the grace of our Lord Jesus Christ, who though he was
rich for our sakes, became poor, that we through his poverty might be rich;'
this is the grace made manifest in the gospel, the tidings of it are to be told
to every creature; this is the grace whereby we serve God acceptably, which our
Apostle exhorts to hold fast, we receiving a kingdom which cannot be moved; we
read it, let us have grace, but the margin reads it agreeable to the original,
'let us hold fast the grace whereby we may serve God acceptably with reverence
and godly fear,' for our God is a consuming fire; every thing in the service of
God, that has not respect to the grace that is in Christ Jesus, is wood, hay,
stubble, and must be burnt up.

The Apostle Peter drawing to a close in his first Epistle, speaking of what he
had been writing, says, 'I have written briefly, exhorting and testifying that
this is the true grace of God, wherein ye stand;' if we look back into the
Epistle, we find him writing of the grace, that is in Christ Jesus, who his
ownself bear our sins in his own body on the tree, for Christ has once
suffered the just for the unjust, that he might bring us to God, by whose
stripes ye were healed. Much has been said about marks and evidences of true
grace, in the hearts of men; but the voice behind us, reminds us of the true
grace of God, and the evidences of it manifested in Christ Jesus, this is the
grace, the Apostle exhorts the Hebrews to look dilligently least they fall
from, we read it 'looking dilligently least any man fail of the grace of God,'
but according to the margin, agreeable to the original, it is, least any man
fall from the grace of God, to the grace of man; from the grace that is in
Christ Jesus, by which alone, we are accepted to grace, in our own hearts,
which cannot procure our acceptance with God: Can any one in the exercise of
reverence and godly fear, approach the divine presence, in his own name, making
mention of the grace, that is in his own heart, as that whereby he may serve
God acceptably, it brings to mind, Isaiah, xxvii, 4, 'who would set the briers
and thorns against me in battle, I would go through them, I would burn them
together, or let him take hold of my strength, he may make peace with me, he
shall make peace with me; peace is preached by Jesus Christ.'

The scriptures testify of Christ, both in the law of Moses, the Prophets, and
the Plalms: The great error of many preachers, has centred in their
apprehension, that the scriptures testified of good men, and in proportion as
this error has prevailed, we have heard of the virtue and piety of Abraham,
David, the Prophets, and other pious men, whom we have been excited to follow,
in hope of the divine favor, if we could come to their seize; but the
light discovers this to be a species of idolatry, putting the Creature in the
place of Jesus Christ, or at least between us and him, while the gospel calls
us 'to behold the Lamb of God, that takes away the sin of the world.' The
light discovering this error, in the place of it, their has crept in, perhaps a
more undiscernable one, when preachers have been led to speak excellently of
the character and finished work of Christ, they have known something else
besides Jesus Christ, and him crucified, having a great part of their
discourses, taken up about the excellency of believers, their experiences,
seize, devotions in their closets and families, and at public worship,
and in their conduct in moral civil life, to the flattering of their pride and
importance, causing them to conceive themselves the chief of saints, to the
abasement of those that have not these seize. But let it be considered
whether it would not be more advantageous to the believers of the gospel, as
well as nearer their pattern, if they were put in mind of the various apostolic
exhortations to them, and put upon inquiring how much cause they have for shame
and humiliation, that these exhortations have so little influence on their
minds and conduct, which if attended to with sobriety of mind, would tend to
excite them, to take rank with the chief of sinners, and to glorify God for
mercy, upon a level with the vilest. Such preachers as are above described,
draw the minds of their hearers from the one object, having two to present
before them; whereas the Prophet Isaiah, proposes one object, 'the glory of the
Lord shall be revealed, and all flesh shall see together. Look unto me and be
saved, all the ends of the earth.' John says, 'behold the Lamb of God that
takes away the sin of the world;' and Paul determines to know nothing among
them, save Jesus Christ and him crucified. Let Peter close with his testimony
of Christ, as recorded in his 1st Epistle, 2d chapter, 24 verse, 'who his
ownself, bear our sins in his own body on the tree, that we being dead to sin,
might live to righteousness, by whose stripes ye were healed.'

Should the mind of any, suggest the old objection, to preaching the gospel to
every creature, that was brought in the Apostle's days and is kept up, down to
our day, that it endangers morality, and will excite to continue in sin, that
grace may abound.

It may be answered, that the morality of the gospel is founded on divine love,
both by Jesus Christ and his Apostles; when Jesus Christ gave the golden rule
as it is deservedly called, it was founded on the love of God, set forth in a
most striking figure, 'what man is there of you, who if his son ask bread will
he give him a stone?' Is there such a man (...) you that are evil, prone to
covetousness, anger and various other evils? Is there one among you who if his
son ask bread will he give him a stone, and thus mock his hunger? What heart,
among you that are evil, can do this? If ye then being evil, know how to give
good gifts to your children, how much more shall your father who is in Heaven,
give good things to them that ask him? Therefore all things whatsoever ye
would, that men should do to you, do ye even so to them; you never need defraud
or overreach one another, to obtain any good you may think you want, because
your heavenly father is more ready to give good things to them that ask him,
than the best of you are to give bread to your children; let his love constrain
you in all things, to do one to another, as ye would they should do to you;
when Jesus bid his Disciples love their enemies, he gave the example in his
love to them.

When he bid them pray for them that said all manner of evil of them falsely for
his name sake, he gave his example on the cross, 'father forgive them, for they
know not what they do.'

He says to his Disciples, a new commandment I give unto you, 'that ye love
one another, as I have loved you,' mark that, and consider, how did he love his
Disciples? let one of them answer, 'herein is love, not that we loved God, but
he loved us, and sent his son, the -- propitiation for our sin', (he adds)
'beloved, if God so loved us, we ought to love one another,' the love of God
and our neighbor, contains all morality, and we love him because he first
loved us, and when we believe the love of God to our neighbor, as well as to
ourselves, we shall see the only foundation of loving our neighbor as
ourselves.

The morality of the gospel is founded on divine love by the Apostles; they
preached the gospel to every creature, those who were gathered to the faith of
the gospel, they collected into churches, and taught them to observe all things
whatsoever Jesus Christ commanded; they exhorted, comforted, and charged every
one of them, as a father does his children, that they would walk worthy of God,
who has called them to his kingdom and glory. Let any one, whose mind is
concerned about the preaching of the gospel to every creature, endangering
morality, look over the Epistles, wrote to the churches, collected by preaching
the gospel, and they will see in the former parts of these Epistles, the riches
of divine grace, contained in the doctrine of Christ, then, the obligations the
Disciples are under to adorn this doctrine, in their lives and conversations in
the various places and relations that they sustain; that they which have
believed in God, be careful to maintain good works, not merely to talk of them,
with approbation, but be at the cost of maintaining them. If these things be
soberly attended to, it will appear to any impartial inquirer, that the
interest of morality is not endangered by preaching the gospel to every
creature.

Having inquired who Archipus was, and what was the ministry he received in the
Lord; the next inquiry is, in what manner is this ministry thus received of the
Lord, to be delivered to the people. The answer to this inquiry is given by the
Apostle. 'Not with wisdom of words least the cross of Christ should be made of
none effect,' 1st of Corinthians, xvii, to the end. 'And I brethren when I came
to you, came not with excellency of speech or of wisdom, declaring unto you the
testimony of God, for I determined not to know any thing among you, save Jesus
Christ, and him crucified,' 1st of Corinthians, ii, 1 to 5, 'And my speech and
my preaching was not with enticing words of man's wisdom, but in demonstration
of the spirit and of power, now we have received not the spirit of the world,
but the spirit which is of God, that we may know the things that are freely
given us of God, which things we speak, not in the words which man's wisdom
teaches, but which the Holy Ghost teaches, comparing spiritual things with
spiritual.' Verses 12, 13. That is, I conceive comparing the types and
prophesyes of the old testament, with their fulfillment in the antitype, as
recorded in the new.

If it should be inquired, why were the Apostles of Christ thus cautious to
shun the enticing words of man's wisdom? the two reasons the Apostle gives, may
be brought as an answer; the first, the corruption of the doctrine of Christ,
in these words, 'not with wisdom of words, least the cross of Christ should be
made of none effect, the preaching of the cross, or of Christ crucified, is to
the Jew a stumbling block, and to the Greek foolishness,' now there have not
been wanting those who sought by wisdom of words, to make the offense of the
cross cease from the Apostles days down to our own. The false teachers in the
Apostles days, labored to reconcile the stumbling Jew to the gospel, by adding
the ceremonies of the law, teaching the Gentile believers, 'except they be
circumcised after the manner of Moses, they cannot be saved, making by their
wisdom, the cross of Christ, of none effect,' for says the Apostle, 'whosoever
is circumcised, he is a debtor to do the whole law, Christ is become of none
effect,' seeking thus to be justified by the law, they fall from the grace of
the gospel. The false teachers from the Apostles days to our own, have in like
manner studied by wisdom of words, to reconcile the doctrine of Christ, to the
wise Greek, who held it foolish to build the hope of salvation on Christ
crucified, as the only exclusive foundation; saying it is foolish for an
ungodly sinner, to look for justification by the work of Christ, unless he have
repentance, faith, obedience, etc. which are brought in as props to the work of
Christ, as though it were not alone all sufficient; faith, as it is thus
considered, is not the belief of the gospel, which reports our blessedness in
Christ Jesus, but is something we must have wrought in us, or exercised by us,
in order to our being interested therein. Repentance as it is thus considered,
is not a turning from ourselves, and all creature dependence, where we have
been seeking life, to Christ who is our life; but is a certain sorrow, for our
open heinous, and even secret sins, to qualify us for obtaining forgiveness by
Christ Jesus. Obedience is likewise considered a necessary qualification for
our acceptance; not as a testimony of our gratitude, that he has made us
accepted in the beloved.

And in this mistaken view, faith, repentance and obediance, being added to the
work of Christ, are calculated to bring the doctrine to the wisdom of the
Greek, who always suppose God will be propitious to the believing penitent and
obedient. Every species of false religion, of what ever name or denomination,
will agree here, while every true christian will agree with the Apostle, that
it is And will break out with the Prophet Micah, who is a God like unto thee
that pardons iniquity.
a faithful saying, and worthy of all acceptance, that Jesus came to save
sinners, of whom I am chief; but that Christ came to seek and save that which
was lost, died for the ungodly, came to save sinners, even the chief, will not
do to mention alone, it is too weak and foolish.

It is true, say they, that Christ came to save that which was lost, and no
sinner will miscarry, who seek him sincerely, earnestly and perseveringly; but
the text says, 'he came to seek and to save that which was lost,' it is true say
they, 'Christ died for the ungodly,' and all of that description shall be
benefited thereby, that will come to him; but they will not come that they may
have life; but read the text, 'my people shall be willing in the day of my
power.'

Yes say they, but who are his people, who are given to him? Let the scriptures
answer, 'the father loves the son, and has given all things into his hands,
he has given the heathen his inheritance, and the utmost parts of the earth,
his possession, and all that the father gives, shall come.'

Thus we have contemplated how the wisdom of words, is employed, to endeavor to
take away the stumbling block from the Jew, and the imputation of foolishness
from the Greek; and that every attempt of this kind, is making the cross of
Christ of none effect. The second reason, the Apostle draws from the effects on
the hearers; where the doctrine of Christ is maintained, there should be a
constant care to use great plainess of speech, because the poor have the gospel
preached to them, and if it is preached in language above their capacity,
although it may be very good, and easy to be understood by the learned, yet if
there come in one that is unlearned, how shall he say Amen, at thy giving
thanks, seeing he understands not what thou say; except (says the Apostle)
ye utter by the tongue, words easy to be understood, how shall it be known what
is spoken, for ye shall speak unto the air; and he says I had rather speak five
words with my understanding, that I might teach others also, than ten thousand
words in an unknown tongue.

Although tongues have ceased, yet these expressions of the Apostle, may at
this day be improved as a guard against language above common capacities and
when such language is familiar by use, to any of the preachers of the gospel,
such would do well to attend the exhortation of the Apostle, let him that
speaks in an unknown tongue, pray that he may interpret; let him pray that he
may be able to come to the capacity of the most unlearned of his hearers, when
preaching the gospel of Christ; it seems as if this was what the Apostle meant,
by saying, 'brethren be not children in understanding, in understanding be
men,' as it immediately follows his saying, he had rather speak five words with
his understanding that he might teach others, than ten thousand that could not
be understood; for says he, if I know not the meaning of the voice, I shall be
to him that speaks a barbarian, and he that speaks, a barbarian unto me.

Upon the whole, the Apostle appears to aim at inculcating the delivering of
the gospel with plainness of speech for the above reasons, which appear weighty
and worthy of attention; and says, 'seeing then we have such hope we use great
plainness of speech, and not as Moses, who put a veil over his face;' and in
another place neither of men sought we glory, neither of you nor of others.

Let gospel ministers imitate the Apostle herein, let them attend the express
declaration of scripture, both of the old and new testament, that unite to
publish salvation, to the end of the earth, and to the evidences of the truth
of these glad tidings, of great joy to all people; that being convinced of the
truth of this good news, they may tell it as a truth to their hearers, even to
unbelievers, in as plain, intelligible a manner as may be, that if it please
God to accompany the truth with divine evidence, they may believe, and
believing have life through his name.

Let the hearers, whose minds are at a loss about the truth of the gospel, bend
their attention to the search of the scriptures after the example of the
Bereans, to see if these things are so.

And those that are satisfied of the truth, from scripture evidence, abound in
thanksgiving for the manifestation of the exceeding riches of the grace
appearing therein, and make it their constant study to live as the grace of
God, which has appeared, which brings salvation to all men, teaches, viz.
'denying ungodliness and worldly lusts, and to live soberly, righteously and
godly in the world, looking for the blessed hope, and the glorious appearing of
the great God and our Savior Jesus Christ, who gave himself for our sins, that
he might redeem us from all iniquity and purify unto himself a peculiar people
zealous of good works.'

Let the words of the Apostle Peter close, 'if any man speak, let him speak as
the oracles of God, if any man minister, let him do it as of the ability, that
God gives; that God in all things may be glorified through Jesus Christ, to
whom be praise and dominion forever,

AMEN.

