REPORT OF THE SECRETARY OF THE TREASURY, ON THE SUBJECT OF THE PUBLIC DEBT.

PRESENTED TO THE HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES, February 7th, 1792.

PRINTED BY CHILD'S AND SWAIN.

TREASURY DEPARTMENT, FEBRUARY 6th, 1792. SIR,
I have the honor to send herewith a Report on the subject of the Public Debt,
pursuant to the order of the House of Representatives of the 1st of November,
1791, and to subsequent references therein mentioned; and to be, with perfect
respect,

SIR, your most obedient, And most humble servant, ALEXANDER HAMILTON,
Secretary of the Treasury.
The Honorable the SPEAKER of the House of Representatives.
TREASURY DEPARTMENT, JANUARY 23d, 1792.
PURSUANT to the Order of the HOUSE of REPRESENTATIVES of the first of
November, 1791, directing the SECRETARY of the TREASURY, "to report to the
House the Amount of the Subscriptions to the Loans proposed by the Act making
Provision for the PUBLIC DEBT, as well in the Debts of the respective States as
in the Domestic Debt of the United States, and of the Parts which remain
unsubscribed, together with such Measures as are, in his Opinion, expedient to
be taken on the Subject:" the said Secretary respectfully submits the following
REPORT.
I. THE whole amount of the domestic debt of the United States, principal and
interest, which has been subscribed to the loan proposed concerning that debt,
by the act entitled, "An act making provision for the debt of the United
States," according to the statement herewith transmitted, marked A. and subject
to the observations accompanying that statement, is Dollars 31,797,481.22 which
pursuant to the terms of that act has been converted into stock, bearing an
immediate interest of 6 per cent. per annum 14,177,450.43 Stock bearing the
like interest from the 1st of Jan. 1801 7,088,727.79 Stock bearing an immediate
interest of 3 per cent. per annum 10,531,303 Making together Dollars
31,797,481.22 Of which there stands to the credit of the Trustees of the
sinking fund, in consequence of purchases of the public debt, made under their
direction, the sum of Dollars 1,131,364.76 The unsubscribed residue of the said
debt, according to the statements herewith transmitted, marked B. and C. and
subject to the observations acompanying the statement C. appears to amount to
Dollars 10,616,604.65 Consisting of registered debt, principal and interest
6,795,815.26 Unsubscribed stock on the books of the Commissioners of Loans for
New Jersey, Pennsylvania and Maryland, principal and interest 15,674.62 Credits
on the books of the Treasury, for which no certificates have issued, principal
and interest 107,648.63 Outstanding or floating evidences of debt, estimated
per statement C. at 3,697,466.14 Making together Dollars 10,616,604.65

Concerning which some farther arrangement is necessary.

The greatest part of the registered debt, hitherto unsubscribed, is owned by
the citizens of foreign countries, most, if not all of whom appear now disposed
to embrace the terms held out by the act above mentioned; extensive orders
having been received from those creditors, to subscribe to the loan, after the
time for receiving subscriptions had elapsed.

A considerable part of the outstanding or floating debt, consists of
loan-office certificates issued between the first of September, 1777, and the
first of March, 1778, bearing interest on the nominal sum. Many of the holders
of this species of debt have come in upon the terms of the act, but others have
hitherto declined it; alleging, that the special nature of their contract
gives a peculiarity to their case, and renders the commutation proposed not so
fair an equivalent to them, as in other instances. They also complain, that the
act has had, toward them, a compulsory aspect, by refusing the temporary
payment of interest, unless they should exchange their old for new
certificates, essentially varying the nature of their contract.

A resolution of Congress of the tenth of September, 1777, stipulates in favor
of this class of creditors, interest upon the nominal, instead of the real
principal of their debt, until that principal be discharged. This certainly
renders their contract of a nature more beneficial than that of other
creditors; but they are at the same time liable to be divested of the
extra-benefit it gives them, by a payment of their specie-dues; and it may be
observed, that they have actually enjoyed, and by accepting the terms offered
to them, were enabled to realise, advantages superior to other creditors. They
have been paid interest by bills on France from the tenth of September, 1777,
to the first of March, 1782, while other creditors received their interest in
depreciated bills of the old emissions; and the terms of the loan proposed put
it in their power to realise the benefit of interest on the nominal amount of
their respective debts, at rates from 6 10/100, nearly to 10 47/100 per cent.
on their real or specie capital down to the last of December, 1790.

It does not therefore appear to have been an unreasonable expectation, that
they, as readily as any other description of public creditors, would have
acquiesced in a measure, calculated for the accommodation of the government,
under circumstances, in respect to which, it has been demonstrated by
subsequent events that the accommodation desired was consistent with the best
interest of the public creditors. A large proportion of the parties interested
have indeed viewed the matter in this light, and have embraced the proposition.
It is probable, that the progress of things will satisfy the remainder, that it
is equally their interest to concur; if a farther opportunity be afforded. But
it is, nevertheless, for themselves only to judge, how far the equivalent
proposed is, in their case, a reasonable and fair one; how far any
circumstances in their claim may suggest reasons for moderation on their part;
or how far any other motives, public or private, ought to induce an acceptance.
And the principles of good faith require, that their election should be free.

On this ground, the complaint which regards the withholding of a temporary
payment of interest, except on the condition of a surrender of the old
certificates for new ones importing a contract substantially different, appears
to the Secretary not destitute of foundation. He presumes, that the operation
of that provision, in the particular case was not adverted to; or, that an
exception would have been introduced as most consonant with the general spirit
and design of the act. Accordingly the farther measures which will be
submitted, will contemplate a method of obviating the objection in question.

From the consideration, that an extension of the time for receiving
subscriptions, upon the terms of the act making provision for the debt of the
United States, is desired by a large proportion of the non-subscribing
creditors; and from the farther consideration, that sufficient experience has
not yet been had of the productiveness of a considerable branch of the revenues
which have been established, to afford the light necessary to a final
arrangement -- it is, in the judgment of the Secretary, advisable, to renew
the proposition for a loan in the domestic debt, on the same terms with the one
which has been closed, and to allow time for receiving subscriptions to it
until the last day of September next, inclusively; making provision for the
temporary payment of interest to such who may not think fit to subscribe, for
the year 1792, of the like nature with that which was made in the same case for
the year 1791 -- except as to the holders of loan-office certificates, issued
between the first of September, 1777, and the first of March, 1778; in respect
to whom it is submitted as proper to dispense with the obligation of exchanging
their old certificates for new, as the condition of their receiving interest in
capacity of non-subscribers; and to allow them, without such exchange, to
receive the same interest, both for the years 1791 and 1792, as if they had
subscribed to the first loan. It will not be materially difficult, so to
regulate the operation at the treasury as to avoid in the particular case, that
danger of imposition by counterfeits, which was the motive to the general
provision for an exchange of certificates.

II. The amount of the subscriptions in the debts of the respective states,
within the limits of the sum assumed in each, appears by the statement marked
D. to be dollars 17,072,334 39/100 subject to the observations accompanying
that statement. Consequently the difference between the aggregate of the sums
subscribed, and the aggregate of the sums assumed, is dols. 4,427,665 61/100

This difference is to be attributed to several causes, the principal of which
are the following. First, That the sums assumed in respect to certain states
exceeded the actual amount of their existing debts. Second, That in various
instances, a part of the existing debt was in a form which excluded it from
being received, without contravening particular provisions of the law; as in
the case of certificates issued after the first day of January, 1790, in lieu
of certificates which had been issued prior to that period, which was reported
upon by the Secretary on the twenty-fifth day of February last. Third,
Ignorance of, or inattention to the limitation of time for receiving
subscriptions. It appears, that a number of persons lost the opportunity of
subscribing from the one or the other of these causes.

A strong desire that a farther opportunity may be afforded for subscriptions
in the debts of the states, has been manifested by the individuals interested.
And the states of Rhode Island and New Hampshire, have, by the public acts
referred to the Secretary, indicated a similar desire. The affording of such
farther opportunity, may either be restricted within the limit, as to amount,
which is contemplated by the act itself, or may receive an extension which will
embrace the residuary debts of the states.

The first may be considered as nothing more than giving full effect to a
measure already adopted.

The last appears to have in its favor all the leading inducements to what has
been already done. The embarrassments which might arise from conflicting
systems of finance are not entirely obviated. The efficacious command of the
national resources for national exigencies, is not unequivocally secured. The
equalizing of the condition of the citizens of every state, and exonerating
those of the states most indebted, from partial burdens which would press upon
them in consequence of exertions in a common cause, is not completely
fulfilled, until the entire debt of every stae, contracted in relation to the
war, is embraced in one general and comprehensive plan. The inconvenience to
the United States of disburthening the states, which are still encumbered with
considerable debts, would bear no proportion to the inconvenience which they
would feel, if left to struggle with those debts, unaided.

More general contentment, therefore, in the public mind, may be expected to
attend such an exonoration, than the reverse; in proportion as the experience
of actual inconvenience would be greater, though only applicable to parts, in
the one than in the other case.

With regard to states, parts only of the debts of which have been assumed, and
in proportions short of those, which have prevailed, in favor of other states,
and short also of what would have resulted from a due apportionment of the
entire sum assumed; the claim to a further assumption is founded on
considerations of equal justice, as relative to the measure itself, considered
in a separate and independent light.

But there is a further reason of material weight for an immediate general
assumption. Monied men, as well foreigners as citizens, through the expectation
of an eventual assumption, or that in some shape or other a substantial
provision will be made for the unassumed residue of the state debts, will be
induced to speculate in the purchase of them. In proportion as the event is
unsettled, or uncertain, the price of the article will be low, and the present
proprietors will be under disadvantage in the sale. The loss to them in favor
of the purchasers is to be regarded as an evil; and as far as it is connected
with a transfer to foreigners, at an undervalue, it will be a national evil. By
whatsoever authority an ultimate provision may be made, there will be an
absolute loss to the community equal to the total amount of such undervalue.

It may appear an objection to the measure, that it will require an
establishment of additional funds by the government of the United States. But
this does not seem to be a necessary consequence. The probability is, that
without a supplementary assumption, an equal, or very nearly equal augmentation
of funds will be requisite to provide for greater balances in favor of certain
states, which would be proportionably diminished by such assumption. The
destination, not the quantum of the fund, will therefore be the chief
distinction between the two cases.

It may also appear an objection to a total assumption, that the magnitude of
the object is not ascertained with precision. It is not certainly known, what
sum is due in each state; nor has it been possible to acquire the information,
owing to different causes. But though precise data are deficient, there are
materials which will serve as guides. From the returns received at the
treasury, assisted by information in other ways, it may be stated without
danger of material error -- That the remaining debts of the states over and
above the sums already subscribed will not exceed the amounts specified in the
statement D. accompanying this report -- And that, including the sums already
subscribed, the total amount to be ultimately provided for, in the event of a
general assumption, will not exceed 25,403,362 1^/100 dollars, which would
constitute an addition of 3,903,362, ^1/100 dollars, to the sum of 21,500,000
dollars already assumed.

Should a total assumption be deemed eligible, it may still be advisable to
assign a determinate sum for each state, that the utmost limit of the operation
may be pre-established; and it is necessary in order to the certainty of a due
provision in proper time, that interest should not begin to be payable, on the
additional sums assumed, till after the year 1792.

It will occur, that provision has been made, for paying to each state, in
trust for its non-subscribing creditors, an interest upon the difference
between the sum assumed for such state, and that actually subscribed, equal to
what would have been payable, if it had been subscribed.

In the event of a farther assumption, either within the limits already
established, or commensurate with the remaining debts of the states; it is
conceived, that it will not be incompatible with the provision just mentioned,
to retain, at the end of each quarter, during the progress of the farther
subscription, out of the money directed to be paid to each state, a sum
corresponding with the interest upon so much of its debts as shall have been
subscribed to that period, paying the overplus, if any, to the state. An
absolute suspension of that payment does not appear consistent with the nature
of the stipulation, included in that provision; for though the money to be paid
to a state be expressly a trust for the non-subscribing creditors; yet as it
cannot be certain beforehand, that they will elect to change their condition,
the possibility of it will not justify a suspension of payment to the state,
which might operate as a suspension of payment to the creditors themselves.

A farther objection to such a suspension results from the idea, that the
provision in question appears to have a secondary object; namely, as a pledge
for securing a provision for whatever balance may be found due to a state on
the general settlement of accounts. The payment directed to be made to a state,
is "to continue until there shall be a settlement of accounts between the
United States and the individual states; and incase a balance should then
appear in favor of a state, until provision shall be made for the said
balance."

This secondary operation as a pledge or security (consistently with the intent
of the funding act) can only be superseded in favor of the primary object, a
provision for the creditors; and as far as may be necessary to admit them to an
effectual participation of it. But as whatever money may be paid to a state, is
to be paid over to its creditors, proportional deductions may, with propriety,
be made from the debts of those creditors who may hereafter subscribe; so as
that the United States may not have to pay twice for the same purpose.

If it shall be judged expedient, either to open again, or extend the
assumption, it will be necessary to vary the description of the debts, which
may be subscribed, so as to comprehend all those, which have relation to
services or supplies during the war, under such restrictions as are requisite
to guard against abuse.

In the original proposition for an assumption of the state debts, and in the
suggestions now made on the same subject, the Secretary has contemplated, and
still contemplates, as a material part of the plan, an effectual provision, for
the sale of the vacant lands of the United States. He has considered this
resource, as an important mean of sinking a part of the debt, and facilitating
ultimate arrangements concerning the residue. If supplementary funds shall be
rendered necessary, by an additional assumption, the provision will most
conveniently be made, at the next session of Congress, when the productiveness
of the existing revenues, and the extent of the sum to be provided for, will be
better ascertained.

There is a part of the public debt of the United States, which is a cause of
some perplexity to the treasury. It is not comprehended within the existing
provision for the foreign debt which is confined to loans made abroad; and it
is questionable, whether it is to be regarded as a portion of the domestic
debt. It is not only due to foreigners, but the interest upon it is payable, by
express stipulation, in a foreign country, whence it becomes a matter of doubt,
whether it be at all contemplated by the act making provision for the debt of
the United States. The part alluded to is that, which is due to certain foreign
officers, who served the United States during the late war. In consequence of a
resolution of Congress, directing their interest to be paid to them in France,
the certificates which were issued to them specify, that "in pursuance of and
compliance with a certain resolution of Congress of the third day of February
1784, the said interest is to be paid, annually, at the house of Mons. le
Grand, banker in Paris." Interest has accordingly been paid to them at Paris,
down to the 31st of December 1788, by virtue of a special resolution of
Congress of the 20th of August in that year; since which period, no payment has
been made.

It has been heretofore suggested as the opinion of the Secretary, that it
would be expedient to cause the whole of this description of debt to be paid
off; among other reasons, because it bears an interest at six per centum per
annum, payable abroad, and can be discharged with a saving. The other reasons
alluded to are of a nature both weighty and delicate, and too obvious, it is
presumed, to need a specification. Some recent circumstances have served to
strengthen the inducements to the measure. But if it should, finally, be deemed
unadviseable, it is necessary at least, that provision should be made for the
interest, which is now suspended, under the doubt that has been stated, and
from the want of authority to remit it pursuant to the contract.

The amount of this debt, with the arrears of interest to the end of the year
1791, is Dollars 220,646. 81

IV. The act making provision for the debt of the United States has
appropriated the proceeds of the western lands as a fund for the discharge of
the public debt. And the act making provision for the reduction of the public
debt, has appropriated all the surplus of the duties on imports and tonnage, to
the end of the year 1790, to the purpose of purchasing the debt at the market
price, and has authorized the President to borrow the further sum of two
millions of dollars for the same object.

These measures serve to indicate the intention of the legislature, as early
and as fast as possible, to provide for the extinguishment of the existing debt.

In pursuance of that intention, it appears advisable, that a systematic plan
should be begun for the creation and establishment of a sinking fund.

An obvious basis of this establishment, which may be immediately contemplated,
is the amount of the interest on so much of the debt as has been or shall be,
from time to time, purchased, or paid off, or received in discharge of any debt
or demand of the United States, made payable in public securities -- over and
above the interest of any new debt, which may be created, in order to such
purchase or payment.

The purchases of the debt already made have left a sum of interest in the
Treasury, which will be increased by future purchases -- certain sums payable
to the United States in their own securities, will, when received, have a
similar effect. And there is ground to calculate on a saving upon the
operations, which are in execution with regard to the foreign debt. The sale of
the Western Lands, when provision shall be made for it, may be expected to
produce a material addition to such a fund.

It is therefore submitted, that it be adopted as a principle, that all
interest which shall have ceased to be payable, by any of the means above
specified, shall be set apart and appropriated in the most firm and inviolable
manner, as a fund for sinking the public debt, by purchase or payment; and that
the said fund be placed under the direction of the officers named in the second
section of the act making provision for the reduction of the public debt, to be
by them applied toward the purchase of the said debt, until the annual produce
of the said fund shall amount to two per cent. of the entire portion of the
debt which bears a present interest of six per centum, and thenceforth to be
applied, toward the redemption of that portion of the debt, according to the
right which has been reserved to the government.

It will deserve the consideration of the Legislature, whether this fund ought
not to be so vested, as to acquire the nature and quality of a proprietary
trust, incapable of being diverted, without a violation of the principles and
sanctions of property.

A rapid accumulation of this fund would arise from its own operation; but it
is not doubted, that the progressive developement of the resources of the
country, and a reduction of the rate of interest, by the progress of public
credit, already exemplified in a considerable degree, will speedily enable the
government to make important additions to it, in various ways. With due
attention to preserve order and cultivate peace, a strong expectation may be
indulged, that a reduction of the debt of the country will keep pace with the
reasonable hopes of its citizens.

All which is humbly submitted. ALEXANDER HAMILTON,
Secretary of the Treasury.
A. STATEMENT of the DEBT of the UNITED STATES, Funded agreeably to the Act of
Congress of the 4th of August, 1790, at the Treasury and the several
Loan-Offices, from the 1st of October, 1790, to the 30th of September, 1791.
Funded 6 per cent. stock. Deferred 6 per cent. stock. Funded 3 per cent.
stock. Total amount. Dollars. Cts. Dollars. Cts. Dollars. Cts. Dollars. Cts.
Treasury 5,184,041. 41 2,592,018. 72 3,973,865. 10 11,749,925. 23 New Hampshire
191,322. 44 95,661. 22 147,423. 35 434,407. 1 Massachusetts 2,126,062. 40
1,063,034. 94 1,984,457. 41 5,173,554. 75 Rhode Island 279,609. 72 139,803. 55
179,577. 71 598,990. 98 Connecticut 461,644. 31 230,823. 38 342,760. 99
1,035,228. 68 New York 2,204,016. 7 1,102,012. 12 1,643,224. 96 4,949,253. 15
New Jersey 472,728. 51 236,358. 96 271,749. 71 980,837. 18 Pennsylvania
1,871,455. 80 935,730. 39 865,216. 21 3,672,402. 40 Delaware 26,191. 19 13,095.
64 16,242. 75 55,529. 58 Maryland 717,818. 71 358,903. 15 621,188. 48
1,697,910. 34 Virginia 453,979. 69 226,996. 35 343,128. 22 1,024,104. 26
North Carolina 13,064. 3 6,531. 77 9,398. 35 28,994. 75 South Carolina 135,366.
33 67,682. 68 96,060. 87 299,109. 88 Georgia 40,149. 82 20,074. 92 37,008. 29
97,233. 3 14,177,450. 43 7,088,727. 79 10,531,303 31,797,481. 22

The amount of Stock funded at the Treasury to 30th September, 1791, has been
ascertained with accuracy, but at that time many subscriptions had been made
which have not yet been adjusted for want of proper powers of attorney and
other documents. -- It is therefore probable that on settlement of all the
loans the amount will be found somewhat different from what is now represented.

The sums funded at the several loan-offices, it is presumed, are ascertained
with accuracy; but as the loans had not been adjusted in all instances when the
returns were made, some immaterial differences will probably hereafter appear.

TREASURY DEPARTMENT, Register's-Office, September 30, 1791. JOSEPH NOURSE,
Register.

B. STATEMENT of the REGISTERED and UNSUBSCRIBED DEBT of the United States,
which remained unfunded upon the close of the Loan on the 30th of September
1791.
REGISTERED or UNFUNDED DEBT. Dols. Cts. Dols. Cts. The amount of this debt as
stated to Congress on the 3d March 1789, was 4,598,462. 78 There were Treasury
certificates issued in exchange for Loan-Office and Final Settlement
Certificates, cancelled by the Auditor of the Treasury, from 3d March 1789, to
30th June, 1791 4,716,376. 45 There have been certificates issued to invalid
pensioners and others, entitled thereunto, on final settlement in pursuance of
acts of Congress of the present and late government, 134,883. 18 9,449,722. 41
Of the said debt there has been loaned as follows, viz. From the opening of the
loan to 31st of March, 1791, 1,371,978. 37 1st April to 30th June, 1791,
1,088,466. 60 1st July to 30th September, 1,611,194. 82 Which being deducted
leaves a balance, 4,071,639. 79 Principal sum due to the several creditors on
the treasury books 5,378,082. 62 The interest due on said debt to 31st
December, 1790, is as follows, viz. Arrearages to 31st December 1787, 449,677.
88 Three years interest from 1st January 1788, to 31st December, 1790 968,054.
76 1,417,732. 64 Registered debt principal and interest 6,795,815. 26
UNSUBSCRIBED DEBT. The debt unsubscribed upon the books. New Jersey,
Pennsylvania and Maryland, amounts to 12,539. 70 Interest 3,134. 92 15,674. 62
Carried forward, 6,811,489. 88 Brought forward, 6,811,489. 88 Credits on the
treasury books to invalid pensioners, and several corpse for which certificates
of registered debt are yet to be issued. INVALID PENSIONERS. For the amount due
to them, under the act of Congress, providing for the payment of their
arrearages 56,152. 76 The following corpse have credit on the treasury books,
being for certain certificates of final settlement, returned to the treasury
and cancelled, and which certificates had issued to the non-commissioned
officers and soldiers of said corpse, respectively for their pay. 4th regiment
Pennsylvania artillery 846. 37 Corpse of light dragoons 1,009. 83 Invalid
regiment 3,803. 35 Artillery artificers 386. 28 Willet's regiment 2,565. 42
Hazen's regiment 11,267. 49 Baldwin's do. of artificers 281. 28 Corpse of
sappers and miners 416. 93 Armand's legion 834. 17 Lee's legion 593. 17 4th
PENNSYLVANIA REGIMENT. Capt. North's company 487. 67 Lacy's, 1,062. 97 1,550.
64 Franklin's company of militia 280. 67 Individual creditors of the states of
Pennsylvania and Maryland, have credit on the treasury books, being for
certificates of final settlement returned to the treasury, and cancelled, and
which certificates had issued to them respectively. By Benjamin Stelle,
commissioner of Pennsylvania 5436. 66 John White, Maryland 693. 89 6,130. 55
86,118. 91 Interest upon the foregoing credits 21,529. 72 107,648. 63 Dollars,
6,919,138. 51

TREASURY DEPARTMENT, Register's-Office, 30 th November, 1791. JOSEPH NOURSE,
Register.

C. ESTIMATE of the OUTSTANDING DEBT, on the 30th September, 1791, viz.
The amount of the Domestic Debt of the United States, as stated by the
Secretary of the Treasury in his report of the 9th January, 1790, to the House
of Representatives, relative to a provision for the support of the Public
Credit, is as follows, viz.

Dols. Cts. Liquidated and loan-office debt as per schedule C. 27,383,917. 67
Interest thereon to the 31st December, 1790, as per do. D. 13,030,168. 20
Additional sum for sinking the continental bills of credit, and for the
discharge of the other parts of the Unliquidated debt, 2,000,000. 42,414,085.
87 From which deduct amount, as per statemet A. 31,797,481. 22 Amount of the
registered debt and credit with interest, per statement B. 6,919,138. 51
38,716,619. 73 Balance outstanding, 3,697,466. 14

NOTE. -- The balance above stated to be outstanding probably exceeds the real
sum. In the original estimate the old emission bills were computed at 40 for 1,
but they have been provided for at 100 for 1. There are also loan-office
certificates which were sent to public officers to be applied to the public
service, and which were supposed to have been so applied, but which have since,
upon settlements of their accounts at the Treasury, been returned and cancelled.

In addition to this, payments in public securities are expected to be made
into the Treasury, which will thereupon be cancelled. And it is presumable that
in the course of the war, sums have been lost and destroyed which are included
in the estimate. But as there is some arrearage of interest not included in the
calculation, and as there are certain claims on the Treasury, the event or
amount of which is not yet determined, it is not possible now to make a precise
estimate of the difference between the sum computed to be outstanding and what
will be really found so.

JOSEPH NOURSE, Register.
TREASURY DEPARTMENT, Register's Office, November 30 th, 1791.
D. STATEMENT of SUBSCRIPTIONS to the LOAN, payable in Certificates or Notes
issued by the respective States, in the several Loan-Offices, from the 1st of
October, 1790, to the 30th of September, 1791, agreeably to the Act passed the
4th of August, 1790.
STATES. Amount assumed by the act. Amount subscribed. Remaining
unsub-subscribed to complete the amount assumed. Subscribed beyond the amount
assumed. Estimated amount of remaining debt of the State. Dollars. Dollars.
Cts. Dollars. Cts. Dollars. Cts. Dollars. Cts. New Hampshire 300,000 242,501.
25 57,498. 75 100,000 (a) Massachusetts 4,000,000 4,177,013. 81 477,013. 81
1,838,540. 66 (b) Rhode Island 200,000 344,259. 49 144,259. 49 349,259. 69 (c)
Connecticut 1,600,000 1,455,331. 81 144,668. 19 458,436. 52 (a) New York
1,200,000 1,028,238. 75 171,761. 25 195,639. 79 (a) New Jersey 800,000 599,703.
56 200,296. 44 207,647. 78 (a) Pennsylvania 2,200,000 675,101. 33 1,524,898. 67
500,000 (a) Delaware ^00,000 53,305. 84 146,694. 16 none Maryland 800,000
29^,225. ^0 500,774. 60 430,000 (c) Virginia 3,500,000 2,552,^70. 88 947,429.
12 1,172,555. 25 (d) North Carolina 2,400,000 1,66^,355. 57 733,644. 43
713,192. 30 (e) South Carolina 4,^00,000 4,^34,578. 52 634,573. 52 1,965,756.
33 (b) Georgia 300,000 300,000. 400,000 (f) 21,^00,000 18,328,186. 21
4,427,663. 61 1,255,851. 82 8,331,028. 32

NOTES.
I. The sums marked (a) in the column of remaining debts are inserted upon
recent official communications.

II. Those marked (b) are founded upon official statements some time since
received, and reported to the House of Representatives on the 9th of January,
1790, adding interest for the subsequent period.

III. Those marked (c) are founded on informal information, but such as is
deemed substantially authentic and accurate. The estimate for Rhode Island
includes a sum not ascertained, which has been cancelled in consequence of
former laws of the state, enjoining the creditors to bring in their
certificates and receive payment in paper-money, but has been revived by a late
law of the State, directing the sums paid to be liquidated according to a
certain scale, and deducted from the original amount.

IV. That marked (d) is founded on a report of a committee of the 11th
November, 1791, to the House of Delegates of Virginia, compared with a former
return to the Treasury and other information.

V. That marked (e) is founded upon a statement of the Comptroller of
North Carolina, of May 20th, 1790.

VI. That marked (f) is founded on a statement of the Treasurer of Georgia of
the 30th of April, 1790, compared with other information.

VII. The sums expressed in round numbers are not meant to be understood as
precisely accurate, but as very near the truth.

VIII. The foreign as well as the domestic debt of the States is included.

TREASURY DEPARTMENT, January 23 d, 1792. ALEXARDER HAMILTON,
Secretary of the Treasury.

