REPORT OF THE SECRETARY OF THE TREASURY, ON THE Act for laying Duties on
Spirits, etc.

READ IN THE HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES, March 6th, 1792.

PRINTED BY CHILD'S AND SWAIN.

IN obedience to the Orders of the HOUSE of REPRESENTATIVES of the first and
second days of November last, the first directing the Secretary of the Treasury
to report to the House such information as he may have obtained, respecting any
difficulties which may have occurred in the execution of the Act " repealing,
after the last day of June next, the duties heretofore laid upon distilled
spirits imported from abroad, and laying others in their stead; and also upon
spirits distilled within the United States, and for appropriating the same,"
together with his opinion thereupon; the second directing him to report to the
House whether any, and what alterations in favor of the spirits which shall be
distilled from articles of the growth or produce of the United States, or from
foreign articles, within the same, can, in his opinion, be made in the act for
laying duties upon spirits distilled within the United States, consistently
with its main design, and with the maintenance of the public faith -- the said
Secretary respectfully submits the following

REPORT.
FROM the several petitions and memorials which have been referred to the
Secretary, as well as from various representations which have been made to him,
it appears that objections have arisen in different quarters against the above
mentioned act; which have in some instances embarrassed its execution, and
inspired a desire of its being repealed, in others have induced a wish that
alterations may be made in some of its provisions.

These objections have reference to a supposed tendency of the act: 1st, To
contravene the principles of liberty: 2dly, To injure morals: 3dly, To oppress
by heavy and excessive penalties: 4thly, To injure industry and interfere with
the business of distilling.

As to the supposed tendency of the act to contravene the principles of
liberty, the discussions of the subject, which have had place in and out of the
Legislature, supersede the necessity of more than a few brief general
observations.

It is presumed that a revision of the point cannot, in this respect, weaken
the conviction which originally dictated the law.

There can surely be nothing in the nature of an internal duty on a consumable
commodity more incompatible with liberty, than in that of an external duty on a
like commodity. A doctrine which asserts, that all duties of the former kind
(usually denominated excises) are inconsistent with the genius of a free
government, is too violent and too little reconcilable with the necessities of
society to be true. It would tend to deprive the government of what is in most
countries a principal source of revenue, and by narrowing the distribution of
taxes, would serve to oppress particular kinds of industry. It would throw in
the first instance an undue proportion of the public burden on the merchant
and on the landholder.

This is one of those cases in which names have an improper influence, and in
which certain prepossessions exclude a due attention to facts.

Accordingly the law under consideration is complained of though free from the
features, which have served in other cases to render laws on the same subject
exceptionable. And though the differences have been pointed out, they have not
only been overlooked, but the very things, which have been studiously avoided
in the formation of the law, are charged upon it, and that too from quarters
where its operation would from circumstances have worn the least appearance of
them.

It has been heretofore noticed, that the chief circumstances, which in certain
excise-laws have given occasion to the charge of their being unfriendly to
liberty, are not to be found in the act, which is the subject of this report;
namely: 1st, A summary and discretionary jurisdiction in the excise officers
contrary to the course of the common law, and in abridgment of the right of
trial by jury: and 2dly, A general power in the same officers to search and
inspect indiscriminately all the houses and buildings of the persons engaged in
the business to which the tax relates.

As to the first particular, there is nothing in the act even to give color to
a charge of the kind against it, and accordingly it has not been brought. But
as to the second, a very different power has been mistaken for it, and the act
is complained of as conferring that very power of indiscriminate search and
inspection.

The fact nevertheless is otherwise. An officer, under the act in question, can
inspect or search no house or building, or even apartment of any house or
building, which has not been previously entered and marked by the possessor as
a place used for distilling or keeping spirits.

And even the power so qualified is only applicable to distilleries from
foreign materials, and in cities, towns and villages from domestic materials;
that is only in cases in which the law contemplates that the business is
carried on upon such a scale as effectually to separate the distillery from the
dwelling of the distiller. The distilleries scattered over the country, which
form much the greatest part of the whole, are in no degree subject to
discretionary inspection and search.

The true principle of the objection, which may be raised to a general
discretionary power of inspection and search is, that the domicil or dwelling
of a citizen ought to be free from vexatious inquisition and intrusion.

This principle cannot apply to a case in which it is put in his own power to
separate the place of his business from the place of his habitation, and by
designating the former by visible public marks, to avoid all intermeddling with
the latter.

A distillery seldom forms a part of the dwelling of its proprietor, and even
where it does, it depends on him to direct and limit the power of visiting and
search, by marking out the particular apartments which are so employed.

But the requisition upon the distiller to set marks on the building or
apartments which he makes use of in his business, is one of the topics of
complaint against the law. Such marks are represented as a dishonorable badge.
And thus a regulation, designed as much to conform with the feelings of the
citizen, as for the security of the revenue, is converted into matter of
objection.

It is not easy to conceive what maxim of liberty is violated, by requiring
persons, who carry on particular trades, which are made contributory to the
revenue, to designate by public marks the places in which they are carried on.
There can certainly be nothing more harmless or less inconvenient, than such a
regulation. The thing itself is frequently done by persons of various callings
for the information of customers; and why it should become a hardship or
grievance, if required for a public purpose, can with difficulty be imagined.

The supposed tendency of the act to injure morals seems to have relation to
the oaths, which are in a variety of cases required, and which are liable to
the objection, that they give occasion to perjuries.

The necessity of requiring oaths, is whenever it occurs, matter of regret. It
is certainly desirable to avoid them as often and as far as possible. But it is
more easy to desire than to find a substitute. The requiring of them is not
peculiar to the act in question. They are a common appendage of revenue laws,
and are among the usual guards of those laws, as they are of public and private
rights in courts of justice. They constantly occur in jury trials, to which the
citizens of the United States are so much and so justly attached. The same
objection in different degrees lies against them in both cases. Yet it is not
perceivable how they can be dispensed with in either.

It is remarkable, that both the kinds of security to the revenue, which are to
be found in the act, the oaths of parties, and the inspection of officers, are
objected to. If they are both to be abandoned, it is not easy to imagine what
security there can be for any species of revenue, which is to be collected from
articles of consumption.

If precautions of this nature are inconsistent with liberty, and immoral, as
there are very few indirect taxes, which can be collected without them, the
consequence must be, that the entire or almost entire weight of the public
burdens must, in the first instance, fall upon fixed and visible property,
houses and lands, a consequence which would be found in experiment productive
of great injustice and inequality, and ruinous to agriculture.

It has been suggested by some distillers, that both the topics of complaint,
which have been mentioned, might be obviated by a fixed rate of duty, adjusted
according to a ratio compounded of the capacity of each still, and the number
and capacities of the cisterns employed with it; but this and every similar
method are objected to by other distillers, as tending to great inequality,
arising from unequal supplies of the material at different times and at
different places, from the different methods of distillation practiced by
different distillers, and from the different degrees of activity in the
business which arise from capitals more or less adequate.

The result of an examination of this point appears to be, that every such mode
in cases in which the business is carried on upon an extensive scale, would
necessarily be attended with considerable inequalities; and upon the whole,
would be less satisfactory than the plan which has been adopted.

It is proved by the fullest information, that, in regard to distilleries,
which are rated in the law, according to the capacity of each still, the
alternative of paying according to the quantity actually distilled is viewed in
many parts of the United States as essential to the equitable operation of the
duty. And it is evident that such an alternative could not be allowed, but upon
the condition of the party rendering upon oath an account of the quantity of
spirits distilled by him, without entirely defeating the duty.

As to the charge that the penalties of the act are severe and oppressive, it
is made in such general terms, and so absolutely without the specification of a
single particular, that it is difficult to imagine where it points.

The Secretary however has carefully reviewed the provisions of the act in this
respect, and he is not able to discover any foundation for the charge.

The penalties it inflicts are in their nature the same with those which are
common in revenue laws, and in their degree comparitively moderate.

Pecuniary fines from fifty to five hundred dollars, and forfeiture of the
article in respect to which there has been a failure to comply with the law,
are the severest penalties inflicted upon delinquent parties, except in a very
few cases: In two, a forfeiture of the value of the article is added to that of
the article itself, and in some others a forfeiture of the ship or vessel, and
of the wagon or other instrument of conveyance, assistant in a breach of the
law is likewise involved.

Penalties like these for wilful and fraudulent breaches of an important law,
cannot truly be deemed either unusual or excessive. They are less than those
which secure the laws of impost, and as moderate as can promise security to any
object of revenue, which is capable of being evaded.

There appears to be but one provision in the law which admits of a question,
whether the penalty prescribed may not partake of severity. It is that which
inflicts the pains of perjury on any person who shall be convicted of "wilfully
taking a false oath or affirmation in any of the cases in which oaths or
affirmations are required by the act."

Precedents in relation to this particular vary. In many of them the penalties
are less severe, than for perjury in courts of justice; in others they are the
same. The latter are generally of the latest date, and seem to have been the
result of experience.

The United States have in other cases pursued the same principle as in the law
in question. And the practice is certainly founded on strong reasons.

1st. The additional security which it gives to the revenue cannot be doubted.
Many who would risk pecuniary forfeitures and penalties would not encounter the
more disgraceful punishment annexed to perjury.

2. There seems to be no solid distinction between one false oath in violation
of law and right, and another false oath in violation of law and right. A
distinction in the punishments of different species of false swearing is
calculated to beget false opinions concerning the sanctity of an oath; and by
countenancing an impression that a violation of it is less heinous in the cases
in which it is less punished, it tends to impair in the mind that scrupulous
veneration for the obligation of an oath which ought always to prevail, and not
only to facilitate a breach of it in the cases which the laws have marked with
less odium, but to prepare the mind for committing the crime in other cases.

So far is the law under consideration from being chargeable with particular
severity, that there are to be found in it marks of more than common attention
to prevent its operating severely or oppressively.

The 43d section of the act contains a special provision (and one which it is
believed is not to be found in any law enacted in this country prior to the
present constitution of the United States) by which forfeitures and penalties
incurred without an intention of fraud or wilful negligence may be mitigated or
remitted.

This mild and equitable provision is an effectual guard against suffering, or
inconvenience in consequence of undesigned transgressions of the law.

The 38th section contains a provision in favor of persons, who though innocent
may accidentally suffer by seizures of their property (in the execution of the
revenue laws sometimes unavoidably happens) which is perhaps entirely peculiar
to the law under consideration. Where there has even been a probable cause of
seizure, sufficient to acquit an officer, the jury are to assess whatever
damages may have accrued, from any injury to the article seized, with an
allowance for the detention of it at the rate of six per centum per annum of
the value, which damages are to be paid out of the public treasury.

There are other provisions of the act which mark the scrupulous attention of
the government, to protect the parties concerned from inconvenience and injury,
and which conspire to vindicate the law from imputations of severity or
oppression.

The supposed tendency of the act to injure industry, and interfere with the
business of distilling, is endeavored to be supported by some general and some
special reasons; both having relation to the effect of the duty upon the
manufacture.

Those of the first kind affirm generally, that duties on home manufactures are
impolitic, because they tend to discourage them; that they are particularly so,
when they are laid on articles manufactured from the produce of the country,
because they have then the additional effect of injuring agriculture; that it
is the general policy of nations to protect and promote their own manufactures;
especially those which are wrought out of domestic materials; that the law in
question interferes with this policy.

Observations of this kind admit of an easy answer. Duties on manufactures tend
to discourage them or not, according to the circumstances under which they are
laid, and are impolitic or not, according to the same circumstances. When a
manufacture is in its infancy, it is impolitic to tax it; because the tax would
be both unproductive, and would add to the difficulties, which naturally impede
the first attempts to establish a new manufacture, so as to endanger its
success.

But when a manufacture (as in the case of distilled spirits in the United
States) is arrived at maturity, it is as fit an article of taxation as any
other. No good reason can be assigned, why the consumer of a domestic commodity
should not contribute something to the public revenue, when the consumer of a
foreign commodity contributes to it largely. And as a general rule it is not to
be disputed, that duties on articles of consumption are paid by the consumers.

To the manufacture itself the duty is no injury, if an equal duty be laid on
the rival foreign article. And when a greater duty is laid upon the latter than
upon the former, as in the present instance, the difference is a bounty on the
domestic article, and operates as an encouragement of the manufacture. The
manufacturer can afford to sell his fabric the cheaper, in proportion to that
difference, and is so far enabled to undersell and supplant the dealer in the
foreign article.

The principle of the objection would tend to confine all taxes to imported
articles, and would deprive the government of resources which are indispensible
to a due provision for the public safety and welfare; contrary to the plain
intention of the constitution, which gives express power to employ those
resources when necessary; a power which is found in all governments, and is
essential to their efficiency, and even to their existence.

Duties on articles of internal production and manufacture form in every
country the principal sources of revenue. Those on imported articles can only
be carried to a certain extent, without defeating their object; by operating
either as prohibitions; or as bounties upon smuggling. They are moreover in
some degree temporary; for as the growth of manufactures diminishes the quantum
of duty on imports, the public revenue, ceasing to arise from that source, must
be derived f^^m articles which the national industry has substituted for those
previously imported. If the government cannot then resort to internal means for
the additional supplies, which the exigencies of every nation call for, it will
be unable to perform its duty or even to preserve its existence. The community
must be unprotected, and the social compact be dissolved.

For the same reasons, that a duty ought not to be laid on an article
manufactured out of the produce of the country (which is the point most
insisted upon) it ought not to be laid upon the produce itself, nor
consequently upon the land, which is the instrument of that produce; because
taxes are laid upon land as the fund out of which the income of the proprietor
is drawn, or, in other words, on account of its produce. There ought,
therefore, on the principle of the objection, to be neither taxes on land nor
on the produce of land, nor on articles manufactured from that produce. And if
a nation should be in a condition to supply itself, with its own manufactures,
there could then be very little or no revenue, of course there must be a want
of the essential means of national justice and national security.

Positions like these, however well meant by those who urge them, refute
themselves, because they tend to the dissolution of government, by rendering it
incapable of providing for the objects for which it is instituted.

However true the allegation that it is and ought to be the prevailing policy
of nations to cherish their own manufactures, it is equally true that nations
in general lay duties for the purpose of revenue on their own manufactures; and
it is obvious to a demonstration that it may be done without injury to them.
The most successful nations in manufactures have drawn the largest revenues
from the most useful of them. It merits particular attention, that ardent
spirits are an article, which has been generally deemed and made use of, as one
of the fittest objects of revenue, and to an extent in other countries, which
bears no comparison with what has been done in the United States.

The special reasons alluded to are of different kinds. --

I. It is said, that the act in question by laying a smaller additional duty on
foreign spirits, than the duty on home-made spirits, has a tendency to
discourage the manufacture of the latter.

This objection merits consideration, and as far as it may appear to have
foundation ought to be obviated.

The point however seems not to have been viewed in all respects in a correct
light.

Before the present constitution of the United States began to operate, the
regulations of the different states, respecting distilled spirits were very
dissimilar. In some of them, duties were laid on foreign spirits only, in
others, on domestic as well as foreign. The absolute duty in the former
instances, and the difference of duty in the latter, was upon an average,
considerably less than the present difference in the duties on foreign and
home-made spirits. If to this be added the effect of the uniform operation of
the existing duties throughout the United States, it is easy to infer that the
situation of our own distilleries is, in the main, much better, as far as they
are affected by the laws, than it was previous to the passing of any act of the
United States upon the subject. They have therefore upon the whole gained
materially under the system which has been pursued by the national government.

The first law of the United States on this head laid a duty of no more than
eight cents per gallon on those of Jamaica proof. The second increased the duty
on foreign spirits to twelve cents per gallon of the lowest proof, and by
certain gradations to fifteen cents per gallon of Jamaica proof. The last act
places the duty at twenty cents per gallon of the lowest proof, and extends it
by the like gradations to twenty-five cents per gallon of Jamaica proof, laying
also a duty of eleven cents per gallon on home-made spirits distilled from
foreign materials of the lowest proof, with a like gradual extension to fifteen
cents per gallon of Jamaica proof; and a duty of nine cents per gallon on
home-made spirits distilled from domestic materials of the lowest proof, with
the like gradual extension to thirteen cents per gallon of Jamaica proof.

If the transition had been immediate from the first to the last law, it could
not have failed to have been considered as a change in favor of our own
distilleries, as far as the rate of duty is concerned. The mean duty on foreign
spirits by the first law was nine cents, by the last the mean extra-duty on
foreign spirits is in fact about eleven cents, as it regards spirits distilled
from foreign materials, and about thirteen, as it regards spirits distilled
from domestic materials. In making this computation it is to be adverted to,
that the four first degrees of proof mentioned in the law correspond with the
different kinds of spirits usually imported, while the generality of those made
in the United States are of the lowest class of proof.

Spirits from domestic materials derived a double advantage from the last law,
that is, from the increased rate of duty on foreign imported spirits, and from
a higher rate of duty on home-made spirits of foreign materials.

But the intervention of the second law has served to produce in some places a
different impression of the business, than would have happened without it. By a
considerable addition to the duties on foreign spirits, without laying any
thing on those of home manufacture, it has served to give to the last law the
appearance of taking away a part of the advantages previously secured to the
domestic distilleries. It seems to have been overlooked, that the second act
ought in reality to be reviewed only as an intermediate step to the arrangement
finally contemplated by the legislature; and that as part of a system, it has
upon the whole operated in favor of the national distilleries. The thing to be
considered is the substantial existing difference in favor of the home
manufacture, as the law now stands.

The advantage, indeed, to the distillation of spirits from the produce of the
country arising from the difference between the duties on spirits distilled
from foreign and those distilled from domestic materials, is exclusively the
work of the last act, and is an advantage which has not been properly
appreciated by those distillers of spirits from home produce, who have
complained of the law, as hurtful to their manufacture.

Causes entirely foreign to the law itself have also assisted in producing
misapprehension. The approximation of the price of home-made spirits to that of
foreign spirits, which has of late taken place, and which is attributed to the
operation of the act in question is in a great degree owing to the
circumstances, which have tended to raise the price of molasses in the
West India market, and to an extra-importation of foreign spirits prior to the
first of July last, to avoid the payment of the additional duty which then took
place.

It is stated in the petition from Salem, that previous to the last act, the
price of domestic to foreign spirits was as 1 s9 to 3 s4, of the money of
Massachusetts, per gallon, and that since that act it has become as 3 s3 to 4
s2.

It is evident that a rise from 1 s9 to 3 s3 per gallon, which would be equal
to 20 cents, is not to be attributed wholly to a duty of eleven cents. Indeed
if there were a concurrence of no other cause, the inference would be very
different from that intended to be drawn from the fact, for it would evince a
profit gained to the distiller of more than eighty per cent. on the duty.

It is however meant to be understood, that this approximation of prices
occasions a greater importation and consumption of foreign, and a less
consumption of domestic spirits than formerly. How far this may or may not be
the case, the Secretary is not now able to say with precision; but no facts
have come under his notice officially, which serve to authenticate the
suggestion. And it must be considered, as possible, that representations of
this kind, are rather the effect of appprehension than of experience. It would
even be not unnatural, that a considerable enhancement of the prices of the
foreign article should have led to a greater consumption of the domestic
article, as the cheapest of the two, though dearer itself than formerly.

But while there is ground to believe that the suggestions which have been made
on this point are in many respects inaccurate and misconceived, there are known
circumstances, which seem to render advisable, some greater difference between
the duties on foreign and on home-made spirits. These circumstances have been
noticed in the report of the Secretary on the subject of manufactures, and an
alteration has been proposed by laying two cents in additition upon imported
spirits of the lowest proof, with a proportional increase on the higher proofs,
and by deducting one cent from the duty on the lowest proof of home made
spirits, with a proportional diminution in respect to the higher proofs.

This alteration would bring the proportion of the duties nearly to the
standard, which the petitioner Hendrick Doyer, who appears likely to be well
informed on the subject, represents as the proper one to enable the
distillation of geneva to be carried on with ^he same advantage as before the
passing of the act. He observes that the duty on home-made geneva being 9 cents
the additional duty on foreign ought to have been 12 cents. By the alteration
proposed, the proportion will be as 10 to 8 which is little different to that
of 12 to 9.

It is worthy of remark, that the same petitioner states, that previous to the
passing of the act, of which he complains, he "could sell his geneva 16 per
cent. under the price of Holland geneva, but that he cannot do it at present,
and in future lower, than 14 per cent." If, as he also states, the quality of
his geneva be equal to that of Holland, and if his meaning be as it appears to
be, that he can now afford to sell his geneva lower by 14 per cent. than the
geneva of Holland, it will follow that the manufacture of that article is in a
very thriving train, even under the present rate of duties. For a difference of
14 per cent. in the price is capable of giving a decided preference to the sale
of the domestic article.

II. It is objected that the duty, by being laid in the first instance upon the
distiller, instead of the consumer, makes a larger capital necessary to carry
on the business, and in this country, where capitals are not large, puts the
national distillers under disadvantages.

But this inconvenience, as far as it has foundation, in the state of things,
is essentially obviated by the credits given. Where the duty is payable upon
the quantity distilled, a credit is allowed, which cannot be less than six, and
may extend to nine months. Where the duty is charged on the capacity of the
still, it is payable half yearly. Sufficient time is therefore allowed to raise
the duty from the sale of the article, which supersedes the necessity of a
greater capital. It is well known, that the article is one usually sold for
cash, or at short credit. If these observations are not applicable to
distilleries in the interior country, the same may be said in a great degree of
the objection itself. The course of the business in that quarter, renders a
considerable capital less necessary than elsewhere. The produce of the
distillers own farm, or of the neighboring farms, brought to be distilled upon
shares or compensations in the article itself, constitute the chief business of
the distilleries in the remote parts of the country. In the comparatively few
instances, in which they may be prosecuted as a regular business, upon a large
scale, by force of capital, the observations which have been made will
substantially apply.

The collection of the duty from the distiller has, on the other hand, several
advantages. It contributes to equality, by charging the article in the first
stage of its progress, which diffuses the duty among all classes alike. It the
better secures the collection of the revenue, by confining the responsibility
to a smaller number of persons, and simplifying the process. And it avoids the
necessity of so great a number of officers as would be required in a more
diffuse system of collection, operating immediately upon purchasers and
consumers. Besides, that the latter plan would transfer whatever
inconveniences may be incident to the collection, from a smaller to a greater
number of persons.

III. It is alleged that the inspection of the officers is injurious to the
business of distilling, by laying open its secrets or mysteries.

Different distillers, there is no doubt, practice, in certain respects,
different methods in the course of their business, and have different degrees
of skill. But it may well be doubted whether in a business so old and so much
diffused as that of the distillation of spirits, there are, at this day,
secrets of consequence to the possessors.

There will at least be no hazard in taking it for granted, that none such
exist in regard to the distillation of rum from molasses or sugar, or of the
spirits from grain usually called whiskey, or of brandies from the fruits of
this country. The cases in which the allegations are made with most color,
apply to geneva, and perhaps to certain cordials.

It is probable, that the course of the business might and would always be
such, as in fact to involve no inconvenience on this score. But as the contrary
is affirmed, and as it is desirable to obviate complaint as far as it can be
done, consistently with essential principles and objects, it may not be
unadvisable to attempt a remedy.

It is to be presumed, that if any secrets exist, they relate to a primary
process, particularly the mixture of the ingredients; this, it is supposeable,
cannot take a greater time each day, than two hours. If therefore, the officers
of inspection were enjoined to forbear their visits to the part of the
distillery commonly made use of for such process, during a space not exceeding
two hours each day to be notified by the distiller, there is ground to conclude
that it would obviate the objection.

IV. The regulations for marking of casks and vessels, as well as houses and
buildings, also furnish matter of complaint.

This complaint, as it regards houses and buildings, has been already adverted
to: But there is a light in which it is made that has not yet been taken notice
of.

It is said that the requiring the doors of the apartments as well as the outer
door of each building to be marked, imposes unnecessary trouble.

When it is considered how little trouble or expense attends the execution of
this provision, in the first instance, and that the marks once set will endure
for a great length of time, the objection to it appears to be without weight.

But the provision, as it relates to the apartments of buildings, has for its
immediate object the convenience of the distillers themselves. It is calculated
to avoid the very evil of an indiscriminate search of their houses and
buildings, by enabling them to designate the particular apartments, which are
employed for the purposes of their business, and to secure all others from
inspection and visitation.

The complaint, as it respects the marking of casks and vessels, has somewhat
more foundation. It is represented (and upon careful enquiry appears to be
true) that through long established prejudice, home-made spirits of equal
quality with foreign, if known to be home-made, will not command an equal
price. This particularly applies to geneva.

If the want of a distinction between foreign and home-made spirits were an
occasion of fraud upon consumers, by imposing a worse for a better commodity,
it would be a reason for continuing it; but as far as such a distinction gives
operation to a mere prejudice, favorable to a foreign, and injurious to a
domestic manufacture, it furnishes a reason for abolishing it.

Though time might be expected to remove the prejudice, the progress of the
domestic manufacture, in the interval, might be materially checked.

It appears therefore expedient to remove this ground of complaint by
authorizing the same marks and certificates, both for foreign and for home made
geneva.

Perhaps indeed it may not be unadviseable to vest somewhere a discretionary
power to regulate the forms of certificates, which are to accompany, and the
particular marks, which are to be set upon casks and vessels containing
spirits, generally, as may be found convenient in practice.

Another source of objection with regard to the marking of casks is, that there
is a general prohibition against defacing, or altering the marks, and a penalty
upon doing it, which prevents the using of the same casks more than once, and
occasions waste, loss and embarrassment.

It is conceived, that this prohibition does not extend to the effacing of old
marks and placing of new ones by the officers of the revenue, or in their
presence and by their authority. But as real inconveniences would attend a
contrary construction, and there is some room for question, it appears
desirable that all doubt should be removed, by an explicit provision to enable
the officer to efface old marks and substitute new ones, when casks have been
emptied of their former contents, and are wanted for new use.

V. The requisition to keep an account from day to day of the quantity of
spirits distilled is represented both as a hardship and impossible to be
complied with.

But the Secretary is unable to perceive that it can justly be viewed either in
the one or in the other light. The trouble of setting down in the evening the
work of the day, in a book prepared for and furnished to the party must be
inconsiderable, and the doing of it would even conduce to accuracy in business.

The idea of impracticability must have arisen from some misconception. It
seems to involve a supposition that something is required different from the
truth of the fact. Spirits distilled are usually distinguished into high wines,
proof spirits, and low wines. It is certainly possible to express each day the
quantity of each kind produced, and where one kind is converted into another,
to explain it by brief notes, showing in proper columns the results in those
kinds of spirits which are ultimately prepared for sale.

A revision is now making of the forms at first transmitted, and it is not
doubted that it will be easy to obviate the objection of impracticability.

On full reflection the Secretary is of opinion, that the requisition in this
respect is a reasonable one, and that it is of importance to the due collection
of the revenue, especially in those cases, where, by the alternative allowed in
favor of country distilleries, the oath of a party is the only evidence of the
quantity produced. It is useful in every such case to give the utmost possible
precision to the object which is to be attested.

VI. It is alleged as a hardship, that distillers are held responsible for the
duties on spirits which are exported, till certain things difficult to be
performed are done, in order to entitle the exporter to the drawback.

This is a misapprehension. The drawback is at all events to be paid in six
months, which is as early as the duty can become payable, and frequently
earlier than it does become payable. And the government relies on the bond of
the exporter for a fulfillment of the conditions upon which the drawback is
allowed.

An explanation to the several collectors of this point, which has taken place
since the complaint appeared, will have removed the cause of it.

The same explanation will obviate another objection founded on the supposition
that the bond of the distiller and that of the exporter are for a like purpose.
The latter is merely to secure the landing of the goods in a foreign country,
and will often continue depending after every thing relative to duty and
drawback has been liquidated and finished.

VII. It is an article of complaint that no drawback is allowed in case of
shipwreck when spirits are sent from one port to another in the United States.

There does not occur any objection to a provision for making an allowance of
that kind, which would tend to alleviate misfortune and give satisfaction.

VIII. The necessity of twenty-four hours notice, in order to the benefit of
drawback on the exportation of spirits, and the prohibition to remove them from
a distillery after sunset, except in the presence of an officer, are
represented as embarrassments to business.

The length of notice required appears greater than is necessary. It is not
perceived, that any inconvenience would arise, from reducing the time to six
hours.

But it is not conceived to be necessary or expedient to make an alteration in
the last mentioned particular. The prohibition is of real consequence to the
security of the revenue. The course of business will readily adapt itself to
it, and the presence of an officer in extraordinary cases will afford due
accommodation.

IX. It is stated as a hardship, that there is no allowance for leakage and
wastage in the case of spirits shipped from one state to another.

The law for the collection of the duties on imports and tonnage allows two per
cent. for leakage on spirits imported. A similar allowance on home made spirits
at the distillery, does not appear less proper.

X. It is mentioned as a grievance, that distillers are required to give bond
with surety for the amount of the duties, and that the sufficiency of the
surety is made to depend on the discretion of the chief officer of inspection.

The requiring of sureties can be no more a hardship on distillers than on
importing merchants, and every other person to whom the public afford a credit.
It is a natural consequence of the credit allowed; and a very reasonable
condition of the indulgence, which without this precaution might be imprudent,
and injurious to the United States.

The party has his option to avoid it by prompt payment o^ the duty, and is
even entitled to an abatement, which may be considered as a premium if he
elects to do so.

As to the second point, if sureties are to be given, there must be some person
on the part of the government to judge of their sufficiency, otherwise the
thing itself would be nugatory; and the discretion cannot be vested more
conveniently for the party than in the chief officer of inspection for the
survey.

A view has now been taken of most, if not of all, the objections of a general
nature, which have appeared.

Some few of a local complexion remain to be attended to.

The representation signed Edward Cook, chairman, as on behalf of the four most
western counties of Pennsylvania, states, that the distance of that part of the
country from a market for its produce leads to a necessity of distilling the
grain, which is raised, as a principal dependence of its inhabitants; which
circumstance and the scarcity of cash combine to render the tax in question
unequal, oppressive, and particularly distressing to them.

As to the circumstance of equality, it may safely be affirmed to be
impracticable to devise a tax which shall operate with exact equality upon
every part of the community. Local and other circumstances will inevitably
create disparities more or less great.

Taxes on consumable articles have upon the whole better pretensions to
equality than any other. If some of them fall more heavily on particular parts
of the community, others of them are chiefly borne by other parts. And the
result is an equalization of the burden as far as is attainable. Of this class
of taxes it is not easy to conceive one which can operate with greater equality
than a tax on distilled spirits. There appears to be no article, as far as the
information of the Secretary goes, which is an object of more equal consumption
throughout the United States.

In particular districts a greater use of cider may occasion a smaller
consumption of spirits; but it will not be found on a close examination that it
makes a material difference. A greater or less use of ardent spirits, as far as
it exists, seems to depend more on relative habits of sobriety or intemperance
than on any other cause.

As far as habits of less moderation, in the use of distilled spirits, should
produce inequality any where, it would certainly not be a reason with the
legislature either to repeal or lessen a tax, which by rendering the article
dearer might tend to restrain too free an indulgence of such habits.

It is certainly not obvious how this tax can operate particularly unequally
upon the part of the country in question. As a general rule it is a true one,
that duties on articles of consumption fall on the consumers, by being added to
the price of the commodity. This is illustrated in the present instance by
facts. Previous to the law laying a duty on home made spirits the price of
whiskey was about thirty-eight cents; it is now about fifty-six cents. Other
causes may have contributed in some degree to this effect, but it is evidently
to be ascribed chiefly to the duty.

Unless, therefore, the inhabitants of the counties, which have been mentioned
are greater consumers of spirits, than those of other parts of the country,
they cannot pay a greater proportion of the tax. If they are, it is their
interest to become less so. It depends on themselves by diminishing the
consumption to restore equality.

The argument, that they are obliged to convert their grain into spirits in
order to transportation to distant markets, does not prove the point alleged.
The duty on all they send to those markets will be paid by the purchasers. They
will still pay only upon their own consumption.

As far as an advance is laid upon the duty, or as far as the difference o^
duty between whiskey and other spirits tends to favor a greater consumption of
the latter, they as greater manufacturers of the article, supposing this fact
to be as stated, will be proportionably benefited.

The duty on home made spirits from domestic materials, if paid by the gallon,
is nine cents. From the communications which have been received, since the
passing of the act, it appears, that paying the rate annexed to the capacity of
the still, and using great diligence, the duty may be in fact reduced to six
cents per gallon. Let the average be taken at seven and a half cents which is
probably higher than is really paid.

Generally speaking, then, for every gallon of whiskey which is consumed, the
consumer may be supposed to pay seven and a half cents; but for every gallon of
spirits distilled from foreign materials the consumer pays at least eleven
cents, and for every gallon of foreign spirits at least twenty cents. The
consumer therefore of foreign spirits pays nearly three times the duty, and the
consumer of home made spirits from foreign materials nearly fifty per cent.
more duty, on the same quantity, than the consumer of spirits from domestic
materials, exclusive of the greater price in both cases, which is an additional
charge upon each of the two first mentioned classes of consumers.

When it is considered that ^/21 parts of the whole quantity of spirits
consumed in the United States are foreign, and 7/21 parts are of foreign
materials, and that the inhabitants of the Atlantic and mid-land countries are
the principal consumers of these more highly taxed articles, it cannot be
inferred, that the tax under consideration bears particularly hard on the
inhabitants of the western country.

This may serve as an exemplification of a general proposition of material
consequence, namely, that, if the former descriptions of citizens are able from
situation to obtain more for their produce that the latter, they contribute
proportionally more to the revenue. Numerous other examples in confirmation of
this might be adduced.

As to the circumstance of scarcity of money, as far as it can be supposed to
have foundation, it is as much an objection to any other tax as to the one in
question. The weight of the tax is not certainly such as to involve any
peculiar difficulty. It is impossible to conceive that nine cents per gallon on
distilled spirits, which is stating it at the highest, can from the magnitude
of the tax, distress any part of the country, which has an ability to pay taxes
at all, enjoying too the unexampled advantage of a total exemption from taxes
on houses, lands or stock.

The population of the United States being about 4,000,000 of persons, and the
quantity of spirits annually consumed between ten and eleven millions of
gallons, the yearly proportion to each family, if consisting of six persons,
which is a full ratio, would be about sixteen gallons, the duty upon which
would be less than one dollar and a half. The citizen who is able to maintain a
family, and who is the owner or occupier of a farm, cannot feel any
inconvenience from so light a contribution, and the industrious poor, whether
artisans or laborers are usually allowed spirits or an equivalent in addition
to their wages.

The Secretary has no evidence to satisfy his mind, that a real scarcity of
money will be found, on experiment, a serious impediment to the payment of the
tax any where. In the quarter where this complaint has particularly prevailed,
the expenditures for the defense of the frontier would seem alone sufficient to
obviate it. To this it is answered, that the contractors for the supply of the
army operate with goods and not with money: But this still tends to keep at
home whatever money finds its way there. Nor is it a fact, if the information
of the Secretary be not materially erroneous, that the purchases of the
contractors of flour, meat, etc. are wholly with goods. But if they were, the
Secretary can aver, that more money has in the course of the last year been
sent into the western country from the treasury, in specie, and bank bills
which answer the same purpose, for the pay of the troops and militia, and for
quarter masters supplies, than the whole amount of the tax in the four western
counties of Pennsylvania and the district of Kentucky is likely to equal in
four or five years. Similar remittances are likely to be made in future.

Hence the government itself furnishes, and in all probability will continue to
furnish, the means of paying its own demands, with a surplus which will
sensibly foster the industry of the parties concerned, if they avail themselves
of it under the guidance of a spirit of economy and exertion.

Whether there be no part of the United States, in which the objection of want
of money may truly exist, in a degree to render the payment of the duty
seriously distressing to the inhabitants, the Secretary is not able to
pronounce. He can only express his own doubt of the fact, and refer the matter
to such information as the members of any district so situated, may have it in
their power to offer to the legislative body.

Should the case appear to exist, it would involve the necessity of a measure
in the abstract very ineligible, that is the receipt of the duty in the article
itself.

If an alternative of this sort were to be allowed, it would be proper to make
it the duty of the party paying, to deliver the article at the place in each
county where the office of inspection is kept, and to regulate the price
according to such a standard, as would induce a preference of paying in cash
except from a real impracticability of obtaining it.

In regard to the petition from the district of Kentucky, after what has been
said with reference to other applications, it can only be necessary to observe
that the exemption which is sought by that petition, is rendered impracticable
by an express provision of the constitution, which declares, that all duties,
imposts and excises shall be uniform throughout the United States.

In the course of the foregoing examination of the objections which have been
made to the law, some alterations have been submitted for the purpose of
removing a part of them. The Secretary will now proceed to submit such farther
alterations as appear to him advisable, arising either from the suggestions of
the officers of the revenue or from his own reflections.

I. It appears expedient to alter the distinction respecting distilleries from
domestic materials in cities, towns and villages, so as to confine it to one or
more stills worked at the same distillery, the capacity or capacities of which
together do not fall short of four hundred gallons.

The effectual execution of the present provisions respecting distilleries from
home materials in cities, towns and villages, would occasion an inconvenient
multiplication of officers, and would in too great a degree exhaust the product
of the duty in the expense of collection. It is also probable that the
alteration suggested would also conduce to public satisfaction.

II. The present provisions concerning the entering of stills are found by
experience not to be adequate, and in some instances not convenient.

It appears advisable, that there shall be one office of inspection for each
county, with authority to the supervisor to establish more than one, if he
shall judge it necessary for the accommodation of the inhabitants; and that
every distiller or person having or keeping a still, shall be required to make
entry of the same, at some office of inspection for the county, within a
certain determinate period in each year. It will be proper also to enjoin upon
every person, who residing within the county, shall procure a still, or who
removing into a county, shall bring into it a still, within twenty days after
such procuring or removal, and before he or she begins to use the still, to
make entry at the office of inspection. Every entry besides describing the
still, should specify in whose possession it is, and the purpose for which it
is intended, as whether for sale or for use in distilling; and in the case of a
removal of the person from another place into the county, shall specify the
place from which the still shall have been brought. A forfeiture of the still
ought in every case in which an entry is required, to attend an omission to
enter.

This regulation by simplifying the business of entering stills, would render
it easier to comprehend and comply with what is required, would furnish the
officers with a better rule for ascertaining delinquencies, and, by avoiding to
them a considerable degree of unnecessary trouble will facilitate the retaining
of proper characters in the offices of collectors.

III. It is represented that difficulties have in some instances arisen
concerning the persons responsible for the duty. The apparent, not being always
the real proprietor, an opportunity for collusion is afforded; and without
collusion the uncertainty is stated as a source of embarrassment.

It also sometimes happens, that certain itinerant persons without property,
complying with the preliminary requisitions of the law as to entry, etc. erect
and work stills for a time, and before a half yearly period of payment arrives,
remove and evade the duty.

It would tend to remedy these inconveniences, if possessors and proprietors of
stills were made jointly and severally liable, and if the duty were made a
specific lieu on the still itself; if also the proprietor of the land, upon
which any still may be worked should be made answerable for the duty, except
where it is worked by a lawful and bona fide tenant of the land of an estate
not less than for a term of one year, or unless such proprietor can make it
appear, that the possessor of the still was during the whole time without his
privity or connivance an intruder or trespasser on the land; and if in the last
place any distiller about to remove from the division in which he is, should be
required previous to such removal to pay the tax for the year, deducting any
prior payments, or give bond with approved surety, conditioned for the payment
of the full sum for which he or she should be legally accountable to the end of
the year, to the collector of the division to which the removal shall be,
rendering proof thereof under the hand of the said collector, within six months
after the expiration of the year.

As well with a view to the forfeiture of the stills for non-entry, as to give
effect to a specific lieu of the duty (if either or both of these provisions
should be deemed eligible) it will be necessary to enjoin it upon the officers
of the revenue to identify by proper marks the several stills which shall have
been entered with them.

IV. The exemptions granted to stills of the capacity of fifty gallons and
under, by the 36th section of the law, appear from experience to require
revision. Tending to produce inequality, as well as to frustrate the revenue,
they have excited complaint. It appears at least advisable, that the
obligation to enter, as connected with that of paying duty, should extend to
stills of all dimensions, and that it should be enforced in every case by the
same penalty.

V. The 28th section of the act makes provision for the seizure of spirits
unaccompanied with marks and certificates in the cases in which they are
required; but as they are required only in certain cases, and there is no
method of distinguishing the spirits, in respect to which they are necessary,
from those in respect to which they are not necessary, the provision becomes
nugatory, because an attempt to enforce it would be oppressive. Hence not only
a great security for the due execution of the law is lost, but seizures very
distressing to unoffending individuals must happen notwithstanding great
precaution to avoid them.

It would be, in the opinion of the Secretary of great importance to provide,
that all spirits whatsoever, in casks or vessels of the capacity of twenty
gallons and upwards should be marked and certified, on pain of seizure and
forfeiture, making it the duty of the officers to furnish the requisite
certificates gratis to distillers and dealers in all cases, in which the law
shall have been complied with.

In those cases in which an occasion at recurrence to the officers for
certificates might be inconvenient, blanks may be furnished to be accounted
for. And it may be left to the parties themselves in the like cases to mark
their own casks or vessels in some simple manner to be defined in the law.
These cases may be designated generally. They will principally relate to
dealers, who in the course of their business draw off spirits from larger to
smaller casks, and to distillers who pay according to the capacities of their
stills.

As a part of a regulation of this sort it will be necessary to require, that
within a certain period, sufficiently long to admit of time to know and comply
with the provision, entry shall be made, by all dealers and distillers, of all
spirits in their respective possessions, which shall not have been previously
marked and certified according to law, in order that they may be marked and
certified as old stock.

The regulations here proposed though productive of some trouble and
inconvenience in the outset, will be afterward a security both to individuals
and to the revenue.

VI. At present spirits may not be imported from abroad in casks of less
capacity than fifty gallons. The size of these casks is smaller than is
desirable, so far as the security of the revenue is concerned, and there has
not occurred any good objection to confining the importation to larger casks,
that is to say, to casks of not less than ninety gallons. Certainly as far as
respects rum from the West Indies it may be done without inconvenience, being
conformable to the general course of business. The result of examination is
that the exception as to this particular in favor of gin may be abolished.
Should any alteration on this subject take place it ought not to begin to
operate till after the expiration of a year.

VII. There is ground to suppose, that the allowance of drawback without any
limitation as to quantity has been abused. It is submitted that none be made on
any less quantity than one hundred and fifty gallons.

VIII. There is danger that facility may be given to illicit importations, by
making use of casks which have been once regularly marked, and the certificates
which have been issued with them to cover other spirits than those originally
contained in such casks. Appearances which countenance suspicion on this point
have been the subjects of representation from several quarters.

The danger may be obviated by prohibiting the importation in such marked casks
on pain of forfeiture, both of the spirits and of any ship or vessel in which
they may be brought. A prohibition of this sort does not appear liable to any
good objection.

IX. The duty of sixty cents per gallon of the capacity of a still was founded
upon a computation, that a still of any given dimensions worked four months in
the year, which is the usual period of country distillation, would yield a
quantity of spirits which at the rate of nine cents per gallon, would
correspond with sixty cents per gallon of the capacity of the still. It will
deserve consideration, whether it will not be expedient to give an option to
country distillers, at the annual entry of their stills, to take out a license
for any portion of the year, which they may respectively think fit, and to pay
at the rate of 12 cents per gallon of the capacity, per month, during such
period. This to stand in lieu of the alternative of paying by the gallon
distilled. It would obviate in this case the necessity of accounting upon oath,
and would leave it in the power of each distiller to cover the precise time he
meant to work his still with a license, and to pay for that time only. A strict
prohibition to distill at any other time, than that for which the license was
given, would be of course necessary to accompany the regulation as far as
regarded any such licensed distiller.

The only remaining points which have occurred, as proper to be submitted to
the consideration of the legislature, respects the officers of the revenue.

It is represented, that in some instances, from the ill humor of individuals,
the officers have experienced much embarrassment, in respect to the filling of
stills with water, to ascertain their capacity, which upon examination is found
the most simple and practicable mode. The proprietors have in some instances
not only refused to aid the officers, but have even put out of their way the
means by which the filling might be conveniently accomplished.

It would conduce to the easy execution of the law, and to the very important
purpose of retaining and procuring respectable characters as collectors, if the
proprietors and possessors of stills were required to aid them in the execution
of this part of their duty, or to pay a certain sum as a compensation for the
doing of it.

The limits assigned in the law respecting compensations are found in practice
essentially inadequate to the object.

This is so far the case, that it becomes the duty of the Secretary to state,
that greater latitude in this particular is indispensible to the effectual
execution of the law.

In the most productive DIVISIONS the commissions of the collectors afford but
a moderate compensation. In the greatest part of THEM the compensation is
glaringly disproportioned to the service, in many of them it falls materially
short of the expense of the officer.

It is believed, that in no country whatever has the collection of a similar
duty been effected within the limit assigned. Applying in the United States to
a single article only, and yielding consequently a less total product than
where many articles are comprehended, the expense of collection must of
necessity be proportionally greater.

It appears to the Secretary that 7 per cent. of the total product of the
duties on distilled spirits, foreign as well as domestic, and not less will
suffice to defray the compensations to officers and other expenses incidental
to the collection of the duty. This is to be understood as supplemental to the
present custom-house expenses.

It is unnecessary to urge to the House of Representatives, how essential it
must be to the execution of the law in a manner effectual to the purposes of
the government and satisfactory to the community, to secure by competent,
though moderate rewards, the diligent services of respectable and trust-worthy
characters.

All which is humbly submitted. ALEXANDER HAMILTON, Secretary of the Treasury.
TREASURY DEPARTMENT, March 5 th, 1792.

