

THE YOUNG LADY'S PARENTAL MONITOR:

CONTAINING,

I. Dr. GREGORY'S FATHER'S LEGACY TO HIS DAUGHTERS. II. LADY PENNINGTON'S
UNFORTUNATE MOTHER'S ADVICE TO HER ABSENT DAUGHTERS. III. MARCHIONESS DE
LAMBERT'S ADVICE OF A MOTHER TO HER DAUGHTER.
LONDON: PRINTED: HARTFORD, Reprinted, and Sold BY, NATHANIEL PATTEN,
M.DCC.XCII.

A FATHER'S LEGACY TO HIS DAUGHTERS. BY THE LATE Dr. GREGORY, OF EDINBURGH.
PREFACE.
THAT the subsequent Letters were written by a tender father, in a declining
state of health, for the instruction of his daughters, and not intended for the
Public, is a circumstance which will recommend them to every one who considers
them in the light of admonition and advice. In such domestic intercourse, no
sacrifices are made to prejudices, to customs, to fashionable opinions.
Paternal love, paternal care, speak their genuine sentiments, undisguised and
unrestrained. A father's zeal for his daughter's improvement, in whatever can
make a woman amiable, with a father's quick apprehension of the dangers that
too often arise, even from the attainment of that very point, suggest his
admonitions, and render him attentive to a thousand little graces and little
decorums, which would escape the nicest moralist who should undertake the
subject on uninterested speculation. Every faculty is on the alarm, when the
objects of such tender affection are concerned.

In the writer of these Letters paternal (...) and vigilance were doubted, as
he was at (...) sole parent; death having before deprived, the young ladies of
their excellent mother. His own precarious state of health inspired him with
the most tender solicitude for their future welfare; and though he might have
(...) that the impression on made by his instruction and uniform example could
never be effaced from the memory of his children, yet his anxiety for their
orphan condition suggested to him this method of continuing to them those
advantages.

The Editor is encouraged to offer this Treatise to the Public, by the very
favorable reception which the rest of his father's works have met with. The
Comparative View of the State of Man and other Animals, and the Essay on the
Office and Duties of a Physician, have been very generally read; and, if he is
not deceived by the partiality of his friends, he has reason to believe they
have met with general approbation.

In some of those tracts the Author's object was to improve the taste and
understanding of his reader; in others, to mend his heart; in others, to point
out to him the proper use of philosophy, by showing its application to the
duties of common life. In all his writings his chief view was the good of his
fellow creatures; and as those among his friends, in whose taste and judgment
he most confided, think the publication of this small work will contribute to
that general design, and at the same time do honor to his memory, the Editor
can no longer hesitate to comply with their advice in communicating it to the
Public.

THE CONTENTS.
Introduction, 10 Religion, 13 Conduct and Behavior, 18 Amusements, 24
Friendship, Love, Marriage, 30
A FATHER's LEGACY TO HIS DAUGHTERS.
MY DEAR GIRLS,
YOU had the misfortune to be deprived of your mother at a time of life when
you were insensible of your loss, and could receive little benefit either from
her instruction or her example. Before this comes to your hands, you will
likewise have lost your father.

I have had many melancholy reflections on the forlorn and helpless situation
you must be in, i^ it should please God to remove me from you, before you
arrive at that period of life when you will be able to think and act for
yourselves. I know mankind too well: I know their falsehood, their dissipation,
their coldness to all the duties of friendship and humanity. I know the little
attention paid to helpless infancy. You will meet with few friends
disinterested enough to do you good offices, when you are incapable of making
them any return, by contributing to their interest or their pleasure, or even
to the gratification of their vanity.

I have been supported under the gloom naturally arising from these
reflections, by a reliance on the goodness of that Providence which has
hitherto preserved you, and given me the most pleasing prospect of the goodness
of your dispositions; and by the secret hope that your mother's virtues will
entail a blessing on her children.

The anxiety I have for your happiness, has made me resolve to throw together
my sentiments relating to your future conduct in life. If I live for some
years, you will receive them with much greater advantage, suited to your
different geniuses and dispositions. If I die sooner, you must receive them in
this very imperfect manner, -- the last proof of my affection.

You will all remember your father's fondness, when perhaps every other
circumstance relating to him is forgotten. This remembrance, I hope, will
induce you to give a serious attention to the advices I am now going to leave
with you. I can request this attention with the greater confidence, as my
sentiments on the most interesting points that regard life and manners, were
entirely correspondent to your mother's whose judgment and taste I trusted much
more than my own.

You must expect that the advices which I shall give you will be very
imperfect, as there are many nameless delicacies in female manners of which
none but a woman can judge. You will have one advantage by attending to what I
am going to leave with you; you will hear, at least for once in your lives, the
ginuine sentiments of a man who has no interest in flattering or deceiving you.
I shall throw my reflections together without any studied order, and shall
only, avoid confusion, range them under a few (...) hea^.

You will see, in a little Treatise of mine just published, in what an
honorable point of view I have considered your sex; not as domestic dru^^es,
or the slaves of our pleasures, but as our ^^mpanions and equals; as designed
to soften our (...) and polish our manners; and as Thomson finely says, To
raise the virtues, (...) the bliss,
And sweeten all the toils (...) human life.


I shall not repeat what I have there said on this subject, and shall only
observe, that from the view I have given of your natural character and place in
society, there arises a certain propriety of conduct peculiar to your sex. It
is this peculiar propriety of female manners of which I intend to give you my
sentiments, without touching on those general rules o^ conduct by which men and
women are equally bound.

While I explain to you that system of conduct which I think will tend most to
your honor and happiness, I shall, at the same time, endeavor to point out
those virtues and accomplishments which render you most respectable and most
amiable in the eyes of my own sex.

RELIGION.
THOUGH the duties of religion, strictly speaking, are equally binding on both
sexes, yet certain differences in their natural character and education, render
some vices in your sex particularly odious. The natural hardness of our hearts,
and strength of our passions, inflamed by the uncontrouled license we are too
often indulged with in our youth, are apt to render our manners more dissolute,
and make us less susceptible of the finer feelings of the heart. Your superior
delicacy, your modesty, and the usual severity of your education, preserve you,
in a great measure, from any temptation to those vices to which we are most
subjected. The natural softness and sensibility of your dispositions
particularly sit you for the practice of those duties where the heart is
chiefly concerned. And this, along with the ^^tural warmth of your imagination,
renders you peculiarly susceptible of the feelings of devotion.

There are many circumstances in your situation that peculiarly require the
supports of religion to enable you to act in them with spirit and propriety.
Your whole life is often a life of suffering. You cannot plunge into business,
(...) dissipate yourselves in pleasure and riot, as men too often do, when
under the pressure of misfortunes. You must bear your sorrows in silence,
unknown and unpitied. You must often put on a face of serenity and
cheerfulness, when your hearts are torn with anguish, or sinking in despair.
Then your only resource is in the consolations of religion. It is chiefly owing
to these, that you bear domestic misfortunes better than we do.

But you are sometimes in very different circumstances, that equally require
the restraints of religion. The natural vivacity, and perhaps the natural
vanity of your sex, is very apt to lead you into a dissipated state of life
that deceives you, under the appearance of innocent pleasure; but which in
reality wastes you, spirits, impairs your health, weakens all the superior
facultie^ of your minds, and often fullies your reputations. Religion, by
checking this dissipation, and rage for pleasure, enables you to draw more
happiness even from those very sources of amusement, which, when too frequently
applied to, are often productive of satiety and disgust.

Religion is rather a matter of sentiment than reasoning. The important and
interesting articles of faith are sufficiently plain. Fix your attention on
these, and do not meddle with controversy. If you get into that, you plunge
into a chaos, from which you will never be able to extricate yourselves. It
spoils the temper, and, I suspect, has no good effect on the hear^.

Avoid all books and all conversation that tend to shake your faith on those
great points of religion which should serve to regulate your conduct, and on
which your hopes of future and eternal happiness depend.

Never indulge yourselves in ridicule on religious subjects, nor give
countenance to it in others by seeming diverted with what they say. This, to
people of good-breeding, will be a sufficient check.

I wish you to go no further than the Scriptures for your religious opinions.
Embrace those you find clearly revealed. Never perplex yourselves about such as
you do not understand, but treat them with silent and becoming reverence. I
would advise you to read only such religious books as are addressed to the
heart, such as inspire pious and devout affections, such as are proper to
direct you^ in your conduct, and not such as tend to entangle you in the
endless maze of opinions and systems.

Be punctual in the stated performance of your private devotions, morning and
evening. If you have any sensibility or imagination, this will establish such
an intercourse between you and the Supreme Being, as will be of infinite
consequence to you in life. It will communicate an habitual cheerfulness to
your tempers, give a firmness and steadiness to your virtue, and enable you to
go through all the vicissitudes of human life with propriety and dignity.

I wish you to be regular in your attendance on public worship, and in
receiving the communion. Allow nothing to interrupt your public or private
devotions, except the performance of some active duty in life, to which they
should always give place. In your behavior at public worship, observe an
exemplary attention and gravity.

That extreme strictness which I recommend to you in these duties, will be
considered by many of your acquaintance as a superstitious attachment to forms;
but in the advices I give you^ on this and other subjects, I have an eye to the
spirit and manners of the age. There is a levity and dissipation in the present
manners, a coldness and listlessness in whatever relates to religion which
cannot fail to infect you, unless you purposely cultivate in your minds a
contrary bias, and make the devotional taste habitual.

Avoid all grimace and ostentation in your religious duties. They are the usual
cloaks of hyprocrisy; at least they show a weak and vain mind.

Do not make religion a subject of common conversation in mixed companies. When
it is introduced, rather seem to decline it. At the same time, never suffer any
person to insult you by any foolish ribaldry on your religious opinions, but
show the same resentment you would naturally do on being offered any other
personal insult. But the surest way to avoid this, is by a modest reserve on
the subject, and by using no freedom with others about their religious
sentiments.

Cultivate an enlarged charity for all mankind, however they may differ from
you in their religious opinions. That difference may probably arise from causes
in which you had no share, and from which you can derive to merit.

Show your regard to religion by a distinguishing respect to all its ministers,
of whatever persuasion who do not by their lives dishonor their profession;
but never allow them the direction of your consciences, left they taint you
with the narrow spirit of their party.

The best effect of your religion will be a diffusive humanity to all in
distress. Set apart a certain proportion of your income as sacred to charitable
purposes. But in this, as well as in the practice of every other duty,
carefully avoid ostentation. Vanity is always defeating her own purposes. Fame
is one of (...) ^^tural rewards of virtue. Do not pursue her, and she will
follow you.

Do not confine your charity to giving money. You may have many opportunities
of showing a tender and compassionate spirit where your money is not wanted.
There is a false and unnatural refinement in sensibility, which makes some
people shun the sight of every object in distress. Never indulge this,
especially where your friends or acquaintances are concerned. Let the days of
there misfortunes, when the world forgets or avoids them, be the season for you
to exercise your humanity and friendship, the sight of human misery softens the
heart, and makes it better: it checks the pride of health and prosperity, and
the distress it occasions is amply compensated by the consciousness of doing
your duty, and by the secret endearment which nature has annexed to all our
sympathetic sorrows.

Women are greatly deceived, when they think they recommend themselves to our
sex by their indifference about religion. Even those men who are themselves
unbelievers, dislike infidelity in you. Every man who knows human nature,
connects a religious taste in your sex with softness and sensibility of heart;
at least we always consider the want of it as a proof of that hard and
masculine spirit, which of all your faults we dislike the most. Besides, men
consider your religion as one of their principal securities for that female
virtue in which they are most interested. If a gentleman pretends an attachment
to any of you, and endeavors to shake your religious principles, be assured he
is either a fool, or has designs on you which he dares not openly avow.

You will probably wonder at my having educated you in a church different from
my own. The reason was plainly this: I looked on the differences between our
churches to be of no real importance, and that a preference of one to the other
was a mere matter of taste. Your mother was educated in the Church of England,
and had an attachment to it, and I had a prejudice in favor of every thing she
liked. It never was her desire that you should be baptized by a clergyman of
the Church of England, or be educated in that Church. On the contrary, the
delicacy of her regard to the smallest circumstance that could affect me in the
eye of the world, made her anxiously insist it might be otherwise. But I could
not yield to her in that kind of generosity. When I lost her, I became still
more determined to educate you in that Church, as I feel a secret pleasure in
doing every thing that appears to me to express my affection and veneration for
her memory. I draw but a very faint and imperfect picture of what your mother
was, while I endeavor to point out what you should be The reader will
remember, that such observations as respect equally both the sexes, are all
along as much as possible avoided.
.

CONDUCT and BEHAVIOR.
ONE of the chief beauties in a female character, is that modest reserve, that
retiring delicacy, which avoids the public eye, and is disconcerted even at the
gaze of admiration. -- I do not wish you to be insensible to applause; if you
were, you must become, if not worse, at least less amiable women: but you may
be dazzled by that admiration which yet rejoices your hearts.

When a girl ceases to blush, she has lost the most powerful charm of beauty.
That extreme sensibility which it indicates, may be a weakness and encumbrance
in our sex, as I have too often felt; but in yours it is peculiarly engaging.
Pedants, who think themselves philosophers, ask why a woman should blush when
she is conscious of no crime? It is a sufficient answer, that Nature has made
you to blush when you are guilty of no fault, and has forced us to love you
because you do so. -- Blushing is so far from being necessarily an attendant on
guilt, that it is the usual companion of innocence.

This modesty, which I think so essential in your sex, will naturally dispose
you to be rather silent in company, especially in a large one. -- People of
sense, and discernment will never mistake such silence for dullness. One may
take a share in conversation without uttering a syllable. The expression in the
countenance shows it, and this never escapes an observing eye.

I should be glad that you had an easy dignity in your behavior at public
places, but not that confident ease, that unabashed countenance, which seems to
set the company at defiance. If, while a gentleman is speaking to you, one of
superior rank addresses you, do not let your eager attention and visible
preference betray the flutter of your heart: let your pride on this occasion
preserve you from that meanness into which your vanity would sink you. Consider
that you expose yourselves to the ridicule of the company, and affront one
gentleman only to swell the triumph of another, who perhaps thinks he does you
honor in speaking to you.

Converse with men even of the first rank with that dignified modesty which may
prevent the approach of the most distant familiarity, and consequently prevent
them from feeling themselves your superiors.

Wit is the most dangerous talent you can possess. It must be guarded with
great discretion and good nature, otherwise it will create you many enemies.
Wit is perfectly consistent with softness and delicacy; yet they are seldom
found united. Wit is so flattering to vanity, that they who possess it become
intoxicated, and lose all self-command.

Humor is a different quality (...) make your company much solicited, but be
cautious how you indulge it. It is often a great enemy to delicacy, and a still
greater one to dignity of character. It may sometimes gain you applause, but
will never procure you respect.

Be even cautious in displaying your good sense. It will be thought you assume
a superiority over the rest of the company. But if you happen to have any
learning, keep it a profound secret, especially from the men, who generally
look with a jealous and malignant eye on a woman of great parts, amd a
cultivated understanding.

A man of real genius and candor is far superior to this meanness; but such a
one will seldom fall in your way; and if by accident he should, do not be
anxious to show the full extent of your knowledge. If he has any opportunities
of seeing you, he will soon discover it himself; and if you have any advantages
of person or manner, and keep your own secret, he will probably give you credit
for a great deal more than you possess, The great art of pleasing in
conversation consists in making the company pleased with themselves. You will
more readily hear them talk yourselves into their good graces.

Beware of detraction, especially where your own sex are concerned. You are
generally accused of being particularly addicted to this vice -- I think,
unjustly. Men are fully as guilty of it when their interests interfere. As your
interests more frequently clash, and as your feelings are quicker than ours,
your temptations to it are more frequent; for this reason be particularly
tender of the reputation of your own sex, especially when they happen to rival
you in our regards. We look on this as the strongest proof of dignity an^ true
greatness of mind.

Show a compassionate sympathy to unfortunate women, especially to those who
are rendered so by the villainy of men. Indulge a secret pleasure, I may say
pride, in being the friends and refuge of the unhappy, but without the vanity
of showing it.

Consider every species of indelicacy in conversation, as shameful in itself,
and as highly disgusting to us. All double entendre is of this fort. The
dissoluteness of men's education allows them to be diverted with a kind of wit,
which yet they have delicacy enough to be shocked at, when it comes from your
mouths, or even when you hear it without pain and contempt. -- Virgin purity is
of that delicate nature, that it cannot hear certain things without
contammation. It is always in your power to avoid these. No man but a brute or
a fool will insult a woman with conversation which he sees gives her pain; nor
will he dare to do it, if she resent the injury with a becoming spirit. There
is a dignity in conscious virtue which is able to awe the most shameless and
abandoned of men.

You will be reproached perhaps with prudery. By prudery is usually meant an^
affectation of delicacy: Now I do not wish you ^o affect delicacy; I wish you
to possess it: at any rate it is better to run the risk of being thought
ridiculous than disgusting.

The men will complain of your reserve. They will assure you that a franker
behavior would make you more amiable. But, trust me, they are not sincere when
they tell you so. I acknowledge, that on some occasions it might render you
more agreeable as campanions, but it would make you less amiable as women -- an
important distinction, which many of your sex are not aware of After all, I
wish you to have great ease and openness in your conversation; I only point out
some considerations which ought to regulate your behavior in that respect.

Have a sacred regard to truth. Lying is a mean and despicable vice. I have
known some women of excellent parts, who were so much addicted to it, that they
could not be trusted in the relation of any (...) especially if it contained
any thing of the mavelous, or if they themselves were the heroines of the
tale. This weakness did not proceed from a bad heart, but was merely the effect
of vanity, or an unbridled imagination. I do not mean to censure that lively
embellishment of a humorous story, which is only intended to promote innocent
mirth.

There is a certain gentleness of spirit and manners extremely engaging in your
sex; not that indiscriminate attention, that unmeaning simper, which smiles on
all alike. This arises either from an affectation of softness, or from perfect
insipidity.

There is a species of refinement in luxury, just beginning to prevail among
the gentlemen of this country, to which our ladies are yet as great strangers
as any women upon earth; I hope, for the (...) of the sex, they may ever
continue so; I mean, the luxury of eating. It is a despicable selfish vice in
men, but in your sex it is beyond expression indelicate and disgusting.

Every one who remembers a few years back, is sensible of a very striking
change in the attention and respect formerly paid by the gentlemen to the
ladies; their drawing rooms are deserted, and after dinner and supper the
gentleman are impatient till they retire. How they came to lose this respect,
which nature and politeness so well entitle them to, I shall not here
particularly inquire. The revolutions of manners in any country depend on
causes very various and complicated. I shall only observe, that the behavior
of the ladies in the last age was very reserved and stately. I would now be
reckoned ridiculously stiff and formal. Whatever it was, it had certainly the
effect of making them more respected.

A fine woman, like other fine things in nature, has her proper point of view,
from which she may be seen to most advantage. To fix this point requires great
judgment, and an intimate knowledge of the human heart. By the present mode of
female manners, the ladies seem to expect that they shall regain their
ascendency over us, by the fullest display of their personal charms, by being
always in our eye at public places, by conversing with us with the same
unreserved freedom as we do with one another; in short, by resembling us as
nearly as they possibly can. -- But a little time and experience will show the
folly of this expectation and conduct.

The power of a fine woman over the hearts of men, of men of the finest parts,
is even beyond what she conceives. They are sensible of the pleasing illusion,
but they cannot, nor do they wish to dissolve it. But if she is determined to
dispel the charm; it certainly is in her power; she may soon reduce the angel
to a very ordinary girl.

There is a native dignity in ingenuous modesty to be expected in your sex,
which is your natural protection from the familarities of the men, and which
you should feel previous to the reflection that it is your interest to keep
yourselves sacred from all personal freedoms. The many nameless charms and
endearments of beauty should be reserved to bless the arms of the happy man to
whom you give your heart, but who, if he has the least delicacy, will despise
them if he knows that they have been prostituted to fifty men before him. The
sentiment, that a woman may allow all innocent freedoms, provided her virtue is
secure, is both grossly indelicate and dangerous, and has proved fatal to many
of your sex.

Let me now recommend to your attention that elegance, which is not so much a
quality itself, as the high polish of every other. It is what diffuses an
ineffable grace over every look, every motion, every sentence you utter; it
gives that charm to beauty, without which it generally fails to please. It is
partly a personal quality, in which respect it is the gift of nature; but I
speak of it principally as a quality of the mind. In a word, it is the
perfection of taste in life and manners; -- every virtue and every excellency
in their most graceful and amiable forms.

You may perhaps think that I want to throw every spark of nature out of your
composition, and to make you entirely artificial. Far from it. I wish you to
possess the most perfect simplicity of heart and manners. I think you may
possess dignity without pride, affability without meanness, and simple elegance
without affectation, Milton had my idea, when he says of Eve, Grace was in all
her steps, Heaven in her eye,
In every gesture dignity and love.


AMUSEMENTS.
EVERY period of life has amusements which are natural and proper to it. You
may indulge the variety of your tastes in these, while you keep within the
bounds of that propriety which is suitable to your sex.

Some amusements are conductive to health, as various kinds of exercise; some
are connected with qualities really useful, as different kinds of women's work,
and all the domestic concerns of a family; some are elegant accomplishments, as
dress, dancing, music, and drawing. Such books as improve your understanding,
enlarge your knowledge, and cultivate your taste, may be considered in a higher
point of view than mere amusements. There are a variety of others, which are
neither useful nor ornamental, such as play of different kinds.

I would particularly recommend to you those exercises that oblige you to be
much abroad in the open air, such as walking and riding on horseback. This will
give vigor to your constitutions, and a bloom to your complexions. If you
accustom yourselves to go abroad always in chairs and carriages, you will soon
become so enervated, as to be unable to go out of doors without them. They are
like most articles of luxury, useful and agreeable when judiciously used; but
when made habitual, they become both insipid and pernicious.

An attention to your health is a duty you owe to yourselves and to your
friends. Bad health seldom fails to have an influence on the spirits and
temper. The finest geniuses, the most delicate minds, have very frequently a
correspondent delicacy of bodily constitution, which they are too apt to
neglect. Their luxury lies in reading and late hours, equal enemies to health
and beauty.

But though good health be one of the greatest blessings of life, never make a
boast of it, but enjoy it in grateful silence. We so naturally associate the
idea of female softness and delicacy with a correspondent delicacy of
constitution, that when a woman speaks of her great strength, her extraordinary
appetite, her ability to bear excessive fatigue, we recoil at the description
in a way she is little aware of.

The intention of your being taught needlework, knitting, and such like, is not
on account of the intrinsic value of all you can do with your hands, which is
trifling, but to enable you to judge more perfectly of that kind of work, and
to direct the execution of it in others. Another principal end is to enable you
to fill up, in a tolerably agreeable way, some of the many s^ltary hours you
must necessarily pass at home. It is a great article in the happiness of life,
to have your pleasures as independent of others as possible. By continually
gadding abroad in search of amusement, you lose the respect of all your
acquaintances, whom you oppress with those visits, which, by a more discreet
management, might have been courted.

The domestic economy of a family is entirely a woman's province, and
furnishes a variety of subjects for the exertion both of good ^ence and good
taste. If you ever come to have the charge of a family, it ought to engage much
of your time and attention; nor can you be excused from this by any extent of
fortune, though with a narrow one the ruin that follows the neglect of it may
be more immediate.

I (...) the greatest loss what to advise you in regard to books. There is no
impropriety in your reading history, or cultivating any art or science to which
genius or accident lead you. The whole volume of Nature lies open to your eye,
and furnishes an infinite variety of entertainment. If I was sure that Nature
had given you such strong principles of taste and sentiment as would remain
with you, and influence your future conduct, with the utmost pleasure would I
endeavor to direct your reading in such a way as might from that ^aste to the
utmost perfection of truth and elegance. "But when I reflect how easy it is to
warm a girl's imagination, and how difficult deeply and permanently to affect
her heart; how readily she enters into every refinement of sentiment, and how
easily she can sacrifice them to vanity or convenience;" I think I may very
probably do you an injury by artificially creating a taste, which, if Nature
never gave it you, would only serve to embarrass your future conduct. I do not
want to make you any thing: I want to know what Nature has made you, and to
perfect you on her plan. I do not wish you to have sentiments that might
perplex you; I wish you to have sentiments that may uniformly and steadily
guide you, and such as your hearts so thoroughly approve, that you would not
forego them for any consideration this world could offer.

Dress is an important article in female life. The love of dress is natural to
you, and therefore it is proper and reasonable. Good sense will regulate your
expense in it, and good taste will direct you to dress in such a way as to
conceal any blemishes, and set off your beauties, if you have any, to the
greatest advantage. But much delicacy and judgment are required in the
application of this rule. A fine woman shows her charms to most advantage, when
she seems most to conceal them. The finest bosom in nature is not so fine as
what imagination forms. The most perfect elegance of dress appears always the
most easy, and the least studied.

Do not confine your attention to dress to your public appearances. Accustom
yourselves to an habitual neatness, so that in the most careless undress, in
your most unguarded hours, you may have no reason to be ashamed of your
appearance. You will not easily believe how much we consider your dress as
expressive of your characters. Vanity, levity, slovenliness, folly, appear
through it. An elegant simplicity is an equal proof of taste and delicacy.

In dancing, the principal points you are to attend to are ease and grace: I
would have you to dance with spirit; but never allow yourselves to be so far
transported with mirth, as to forget the delicacy of your sex. Many a girl
dancing in the gaiety and innocence of her heart, is thought to discover a
spirit she little dreams of.

I know no entertainment that gives such pleasure to any person of sentiment or
humor, as the theater. But I am sorry to say there are few English comedies a
lady can see, without a shock to delicacy. You will not readily suspect the
comments gentlemen make on your behavior on such occasions. Men are often best
acquainted with the most worthless of your sex, and from them too readily form
their judgment of the rest. A virtuous girl often hears very indelicate things
with a countenance no wise embarrassed, because in truth she does not
understand them. Yet this is, most ungenerously, ascribed to that command of
features, and that ready presence of mind, which you are thought to possess in
a degree far beyond us; or, by still more malignant observers, it is ascribed
to hardened effrontery.

Sometimes a girl laughs with all the simplicity of unsuspecting innocence, for
no other reason but being infected with other people's laughinging: she is then
believed to know more than she should do. If she does happen to understand an
improper thing, she suffers a very complicated distress. she feels her modesty
hurt in the most sensible manner, and at the same time is ashamed of appearing
conscious of the injury. The only way to avoid these inconveniences, is never
to go to a play that is particularly offensive to delicacy. Tragedy subjects
you to no such distress. -- Its sorrows will soften and enable your hearts.

I need say little about gaming, the ladies in this country being as yet almost
strangers to it. It is a ruinous and incurable vice; and as it leads to all the
selfish and turbulent passions, is peculiarly odious in your sex. I have no
objection to your playing a little at any kind of game, as a variety in your
amusements, provided that what you can possibly lose is such a trifle as can
neither interest you, nor hurt you.

In this, as well as in all important points of conduct, show a determined
resolution and steadiness. This is not in the least inconsistent with that
softness and gentleness so amiable in your sex. On the contrary, it gives that
spirit to a mild and sweet disposition, without which it is apt to degenerate
into insipidity. It makes you respectable in your own eyes, and dignifies you
in ours.

FRIENDSHIP, LOVE, MARRIAGE.
THE luxury and dissipation that prevails in genteel life, as it corrupts the
heart in many respects, so it renders it incapable of warm, sincere, and steady
friendship. A happy choice of friends will be of the utmost consequence to you,
as they may assist you by their advice and good offices. But the immediate
gratification which friendship affords to a warm, open, and ingenuous heart, is
of itself a sufficient motive to court it.

In the choice of your friends, have your principal regard to goodness of heart
and fidelity. If they also possess taste and genius, that will still make them
more agreeable and useful companions. You have particular reason to place
confidence in those who have shown affection for you in your early days, when
you were incapable of making them any return. This is an obligation for which
you cannot be too grateful. When you read this, you will naturally think of
your mother's friend, to whom you owe so much.

If you have the good fortune to meet with any who deserve the name of friends,
unbosom yourself to them with the most unsuspicious confidence. It is one of
the world's maxims, never to trust any person with a secret, the discovery of
which could give you any pain; but it is the maxim of a little mind and a cold
heart, unless where it is the effect of frequent disappointments and bad usage.
An open temper, it restrained but by tolerable prudence, will make you, on the
whole, much happier than reserved suspicious one, although you may sometimes
suffer by it. Coldness and distrust are but the too certain consequences of age
and experience; but they are unpleasant feelings, and need not be anticipated
before their time.

But however open you may be in talking of your affairs, never disclose the
secrets of one friend to another. These are secret deposits, which do not
belong to you, nor have you any right to make use of them.

There is another case, in which I suspect it is proper to be secret, not so
much from motives of prudence, as delicacy; I mean in love matters. Though a
woman has no reason to be ashamed of an attachment to a man of merit, yet
Nature, whose authority is superior to philosophy, has annexed a sense of shame
to it. It is even long before a woman of delicacy dares avow to her own heart
that she loves; and when all the subterfuges of ingenuity to conceal it from
herself fail, she feels a violence done both to her pride and to her modesty.
This, I should imagine, must always be the case where she is not (...) of a
return to her attachment.

In such a situation, to lay the heart open to any person whatever, does not
appear to me consistent with the perfection of female delicacy. But perhaps I
am in the wrong. At the same time I must tell you, that, in point of prudence,
it concerns you to attend well to the consequences of such a discovery. These
secrets, however important in your own estimation, may appear very trifling to
your friend, who possibly will not enter into your feelings, but may rather
consider (...) as a subject of pleasantry. For this reason love secrets are of
all others the worst (...). But the consequences to you may be very (...) as no
man of spirit and delicacy ever valued a heart much hackneyed in the ways of
love.

I^, therefore, you must have a friend to pour out your hearts to, be sure of
her honor and secrecy. Let her not be a married woman, especially if she lives
happily with her husband. There are certain unguarded moments, in which such a
woman, though the best and worthiest of her sex, may let hints escape, which at
other times, or to any other person than her husband, she would be incapable
of; nor will a husband in this case feel himself under the same obligation of
secrecy and honor, as if you had put your confidence originally in himself,
especially on a subject which the world is apt to treat so lightly.

If all other circumstances are equal, there are obvious advantages in your
making friends of one another. The ties of blood, and your being so much united
in one common interest, from an additional bond of union to your friendship. If
your brothers should have the good fortune to have hearts susceptible of
friendship, to possess truth, honor, sense and delicacy of sentiment, they are
the fittest and most unexceptionable confidants. By placing confidence in them,
you will receive every advantage which you could hope for from the friendship
of men, without any of the inconveniences that attend such connexions with our
sex.

Beware of making confidants of your servants. Dignity not properly understood
very readily degenerates into pride, which enters into no friendship, because
it cannot bear an equal, and is so fond of flattery as to grasp at it even from
servants and dependants. The most intimate confidants, therefore, of proud
people, are valets-de-chamber and waiting-women. Show the utmost most humanity
to your servants; make their situation as comfortable to them as possible: but
if you make them your confidants, you spoil them, and debase yourselves.

Never allow any person, under the pretended sanction of friendship, to be so
familiar as to lose a proper respect to you. Never allow them to teaze you on
any subject that is disagreeable, or where you have once taken your resolution.
Many will tell you, that this reserve is inconsistent with the freedom which
friendship allows; but a certain respect is as necessary in friendship as in
love. Without it you may be liked as a child, but you will never be beloved as
an equal.

The temper and disposition of the heart in your sex make you enter more
readily and warmly into friendships than men. Your natural propensity to it is
so strong, that you often run into intimacies which you soon have sufficient
cause to repent of; and this makes your friendships so very fluctuating.

Another great obstacle to the sincerity as well as steadiness of your
friendships, is the great clashing of your interests in the pursuits of love,
ambition, or vanity. For these reasons, it would appear it first view more
eligible (...) you to contract your friendships with the men. Among other
obvious advantages of an easy intercourse between the two sexes it occasions an
emulation and exertion in each to excel and be agreeable: hence their
respective excellencies are mutually communicated and blended. As their (...)
in (...) degree interfere, there can be no (...) for jealousy, or inspicion of
rival (...). The friendship of a man for a woman is always (...) with
tenderness, which he never feel for one of his own sex, even where love is in
no degree concerned: Besides, we are conscious of a natural title you have to
your protection and good offices, and therefore we feel an additional
obligation of honor to serve you, and to observe an inviolable secrecy,
whenever you confide in us.

But apply these observations with great caution. Thousands of women of the
best hearts and finest parts have been ruined by men who approach them under
the specious name of friendship. But supposing a man to have the most undoubted
honor, yet his friendship to a woman is so near a ^kin to love, that if she be
very agreeable in her person, she will probably very soon find a lover, where
she only wished to meet a friend. Let me here, however, warn you against that
weakness so common among vain women, the imagination that every man who takes
particular notice of you in a lover. Nothing can expose you more to ridicule
than the taking up a man on the suspicion of being your lover, who perhaps
never once thought of you in that view, and giving yourselves those airs so
common among all silly women on such accasions.

There is a kind of unmeaning gallantry much practiced by some men, which, if
you have any discernment, you will find really very harmless. (...) of this
sort will attend you to public places, and be useful to you by a number of
little observances, which those of a superior class do not so well understand,
or have not leisure to regard, or perhaps are too proud to submit to. Look on
the compliments of such men as words of course, which they repeat to every
agreeable women of their acquaintance. There is a familiarity they are apt to
assume, which a proper dignity in your behavior will be easily able to check.

There is a different species of men whom you may like as agreeable companions,
men of worth, taste, and genius, whose conversation, in some respect, may be
superior to what you generally meet with among your own sex. It will be foolish
in you to deprive yourselves of an useful and agreeable acquaintance, merely
because idle people say he is your lover. Such a man may like your company,
without having any design on your person.

People whose sentiments, and particularly whose tastes correspond, naturally
like to associate together, although neither of them have the most distant view
of any further connection. But as this similarity of minds often gives rise to
a more tender attachment than friendship, it will be prudent to keep a watchful
eye over yourselves, le^t your hearts become too far engaged before you are
aware of it. At the same time, I do not think that your ^ex, at least in this
part of the world, have much of that sensibility which disposes to such
attachments. What is commonly called love among you is rather gratitude, and a
partiality to the man who prefers you to the rest of your sex; and such a man
you often marry, with little of either personal esteem or (...). Indeed,
without an unusual share of natural ^^^bility, and very peculiar good fortune a
(...) this country has very little probability of (...) for love

It is a maxim laid down among (...) a ^very prudent one it is. That love (...)
beg a on your part, but is entirely to be the (...) of our attachment to you*
Now (...) woman to have sense and taste, she (...) many men to whom she can
possibly be (...) to bear any considerable share of esteem. Among these few it
is very great chance if one of them distinguishes her particularly. Love, at
least with us, is exceedingly capricious, and will not always (...) where
reason says it should. But supposing one of them should become particularly
attached to her, it is still extremely improbable that he should be the man in
the world her heart most approved of.

As, therefore: Nature has not given you that (...) range in your choice which
we enjoy, she has w^^ely and benevolently assigned to you a greater flexibility
of ^^^le on this subject. Some agreeable qualities recommend a gentleman to
your common good ^^^ing and friendship. In the course of his acquaintance, he
contracts an attachment to you. When you perceive is, it (...) your gratitude:
this gratitude rises into a (...), and this preference perhaps at last advances
to some degree of attachment, especially (...) meets with crosses and
difficulties; for these, (...) a state of suspense, are very great incitements
(...) attachment, and are the food of love in born (...). If attachment was not
excited in your (...) in this manner, there is not one of a mission (...) that
could ever marry with any degree of (...).

(...) man of taste and delicacy marries a woman (...) he (...) her ^^re than
any other. A (...) of equal taste and delicacy marries him (...) ^he esteems
him, and because he gives her (...). But if a man unfortunately becomes
attached to a woman whose heart is (...), his attachment, instead of obtaining
(...) suitable return, is particularly offensive; and if he persists to teaze
her, he makes himself equally the object of her scorn and aversion.

The effects of love among men are diversified by their different tempers. An
artful man may counterfeit every one of them so easily as to impose on a young
girl of an open, generous, and feeling heart, if she is not extremely on her
guard. The finest parts in such a girl may not always prove sufficient for her
security. The dark and crooked paths of cunning are unsearchable and
inconceivable to an honorable and elevated mind.

The following, I apprehend, are the most genuine effects of an honorable
passion among the men, and the most difficult to counterfeit. A man of delicacy
often betrays his passion by his too great anxiety to conceal it, especially if
he has little hopes of success. True love, in all its stages, seeks
concealment, and never expects success. It renders a man not only respectful,
but timid to the highest degree in his behavior to the woman he loves. To
conceal the awe he stands in of her, he may sometimes affect pleasantry, but it
sits awkwardly on him, and he quickly relapses into seriousness, if not into
dullness. He magnifies all her real perfections in his imagination, and is
either blind to her failings, or converts them into beauties. Like a person
conscious of guilt, he is jealous that every eye observes his; and to avoid
this, he shuns all the little observances of common gallantry.

His heart and his character will be improved in every respect by his
attachment. His manners (...) become more gentle, and his conversation more
agreeable: but diffidence and (...) always make him appear to (...) in the
company of his mistress. If the fascination continue long, it will totally
depress his spirit, and extinguish every active, vigorous, and manly principle
of his mind. You will find this subject beautifully and pathetically painted in
Thomson's Spring.

When you observe in a gentleman's behavior these marks which I have described
above, reflect seriously what you are to do. If his attachment is agreeable to
you, I leave you to do as nature, good sense, and delicacy shall direct you. If
you love him, let me advise you never to discover to him the full extent of
your love, no, not although you marry him. That sufficiently shows your
preference, which is all he is entitled to know. If ^e has delicacy, he will
(...) for no stronger proof of your affection for your sake; if he has sense,
he will no^ ask it for his own. This is an unpleasant truth, but it is my duty
to let you know it. Violent love cannot subsist, at least cannot be expressed,
for any time together on both sides; otherwise the certain consequence, however
concealed, is satiety and disgust. Nature in this case has laid the reserve on
you.

If you see evident proofs of a gentleman's attachment, and are determined to
shut your heart against him, as you ever hope to be used with generosity by the
person who shall engage your own heart, treat him honorably and humanely. Do
not let him linger in a miserable suspense, but be anxious to let him know your
sentiments with regard to him.

However people's hearts may deceive them, there is scarcely a person that can
love for any time without at least some distant hope of success. If you really
wish to undeceive a lover, you may do it in a variety of ways. There is a
certain species of easy familiarity in your behavior which may satisfy him, if
he has any discernment left, that he has nothing to hope for. But perhaps your
particular temper may not admit of this: you may easily show that you want to
avoid his company; but if he is a man whose friendship you wish to preserve,
you may not choose this method, because then you lose him in every capacity. You
may get a common friend to explain matters to him, or fall on many other
divice^^^ you are seriously anxious to put him out of suspense.

But if you are resolved against every such method, at least do not shun
opportunities of letting him explain himself. If you do this, you act
barbarously and unjustly. If he brings you to an explanation, give him a p^^^e,
but resolute and decisive answer. In whatever, way you convey your sentiments
to him, if he is a man of spirit and delicacy, he will give you no further
trouble, nor apply to your friends for their intercession. This last is a
method of courtship which every man of spirit will disdain. He will never whine
nor sue for your pity: That would mortify him almost as much as your scorn. In
short, you may possibly break such a heart, but you can never bend it. Great
pride always accompanies delicacy, however concealed under the appearance of
the utmost gentleness and modesty, and is the passion of all others the most
difficult to conquer.

There is a case where a woman may coquette justifiably to the utmost verge
which her conscience will allow. It is where a gentleman purposely declines to
make his addresses, till such time as he thinks himself perfectly sure of her
consent. This at bottom is intended to force a woman to give up the undoubted
privilege of her sex, the privilege of refusing; it is intended to force her to
explain herself, in effect, before the gentleman deigns to do it, and by this
means to oblige her to violate the modesty and delicacy of her sex, and to
invert the clearest order of nature. All this sacrifice is proposed to be made
merely to gratify a most despicable vanity in a man who would degrade the (...)
woman whom he wishes to make his wife.

It is of great importance to distinguish whether a gentleman, who has the
appearance of being your lover, delays to speak explicitly, from the motive I
have mentioned, or from a diffidence inseparable from true attachment. In the
one case, you can scarcely use him too ill; in the other, you ought to use him
with great kindness: and the greatest kindness you can show him, if you are
determined not to listen to his addresses, is to let him know it as soon as
possible.

I know the many excuses with which women endeavor to justify themselves to
the world, and to their own consciences, when they act otherwise. Sometimes
they plead ignorance, or at least uncertainty, of the gentleman's real
sentiments. That may sometimes be the case. Sometimes they plead the decorum of
their sex, which enjoins an equal behavior to all men, and forbids them to
consider any man as a lover till he has directly told them so. Perhaps few
women carry their ideas of female delicacy and decorum so far as I ^o. But I
must say, you are not entitled to plead the obligation of these virtues in
opposition to the superior ones of gratitude, justice and humanity. The man is
entitled to all there, who prefers you to the rest of your sex, and perhaps
whose greatest weakness is this very preference. The truth of the matter is,
vanity, and the love of admiration, is so prevailing a passion among you, that
you may be considered to make a very great sacrifice whenever you give up a
lover, till every art of coquetry fails to keep him, or till he forces you to
an explanation. You can be fond of the love, when you are indifferent to, or
even when you despise the lover.

But the deepest and most artful coquetry is employed by women of superior
taste and sense, to engage and fix the heart of a man whom the world and whom
they themselves esteem, although they are firmly determined never to marry him.
But his conversation amuses them, and his attachment is the highest
gratification to their vanity: nay, they can sometimes be gratified with the
utter ruin of his fortune, same and happiness. God forbid I should ever think
so of all your sex! I know many of them have principles, have generosity and
dignity of soul that elevate them above the worthless vanity I have been
speaking of.

Such a woman, I am persuaded, may always convert a lover, if she cannot give
him her affections, into a warm and steady friend, provided he is a man of
sense, resolution and candor. If she explains herself with a generous openness
and freedom, he must feel the stroke as a man; but he will likewise bear it as
a man: what he suffers, he will suffer in silence. Every sentiment of esteem
will remain; but love, though it requires very little food, and is easily
su^^^ited with too much, yet it requires some. He will view her in the light of
a married woman; and though passion subsides, yet a man of a candid and
generous heart always retains a tenderness for a woman he has once loved, and
who has used him well, beyond what he feels for any other of her sex.

If he has not confided his own secret to any body, he has an undoubted title
to ask you not to divulge it. If a woman chooses to trust any of her companions
with her own unfortunate attachments, she may, as it is her own affair alone;
but if she has any generosity or gratitude, she will not betray a secret which
does not belong to her.

Male coquetry is much more in excusable than female, as well as more
pernicious; but it is rare in this country. Very few men will give themselves
the trouble to gain or retain any woman's affections, unless they have views on
them either of an honorable or dishonorable kind. Men employed in the
pursuits of business, ambition or pleasure, will not give themselves the
trouble to engage a woman's affections, merely from the vanity of conquest, and
of triumphing over the heart of an innocent and defenseless girl. Besides,
people never value much what is entirely in their power. A man of parts,
sentiment and address, if he lays aside all regard to truth and humanity, may
e^gae the hearts of (...) women at the same time, and may likewise conduct his
coquetry with so much art, as to put it out of the power of any of them to
specify (...) single expression that could be said to be directly expressive of
love.

This ambiguity of behavior, this art of keeping one in suspense, is the great
secret of coquetry in both sexes. It is the more cruel in as, because we can
carry it what length we please, and continue it as long as we please, without
your being so much as at liberty to complain or expostulate; whereas we can
break our chain, and force you to explain, whenever we become impatient of our
situation.

I have insisted the more particularly on this subject of courtship, because it
may most readily happen to you at that early period of life when you can have
little experience or knowledge of the word; when your passions are warm, and
your judgments not arrived at such full maturity as to be able to correct them.
I wish you to posses such high principles of honor and generosity as will
render you incapable of deceiving, and at the same time to possess that acute
discernment which may secure you against being deceived.

A woman, in this country, may easily prevent the first impressions of love;
and every motive of prudence and delicacy should make her guard her heart
against them, till such time as she has received the most convincing proofs of
the attachment of a man of such merit, as will justify a reciprocal regard.
Your hearts indeed may be shut inflexibly and permanently against all the merit
a man can posses. That may be your misfortune, but cannot be your fault. In
such a situation, you would be equally unjust to yourself and your lover, if
you gave him your hand when your heart revolted against him. But miserable will
be your fate, if you allow an attachment to s^^al on you before you are sure of
a return; or, what is infinitely worse, where there are (...) those qualities
which alone can ensure happiness in (...) state.

I know nothing that renders a woman more despicable, than her thinking it
essential to happiness to be married. Besides the gross indelicacy of the
sentiment, it is a false one, as thousands of women have experienced. But if it
was true, the belief that it is so, and the consequent impatience to be
married, is the most effectual way to prevent it.

You must not think from this that I do not wish you to marry; on the contrary,
I am of opinion, that you may attain a superior degree of happiness in a
married state, to what you can possibly find in any other. I know the forlorn
and unprotected situation of an old maid, the chagrin and peevishness which are
apt to infect their tempers, and the great difficulty of making a transition,
with dignity and cheerfulness, from the period of youth, beauty, admiration and
respect, into the calm, silent unnoticed retreat of declining years.

I see some unmarried women, of active vigorous minds, and great vivacity of
spirits, degrading themselves; sometimes by entering into a dissipated course
of life, unsuitable to their years, and exposing themselves to the ridicule of
girls, who might have been their grand children; sometimes by oppressing their
acquintances by impertinent intrusions in their private affairs; and sometimes
by being the propagators of scandal and defamation. All this is owing to an
exuberant activity of spirit, which, if it had ^ound employment at home, would
have rendered them respectable and useful members of society.

I see other women, in the same situation, gentle, modest, blessed with sense,
taste, del^cacy, and every milder feminine virtue of the heart, but of weak
spirits, bashful, and timid: I (...) such women sinking into obscurity and
insignificance, and gradually losing every elegant accomplishment; for this
evident reason, that they are not united to a partner who has sense, and worth,
and taste, to know their value; one who is able to draw forth their concealed
qualities, and show them to advantage; who can give that support to their
feeble spirits which they stand so much in need of; and who, by his affection
and tenderness, might make such a woman happy in exerting every talent, and
accomplishing herself in every elegant art that could contribute to his
amusement.

In short, I am of opinion, that a married state, if entered into from proper
motives of esteem and affection, will be the happiest for yourselves, make you
most respectable in the eyes of the world, and the most useful members of
society: but I confess I am not enough of a Patriot to wish you to marry for
the good of the public; -- I wish you to marry for no other reason but to make
yourselves happier. When I am so particular in my advices about your conduct, I
own my heart beats with the fond hope of making you worthy the attachment of
men who will deserve you, and be sensible of your merit. But Heaven forbid you
should ever relinquish the ease and independence of a single life, to become
the slaves of a fool or a tyrant's caprice.

As these have always been my sentiments, I shall do you but justice, when I
leave you in such independent circumstances as may lay you under no temptation
to do from necessity what you would never do from choice. This will likewise
save you from that cruel mortification to a woman of (...), the suspicion that
a gentleman thinks he does you an honor or a favor when he asks you for his
wife.

If I live till you arrive at that age when you shall be capable to judge for
yourselves, and do not strangely alter my sentiments, I shall act toward you
in a very (...) manner from what most parents do. My opinion has always been,
that when that period arrives the parental authority ceases.

I hope I shall always treat you with that affection and easy confidence which
may dispose you to look on me as your friend; in that capacity alone I shall
think myself entitled to give you my opinion; in the doing of (...). I should
think myself highly criminal, if I did not to the utmost of my power endeavor
to divest myself of all personal vanity, and all prejudices in favor of my
particular taste. If you did not choose to follow my advice, I should not on
that account cease to love you as my children: though my right to your
obedience was expired, yet I should think nothing could release me from the
ties of nature and humanity.

You may perhaps imagine, that the reserved behavior which I recommend to you,
and your appearing seldom at public places, must cut off all opportunities of
your being acquainted (...) gentlemen; I am very far from intending this. I
advise you to no reserve, but what will (...) you more respected and beloved by
our sex. I do not think public places (...) to make people acquainted together;
they can only be distinguished there by their looks and external behavior; but
it is in private companies alone where you can expect easy and agreeable
conversation. Which I should never wish you to decline* (...) you do not allow
gentlemen to become acquainted with you, you can never expect to marry with
attachment on either side -- Love is very seldom produced at first sight, at
least it must have, in that case, a very unjustifiable foundation. True love is
founded on esteem, in a correspondence of tastes and sentiments, and steals on
the heart imperceptibly.

There is one advice I shall leave you, to which I beg your particular
attention: -- Before your affections come to be in the least engaged to any
man, examine your tempers, your tastes, and your hearts, very severely, and
fe^^^e in your own minds, what are the requisites to your happiness in a
married state; and, as it is almost impossible that you should get every thing
you wish, come to a steady determination what you are to consider as essential,
and what may be sacrificed.

If you have hearts disposed by nature for love and friendship, and possess
those feelings which enable you to enter into all the refinements and
delicacies of these attachments, consider well, for Heaven's sake, and as you
value your future happiness, before you give them any indulgence. If you have
the misfortune (for a very great misfortune it commonly is to your sex) (...)
have such a temper and such sentiments deeply rooted in you. (...) you have
spirit and resolution to resist the solicitations of vanity, the (...) of
friends (for you will have lost the only (...) ends that would never persecute
you) ^^and can support the prospect of the many inconveniences attending the
state of an old maid, which I formerly point^^ out, then you may indulge
yourselves in that kind of sentimental reading and conversation which is (...)
correspondent to your feelings.

But if you find on a strict self-examination that marriage is absolutely
essential to your happiness, keep the secret inviolable in your own bosoms, for
the reasons I formerly mentioned; but shun as you would do the most fatal
poison, all that species of reading and conversation which warms the
imagination, which engages and softens the heart, and raises the taste above
the level of common life; if you do otherwise, confider the terrible conflict
of passions this may afterward raise in your breasts.

If this refinement once takes deep root in your minds, and you do not obey its
dictates, but marry from vulgar and mercenary views, you may never be able to
eradicate it entirely, and then it will embitter all your married days. Instead
of meeting with sense, delicacy, tenderness, a lover, a friend, an equal
companion, In a husband, you may be tired with insipidity and dullness; shocked
with indelicacy, or mortified by indifference. You will find none to
compassionate, or even understand your sufferings; for your husbands may not
use you cruelly, and may give you as much money for your clothes, personal
expense, and domestic necessaries, as is suitable to their fortunes. The world
would therefore look on you as unreasonable women, and that did not deserve to
be happy, if you were not so. To avoid these complicated evils, if you are
determined at all events to marry, I would advise you to make all your reading
and amusements of such a kind, as do not affect the heart nor the imagination,
except in the way of wit or humor.

I have no view by these advices to lead your tastes; I only want to persuade
you of the necessity of knowing your own minds, which, though seemingly very
easy, is what your sex seldom attain on many important occasions in life, but
particularly on this of which I am speaking. There is not a quality I more
anxiously wish you to possess, than that collective decisive spirit, which
rests on itself which enables you to see where your true happiness lies, and to
pursue it with the most determined resolution. In matters of business, follow
the advice of those who know them better than yourselves, and in whose
integrity you can confide; but in matters of taste, that depend on your own
feelings, consult no one friend whatever, but consult your own hearts.

If a gentleman makes his addresses to you, or gives you reason to believe he
will do so, before you allow your affections to be engaged, endeavor, in the
most prudent and secret manner, to procure from your friends every necessary
piece of information concerning him; such as his character for sense, his
morals, his temper, fortune, and family; whether it is distinguished for parts
and worth, or for folly, knavery, and loathsome hereditary diseases. When your
friends inform you of these* they have fulfilled their duty. If they go
farther, they have not that deference for you which a becoming dignity on your
part would effectually command.

Whatever your views are in marrying, take every possible precaution to prevent
their being (...). If fortune, and the pleasures it (...), are your aim, it is
not sufficient that the ^^^^^ments of a jointure and children's provisions
(...) ^ample, and properly secured; it is necessary (...) you should enjoy the
fortune during your (...). The principal security you can have (...) this will
depend on your marrying (...) good-natured, generous man, who despises money,
and who will let you live where you can best enjoy that pleasure, that pomp and
parade of life, for which you married him.

From what I have said, you will easily see that I could never pretend to
advise whom you should marry; but I can with great confidence advise whom you
should not marry.

Avoid a companion that may entail any hereditary disease on your posterity,
particularly (that most dreadful of all human calamities) madness. It is the
height of imprudence to run into such a danger, and, in my opinion, highly
criminal.

Do not marry a fool; he is the most intractable of all animals; he is led by
his passions and caprices, and is incapable of hearing the voice of reason. It
may probably too hurt your vanity to have husbands for whom you have reason to
blush and tremble every time they open their lips in company. But the worst
circumstance that attends a fool^^^ his constant jealousy of his wife being
thought to govern him. This renders it impossible to lead him, and he is
continually doing absurd and disagreeable things, for no other reason but to
show he dares do them.

A rake is always a suspicious husband, because, he has only known the most
worthless of your sex. He like wise entails the worst diseases on his wife and
children, if he has the misfortune to have any.

If you have a sense of religion yourselves, do not think of husbands who have
none. If the^^ have tolerable understandings, they will be (...) that you have
religion, for their own sakes, (...) for the sake of their families; but it
will s^^k (...) in their esteem. If may are weak men, they (...) be continually
teazing and shocking you about your principles. -- If you have children, you
will suffer the most bitter distress, in seeing all your endeavors to form
their minds to virtue and piety, all your endeavors to secure their present
and eternal happiness, frustrated and turned into ridicule.

As I look on your choice of a husband to be of the greatest consequence to
your happiness, I hope you will make it with the utmost circumspection. Do not
give way to a sudden sally of passion, and dignify it with the name of love. --
Genuine love is not founded in caprice^ it is founded in nature, on honorable
views, on virtue, on similarity of tastes and sympathy of souls.

If you love these sentiments, you will never marry any one, when you are not
in that situation, in point of fortune, which is necessary to the happiness of
either of you. What that competency may be, can only be determined by your own
tastes. It would be ungenerous in you to (...) advantage of a lover's
attachment, to plunge him into distress; and if he has any honor, no personal
gratification will ever tempt him to enter into any connection which will
render you unhappy. If you have as much between you as to satisfy all your
demands, it is sufficient.

I shall conclude with endeavoring to remove a difficulty which must naturally
occur to any woman of reflection on the subject of marriage. What is to become
of all those refinements of delicacy, that dignity of manners, which checked
all familiarities, and suspended desire in respectful and awful admiration? In
answer to this, I shall only observe, that if motives of interest or vanity
have had any share in your resolutions to marry, none of these chimerical
notions will give you any pain; nay, they will very quickly appear as
ridiculous in your own eyes, as they probably always did in the eyes of your
husbands. They have been sentiments which have floated in your imaginations,
but have never reached your hearts. But if these sentiments have been truly
genuine, and if you have had the singular happy fate to attach those who
understand them, you have no reason to be afraid.

Marriage, indeed, will at once dispel the enchantment raised by external
beauty; but the virtues and graces that first warmed the heart, that reserve
and delicacy which always left the lover something further to wish, and often
made him doubtful of your sensibility or attachment, may and ought ever to
remain. The tumult of passion will necessarily subside; but it will be
succeeded by an endearment, that effects the heart in a more equal, more
sensible, and tender manner. But I must check myself, (...) not indulge in
descriptions that may mislead you, and that too sensibly awake the remembrance
of my happier days, which, perhaps, it were better for me to forget for ever.

I have thus given you my opinion on some of the most important articles of
your future life, chiefly calculated for that period when you are just entering
the world. I have endeavored to avoid some peculiarities of opinion, which,
from their contradiction to the general practice of the world, I might
reasonably have suspected were not to well founded. But, in writing to you, I
am afraid my heart has been too full, and too warmly interested, to allow me to
keep this resolution. This may have produced some embarrassments, and some
seeming contradictions. What I have written has been the amusement of some
solitary hours, and has served to divert some melancholy reflections. -- I am
conscious I undertook a task to which I was very unequal; but I have discharged
a part of my duty. -- You will at least be pleased with it, as the last mark of
your father's love and attention.

THE END OF THE FATHER'S LEGACY.
AN UNFORTUNATE MOTHERS'S ADVICE TO HER ABSENT DAUGHTERS, IN A LETTER TO MISS
PENNINGTON: BY TAE LATE LADY PENNINGTON.
AN UNFORTUNATE MOTHER'S ADVICE, etc.
MY DEAR JENNY,
WAS there any probability that a letter from me would be permitted to reach
your hand alone, I should not have chosen this least eligible method of writing
to you. The public is no way concerned in family affairs, and ought not to be
made a party in them; but my circumstances are such as lay me under the
necessity of either communicating my sentiments to the world, or of concealing
them from you: the latter would, I think, be the breach of an indispensable
duty, which obliges me to waive the impropriety of the former.

A long train of events, of a most extraordinary nature conspired to remove
you, very early from the tender care of an affectionate mother. You were then
too young to be able to form any right judgment of her conduct; and since that
time it is very probable that it has been represented to you in the most
unfavourable light. The general prejudice against me I never gave myself the
useless trouble of any endeavor to remove. I do not mean to infer from hence
that the open (...) of others is of no material consequence (...) contrary, I
would advise you always (...) (...) that next to the consciousness of acting
right, the public voice should be regarded; and to endeavor by a prudent
behavior, even (...) the most trifling instances, to secure it in your favor.
The being educated in a different opnion, was a misfortune to me. I was indeed
early and wisely taught, that (...) was the one thing necessary, and that (...)
happiness could ^e expected either in (...) any (...) but, with this good (...)
one was at the same time inculcated, (...). That the self-approbation arising
from conscious virtue was alone sufficient; and, That the censures of an
ill-natured world, ever ready to calumniate, when not founded on truth, were
beneath the concern of a person whose actions were guided by the superior
motive of obedience to the will of Heaven.

This notion, strongly imbibed before reason had gained sufficient strength to
discover its fallacy was the cause of an inconsiderate conduct in my subsequent
life, which marked my character with a disadvantageous impression. To you I
shall speak with the most unreserved sincerity, not concealing a fault which
you may profit by the knowledge of; and therefore I freely own, that in my
younger years, not satisfied with keeping strictly within the bounds of virtue.
I (...) a foolish pleasure in exceeding those (...) prudence, and was
ridiculously vain of indulging (...) latitude of behavior, into which others
of my age were afraid of launching: but then, in justice to myself, I must at
the same time declare, that this (...) was only taken in public company; (...)
so extremely cautious was I of doing any (...) which appeared to me a just
ground for censure, that I call Heaven to witness, your father was the first
man whom I ever made any ^private assignation with, or even met in a room
alone; nor did I take that liberty with him till the most solemn mutual
engagement the matrimonial ceremony, had bound us to each other. My behavior
then, he has frequently since acknowledged, fully convinced him I was not only
innocent of any criminal act, but of ^^ery vicious thought; and that the
outward freedom of my deportment proceeded merely from a great gaiety of
temper, and from a very high flow of spirits, never broke (if the expression
may be allowed) into the formal rules of decorum. To sum up the whole in a few
words, my private conduct was what the severest prude could not condemn; my
public, such as the most finished coquet alone would have ventured upon; the
latter only could be known to the world, and consequently, from thence must
their opinion be (...). You will therefore easily be sensible, that it would
not be favorable to me; on the contrary, it gave a general prejudice against
me: and this has been since made use of as an argument to gain credit to the
malicious falsehoods laid to my charge. For this reason, convinced by long
experience that the greater part of mankind are so apt to receive, and so
willing to retain a bad impression of others, that, when it is once
established, there is hardly a possibility of removing it through life; I (...)
for some years past silently (...) in the dispensations of providence, (...)
attempting any justification of myself (...) and, being conscious that the
infamous aspersions (...) character were not found (...) on truth, I have (...)
^own content with the (...) of an open and perfect acquittal of all vicious
dispositions, or criminal conduct, at that great day, when all things shall
appear as they really are, and when both our actions, and the most secret
motives for them, will be made manifest to men and angels.

Had your father been amongst the number of those who were deceived by
appearances, I should have thought it my duty to leave no method unessay'd to
clear myself in his opinion; but that was not the case. He knows that many of
those appearances which have been urged against me, I was forced to submit to,
not only from his direction, but by his absolute command; which, contrary to
reason and to my own interest, I was, for more than twelve years* weak enough
implicitly to obey; and that others, even since our separation, were occasioned
by some particular instances of his behavior, which rendered it impossible for
me to act with safety in any other manner. To him I appeal for the truth of
this assertion, who is conscious of the meaning that may hereafter be explained
to you. Perfectly acquainted with my principles and with my natural
disposition, his heart, I am convinced never here condemned me. Being greatly
incensed that my father's will gave to me an independent fortune; which will he
imagined I was a^cessary to, or a^ least that I could have prevented; he was
thereby laid open to the arts of designing men, who, having their own interest
solely in view, worked him (...) i^to a desire of revenge, and from thence,
upon probable circumstances, into a public accusation; though that public
accusation was supported only by the single testimony of a person, whose known,
falsehood had made him a thousand times declare that he would not credit her
oath in the most trifling incident: yet, when he was disappointed of the
additional evidence he might have been flattered with the hope of obtaining, it
was too late to recede. 'This I sincerely believe to be the truth of the case,
though I too well know his tenacious temper to expect a present justification;
but, whenever he shall arrive on the verge of eternity, if Reason holds her
place at that awful moment, and if Religion has then any power on his heart, I
make no doubt, he will at that time acquit me to his children: and with truth
he must then confess, that no part of my behavior to him ever deserved the
treatment I have met with.

Sorry am I to be under the necessity of pointing out faults in the conduct of
another, which are, perhaps, long since repented of, and ought in that case to
be as much forgotten as they are most truly forgiven. Heaven knows, that, so
far from retaining any degree of resentment in my heart, the person breathes
not whom I wish to hurt, or to whom I would not this moment render every
service in my power. The injuries which I have sustained, had I no children,
should contentedly ^e buried in silence 'till the great day of retribution;
but, in justice to you, to (...), and to myself, it is incumbent on me, as
(...) possible, to efface the false impressions, which, by such silence, might
be fixed on your (...) and on those of your brothers and sister, (...) I
include with you. To this end, it will (...) necessary to enter into a
circumstantial history (...) fifteen years, f^ll of incidents of a nature (...)
uncommon as to be scarcely credible. This (...) convinced, will effectually
clear me, (...) your opinions, of the imputations I now lie under, and it will
prove, almost to a demonstration, the true cause of those proceedings against
me that were couched under pretended motives, as injurious to my reputation as
they were false in themselves.

But this must be deferred some time longer. You are all yet too young to enter
into things of this kind, or to judge properly of them. When a few years shall,
by ripening your understandings, remove this objection, you shall be informed
of the whole truth, most impartially and without disguise. 'Till then suspend
your belief of all that may have reached your ears with regard to me, and wait
the knowledge of those facts, which my future letters will reveal for your
information.

Thus much I thought it necessary to premise concerning myself, though foreign to
the design of this epistle, which is only to remind you that you have still an
affectionate mother, who is anxious for your welfare, and desirous of giving
you some advice with regard to your conduct in life. I would lay down a few
precepts for you, which, if attended to, will supply, as far as it is in my
power to supply, the deprivation of a constant and tender maternal care. The
address is to you in particulars your sisters being yet too young to receive
it, but my intention is for the equal service of you all.

You are just entering, my dear girl, into a world full of deceit and falsehood,
where few persons or things appear in their true character, Vice hides her
deformity with the borrowed garb of virtue; and, though discernible to an
intelligent and careful observer, ^y the unbecoming a^kwardness of her
deportment under, it, she passes on thousands undetected. Every present
pleasure usurps the name of happiness, and as such deceives the unwary pursuer.
Thus one general mask disguises the whole face of things, and it requires a
long experience, and a penetrating judgment, (...) discover the truth. Thrice
happy they, whose d^^^le tempers improve from the instructions of ^^^urer age,
and who thereby attain some degre^ of this necessary knowledge, while it may be
useful in directing their conduct*

The turn which your mind may now take, will fix the happiness or misery of
your future life; and I am too nearly concerned for your welfare, not to be
most solicitously anxious that you may be early lead into so just a way of
thinking as will be productive to you of a prudent, rational behavior, and
which will secure to you a lasting felicity. You were old enough before our
separation, to convince me that Heaven had not denied you a good natural
understanding. This, if properly cultivated, will set you above that trifling
disposition, too common among the female world, which makes youth ridiculous,
maturity insignificant, and old age contemptible. It is therefore needless to
enlarge on that head, since good sense is there the best adviser; and, without
it, all admonitions or directions on the subject would be as fruitless as to
lay down rules for the conduct or for the actions of an id^ot

There is no room to doubt but that sufficient care will be taken to give you a
polite education* but a religious one is still of greater consequence.
Necessary as the former is for your (...) proper figure in the world, and for
your being well accepted in it, the latter is yet more so to secure to you the
approbation of the greatest and best of Beings; on whose favor depends your
everlasting happiness. Let therefore your duty to GOD be ever the first and
principal object of your care. As your Creator and Governor, he claims
adoration and obedience; as your father, and friend, he demands submissive duty
and affection. Remember that from this common Parent of the unverse you
received your life; that to His general providence you owe the continuance of
it; and to his bounty you are indebted for all the health, ease, advantages, or
enjoyments, which help to make that life agreeable. A sense of benefits
received naturally inspires a grateful disposition, with a desire of making
suitable returns. All that can hear be made, for innumerable favors every
moment bestowed ^is a thankful acknowledgement, and a willing obedience. In
these be never wanting. Make it an invariable rule to begin and end the day
with a solemn address to the Deity. I mean not by this what is commonly, with
too much propriety, called saying of prayers, namely, a customary repetition of
a few good words, without either devotion or attention; than which nothing is
more inexcusable and affrontive to the Deity; it is the homage of the heart
that can alone be accepted by him. Expressions of our absolute dependence on,
and of our entire resignation to him; thanksgivings for the mercies already
received; petitions for those blessings it is fit for us to pray for; and
intercessions for all our fellow creatures, compose the principal parts of this
duty; which may be comprised in a very few words, or may be more enlarged upon,
as the circumstances of time and disposition may render most suitable: for it
is not the length, but the sincerity and attention of our prayers that will
make them (...). A good heart, joined to a tolerable understanding, will seldom
be at a loss for proper words with which to clothe these sentiments; and all
persons, being best acquainted with their own particular circumstances, may
reasonably be supposed best qualified for adapting their petitions and
acknowledgements to them; but for those who are of a different opinion, there
are many excellent forms of prayer already composed. Among these, none that I
know of, are equal to Doctor Hoadly's, the late Bishop of Winchester, which I
recommend to your perusal and use. In the preface to them, you will find better
instructions on this head than I am capable of giving, and to these I refer you.

It is acknowledged that our petitions cannot in any degree alter the intention
of a Being, who is in himself invariable, and without a possibility of change;
all that can be expected from them is, that, by bettering ourselves, they will
render us more proper objects of His favorable regard; and this must
necessarily be the result of a serious, regular, and constant discharge of this
branch of our duty; for it is scarcely possible to offer up our sincere and
fervent devotions to Heaven every morning and evening, without leaving on our
minds such useful impressions as will naturally dispose us to a ready and
cheerful obedience, and will inspire a filial fear of offending, the best
security virtue can have. As you value your own happiness, let not the force of
bad examples ever lead you into an habitual disuse of secret prayer: nor let an
unpardonable negligence so far (...) you, as to make you rest satisfied with a
formal, customary, inattentive repetition of some well-chosen words: let your
heart and attention always go with your lips, and experience will soon convince
you, that this permission of addressing the Supreme Being is the most valuable
prerogative of human nature; the chief, nay the only support under all the
distresses and calamities to which this state of sin and misery is liable; the
highest rational satisfaction the mind is capable of on this side the grave;
and the best preparative for everlasting happiness beyond it. This is a duty
ever in your own power, and therefore you only will be culpable by the omission
of it.

Public worship may not always be so, but whenever it is, do not wilfully
neglect the service of the church, at least on Sundays; and let your behavior
there be adapted to the solemnity of the place, and to the intention of the
meeting. Regard neither the actions nor the dress of others: let not your eyes
rove in search of acquaintance, but in the time of divine service avoid, as
much as possible, all complimental civilities, of which there are too great an
intercourse, in most of our churches. Remember that your only business there is
to pay a solemn act of devotion to Almighty GOD, and let every part of your
conduct be suitable to this great end. If you hear a good sermon, treasure it
in your memory, that you may reap all the benefit it was capable of imparting;
if you should hear but an indifferent one, some good things must be in it;
retain those, and let the remainder be buried in oblivion. Ridicule not the
preacher, who no doubt has done his best, and who is rather the object of pity
than of contempt, for having been placed in a situation of life, to which his
talents were not equal; he may perhaps be a good man, though he is not a great
orator.

I would also recommend to you the early and frequent participation of the
Communion, or what is commonly called Receiving the Sacrament, as the
indispensible duty of every christian. There is no institution of our religion
more simple, plain, and intelligible than this, as delivered to us by our
Savior; and most of the elaborate treatises written on the subject have served
only to puzzle and to disturb weak minds, by throwing the dark veil of
superstition and of human invention over a plain positive command, given by him
in so explicit a manner as to be easily comprehended by the meanest capacity,
and which in doubtless in the power of all his sincere followers to pay an
acceptable obedience to. Nothing has more contributed to the neglect of this
duty, than the numerous well-meaning books that have been written to enjoin a
month's or a week's preparation, as previously necessary to the due performance
of it; by these means filling the minds of many with needless terror, putting
it even out of the power of some to receive it at all, and inducing great
numbers to rest satisfied with doing it only once or twice in a year, on some
high festival; whereas it was certainly the constant custom of the apostles and
primitive christians on every Sunday; and it ought to be received by us as
often as it is administered in the church we frequent, which in most places is
but once in a month. Nor do I think it excusable, at any time, to turn our
backs upon the table we see prepared for that purpose, on pretense of not being
fit to partake worthly of it. The best, the only true preparation for this, and
for every other part of religious duty, is a good and virtuous life, by which
the mind is constantly kept in such a devotional frame, as to require but a
little recollection to be suited to any particular act of worship or of
obedience that may occasionally offer; and without a good and virtuous life,
there cannot be a greater or more fatal mistake than to suppose that a few days
or weeks spent in humiliation and prayer will render us at all the more
acceptable to the Deity, or that we should be thereby better fitted for any one
instance of that duty which we must universally pay, to be either approved by
him, or to be advantageous to ourselves: I would not therefore advise you to
read any of those weekly preparatives, which are too apt to lead the mind into
error, by teaching it to the rest in a ^ere shadow of piety, wherein there is
nothing rationally satisfactory. The best books which I have ever met with on
the subject, are Bishop HOADLY's Plain Account of the Nature and End of the
Sacrament of the Lord's Supper, and NELSON's Great Duty of frequenting the
Christian Sacrifice. To the former are annexed the prayers which I before
mentioned: these are well worth your attentive perusal; the design of the
institution is therein fully explained, agreeable both to scripture and ^o
reason; stripped of that veil of mystery which has been industriously thrown over
it by designing or by mistaken men; and it is there laid as plainly open to
every capacity as it was at first left us by our great Master. Read these books
with due attention: you will there find every necessary instruction concerning
the right, and every reasonable inducement to the constant and to the
conscientious performance of it.

The sincere practice of religious duties naturally leads to the proper
discharge of the social, which may be all comprehended in that one great
general rule of doing unto others as you would they should do unto you; but of
these, more particularly herafter. -- I shall first give you my advice
concerning EMPLOYMENT, it being of great moment to set out in life in such a
method as may be useful to yourself and benificial to others.

Time is invaluable, its loss is irretrievable! The remembrance of having made
an ill use of it must be one of the sharpest tortures to those who are on the
brink of eternity! and what can yield a more unpleasing retrospect than whole
years idled away in an irrational insignificant manner, examples of which are
continually before our eyes! Look on every day as a blank sheet of paper put
into your hands to be filled (...) remember the characters will remain to end.
(...) ages, and that they never can be expunged; (...) careful therefore not to
write any thing but what you may read with pleasure thousand years after. I
would not be understood in a sense so strict as might debar you from any
innocent amusement, suitable to your age, and agreeable to your inclination.
Diversions, properly regulated, are not only allowable, they are absolutely
necessary to youth, and are never criminal but when taken to excess; that is,
when they engross the whole thought, when they are made the chief business of
life; they then give a distaste to every valuable employment, and, by a sort of
infatuation, leave the mind in a state of restless impatience from the
conclusion of (...) till the commencement of another. This is the unfortunate
disposition of many; guard most carefully against it, for nothing can be
attended with more pernicious consequences. A little observation will convince
you, that there is not, amongst the human species, a set of more miserable
beings than these who cannot live out of a constant succession of diversions.
These people have no comprehension of the more satisfactory pleasure to be
found in retirement; thought is insupportable, and consequently solitude must
be intolerable to them; they are a burden to themselves, and a pest to their
acquaintance, by vainly seeking for happiness in company, where they are seldom
acceptable: I say vainly, for true happiness exists only in the mind, nothing
foreign can give it. The utmost to be attained by what is called a gay life, is
a short forgetfulness of misery, to be felt with accumulated anguish in every
interval of reflection. This restless temper is frequently the product of a too
eager pursuit of pleasure in the early part of life, to the neglect of those
valuable improvements which would lay the foundation of a more solid and
permanent felicity. Youth is the season for diversions, but it is also the
season for acquiring knowledge, for fixing useful habits, and for laying in a
stock of such well-chosen materials, as may grow into a serene happiness, which
will increase with every added year of life, and will bloom in the fullest
perfection in the decline of it. The great art of education consists in
assigning to each its proper place, in such a manner that the one shall never
become irksome by intrenching on the other. -- Our separation having taken from
me the pleasing (...) of endeavoring, to the best of my ability, to suit them
occasionally, as might be most conducive both to your profit and pleasure, it
only remains for me to give you general rules, which indeed accidents may make
it necessary sometimes to vary; those however must be left to your own
discretion, and I am convinced you have a sufficient share of understanding to
be very capable of making advantageously such casual regulations to yourself,
if the inclination is not wanting.

It is an excellent method to appropriate the morning wholly to improvement;
the afternoon may then be allowed to diversions. Under this last head, I place
company, books of the amusing kind, and entertaining productions of the needle,
as well as plays, balls, etc. which more commonly go by the name of diversions:
the afternoon, and evening till supper, may by these be employed with innocence
and propriety; but let not one of them ever be suffered to intrude on the
former part of the day, which should be always devoted to more useful
employments. One half hour, or more, either before or immediately after
breakfast, I would have you constantly give to the attentive perusal of some
rationally pious author, or to some part of the New Testament, with which, and
indeed with the whole Scripture, you ought to make yourself perfectly
acquainted, as the basis on which your religion is founded. From this practice
you will reap more real benefit than can ^e supposed by those who have never
made the experiment. The other hours may be divided amongst those necessary and
polite acquisitions which are suitable to your sex, age, and to your rank in
life. -- Study your own language thoroughly, that you may speak correctly, and
write grammatically: do not content yourself with the common use of words,
which custom has taught you from the cradle, but learn from whence they are
derived, and what are their proper significations. -- French you ought to be as
well acquainted with as with English, and Italian might, without much
difficulty, be added. -- Acquire a good knowledge of history; that of your own
country first, then of the other European nations: read them not with a view to
amuse, but to improve your mind; and to that end make reflections on what you
have read, which may be useful to yourself, and will render your conversation
agreeable to others. -- Learn so much of Geography as to form a just idea of
the situation of places, mentioned in any other; and this will make history
more entertaining to you.

It is necessary for you to be perfect in the first four rules of Arithmetic:
more you can never have occasion for, and the mind should not be burdened with
needless application -- Music and Drawing are accomplishments well worth the
trouble of attaining, if your inclination and genius lead to either: if not, do
not attempt them; for it will be only much time and (...) labor unprofitably
thrown away; it being next to impossible to arrive at any degree of perfection
in those arts, by the dint of perseverance only, if a good ^ar and a native
genius be wanting. -- The study of Natural Philosophy, you will find both
pleasing and instructive; pleasing, from the continual new discoveries to be
made of the inflam^^ably various beauties of nature, a most agreeable
gratification of that desire of knowledge wisely (...) in the human mind; and
highly instructive, as those descoveries lead to the contemplation of the great
Author of Nature, whose wisdom and goodness so conspicuously shine through all
His works, that it is impossible to reflect seriously on them, without
admiration and gratitude.

These, my dear, are but a few of those mental improvements I would recommend
to you. Indeed there is no branch of knowledge that your capacity is equal to,
and which you have an opportunity of acquiring, that, I think, ought to be
neglected. It has been objected against all female learning, (...) that of
household economy, that it tends only to fill the minds of the sex with a
concerned vanity, which sets them above their proper business; occasions an
indifference to, if not a total neglect of, their family affairs; and serves
only to render them useless wives, and impertinent companies. It must be
confessed, that some reading ladies have given but too much cause for this
objection; and could it be proved to hold good throughout the sex, it would
certainly be right to confine their improvements within the narrow limits of
the nursery, of the kitchen, and the confectionary: but, I believe, it will,
upon examination, be found, that such ill consequences proceed chiefly from too
great an imbecility of mind to be capable of much enlargement, or from a mere
affectation of knowledge, void of all reality. Vanity is never the result of
understanding. A sensible woman will soon be convinced, that all the learning
her utmost application can make her mistress of, will be from the difference of
education, in many points, inferior to that of a (...) boy (...) reflection
will keep her always, (...) and will be an effectual check to that loquacity
which renders some women such insupportable companions.

The management of all domestic affairs is certainly the proper business of
woman; and, unfashionably rustic as such an assertion may be thought, it is not
beneath the dignity of any (...), however high her rank, to know how to educate
her children, to govern her servants; (...) to order an elegant table with
economy, and to manage her whole family with prudence, regularity and method.
If in these she is defective, whatever may be her seize in any other
kinds of knowledge, she will act out of character; and, by not moving in her
proper sphere, she will become rather the object of ridicule than of
approbation. But I believe it may with truth be affirmed, that the neglect of
these domestic concerns has much more frequently proceeded from an exorbitant
love of diversions, from a ridiculous fondness for dress and gallantry, or from
a mistaken pride that (...) placed such duties in a servile light, from (...)
they have been considered as fit only for the employment of dependents, and
below the attention of a fine lady, than from too great an attachment to mental
improvements; yet, from whatsoever cause such a neglect proceeds, it is equally
unjustifiable. If any thing can be (...) in vindication of a custom unknown to
(...) ancestors, which the prevalence of fashion (...) made so general amongst
the modern (...) I mean, that of commiting to the care and discretionary power
of different servants, the sole management: of (...) affairs* nothing certainly
can be alleged in (...) of such an ignorance, in things of this nature, as
renders a lady incapable of giving proper directions on all occasions; an
ignorance, which, in never so exalted a station, will render her contemptible,
even to those servants on whose understanding and fidelity she, in fact,
becomes dependent for the regularity of her house, for the propriety, elegance,
and (...) of her table; which last article is seldom regarded by such sort of
people, who too frequently impose on those by whom they are thus impli^^^^
trusted. Make yourself, therefore, so thoroughly acquainted with the most
proper method of conducting a family, and with the necessary expense which
every article, in proportion to their number will occasion, that you may come
to a reasonable certainty of not being materially deceived, without the
ridiculous drudgery of following year servants continually, and meanly peeping
into every obscure corner of your house; nor is this at all difficult to
attain, as it requires nothing more than an attentive observation.

It is of late, in most great families, become too much the custom to be long
upon the books of every tradesman they employ. To assign a reason for this is
foreign to my purpose but I am certain it would, in general, be better both for
themselves and for the people they deal with never to be on them at all; and
what difficulty or inconvenience can arise, in a well regulated family, from
commissioning the steward or housekeeper to pay (...) every thing at the time
when it is brought in* This obsolete practice, though in itself very laudable,
is not at present, and perhaps never may be again, authorized by fashion;
however, let it be a rule with (...) to (...) as few debts as possible: most
things (...) to be purchased both better in their kind, and at a lower price,
by paying for them at the time of purchasing. But if, to avoid the supposed
trouble of frequent trifling disbursements, you choose to have the (...)
articles thrown together in a bill, let a note of the quantity and price be
brought with (...) such parcel: file these (...) compare them with the bill
when delivered (...) let such hills (...) regularly paid every quarter; (...)
is not reasonable to expect that a tradesman should give longer credit, without
making up the interest of his money by an advanced price on what he feels; and
be assured, if you find it convenient to pay at the end of three months, that
convenience must arise from living at too great an expense, and will
consequently increase in six months, and grow still greater at the end of the
year. By making short payments, you will become the sooner sensible of such a
mistake, and you will find it at first more easy to retrench any
supernumeraries than after having been long habituated to them.

If your house is superintended by a^ housekeeper, and your servants are
accountable to her, let your housekeeper be accountable to yourself, and let
her be entirely governed by your directions. Carefully examine her (...), and
suffer no extravagancies or unnessary articles to pass unnoticed. Let these
(...) brought to you every morning; what they contain will then be easily
recollected without (...) your memory; and your accounts being short will be
adjusted with less trouble and with more exactness. Should you at any time have
an upper servant, whose (...) and ^^^^cation were superior to that state of
(...) to which succeeding misfortunes may have reduced her, she ought to be
treated with peculiar indulgence, if she has understanding enough to be
conversible, and humility enough always to keep her proper distance, lessen, as
much as possible, every painful remembrance of former prospects, by looking
(...) her as an humble friend, and making her an occasional companion. But
never descend to converse with those whose birth, education and early (...) in
life were not superior to a state of servit^^^: their minds being in general
suited to their station, they are apt to be intoxicated by any degree of
familiarity, and to become useless and impertinent. The habit which very many
ladies have contracted of talking to and consulting with their women, has so
spoiled that set of servants, that few of them are to be met with, who do not
commence their service by giving their unasked opinion of your person, dress,
or management, artfully conveyed in the too generally accepted vehicle of
flattery; and, if they are allowed in this, they will next proceed to offer
their advice on any occasion that may happen to discompose or ruffle your
temper: check therefore the first appearance of such impertinences, by a
reprimand sufficiently severe to prevent a repetion of it.

Give your orders in a plain distinct manner, with goodnature joined to a
steadiness that will show they must be punctually obeyed. Treat all your
domestics with such mildness and affability, that you may be served rather out
of affection (...) fear. Let them live happily under you. Give them leisure for
their own business. (...) for innocent recreation, and more especially (...)
attending the public service of the church (...) instructed in their duty to
God; (...) which you have no right to expect the discharge of that owing to
yourself. When wrong, tell them calmly of their faults; if they amend not after
two or three such (...), dismiss them; but never descend to pa^ion and
scolding, which is inconsistent with a good understanding, and beneath the
dignity of a gentlewoman.

(...) very exact in your hours, without which there (...) be no order in your
family, I mean those of r^^^g, eating, etc. Require from your servants
punctuality in these, and never be yourself the cause of breaking through the
rules you have laid down, by deferring breakfast, putting back the dinner, or
letting it grow cold on the table, to wait your dressing; a custom by which
many ladies introduce confusion, and bring their orders into neglect. Be always
dressed at least half an hour before dinner. Having mentioned this important
article, I must be allowed a little digression on the subject.

Whatever time is taken up in dress beyond what is necessary to decency land
cleanliness, may be looked upon, to say no worse, as a vacuum in life. By
decency, I mean such a habit as is suitable to your rank and fortune than
ill-placed finery, inconsistent with (...) not ornamental, but ridiculous. A
(...) with fashion, so far as to avoid the (...) of singularity, is necessary;
but to (...) the extreme of fashions, more especially (...) which are
inconvenient, is the certain (...) of a weak mind. Have a better opinion to
yourself than to suppose you can receive my additional merit (...) the
adventitious ornaments of dress. Leave the (...) of the (...) to those who are
adapted to it* I mean (...) insignificant set of females, whose whole life,
from the cradle to the coffin, is but a varied scene of trifling, and whose
intellectuals ^it them not for any thing beyond it. Such as these may be
allowed to pass whole (...) at their looking-glass, in the important business
of suiting a set of ribb^nds, adjusting a few earls, (...) determining the
position of a patch; one, perhaps, of their most innocent ways of idling. (...)
let as small a portion of your time as possible (...) taken up in dressing. Be
always perfectly (...) and neat, both in your person and cloths; equally so
when alone, as in company. Look upon all beyond this as immaterial in itself,
any further, than as the different ranks of mankind have made some distinction
in habit generally esteemed necessary; and remember, that it is never the
dress, however sumptuous, which reflects dignity and honor on the person: it
is the rank and merit of the person that gives consequence to the dress. But to
return: --

It is your own steadiness and example of regularity that alone can preserve
uninterrupted order in your family. If, by forgetfulness or inattention, you at
any time suffer your commands to be disobeyed with impunity, your servants,
will grow upon (...) neglect into a habit of carelessness, till repeated
faults, of which this is properly the source, (...) you into anger, which an
even hand would never have made necessary. Be not whimsical or (...) in your
likings* approve with judgment, and condemn with reason; that acting right may
be (...) certainly the means of ob^uring your favor, as the contrary of
incurring your displeasure.

From what has been said you will see* that in order to the proper discharge of
(...) domestic duties, it is absolutely necessary for you to have a perfect
knowledge of every branch of household economy, without which you can neither
correct (...) is wrong, approve what is right, now give directions with
propriety. It is the want of this knowledge that reduces many a fine lady's
(...) to a state of the utmost confusion and dis^^^, on the sudden removal of a
managing (...), till the place is supplied by a successor of equal ability. How
much out of character, (...) ridiculous must a mistress of a family appear, who
is entirely incapable of giving practical orders on such an occasion. Let that
never be your case! Remember, my dear, this is the only proper temporal
business assigned you by Providence, and in a thing so indispensibly ^^^ful, so
easily attained, where so little study or application is necessary to arrive at
the (...) commendable degree of it, the want even of perfection is almost
inexcusable. Make yourself mistress of the theory, that you may be (...) the
more readily to reduce it into practice; and when you have a family to command,
(...) the care of it always employ your principal attention, and let every part
of it be subjected to (...) own inspection. If you rise early, a (...) a hope
you have not left off since you (...) me, if you waste no unnecessary time in
(...) and if you conduct your house in a regul^^^ (...) you will find many
vacant hours (...) by this material business; and no objection (...) ^e made to
your employing those is (...) improvements of the mind, as are most suitable to
your genius and inclination. I believe no (...) of understanding will ^ook
that, under such regulations, a woman (...) a (...) agreeable companion, a less
(...), a less careful mat^^^, or a worse mistress o^ a family, for all the
additional knowledge her industry and application can acquire.

The morning being always thus advantageously engaged, the latter part of the
day, as I before said, may be given to relaxation and amusement. Some of these
hours may be very agreeably and usefully employed by entertaining books; a few
of which, in the English language I will mention to you, as a specimen of the
kind I would recommend to your perusal; and I shall include some others,
religious and instructive.

Mason on Self Knowledge Economy of Human Life Seneca's Morals Epictetus
Cicero's Offices Collier's Antoninus
Sermons Hoadly's Seed's Sherlock's Sterne's Fordyce's

Rollin's (...) Letters Nature Displayed The Spectator The Guardian The Female
Spectator The Rambler The Idler The Adventurer The World Cicero's Familiar
Letters Pliny's and Cicero's Letters Fitzosborne's Letters Epistles for the
Ladies Telemachus The Vicar of Wakefield Guthrie's Geographical Grammar
Po^ter's Antiquities of Greece Rollin's Ancient History Kennett's Antiquities
of Rome Hooke's Roman History Hume's History of England Robertson's History of
Scotland Milton's Poetical Works Pope's Ethic Epistles -- Homer Thomson's Works
Young's Works Mrs. Rowe's Works Langhorne's Works Moore's Fables for the Female
Sex Tales of the Gen^^^^ Visions (...) Dodsley's Collection of Poems.
From these you may form a judgment of that sort of reading which will be both
useful and entertaining to you. I have named only those Practical Sermons,
which, I thought, would more (...).

To the above List the Editor of this volume begs leave to add the following
books, most of which have appeared since Lady P^^'s Letter was first printed:
Sermons Blair's Johnson's

West on the Resurrection Lord Lyttelton on the Conversion of St. Paul Miss
Talbot's Reflections and Essays Dr. Watts on the Improvement of the Mind
Wheatley on the Common Prayer Derham's Astro and Physico Theology Ray on the
Wonders of the Creation Mrs. Chapone's Letters and Miscellanies Mulso's
Callistus and Sophronius The Murror The Lounger The Observer Hayley's Triumphs
of Temper Rasselas, Prince of Abyssinia Madame De Genlis's Theater of Education
Ganganelli's Letters Marchioness de Lambert's Works Mrs. Barbauld's Poems and
other Pieces Miss Burney's Evelina and Cecilia Hayley's Young Widow, or,
History of Cornelia Sedley Mrs. Smith's Emmeline, or Orphan of the Castle
General Biographical Dictionary, 12 vol. 8vo. Knox's Collection of Voyages and
Travels Shakespeare's Plays Johnsons's Poets, with their Lives Miss More's
Poems, and Prose Pieces Mrs. Trimmer's Works directly
directly influence your conduct in life -- Our rule of faith should be taken
from the scripture alone, which we must understand for ourselves; therefore the
controverted opinions of others serve in general rather to puzzle than to
improve the mind.

Of Novels and Romances, very few are worth the trouble of reading: some of
them perhaps do contain a few good morals, but they are not worth the finding
where so much rubbish is intermixed. Their moral parts indeed are like small
diamonds amongst mountains of dirt and trash, which, after you have found them,
are too inconsiderable to answer the pains of coming at: yet, ridiculous as
these fictirious tales generally are, they are so artfully managed as to excite
an idle curiosity to see the conclusion, by which means the reader is drawn on,
through a tiresome length of foolish adventures, from which neither knowledge,
pleasure, or profit, seldom can accrue, to the common catastrophe of a wedding.
The most I have met with of these writings, to say no worse, it is little
better than the loss of time to peruse. But some of them have more pernicious
consequences. By drawing characters that never exist in life, by representing
persons and things in a false and extravagant light, and by a series of
improbable causes bringing on impossible events, they are apt to give a
romantic turn to the mind, which is often productive of great errors in
judgment, and of fatal mistakes in conduct. Of this I have seen frequent
instances, and therefore advise you scarce ever to meddle with any of them.

In justice however to a late ingenious author, this Letter must not be
reprinted, without my acknowledging that, since the last edition was published,
I have accidentally met with one exception to my general rule, namely, The
Vicar of Wake-field. That novel is equally entertaining and instructive,
without being liable to any of the objections that occasioned the above
restriction. This possibly may not be the only unexceptionable piece of the
kind, but as I have not met with any other, amongst a number I have perused, a
single instance does not alter my opinion of that sort of writing; and I still
think, the chance is perhaps a thousand to one against the probability of
obtaining the smallest degree of advantage from the reading any of them, as
well as that very few are to be found from which much injury may not be
received.

WORKS OF THE NEEDLE that employ the fancy, may, if they suit your inclination,
be sometimes a pretty amusement; but let this employment never extend to large
pieces, beyond what can be accomplished by yourself without assistance. There
is not a greater extravagance, under the specious name of good housewifery than
the furnishing of houses in this manner. Whole apartments have been seen thus
ornamented by the supposed work of a lady, who, perhaps, never shaded two (...)
the artifici^^^ forest, but has paid four times its value to (...) seve^^^
(...) employed in bringing it to perfection. The expense of these tedious
pieces of work I speak of experimentally, having, many years past, undertaken
one of them, which, when finished, was not worth fifteen pounds; and by a
computation since made, it did not cost less than fifty, in the hire and
maintenance of the people employed in it. This indeed was at the age of
seventeen, when the thoughtless inexperience of youth could alone excuse such a
piece of folly -- Embroideries in gold, silver, or shades of silk, come within
a narrower compass. Works of that kind which may, without calling in expensive
assistance, or tiring the fancy, be finished in a summer, will be a well-chosen
change of amusement, and may, as there are three of you, be made much more
agreeable, by one alternately reading aloud, while the other two are thus
employed. -- All kinds of what is called plain-work, though no very polite
accomplishment, you must be so well versed in, as to be able to cut out, make,
or mend your own linen. Some fathers, and some husbands, choose to have their
daughters and their wives thus attired in the labor of their own hands, and,
from a mistaken notion, believe this to be the great criterion of frugal
economy. Where that happens to be the inclination (...) opinion of either, it
ought always to be readily complied with: but, exclusive of such a motive, I
see no other that makes the practical part necessary to any lady; excepting,
indeed, where there is such a narrowness of fortune as admits (...)
conveniently the keeping a servant, to whom such exercises of the needle much
more properly appertain.

THE THEATER, which, by the indefatigable labor of the inimitable Mr. Ga^^^
(...) been brought to very great perfection, will afford yo^^ an equally
rational and improving entertainment. Your judgment will not now be called in
question^ your understanding affronted, nor will your modesty be offended by
the indecent ribaldry of those authors, who, to their defect in wit, have added
the want of good sense and of good manners. Faults of this kind, which, from a
blameful compliance with a corrupted taste, have sometimes crept into the works
of good writers, are by his prudent direction generally rectified or omitted on
the stage. You may now see many of the best plays performed in the best manner*
Do not, however, go to any that you have n^^ before heard the character of; be
present only at those which are approved by persons of understanding and
virtue, as calculated to answer th^^ proper ends of the theater, namely, that
of conveying instruction in the most pleasing method. Attend to the sentiment,
apply the moral, (...) then you cannot, I think, pass an evening (...) a more
useful, or in a more entertaining divers^^.

DANCING may also take its turn as a hea^^^ exercise, as it is generally
suitable to the (...) gaiety of young minds.

PART of the hours appropriated to (...) must of necessity be less agreeably
taken (...) the paying and receiving visits of mere cere^^^ and civility; a
tribute, by custom author by good manners enjoined. In these, when conversation
is only insignificant, join in it an apparent satisfaction. Talk of the eleg^^^
of a birthday suit, the pattern of a lace, judicious assortment of jewels, the
cut of a ruff^ or the set of a sleeve, with an unaffected ease not according to
the rank they hold in your estimation, but proportioned to the consequence they
may be of in the opinion of those you are conversing with. The great art of
pleasing is to appear pleased with others; suffer not then an ill-bred absence
of thought, or a contemptuous sneer, ever to betray a conscious superiority of
understanding, always productive of ill nature and ^^^like. Suit yourself to
the capacity and to the taste of your company, when that taste is confined to
harmless trifles; (...) where it is so far depraved as to delight in cruel
sarcasms on the absent, to be pleased with discovering the blemishes in a good
character, or in repeating the greater faults (...) a bad one, religion and
humanity in that case forbid the least degree of assent. If you have not any
knowledge of the persons thus unhappily sacrificed to envy or to malice, and
consequently ^^re ignorant as to the truth or falsehood of such ^^per^ions,
always suspect them to be ill ground^^ or, at least, greatly exaggerated. Show
your (...) approbation by a silent gravity, and by taking (...) first
opportunity to change the subject. But (...) ^^re any acquaintance with the
character in (...) gives room (...) defending it, let not an (...) complaisance
prevail over justice: (...) injured innocence with all the freedom and (...) of
an unrestrained benevolence; and (...) the faults of the ^^uilty will admit of
pal^^^ urge all that truth can allow in mitiga^^^ (...) of error. From this
method, besides the (...) ^^sure arising from the consciousness of a strict
(...) ^^^rm^ty to the great rule of doing as you would (...) done by, you will
also reap to yourself the benefit of being less frequently pestered with themes
ever painful to a humane disposition. If, unfortunately, you have some
acquaintance whose malevolence or heart no sentiment of virtue, no check of
good-manners, ca^^ restrain from these malicious ^allies of ill nature, to them
let your (...) be made as seldom, and as short, as decency (...) permit; there
being neither benefit nor satisfaction to be found in such company, amongst
whom (...) may be introduced with advantage. On this account, it will be proper
for you to know the Plays most in use, because it is an argument of great folly
to engage in any thing without doing it well; but this is a diversion which I
hope you will have no fondness for, as it is in itself, to say no worse, a very
insignificant amusement.

With persons for whom you can have no esteem, good-breeding may oblige you to
keep up an intercourse of ceremonious visits, but politeness enjoins not the
length or frequency of them. Here inclination may be followed without a breach
of civility: there is no tax upon intimacy but from choice; and that choice
should ever be founded on merit, the certainty whereof you cannot be too
careful in previously examining. Great caution is necessary not to be deceived
by specious appearances. A plausible behavior often, upon a superficial
knowledge, creates, a prepossession in favor of particulars, who, upon a
nearer view, may be found to have no claim to esteem. The forming a precipitate
judgment sometimes leads into an unwary intimacy, which it may prove absolutely
necessary (...) ^eak off; and yet that breach may be attended with innumerable
inconveniences; nay, perhaps, with very material and lasting ill consequences:
prudence, therefore, here enjoins the greatest circumspection.

Few people are capable of friendship, and still fewer have all the
qualifications one would choose in a friend. The fundamental point is a virtuous
disposition; but to that should be added a good understanding, a solid
judgment, sweetness of temper, steadiness of mind, freedom of behavior, and
sincerity of heart. Seldom as these are to be found united, never makes a bosom
friend of any one greatly deficient in either. Be slow in contracting
friendship, and invariably constant in maintaining it. Expect not many friends,
but think yourself happy, if, through life, you meet with one or two who
deserve that name, and have all the requisites for the valuable relation. This
may justly be deemed the highest blessing of mortality. Uninterrupted health
has the general voice; but, in my opinion, such an intercourse of friendship,
as much deserves the preference, as the mental pleasures, both in nature and
degree, exceed the corporeal. The weaknesses, the pains of the body may be
inexpressibly alleviated by the conversation of a person, by affection
endeared, by reason approved; whose tender sympathy partakes your afflictions,
and shares your enjoyments; who is steady in the correction, but mild in the
reproof of your faults; like a guardian angel, ever watchful to warn you of
unforeseen danger, and, by timely admonitions, to prevent the mistakes incident
to human frailty and to self-partiality: this is the true office of friendship,
With such a friend, no state of life can be absolutely unhappy; but, destitute
of some such connection, Heaven has so formed our natures for this intimate
society, that amidst the affluence of fortune, and in the flow of uninterrupted
health, there will be an aching void in the solitary breast, which can never
otherwise know a plenitude of happiness.

Should the Supreme Disposer of all events bestow on you this superlative gift,
to such a friend let your heart be ever unreservedly open. Conceal no secret
thought, disguise no latent weakness, but bare your bosom to the faithful probe
of honest friendship, and shrink not if it smarts beneath the touch; nor with
tenacious pride dislike the person who freely dares to condemn some favorite
foible; but, ever open to conviction, hear with attention, and receive with
gratitude, the kind reproof that flows from tenderness. When sensible of a
fault, be ingenuous in the confession -- be sincere and steady in the
correction of it.

Happy is her lot, who in a Husband find this invaluable friend! Yet so great
is the hazard, so disproportioned the chances, that I could almost wish the
dangerous die was never to be thrown for any of you: but as probably it may,
let me conjure ye all, my dear girls, if ever any of you take this most
important step in life, to proceed with the utmost care and with deliberate
circumspection. Fortune and Family it is the sole province of your father to
direct in: he certainly has always an undoubted right to a negative voice,
though not to a compulsive one. As a child is very justifiable in the refusal
of her hand, even to the absolute command of a father, where her heart cannot
go with it; so is she extremely culpable in giving it cont^^^^ to his
approbation. Here I must take shame to myself; and for this unpardonable fault,
I do justly acknowledge that the subsequent ill consequences (...) a most
unhappy marriage were the proper punishment. This, and every other error in my
own conduct, I do, and shall, with the utmost candor, lay open to you;
sincerely praying that you may reap the benefit of my experience, and that you
may avoid those rocks, which, either by carelessness, or sometimes, alas, by
too much caution, I have split against! But to return: --

The chief point to be regarded in the choice of a companion for life, is a
really virtuous principle, an unaffected goodness of heart. Without this, you
will be continually shocked by indecency, and pained by impiety. So numerous
have been the unhappy victims to the ridiculous opinion, " A reformed libertine
makes the best husband," that, did not experience daily evince the contrary,
one would believe it impossible for a girl who has a tolerable degree of common
understanding to be made the dupe of so erroneous a position, which has not the
least shadow of reason for its foundation, and which a small share of
observation will prove to be false in fact. A man who has been long conversant
with the worst sort of women, is very apt to contract a bad opinion of and a
contempt for the sex in general. Incapable of esteeming any, he is suspicious
of all, jealous without cause, angry without provocation, and his own disturbed
imagination is a continual source of ill humor. To this is frequently joined a
bad habit of body, the natural consequence of an irregular life, which gives an
additional sourness to the temper. What rational prospect of happiness can
there be with such a companion? And that this is the general character of those
who are called reformed rakes, observation will certify -- But, admit there may
be some exceptions, it is a hazard upon which no considerate women would
venture the peace of her whole future life. The vanity of those girls who
believe themselves capable of working miracles of this kind, and who give up
their persons to men of libertine principles, upon the wild expectation of
reclaiming them, justly deserves the disappointment which it will generally
meet with; for, believe me, a wife is, of all persons, the least likely to
succeed in such an attempt. Be it your care to find that virtue in a lover
which you must never hope to form in a husband. Good-sense and goodnature are
almost equally requisite. If the former is wanting, it will be next to
impossible for you to esteem the person of whose behavior you may have cause
to be ashamed; and mutual esteem is as necessary to happiness in the married
state as mutual affection: without the latter, every day will bring with it
some fresh cause of vexation; 'till repeated quarrels produce a coldness, which
will settle into an irreconcilable aversion, and you will become not only each
other's torment, but the object of contempt to your family and to your
acquaintance.

This quality of Goodnature is, of all others, the most difficult to be
ascertained, on account of the general mistake of blending it with Good Humor,
as if they were in themselves the same; whereas, in fact, no two principles of
action are more essentially different. And this may require some explanation.
-- By Goodnature I mean, that true benevolence which partakes the felicity of
all mankind; which promotes the satisfaction or every individual within the
reach of its ability; which relieves the distressed, comforts the afflicted,
diffuses blessings, and communicates happiness, as far as its sphere of action
can extend, and which, in the private scenes of life, will shine conspicuous in
the dutiful son, the affectionate husband, the indulgent father, the faithful
friend, and the compassionate master both to man and beast: whilst Good Humor
is nothing more than a cheerful, pleasing deportment, arising either from a
natural gaiety of mind, or from an affectation of popularity, joined to an
affability (...) behavior, the result of good-breeding, and a ready compliance
with the taste of every company. This kind of mere good humor is, by far, the
most striking quality; it is frequently mistaken for, and complimented with, the
superior name of real goodnature. A man by this specious appearance has often
acquired that appellation, who, in all the actions of his private life, has
been a morose, cruel, revengeful, sullen, haughty tyrant. Let them put on the
cap whose temples fit the galling wreath! On the contrary, a man of a truly
benevolent disposition, and formed to promote the happiness of all round him,
may sometimes, perhaps from an ill habit of body, an accidental vexation, or
from a commendable openness of heart above the meanness of disguise, be guilty
of little sallies of peevishness, or of ill-humour, which, carrying the
appearance of ill nature, may be unjustly thought to proceed from it, by
persons who are unacquainted with his true character, and who take ill humor
and ill nature to be synonimous terms, though in reality they bear not the
least analogy to each other. In order to the forming a right judgment, it is
absolutely necessary to observe this distinction, which will effectually secure
you from the dangerous error of taking the shadow for the substance; an
irretrievable mistake, pregnant with innumerable consequent evils!

From what has been said it plainly appears, that the criterion of this amiable
virtue is not to be taken from the general opinion; mere good humor being, to
all intents and purposes, sufficient in this particular to establish the public
voice in favor of a man utterly devoid o^ every humane and benevolent
affection of heart. (...) is only from the less conspicuous (...) of life,
(...) more retired sphere of action, from the art (...) of domestic conduct,
that the real character can with any certainty be drawn. These undisguised
proclaim the man; but, as they shun the glare of light, nor court the noise of
popular applause, they pass unnoticed, and are seldom known 'till after an
intimate acquaintance. The best method, therefore, to avoid the deception in
this case, is to lay no stress on outward appearances, which are too often
fallacious, but to take the rule of judging from the simple, unpolished
sentiments of those, whose dependent connections give them an undeniable
certainty; who not only see, but hourly feel the good or bad effects of that
disposition to which they are subjected. By this I mean, that if a man is
equally respected, esteemed, and beloved by his tenants, by his dependents and
domestics; from the substantial farmer to the laborious peasant: from the proud
steward to the submissive wretch, who, thankful for employment, humbly obeys
the mental tri^^^ you may justly conclude he has that true goodnature, that
real benevolence, which delights in communicating felicity, and enjoys the
satisfaction it diffuses. But if by these he is despised and hated, served
merely from a principle of fear, devoid of affection -- which is very easily
discoverable -- whatever may be his public character, however favorable the
general opinion, be assured, that his disposition is such (...) never be
productive of domestic happiness -- I have been the more particular on this
head, as it is one of the most essential qualifications to be regarded, and of
all others the most liable to be mistaken.

Never be prevailed with my dear, to give (...) to a person defective in these
m^terial points Secure of virtue, of goodnature, and understanding in a
husband, you may be secure of happiness. Without the two former, it is
unattainable: without the latter, in a tolerable degree, it must be very
imperfect.

Remember, however, that infallibility is not the property of man, or you may
entail disappointment on yourself, by expecting what is never to be found. The
best men are sometimes inconsistent with themselves. They are liable to be
hurried by sudden starts of passion into expressions and actions which their
cooler reason will condemn. They may have some oddities of behavior, some
peculiarities of temper; they may be subject to accidental ill-humour, or to
whimsical complaints: blemishes of this kind often shade the brightest
character, but they are never destructive of mutual felicity, unless when they
are made so by an improper resentment, or by an ill-judged opposition. Reason
can never be heard by passion; the offer of it tends only to inflame the more.
When cooled, and in his usual temper, the man of understanding, if he has been
wrong, will suggest to himself all that could be urged against him: the man of
good nature will, unupbraided, own his error: immediate contradiction is,
therefore, wholly unserviceable, and highly imprudent; an after repetition
equally unnecessary and injudicious. Any peculiarities in the temper or
behavior ought to be properly represented in the tenderest and in the most
friendly manner, and if the representation of them is made discreetly, it will
generally be well taken: but if they are so habitual as not easily to be
altered, strike not too often upon the unharmonious string; rather let them
pass as unobserved: such a cheerful compliance will better c^ment your union;
and they may be made easy to yourself, by reflecting on the superior good
qualities by which these trifling faults are so greatly over-balanced. -- You
must remember, my dear, these rules are laid down, on the supposition of your
being united to a person who possesses the three essential qualifications for
happiness beforementioned. In this case, no farther direction is necessary,
but that you strictly perform the duty of a wife, namely, to love, to honor
and obey. The two first articles are a tribute so indispensibly due to merit,
that they must be paid by inclination; and they naturally lead to the
performance of the last, which will not only be an easy, but a pleasing task,
since nothing can ever be enjoined by such a person that is in itself improper,
and few things will, that can with any reason be disagreeable to you.

Here should this subject end, were it not more than possible for you, after
all that has been urged, to be led by some inferior motive to the neglect of
the primary caution; and that, either from an opinion too hastily entertained,
from an unaccountable partiality, or from the powerful prevalence of
persuasion, you may be unfortunately induced to give your hand to a man whose
bad heart and morose temper, concealed by a well-practised dissimulation, may
render every flattering hope of hapiness abortive. -- May Heaven, in mercy,
guard you from this fatal error! Such a companion is the worst of all temporal
ills; a deadly potion, that imbitters every social sense of life, damps every
rising joy, and banishes that cheerful temper which alone can give a true
relish to the blessings of mortality. Most sincerely do I pray that this may
never be your lot! and I hope your prudent circumspection will be sufficient to
guard you from the danger. But the bare possibility of the event makes it not
unnecessary to lay down a few rules for the maintaining some degree of ease,
under such a deprivation of happiness. This is by far the most difficult part
of my present undertaking; it is hard to advise here, and (...) harder to
practice the advice: the subject (...) too extensive to be minutely treated
within the compass of a letter, which must confine me to the most material
points only: in these I shall give you the best directions in my power, very
ardently wishing that you may never have occasion to make use of them.

The being united to a man of irreligious principles makes it impossible to
discharge a great part of the proper duty of a wife. To name (...) one
instance, obedience will be rendered impracticable by frequent injunctions
inconsistent wi^h and contrary to the higher obligations of morality. This is
not supposition, but is founded upon facts, which I have too often seen and can
attest. Where this happens, the reasons for noncompliance ought to be offered
in a plain, strong, good-natured manner; there is at least the chance of
success from being heard; but should those reasons be rejected, or the hearing
of them be refused, and silence on the subject enjoined -- which is most
probable, few people caring to (...) what they know to be right, when
determined not to appear convinced by it -- obey the ^^^ction, and urge not the
argument, farther: keep, however, steady to your principles, and suffer neither
persuasion nor threats to prevail on you to act contrary to them. All commands
repugnant to the laws of christianity, it is your indispensible duty to
disobey; all requests that are inconsistent with prudence, or incompatible with
the rank and character which you ought to maintain in life, it is your interest
to refuse. A compliance with the former would be criminal; a consent to the
latter highly indiscreet; and it might thereby subject you to general censure:
for a man capable of requiring from his wife what he knows to be in itself
wrong, is equally capable of throwing the whole blame of such misconduct on
her, and of afterward upbraiding her for a behavior to which he will, upon
the same principle, disown that he has been accessory. Many similar instances
have come within the compass of my own observation. In things of a less
material nature, that are neither criminal in themselves nor pernicious in
their consequences, always acquiesce, if insisted on, however disagreeable they
may be to your own temper and inclination. Such a compliance will evidently
prove that your refusal, in the other cases, proceeds not from a spirit of
contradiction, but merely from a just regard to that superior duty, which can
never be infringed with impunity. Passion may resent, but reason must approve
this conduct; and therefore it is the most likely method, in time, to make a
favorable impression. But if you should fail of such success, you will at
least enjoy that satisfactory self-approbation, which is the inseparable
attendant of a truly religious and rational deportment.

Should the painful task of dealing with a moro^^ tyrannical temper be assigned
you^ there is little more to be recommended than a patient submission to an
evil which admits not of a remedy. Ill Nature is increased, obstinacy confirmed
by opposition; the less such a temper is contradicted, the more supportable
will it be to those who are under its baneful influence. When all endeavors to
please are ineffectual, and when a man seems determined to find fault with
every thing, as if his chief pleasure consisted in tormenting those about him,
it requires a more than common degree of patience and resolution to forbear
uttering reproaches, which such a behavior may be justly allowed to deserve:
yet it is absolutely necessary to the maintaining any tolerable degree of ease,
not only to restrain all expressions of resentment, but to withhold even those
disdainful looks which are apt to accompany a contemptuous silence; and they
both equally tend only to increase the malady. This infernal delight in giving
pain is most unwearied in the search of matter for its gratification, and can
either find, or unaccountably can form it, in almost all the occurrences of
life; but, when suffered unobstructed and unregarded to run its malicious
course, it will quickly vent its blunted arrows, and will die of
disappointment; whilst all endeavors to appease, all complaints of unkindness
will but sharpen against yourself the weapon's edge, and, by proving your
sensibility of the wound, will give the wished-for satisfaction to him who
inflicts it. Prudence, in this case, directs more than ordinary circumspection,
that every part of your behavior may be as blameless as possible, even to the
abstaining from the least appearance of evil; and after you have, to the utmost
of your power, strove to merit approbation, expect not to meet with it: by
these means you will escape the mortification of being disappointed, which,
often repeated, is apt to give a gloomy sourness to the temper, incompatible
with any degree of contentment. You must, so situated, learn to be satisfied
with the consciousness of acting right, according to your best abilities, and,
if possible, you should look with an unconcerned indifference on the reception
of every successful attempt to please.

This, it must be owned, is a hard lesson of philosophy; it requires no less
than an absolute command over the passions; but let it be remembered, that such
a command will itself most amply recompense every difficulty; it will
compensate every pain, which it may cost you to obtain it: besides, it is, I
believe, the only way to preserve any tranquillity of mind, under so
disagreeable a connection.

As the want of understanding is by no art to be concealed, by no address to be
disguised, it might be supposed impossible for a woman of sense to unite
herself to a person whose defect, in this instance, must render that sort of
rational society which contributes the chief happiness of such an union,
impossible; yet, here, how often has the weakness of female judgment been
conspicuous! The advantages of great superiority on rank of fortune have
frequently proved so irresistible a temptation, as, in opinion, to outweigh not
only the fo^ly but even the vices of its possessor; a grand mistake, ever
merely acknowledged by a subsequent repentance, when the expected pleasures or
affluence, equipage, and all the glittering pomp of useless pageantry have been
experimentally found insufficient to make amends for the want of that constant
satisfaction, which results from the social joy of conversing with a reasonable
friend! But however weak this motive must be acknowledged, it is more excusable
than another, which, I fear, has sometimes had an equal influence on the mind;
I mean, so great a love of sway, as to induce her to give the preference to a
person of weak intellectuals, in hopes thereby of holding, uncontrouled, the
reins of government. The expectation is, in fact, ill-grounded obstinacy; and
pride being generally the companion of folly, the silliest people are usually
the most tenacious of their opinions, and consequently, the hardest of all
others to be managed. but admit the contrary, the principle is in itself bad;
it tends to invert the order of nature, and to counteract the design of
Providence.

A woman can never be seen in a more ridiculous light than when she appears to
govern her husband. If, unfortunately, the superiority of understanding is on
her side, the apparent consciousness of that superiority betrays a weakness
that renders her contemptible in the fight of every considerate person, and it
may, very probably, fix in his mind a dislike never to be eradicated. In such a
case, if it should ever be your own, remember that some degree of dissimulation
is commendable, so far as to let your husband's defect appear unobserved. When
he judges wrong, never flatly contradict, but lead him insensibly into another
opinion, in so discreet a manner that it may seem entirely his own; and let the
whole credit of every prudent determination rest on him without indulging the
foolish vanity of claiming any merit to yourself. Thus a person of but an
indifferent capacity may be so assisted as, in many instances, to shine with a
borrowed luster, scarce distinguishable from the native, and, by degrees, he
may be brought into a kind of mechanical method of acting properly, in all the
common occurrences of life. Odd as this position may seem, it is founded in
fact; and I have seen the method successfully practiced by more than one
person, where a weak mind, on the governed side, has been so prudently set off
as to appear the sole director; like the statute of the Delphic god, which was
thought to give forth its own oracles, whilst the humble priest, who lent his
voice, was by the shrine concealed, nor sought a higher glory than a supposed
obedience to the power he would be thought to serve.

From hence it may be inferred, that by a perfect propriety of behavior, ease,
and contentment, at least, are attairable with a companion who has not the most
exalted understanding; but then, virtue and goodnature are presupposed, or
there will be nothing to work upon.

A vicious ill-natured fool being so untractable and tormenting an associate,
there needs only to add jealousy to the composition, to make the curse
complete. This passion, once suffered to get footing in the heart, is hardly
ever to be extirpated: it is a constant source of torment to the breast that
gives it reception, and is (...) inexhaustible fund of vexation to the object
of it. With a person of this unfortunate disposition, it is prudent to avoid
the least appearance of concealment. A whisper in a mixed company, a message
given in a low voice to a servant, have, by the power of a disturbed
imagination, been magnified into a material injury. Whatever has the air of
secrecy raises terror in a mind naturally distrustful. A perfect unreserved
openness, both in conversation and behavior, starves the anxious expectation
of discovery, and may very probably lead into an habitual confidence, the only
antidote against the prison of suspicion. It is easier to (...) than remove a
received ill impression; and, (...) it is much wiser to be sometimes deficient
in little points of civility, which, however indifferent in themselves, may
happen unaccountably to clash with the ease of a person, whose repose it is
both your duty and interest to promote. It is much more commendable,
contentedly to incur the censure of a trifling disposition, by a circumstantial
unasked relation of insignificant incidents, than to give any room for
apprehending the least degree of reserve. Such a constant method of proceeding,
together with a reasonable compliance, is the most likely to cure this painful
turn of mind; for, by withholding every support that could give strength to
it, the want of matter to feed on may probably in time cause its extinction.
If, unhappily, it is so constitutional, so interwoven with the soul as to
become, in a manner, inseparably united with it, nothing remains but to submit
patiently to the Will of Heaven, under the pressure of an unalterable evil; to
guard carefully against the natural consequence of repeated undeserved
suspicions, namely, a growing indifference, which too frequently terminates in
aversion; and, by considering such a situation as a trial of obedience and
resignation, to receive the comfort that must arise from properly exercising
one of the most exalted of the christian virtues. I cannot dismiss this subject
without adding a particular caution to yourself concerning it.

Jealousy, is, on several accounts* still more inexcusable in a woman. There is
not any thing that so much expose her to ridicule, or so much subjects her to
the insult of affrontive addresses: it is an inlet to almost every possible
evil, the fatal source of innumerable indirections, the sure destruction of her
own peace, and is frequently the bane of her husband's affection. Give not a
momentary harbor to its shadow in your heart; fly from it, as from the face of
a fiend, that would lead your unwary steps into a gulf of unalterable misery.
When once embarken in the matrimonial voyage, the fewer faults you discover in
your partner, the better. Never search after what it will give you no pleasure
to find; never desire to hear what you will not like to be told; therefore
avoid that tribe of impertinents, who, either from a malicious love of discord,
or from the mea^^er though less criminal motive of ingratiating themselves by
gratifying the blame-able curiosity of others; sow dissension wherever they
gain admittance; and by telling unwelcome (...), or, more frequently, by
insinuating (...) falsehoods, injure innocent people, disturb (...) union, and
destroy the peace of families. Treat these emissaries of Satan with the
contempt they deserve; hear not what they offer to communicate, but give them
at once to understand, that you can never look on those as your friends who
speak in a disadvantageous manner of that person whom you would always choose to
see in the most favorable light. If they are not effectually silenced by such
rebukes, be inaccessible to their visits, and break off all acquaintance with
such incorrigible pests of society, who will be ever upon the watch to seize an
unguarded opportunity of disturbing your repose.

Should the companion of your life be guilty of some secret indiscretions, run
not the hazard of being told by these malicious meddlers, what, in fact, it is
better for you never to know: but if some unavoidable accident betrays an
imprudent correspondence, take it for a mark of esteem, that he endeavors to
conceal from you what he knows you must, upon a principle of reason and
religion, disapprove; and do not, by discovering your acquaintance with it,
take off the restraint which your supposed ignorance lays him under, and
thereby, perhaps, give a latitude to undisguised irregularities. Be assured,
whatever accidental sallies the gaiety of inconsiderate youth may lead him
into, you can never be indifferent to him, whilst he is careful ^o preserve
your peace, by concealing what he imagines might be an infriengement of (...).
Rest then satisfied, that time and reason will most certainly get the better of
all faults which proceed not from a bad heart; and that, by maintaining the
first place in his esteem, your happiness will be built on too firm a
foundation to be easily shaken.

I have been thus particular on the choice of a husband, and on the material
parts of conduct in a married life, because thereon depends not only the
temporal, but often the external felicity of those who enter into that state; a
constant scene of disagreement, of ill nature and quarrels, necessarily
unfitting the mind for every religious and social duty, by keeping it in a
disposition directly opposite to that christian piety, to that practical
benevolence and rational composure, which alone can prepare it for everlasting
happiness.

Instructions on this head, considering your tender age, may seem premature,
and should have been deferred 'till occasion called for them, had our situation
allowed me frequent opportunities of communicating my sentiments to you; but
that not being the case, I choose, in this epistle, at once to offer you my best
advice in every circumstance of great moment to your well being, both here and
hereafter, left at a more proper season it may not happen to be in my power.
You may de^^^ the particular consideration of this part, ^till the design of
entering into a new scene of life may make it useful to you; which, I hope,
will not be for some years; an unhappy marriage being more generally the
consequence of a too early engagement, before reason has gained sufficient
strength to form a solid judgment, o^ which only a proper choice can be
determined. G^ea^ (...) the hazard of a mistake, and irretrievable the effects
of it! Many are the degrees between happiness and misery! Absolute misery, I
will venture ^o affirm, is to be avoided by a proper behaviour^ even under all
the complicated (...) of human life, but to arrive at that proper behavior,
requires the highest degree of christian philosopy. And who would voluntarily
put themselves upon a state of trial so severe, in which not one of a thousand
has been found able to come off victorious? Betwixt this and positive happiness
there are innumerable steps of comparative evil; each has its separate
conflict, variously difficult, differently painful, under all which a patient
submission and a conscious propriety of behavior is the only attainable good.
Far short indeed of possible temporal felicity is the ease arising from hence!
Rest not content with the prospect of such ease, but fix on a more eligible
point of view, by aiming at true happiness; and, take my word, that can never
be found in a married state, without the three essential qualifications already
mentioned, Virtue, Goodnature, and Good-Sense, in a husband. Remember,
therefore, my dear girl, this (...) caution, if you ever resolve on marriage,
never (...) give your hand to a man who wants either of them, whatever other
advantages he may be possessed of; so shall you not only escape all those
vexations which thousands of unthinking mortals hourly repent of having brought
upon themselves; but, most assuredly, if it is not your own fault, you will
enjoy that uninterrupted domestic harmony, in the afffectionate society of a
virtuous companion, which constitutes the highest satisfaction of human life.
Such an union, founded o^ reason and religion, cemented by mutual esteem and
tenderness, is a kind of saint emblem, if the comparison may be allowed, of the
promised reward of virtue in a future state; and most certainly, it is an
excellent preparative for it, by preserving a perfect equanimity, by keeping a
constant composure of mind, which naturally lead to the proper discharge of all
the religious* and social duties of life, the unerring road to everlasting
peace -- The first have been already spoken to; it remains only to mention some
few of the latter.

Amongst these ECONOMY may, perhaps, be thought improperly placed; yet many of
the duties we own to society being often rendered impracticable by the want of
it, there is not (...) much impropriety in ranking it under this (...) as may
at first be imagined. For instance a man who lives at an expense beyond what
his income will support, lays himself under a necessity of being unjust, by
withholding from his creditors what they have a right to demand from him as
their due, according to all laws both human and divine; and thereby he often
entails ruin on an innocent family, who, but for the loss sustained by his
extravagance, might have comfortably subsisted on the profits of their
industry. He likewise puts it out of his own power to give that relief to the
indigent, which, by the laws of humanity, they have a right to expect, the
goods of fortune being given, as a great Divine excellently observes, for the
use and support of others, as well as for the person on whom (...) are
bestowed. These are surely great (...) that duty we owe (...) our
fellow creatures, and (...) effects (...) frequently and naturally produced by
the (...).

You will find it a very good method so to regulate your stated expenses as to
bring them always one-fourth part within your certain annual income: by these
means you will avoid being at any time distressed by unforeseen accidents, and
you will have it more easily in your power materially to relieve those who
deserve assistance. But the giving trifling sums, indiscriminately, to such as
appear necessitous, is far from being commendable; it is an injury to society;
it is an encouragement to idleness, and helps to fill the streets with lazy
beggars, who live upon misapplied bounty, to the prejudice of the industrious
poor. These are useful members of the commonwealth; and on them such
benefactions might be serviceably bestowed. Be sparing therefore in this kind
of indiscriminate donations; they are too constantly an insignificant relief to
the receives, supposing them really in want; and frequently repeated, they
amount to a considerable sum in the year's account. The proper objects of
charity are those, who, by unavoidable misfortunes, have fallen from affluent
circumstances into a state of poverty and distress; those also, who, by
unexpected disappointments in trade, are on the point of being reduced to (...)
impossibility of carrying on that business, on which their present subsistence
and their future prospects in life depend, from the incapacity of raising an
immediate sum to surmount the difficulty; and those who, by their utmost
industry, can hardly support their families above the miseries of want; or who,
by age or by illness, are rendered incapable of labor. Appropriate a certain
part of your income to the relief of these real distresses. To the first, give
as largely as your circumstances will allow; to the second, after the example
of an^ excellent Prelate of our own church, lend, if it is in your power, a
sufficient sum to prevent the threatened ruin; on condition of being repaid the
loan, without interest, if Providence enables them, by future success, to do it
with convenience. The same method may be used where indigence renders industry
unavailable, by depriving it of the means to lay in a small original stock to
be improved. Never take a note of hand or any acknowledgement of such loan,
le^t what you intended for a benefit should be afterward made the instrument
of ruin to the receiver, by a different disposition in your successor. But such
assistance ought not to be given to any, without a thorough knowledge of their
character, and from having good reason to believe them not only industrious but
strictly honest, which will be a sufficient obligation on them for the
repayment; and the sums so rapid ought to be laid by, 'till an opportunity
again offers of making them in like manner serviceable to others. The latter
sort, who are able to work, may, by a small addition to the profits of their
own labor, be rescued from misery, and may be put into a comfortable way of
subsistence. Those who, by age or by infirmity, are rendered utterly incapable
of supporting themselves, have an undoubted right, not only to the necessaries,
but even to some of the conveniences of life from all whom Providence has
placed in the more happy state of (...) and independence.

As your fortune and situation are yet undetermined, I have purposely laid down
such rules as may be adapted to every station. A large fortune gives greater
opportunity of doing good, and of communicating happiness in a more extensive
degree; but a small one is no excuse for with holding a proportionate relief
from real and deserving objects of compassion. To assist them is an
indispensible duty of christianity. The first and great commandment is, To love
GOD with all your heart; the second, To love your neighbor as yourself: Whosoever
sees his brother in need, and shuts up his bowels of compassion, how
dwells the love of God in him? or how the love of his neighbor? If dificient
in these primary duties, vain are the hopes of acceptance built on a partial
obedience to the lesser branches of the law! -- Inability is often pleaded as
an excuse for the want of charity, by persons who make no scruple of daily
lavishing on their pleasures, what, if better applied, might have made an
indigent family happy through life. These persons lose sight of real felicity,
by the mistaken pursuit of its shadow: the pleasures which engross their
attention die in the enjoyment, are often succeeded by remorse, and always by
satiety; whereas the true joy, the sweet complacency resulting from benevolent
actions, increases by refr^ction, and must be immortal as the soul. So exactly,
so kindly is our duty made to coincide with our present as well as future
interest, (...) incomparably more satisfaction will (...) to a considerate mind
from denying itself, even some of the agreeables of life, in order the more
effectually to relieve the unfortunate, th^n could arise from a full indulgence
of every temporal gratification.

However small your income may be, remember that a part of it is due to merit
in distress. Set by an annual sum for this purpose, even though it should
oblige you to ab^^^ some unnecessary expense to raise the fund; By this method
persons of slender fortune have been enabled to do much good, and to give
happiness to many. If your stock will not admit of frequent draughts upon it,
be the more circumspect with regard to the merit of those you relieve, that
bounties not in your power to repeat often, may not be misapplied. But if
Providence, by a more ample fortune, should bless you with a larger ability of
being serviceable to your fellow creatures, prove yourself worthy of the trust
reposed in you by making a proper use of it. Wide as your influence can extend,
turn the cry of distress and danger into the song of joy and safety; feed the
hungry, clothe the naked, comfort the afflicted, give medicine to the sick,
and, with either, bestow all the alleviation their unfortunate circumstances
can admit of. Thus may you truly make a friend of the unrighteous Mammon. Thus
you may turn the perishable goods of fortune into everlasting blessings. Upon
earth you will partake that happiness you impart to others, and you will lay up
for yourself Treasures in Heaven, where neither ^^th nor ^^st can corrupt, and
where thieves do not break through nor steal.

A person who has once experienced the advantages of a right action, will be
led by the motive of present self-interest, as well as by future expectation,
to the continuance of it. There is no injunction of christianity that a sincere
christian, by obedience, will not find so calculated as to be directly, in some
measure, its own reward.

The forgiveness of injuries, to which is annexed the promise of pardon for our
own offe^^^^, and which is required by the gospel, not only (...) far as to
forbear all kinds of retaliation, but also to render us equally disposed to
serve with our utmost power those persons who have wilfully injured us, as if
no such injury had been received from them, has by some been accounted a hand
precept; yet the difficulty of it arises merely from, and is proportionable to,
the badness of the heart by which it is so esteemed. A good disposition finds a
superlative pleasure in returning good for evil; and, by an inexpressible
satisfaction of mind in so doing, feels the present reward of obedience:
whereas a spirit of revenge is incompatible with happiness, an implacable
temper being a constant torment to its possessor; and the man who returns an
injury, feels move real misery from the rancour of his own heart, than it is in
his power to inflict upon another.

Should a friend wound you in the most tender part, by betraying a confidence
reposed, prudence forbids the exposing yourself to a second deception, by
placing any future trust in such a person. But though here all obligations of
intimacy cease, those of benevolence and humanity remain still in full force,
and are equally binding, as to every act of service and assistance, even to the
suffering a lesser evil yourself, in order to procure a much greater good to
the person by whom you have been thus ill-used. This is in general allowed to
be the duty of every individual to all, as a member of society; but it is
particularly instanced in the present case to she^^, that not even a breach of
friendship, the highest of all provocations, will cancel the duty, at all times
equally and unalterably binding -- the duty of promoting both the temporal and
eternal happiness of all your fellow creatures by every method in your power.

It has been by many thought imp^rt^^^^nt at any time to offer unasked advice;
the reason of which may be chiefly owing to its being too frequently tendered
with a supercilious air that implies a conceited consciousness of superior
wisdom: it is the manner, therefore, more than the thing itself which gives
disgust.

If those with whom you have any degree of intimacy are guilty of what to you
appears either wrong or indiscreet, speak your opinion to them with freedom,
though you should even lose a nominal friend by so doing. Silence makes you, in
some measure, an accessory to the fault; but having thus once discharged your
duty, rest there -- they are to judge for themselves: to repent such
admonitions is both useless and impertinent, and they will then be thought to
proceed rather from pride than from goodnature. To the persons concerned only
are you to speak your disapprobation of their conduct: when they are censured
by others, say all that truth or probability will permit in their justification.

It often happens, that upon an accidental quarrel between friends, they
separately appeal to a third person. In such case, alternately take the
opposite side, alleging every argument in favor of the absent party, and
placing the mistakes of the complainer in the strongest light. This method may
probably at first displease, but is always right, as it is the most likely to
procure a reconciliation. If that, takes place, each, equally obliges, will
thankfully approve your conduct; if not, you will have the satisfaction of at
lea^^ endeavoring to have been the restorer of peace. A contrary behavior,
which generally proceeds from the mean desire of pleasing by flattery at the
expense of truth, often widens a trifling breach into open and irreconcilable
enmity. People of this disposition are the worst sort of incendiaries the
greatest plague of human society, because the most difficult to be guarded
against, from their always wearing the specious disguise of pretended
approbation and friendship to the present, and equally deceitful resentment
against the absent person or company.

To enumerate all the social duties would lead me too far; suffice it,
therefore, my dear, in few words to sum up what remains.

Let truth ever dwell upon your tongue.

Scorn to flatter any, and despise the person who would practice so base an art
upon yourself.

Be honestly open in every part of your behavior and conversion.

All, with whom you have any intercourse, even down to the meanest station,
have a right to civility and good humor from you. A superiority of rank or
fortune is no license for a proud supercilious behavior: the disadvantages of
a dependent state are alone sufficient to labor under; it is both unjust and
cruel to increase them, either by a haughty deportment, or by the unwarrantable
exercise of a capricious temper.

Examine every part of your conduct toward others by the unerring rule of
supposing a change of places. This will certainly lead to an impartial
judgment. Do then what appears to you right, or in other words, what you would
they should do unto you; which comprehends every duty relative to society.

Aim at perfection, or you will never reach to an attainable height of virtue.

Be religious without hypocrisy, pious without enthusiasm.

Endeavor to merit the favor of GOD by a sincere and uniform obedience to
whatever you know, or believe, to be his will; and should afflictive evils be
permitted to cloud the sunshine of your brightest days, receive them with
submission; satisfied that a Being equally wise, omniscient, and beneficent, at
once sees and entends the good of His whole creation; and that every general or
particular dispensation of His providence toward the rational part of it, is
so calculated as to be productive of ultimate happiness, which nothing but the
misbehaviour of individuals can prevent to themselves.

This truth is surely an unanswerable argument for absolute resignation to the
Will of GOD; and such a resignation, founded upon reason and choice, not
enforced by necessity, is unalterable peace of mind, fixed on too firm a basis
to be shaken by adversity. Pain, poverty, ingratitude, calumny, and even the
less of those we hold most dear, may each transiently affect, but united cannot
mortally wound it. Upon this principle, you will find it possible not only to
be content, but cheerful, under all the disagreeable circumstances this state
of probation is liable to; and, by making a proper use of them, you may
effectually remove the garb of te^or from the last of all temporal evils. Learn
then, with greatful pleasure, to meet approaching death as the kind remover of
every painful sensation, the friendly guide to perfect and to everlasting
happiness.

Believe me this is not mere theory. My own experience every moment proves the
fact undeniably true. My conduct in all those relations which still subsist
with me, nearly as human imperfection will allow, is governed by the rules here
laid down for you; and it produces the constant rational composure which
constitutes the most perfect felicity of human life: for with truth I can aver,
that I daily feel incomparably more real satisfaction, more true contentment in
my present retirement, than the gayest scenes of festive mirth ever afforded
me. I am pleased with this life, without an anxious thought for the continuance
of it, and a^ happy in the hope of hereafter exchanging it for a life
infinitely better. My soul, unstained by the crimes unjustly imputed to me,
most sincerely forgives the malicious authors of these imputations; it
anticipates the future pleasure of an open acquaittal, and in that expectation
loses the pain of present undeserved censure. By this is meant the instance
that was made the supposed foundation for the last of innumerable injuries
which I have received through him from whom I am conscious of having deserved
the kindest treatment. Other faults, no doubt, I might have many; to him I had
very ^ew: nay, for several years, I cannot, upon reflection, accuse myself of
any thing but of a too absolute, too unreserved obedience to every injunction,
even where plainly contrary to the dictates of my own reason. How wrong such a
compliance was, has been clearly proved by many instances, in which it has been
since most ungenerously and most ungratefully urged as a circumstantial
argument against me.

It must indeed be owned, that for the two or three last years, tired with a
long series of repeated insults, of a nature almost beyond the power of
imagination to conceive, my temper became soured: a constant fruitless
endeavor to oblige was changed into an absolute indifference about it; and ill
humor, occasioned by frequent disappointment -- a consequence I have
experimentally warned you against -- was perhaps sometimes too much indulged.
How far the unequalled provocations may be allowed as an excuse for this,
Heaven only must determine, whose goodness has thought fit to release me, from
the painful situation; though by a method, at present, not the most eligible,
as it is the cause of a separation from my children also, and thereby has put
it out of my power to attend in the manner I could have wished to their
education; a duty that inclination would have led me with equal care and
pleasure more amply to ^^^lfil, had they continued under my direction. But as
Providence has thought fit otherwise to determine, contented I submit to every
dispensation, convinced that all things are ordered for the best, and that they
will in the end work together for good to them that fear GOD, and who sincerely
endeavor to keep his commandments. If in these I err, I am certain it is owing
to a mistake in the judgment, not to a defect of the will.

Thus have I endeavored, my dear girls, in some measure, to compensate both to
you and to your sisters the deprivation of a constant maternal care, by
advising you, according to my best ability, in the most material parts of your
conduct through life, as particularly as the compass of a letter would allow
time. May these few instruction^ be as serviceable to you as my wishes would
make them! and may that Almighty Being, to whom my daily prayers ascend for
your preservation, grant you His heavenly benediction! May he keep you from all
moral evil, lead you into the paths of righteousness and peace, and may He give
us all a happy meeting in that future state of unalterable felicity, which is
prepared for th^se who, by patient continuance in well-doing, seek after glory
and immortality!

END OF THE UNFORTUNATE MOTHER's ADVICE TO HER DAUGHTERS.
ADVICE OF A MOTHER TO HER DAUGHTER, BY THE MARCHIONESS DE LAMBERT.
ADVICE of a MOTHER TO HER DAUGHTER.
THE world has in all ages been very negligent in the education of daughters;
all their care is laid out entirely upon the men; and as if the women were a
distinct species, they leave them to themselves without any helps, without
thinking that they compose one half of the world; that the two sexes are
necessarily united together by alliances; that the women make either the
happiness or misery of the men, who always feel the want of having them
reasonable; that they are a great means of the rise and ruin of families; that
they are entrusted with the education of the children in their early youth, a
season of life in which they receive the liveliest and deepest impressions.
What would they have them inspire into their children, when from their very
infancy they are left themselves in the hands of governantes, who, as they
(...) generally taken ^^t of the low world, inspire them with low sentiments,
encourage all the timorous passions, and form them to superstition instead of
religion. 'Twould be a subject worthier of their thoughts to contrive how to
make certain vices hereditary to their families, by conveying them down from
the mother to the children, than how to secure their estates by entails.
Nothing therefore is so much mistaken as the education which they give to young
women: they design them to please; they give them no instructions but for the
ornament and graces of the body; they flatter their self-love; they give them
up to effeminacy, to the world, and to false opinions; they give them no
lectures o^ virtue and fortitude: surely it is unreasonable or rather downright
madness to imagine that such an education should not turn to their prejudice.

It may be necessary, my Daughter, to observe all the outward rules of Decorum;
but this is not enough to gain you the esteem of the world; it is the sentiments
of the mind that form the character of a person; that lead the understanding;
that govern the will; that secure the reality and duration of all our virtues:
but religion should be the principle and foundation of these sentiments. When
religion is once engraven on our heart, all the virtues will naturally flow
(...) that source; all the duties of life will be regularly practiced in their
respective order. It Is not enough for the conduct of young persons to oblige
them to do their duty; they must be brought to love it. Authority is a tyrant
only over the outward behavior, it has no sway over the inward sentiments.
When one prescribes a conduct, we should represent the reasons and the motives
of it, and give them a relish for what we advise them.

It Is so much for our interest to practice virtue, that we should never
consider it as our enemy, but rather as the source of happiness, of glory, and
of peace.

You are just coming into the world; enter it, my daughter, with some
principles; you cannot fortify yourself too much against what you will meet
with there: bring along with you all your religion; nourish it in your heart by
your sentiments; confirm it in your mind by proper reflections, and by reading
adapted to encourage it.

There is nothing more necessary, and indeed more happy for us than to keep up
a sentiment that makes us love and hope; that gives us a prospect of an
agreeable futurity; that reconciles all times; that insures all the duties of
life; that answers for us to ourselves, and is our guarantee with regard to
others. What a support will you find from religion under the misfortunes that
threaten you! for a certain number of misfortunes must fall to your share.
'Twas a saying of one of the (...), "That he wrapped himself up in the n^^tle
^his Virtue:" Wrap yourself up in that of your Religion; it will be a great
help to you against the weakness of youth, and a sure refuge in your riper
years.

Women that have cultivated their understanding with nothing but the maxims of
the world, are presented at last with an universal blank, and find themselves
in a terrible want of thought and employment, the most irksome situation in
life. As they advance in age the world quits them, and reason tells them they
should quit the world; but where must they go for relief? The time past
furnishes us with regrets, the present with inquietudes, and the time to come
with ^ears. Religion alone calms all our uneasiness, and comforts us under all
misfortunes; by uniting you to God, it reconciles you with the world, and
yourself too.

A young person when she comes into the world frames to herself an high notion
of the happiness reserved for her. She sets herself to obtain it; it is the
source of all her cares. She is always on the hunt after her notion, and in
hopes of finding a perfect happiness: this is the occasion of lightness and
inconstancy.

The pleasures of the world are deceitful; they promise more than they perform;
the quest of them is full of anxiety: their enjoyment is far from yielding any
true satisfaction, and their loss is attended with vexation.

To fix your desires, think that no solid or lasting happiness is to be found
any where but in your own breast. Honors and riches have no charms that are
lasting for any length of time; their possession extends our view, and gives us
new desires. Pleasures when they grow familiar, lose their relish. Before you
have tasted them, you may do without them; whereas enjoyment makes that
necessary to you, which was once superfluous, and you are worse at your ease
than you were before; by enjoying them you grow used to them, and when you lose
them, they leave you nothing but emptiness and want. What affects us sensibly
is the passage from one circumstance of life to another; the interval between a
miserable season and a happy one. The sense of pleasure wears off as soon as we
grow habituated to it. 'Twould be a great advantage ^f reason could a^ once lay
before ^s all that is necessary for our happiness. Experience brings us back to
ourselves; spare yourself that expense, and lay it early down for a a maxim,
with a firmness and resolution to determine your conduct, that "true felicity
consists in peace of mind, in reason, and in the discharge of our duty." Let us
not fancy ourselves happy, my Daughter, till we feel our pleasures of this sort
flow from the bottom of our soul.

These reflections seem too strong for a young person, and are proper for a
riper age: however, I believe you capable of them; and besides, I am
instructing myself* We cannot engrave the precepts of wisdom too deeply in our
hearts; the impressions that they make are always too light; but it cannot be
denied th^^ such (...) use themselves to make reflections, and fortify their
hearts with principles, are in a fairer way to virtue than such as neglect
them. If we are unhappy enough to be detective in the practice of our duty, let
us a^ least not be wanting in our affections to it: let us then, my Daughter,
make use of these precepts for a continual help to our virtue.

It Is commonly said there are two prejudices with which every body must comply;
Religion and Honor. It Is a wrong expression to call Religion a prejudice. A
prejudice is an opinion that may be subservient to (...) as well as truth: the
term ought never to be applied but to things that are uncertain; and Religion
is not ^o.

Honor is indeed an invention merely human; yet nothing is more real than the
evils that people suffer who would get rid of it; 'twould be dangerous to shake
it off; we should rather do all we can to fortify, a sentiment that ought to be
a rule to our conduct, since nothing is more destructive o^ our quiet, or makes
our life more unequal, than to think one way and act another. Possess your
heart as much as is possible with sentiments for the conduct that you ought to
observe; fortify this prejudice of Honor in your mind; you cannot be too
scrupulously nice on this subject.

Never warp in the least from these principles; never entertain a notion, as if
the virtue of women was a virtue only enjoined by custom; nor allow yourself to
think you have sufficiently discharged your obligations, if you can but escape
the eyes of the world. There are two courts before which you must inevitably
appear in judgment, your Conscience and the World; you may possibly get clear
of the World, but you can never get clear of Conscience. Secure her testimony
in favor of your honesty; it is what you owe to yourself; but withal do not
neglect the approbation of the public, for a contempt of reputation naturally
leads to a contempt of virtue.

When you are a little acquainted with the world, you will find that there is
no need of the sanctions and terror of laws to keep you within the bounds of
your duty; the example of such as have deviated from it, and the calamities
that have ever attended them, is enough to stop any inclination in the midst of
its career; for there is no coquet but must own, if she would be sincere, that
it is the greatest misfortune in the world to be forgot and neglected.

Shame is a passion that might be of excellent advantage to us, if we managed
it well: I do not mean th^^ false shame which only serves to disturb our quiet,
without being of any service to our behavior; I speak of that which keeps us
from evil out of fear of dishonor: we must confess this shame is sometimes the
surest guard of the women's virtue; there are very few virtuous for virtue
itself.

There are some great virtues, which, when they are carried to a certain
degree, make a great many defects be over-looked; such as extraordinary valor
in the men, and extreme modesty in the women. Agrippina, the wife of
Germanicus, was excused of all her faults on account of her chastity. This
Princess was ambitious and haughty; but, says Tacitus, all her passions were
consecrated by her chastity.

If you are sensible and nice in the point of reputation, if you are
apprehensive of being attacked as to essential virtues, there is one sure means
to calm your fears and (...) your nicety; it is to be virtuous. Make it (...)
great care to refine your sentiments: let them ^e reasonable and full of
honor. Be sure always to keep well with yourself; it is a sure income of
pleasures; and will gain you praise, and a good reputation to boot: in a word,
be but truly virtuous, and you will find admirers enough.

The virtues that make a figure in the world do not fall to the women's share;
their virtues are of a simple and peaceable nature: Fame will have nothing to
do with us. 'Twas a saying of one of the Ancients, that the great virtues are
for the men! he allows the women nothing but the single merit of being unknown;
and such as are most praised, (says he) are not always the persons that deserve
it best; but rather such as are not talked of at all. The notion seems to me to
be wrong; but to reduce this maxim into practice, I think it best to avoid the
world, and making a figure, which always strike at modesty, and he contented
with being one's own spectator.

The virtues of the women are difficult, because they have no help from glory
to practice them. To live at home; to meddle with nothing but one's self and
family; to be simple, just, and modest, are painful virtues, because they are
obscure. One must have a great deal of merit to shun making a figure, and a
great deal of courage to bring one's self to be virtuous only to one's own
eyes. Grandeur and reputation serve for supports to our weakness, for such in
reality is our desire to distinguish and raise ourselves. The mind rests in the
public approbation, but true glory consists in being satisfied without it. Let
it not enter then into the motives of your actions; it is enough that it is the
recompense of them.

Be assured, my Daughter, that perfection and happiness cling together; that
you can never be happy but by virtue, and scarce ever unhappy but by ill
conduct. Whoever examines themselves strictly, will find that they never had
any grievous affliction, but they occasioned it themselves by some fault, or by
being wanting in some duty. Anxiety always follows the loss of innocence; but
virtue is ever attended with an inward satisfaction, that is a constant spring
of felicity to all its votaries.

Do not however imagine that your only virtue is modesty; there are abundance
of women that have no notion of any other, and fancy, that by practicing it
they discharge all the duties of society: they think they have a right to
neglect all the rest, and to be as proud and censorious as they please. Anne of
Bretagne, a proud and imperious Princess, made Lewis XII. suffer exceedingly;
and the good Prince was used to say, when he submitted to her humor, we must
pay dear for the women's chastity. Make nobody pay for yours; thin^ rather that
it is a virtue which regards only yourself, and loses its greatest (...), if it
be not (...) with the other virtues.

We should be very tender in our modesty; inward corruption passes from the
heart to the mo^th, and occasions loose discourse. The most violent passions
have need of modesty to show themselves in a seducing form; it (...)
distinguish itself in all your actions; it should set off (...) embellish all
your person.

They say that when Jove (...) the passions, he (...) every one of them its
distinct abode. Modesty was forgot; and when she was introduced to him, he
could not tell where to place her: she was therefore allowed to comfort with
all the rest. Ever since that time she is inseparable from them; she is the
friend of Truth, and betrays the lie that dares attack it; she is in a strict
and intimate union with Love; she always attends, and frequently discovers and
proclaims it: Love, in a word, loses his charms, whenever he appears without
her; there is not a more glorious ornament for a young lady than modesty.

Let the chief part of your finery then be modesty; it has great advantages; it
sets off beauty, and serves for a veil to ugliness: modesty is the supplement
of beauty. The great misfortune of ugliness is, that it ^moth^^^ and buries the
merit of women. People do not go to look in a forbidden figure for the (...)
qualities of the mind and heart; it is a very difficult affair when (...) ^^^st
make its way, and (...) through a (...) outside.

You do not (...) to make you agreeable, but you are no (...) this obliges you
to lay up a stock of merit: (...) world will compliment you with nothing.
Beauty has great advantages. One of the (...) said of it, that it was a short
tyranny, and the greatest privilege in Nature; that handsome persons carry
letters of recommendation in their (...).

Beauty inspires a pleasing sentiment which prepossesses people in its favor.
If you have made no such impressions, you must expect to be taken to pieces.
Take care that there be nothing in your air or (...) to make any body think
that you do not know yourself; an air of confidence in an ordinary figure is
shocking enough. Let nothing in your discourse or dress look like art, at least
let it not be easy to find it out; the most refined art never lets itself be
seen.

You are not to neglect the accomplishments and ornaments proper to make you
agreeable, for women are designed to please; but you should rather think of
acquiring a solid merit, than of employing yourself in trifling things. Nothing
is shorter than the reign of beauty; nothing is more melancholy than the latter
part of the lives of women who never knew any thing but that they were
handsome. If any body makes their court to you for the sake of your agreeable
accomplishments, make their regards center in friendship, and secure the
continuance of that friendship by your merits.

It Is a difficult matter to lay down any sure rules to please. The Graces
without merit cannot please long; and merit without the Graces may command the
esteem of men, but can (...) more them. Women (...) must have (...) amiable
merit, and join the Graces to the Virtues. I do not confine the merit of woman
merely (...) modesty; I give in a (...) larger (...). A valuable woman (...)
the manly virtues of friendship, probity, and ^^^our, in the (...) discharge of
all her obligations. An (...) should not only have the (...) the graces of the
heart (...) sentiments of the mind. There is nothing so hard as to please
without being so intent (...) shall look a little like coquetry. (...) please
the men of the world more (...) fa^lts than their good qualities. The (...) for
making their advantages of the weaknesses of amiable women: they would have
nothing to do with their virtues; they do not care to esteem them; they had
much rather be amused by persons of little or no merit, than be forced to
admire such as are virtuous.

One must know human nature if one disigns to please. The men are much more
affected with what is new, than with what is excellent: but the flower of
novelty soon fades; what pleased when it was new, soon displeases when it grows
common. To keep up this taste of novelty, we must have a great many resources
and various kinds of merit within ourselves; we must not stick only at the
agreeable accomplishments: we must strike their fancy with a variety of graces
^^d merits to keep up their inclinations, and make the same object afford them
all the pleasures of inconstancy.

Women are born (...) a violent desire to please; (...) they find themselves
(...) from all the ways that lead to glory (...) authority, they take another
road to arrive at them, and make themselves amends by their (...). Beauty
imposes on the person that has (...) infatuates the soul; yet remember that
their is (...) a very small number of years difference between a (...) woman
and one that is no longer so. Get over this excessive desire to please; at
least keep from showing it. We must not be extravagant in our dress, or let it
take up all our time; the real ^^^ces do not depend on a studied (...); we m^st
submit to the mode as a (...) sort of slavery, but comply with (...) than we
are obliged in decency. The ^ode would be reasonable if it could be fixed to a
point of perfection, convenience, and gracefulness; but to be always changing
is inconstancy, rather than politeness and a good taste.

A good taste avoids all excessive niceness; it treats little things as little
ones, and gives itself very little trouble about them. Neatness is indeed
agreeable, and deserves to be ranked among things that are graceful, but it
commences littleness, when it is carried to an excess; it is a much better
temper to be careless in things of little consequence than to be too nice about
them.

Young persons are very subject to the spleen; as they are quite destitute of
knowledge, they run with eagerness toward sensible objects; the spleen,
however, is the least evil that they have to dread: excessive joys are no part
of the train of virtue. All violent and moving pleasures are dangerous. Though
one is discreet enough not to break through the rules of decency, and (...)
keep within the bounds of modesty; yet when the heart is once moved with the
pleasure it (...) a sort of softness diffuses itself over the soul, and takes
away its relish for every thing that is called virtue: it stops and makes you
cool in the practice of your duty. A young person does not see the consequences
of this flattering poison, the least mischief of which is to disturb the quiet
of life, to deprave the taste, and render all simple pleasure in^^pid. When one
sees a young person happy enough not to have had her heart touched (as there is
a natural disposition in us to a union, and this disposition has not been
exercised), she easily complies, and gives herself naturally to the person
designed for her.

Be very cautious on the article of plays, and the like public diversions.
There is no dignity in showing one's self continually, nor is it an easy matter
to preserve a strict modesty in a constant hurry of diversions. It is mistaking
one's interest to frequent them: if you have beauty, you must not wear out the
taste of the world by showing yourself continually: you must be still more
reserved if you want graces to set you off; besides the constant use of
diversions lessons the relish of them.

When all your life has been spent in pleasures, and they come to leave you,
either because your taste for them is over, or because your reason forbids you
the enjoyment of them, your mind finds itself in a most uneasy situation for
want of employment. If you would therefore have your pleasures and amusements
last, use them only as diversions to relieve you after more serious
occupations. Entertain yourself with your own reason; keep up that
correspondence, and the absence of pleasures will not leave you any time upon
your hands nor any hankering after them.

It behooves us therefore to husband our tastes; there is no relishing life
without them, but innocence only can preserve them in their integrity;
irregularity is sure to deprave them.

When we have a sound heart, we make an advantage of every thing, and turn it
into a source of pleasure. We come frequently to pleasures with a sick man's
palate; we fancy ourselves nince, when we are only surfeited and ou^ of taste.
When we have not spoiled our mind and heart by sentiments that seduce the
fancy, or by any flaming passion, it is easy to find delight: health and
innocence are the true fountains of joy. But when we have had the misfortune to
habituate ourselves to vehement pleasures, we become insensible to moderate
ones. We spoil our taste by diversions, and use ourselves so much to violent
pleasures, that we cannot take up with such an are simple and regular.

We should always dread such great emotions of the soul as leave us flat and
out of sorts. Young persons have the greater reason to fear them, in that they
are less capable of resisting what flatters their sense. "Temperance," said one
of the Ancients, is the best caterer for luxury. With this temperance, which
makes the health both of mind and body, one has always a pleasing and an equal
joy; one has no need of diversions and expense; reading, work, and
conversation, afford a purer joy than all the train of the greatest pleasures.
In a word, innocent delights are of most advantage; they are always ready at
hand; they are beneficient, and are never purchased at too dear a rate. Other
pleasures flatter, but they do mischief: they alter the constitution of the
mind, and spoil it like that of the body.

Be regular in all your views and in all your actions; it would be happy if our
fortune was such as to make computations of our income unnecessary; but as
yours is narrow, it obliges us to be regular. Be discreet in the article of
your expenses; if you do not observe a moderation in them, you will soon see
your affairs in disorder; as soon as you lay aside ^economy, you can answer for
nothing.

Pompous living is the high road to ruin, and the ruin of people's fortune is
almost always followed with corruption of manners: but in order to be regular,
it is no way necessary to be covetous. Remember that avarice is of little
service, and dishonours a person infinitely. All that one should aim at in a
regular management, is to avoid the shame and injustice that always attend an
irregular conduct. We must retrench superfluous expenses only to be a better
condition to afford such as decency, friendship and charity engage us to make.

It is good order, and not the looking into little matters, that turns to any
great account. Pliny, when ^e sent his f^riend back a bond for a considerable
sum which his father owed him, with a general acquaintance, told him, I have
but a small estate, and am obliged to be at great expenses; but my frugality
serves for a found to supply me wherewith to do the services that I render to
my friends. Borrow from your fancies and diversions, that you may have
something to gratify the sentiments of generosity, which every person of a
genteel spirit ought to have.

Never mind the wants that vanity creates. "We must be," they say, "like
others;" this like goes a vast way. Have a noble emulation, and allow nobody to
have more honor, probity, and integrity than yourself. Be always sensible of
the necessity of virtue: poorness of soul is worse than poverty of fortune.

Whilst you are young, form your reputation, raise your credit: put your
affairs in order: you would have more troub^^ about it in another season of
life. Charles (...) used to say, that "Fortune loved young (...)." In the time
of youth, all the world offer themselves to you, and lend you a helping hand:
young people govern without thinking of it. But in more advanced age, you have
no helps from any quarter; you have no longer that bewitching charm which has
an influence on every body: you have nothing for you but reason and truth,
which do not ordinarily govern the world.

"You are going," said Montagne to some young people, toward reputation and
credit; but I am returning back. When you cease to be young, you have no
acquisition left you to make, but in point of virtue. In all your undertakings
and actions, always aim at the highest perfection; form no project, and set
about nothing without saying to yourself. Could not I do better? By this means
you will insensibly contract a habit of justice and virtue, which will make the
practice thereof easier to you. Do what Seneca advised his friend Lucilius:
"Choose," said he to him, among great men some one that you this is most to be
admired: do nothing but in his presence; give him an account of all your
actions. Happy the man that is esteemed enough to be pitched on for this
purpose! This is the more easy, because young folks have a natural disposition
to imitation. They run less hazard when they choose (...) patterns from (...),
where we generally (...) with (...) but (...) examples. Among the moderns it
may have (...) inconveniences; the copies of them very (...) succeed. It has
been said long ago, that every copy ought to tremble before its original; they
never follow it but at a distances and yet (...) away your natural character
which is general (...) truest and the most simple. You are apt to grow
negligent as to yourself when you fix yourself to a model; besides a great part
of our (...) come from (...). (...), th^n to reverence and stand in awe (...)
let your scrupulousness be your own (...).

(...) application to make yourself happy in your (...) of life; improve all
the means you have; you lo^^ a thousand advantages for want of (...). It is our
attention, and comparing of things th^^ makes us happy.

The more address and capacity you have, the more will you make of your
circumstances, and the more will you extend your pleasures. It is not
possession that makes us happy, it is enjoyment, and enjoy (...) in attention.

If (...) and enjoy themselves in their condition, they would not be troubled
eitheir with ambition or envy, and would be blessed with a perfect
tranquillity; but we do not live enough in the present moment, our desires and
hopes are always pushing us on toward futurity.

There are two sorts of madmen in the world; the one always live upon futurity,
and feed themselves with nothing but hopes; and as they are not wise enough to
calculate them rightly, they pass their lives in a continual mistake.
Reasonable persons are never taken up with any desires but such as are within
their reach; they often gain their point, and though they should be mistaken,
they would easily console themselves under the disappointment; they know
likewise (...) our fondness for things (...) off upon the possession of them,
or (...) upon seeing the impossibility of obtaining (...) desire: wise men
always make themselves easy with such reflections. There is another sort of
madmen that make too much of the present, and take no manner of care for
futurity; they ruin their fortune, their reputation, and their ^aste of life,
by not managing them discreetly. Men of sense join these two times together;
they enjoy the present, and yet do not neglect the future.

It is a duty, my Daughter, to employ our time, but what use do we make of it?
Few people know how to value it as it deserves. Account to yourself, says one
of the Ancients, for every moment of our time; that after making a just use of
the present, you may have less occasion for the future. Time flies with
rapidity: learn to live, that is, to make a good use of your time; but life is
spent too often in vain hopes, in quest of fortune, or in waiting for it. All
mankind feel the vanity of their condition, always taken up without being ever
satisfied. Remember that life does not consist in the space of time that you
live, but in the use you should make of it: consider that you have a mind to
cultivate and feed with truth; (...) to purity and regulate; and a religious
worship to pay to the Deity.

A^ the first years of life are precious, remember, Daug^ter, to make a^
advantageous use of them. (...) the (...) receives impressions, embellish your
memory with valuable things, and consider that you are laying in a provision
for your whole life. The memory is formed and improved by exercising it.

Curiosity is a sentiment that you should not stifle; it wants only to be (...)
on a right object. Curiosity is a know^^^^^ begun, which makes you advance
farther and (...) in the road of truth; it is a natural disposition that meets
instruction halfway; it should not be stopped by laziness and love of ease.

It is very useful for young persons to employ their time in solid sciences;
the Greek and Roman History elevates the mind, and raises the courage by the
great actions that we see there related. We ought to know the History of
France; nobody should be ignorant of the history of their own country. I should
not even blame a little philosophy, especially the new, if one has a capacity
for it: it helps to give you a clear judgment, to distinguish your ideas, and
teach you to think justly. I would likewise have a little morality: by the bare
reading of Cicero, Pliny, and others, one gets a taste for virtue: it makes an
insensible impression on us, that is of great advantage to our morals. The
inclination to vice is corrected by the example of so many virtues, and you
will (...) find an evil disposition have any relish for this sort of reading.
We do not love (...) see what is always upbraiding and condemning us.

As for languages, though a woman ought to be satisfied with speaking that of
(...) own country, I should not (...) the inclination one might have for (...).
(...) the language of the Church: it opens you a (...) you into conversation
(...) the best part of the world in all ages. Women (...) ready enough to learn
Italian: but I think (...) dangerous; it is the language of love: the Italian
writers are not very correct; you (...) all their works a gingle of words, and
a loose imagination inconsistence with a just way of thinking.

Poetry may produce some inconveniences; I should however be (...) to forbid
the reading of the fine trag^^^^^ of Corneille* but the best of them often give
you lectures of virtue; and leave you an impression of vice.

The reading of romances is still more dangerous: I would not have them much
used; they inure the mind to falsehoods. Romances having no foundation of truth
to support them, warm the imagination, impair modesty, put the heart in
disorder, and let a young person have but the least disposition to tenderness,
they hurry on and fire her inclination. One should not increase the charms and
delusions of love; the more it is softened, and the modester it appears, the
more dangerous is it. I would not forbid them; all prohibitions entrench upon
liberty, and raise the desire: but we should as much as we are able, use
ourselves to solid readings, which improve the understanding and fortify the
heart; we cannot too carefully avoid such as leave impressions hard to be
effaced.

(...) your (...) for extraordinary sciences; they are dangerous, and generally
teach one (...) deal of vanity: they depress the (...) of the soul. If you have
a very (...) and (...) imagination, and a curiosity which nothing (...) stop,
it is much better to employ these dispositions in the scienc^es, th^n to run
the hazard of their being turned to serve your passions: but remember that a
young lady should have almost as nice a modesty in the article of sciences, as
she has with regard to vice.

Guard yourself therefore against the inclination of setting up for a virtu^^^;
do not amuse yourself in running after vain sciences, and such as are above
your reach. Our soul is much better qualified for (...) then it (...) for
knowledge; we have all the knowledge that is proper and necessary for one (...)
being; but we will not s^ick there, we are still running after truths that were
not designed for ^s.

Before we engage in enquiries that are above our capacities, we should know
the just extent of our understanding, and what rule we should have for
determining our persuasion: we should learn to distinguish between opinion and
knowledge, and should have resolution enough to doubt, when we have no clear
notion of things, as well as courage to be ignorant of what surpasses us.

The better to prevent a vain opinion of our capacity, and abate a confidence
in our understanding, let us consider that the two principles of all our
knowledge, reason and the senses, want sincerity and often deceive us. The
senses impose on (...), and reason misleads them in its turn. These are out two
guides, and both of them lead us out of the way. Such reflections should
naturally put us out of conceit with abstracted sciences; it is much better for
us to employ our ^^me in useful points of knowledge.

Docility is a quality very necessary for a young person, who should never have
(...) confidence in herself; but this docility must not be carried too far. In
point of religion, indeed, it must submit to authority; but on any other
subject it must receive nothing but from (...) and evidence. By carrying
docility too far, you do an injury to your reason; you make no use of your own
judgment and understanding, which are impaired for want of exercise. You set
too narrow bounds to your ideas, when you confine them to those of other
people. The testimony of men only deserves credit in proportion to the degree
of certainty which they have acquired by examining into facts. There lies no
prescription against truth: it is for all persons and of all times. In a word,
as a great man says, "To be a Christian, one must believe implicitly: but to be
a wise man, one must see clearly."

Accustom yourself to exercise your understanding, and make more use of it than
of your memory. We fill our heads with the notions of other people, and take no
care to form any of our own. We fancy that we have made a great progress, when
we load our memory with histories and facts; but this is of very little service
to perfect our understanding. We must use ourselves to thinking. The
understanding extends and improves itself by exercise; yet few persons take
care to exert it.

Among our sex the art of thinking is a sort of dormant talent. Historical
facts, and the opinions of philosophers, will not defend you against a calamity
that presses you: you will not find yourself much the stronger for them. When
an affliction comes upon you, you have recourse to Seneca and (...) their
reason to give you (...)? Is it not rather the (...) of your: owe? Make use of
your own stock; in the calm of life make a proper provision against the (...)
of affliction, which you are sure to meet with: (...) yourself much better
supported by year own reason than by that of other (...).

If you can govern your imagination, and make it submit to reason and truth, it
will be a great step toward your perfection and happiness. Women are generally
governed by their imagination; as they are not employed in any thing (...), and
are not in the course of their lives troubled either with the care of their
fortune, or the management of their affairs, they give themselves up entirely
to their pleasures. Plays, dress, romances, and inclinations, all depend upon
imagination. I know well enough that if you keep it within due bounds, you take
so much off (...) your pleasures; for Imagination is the source of them; and
the things that please us most, derive from her the charm and illusion in which
all their agreeablene's consists: but for one pleasure of her creating, what
evils does she not make us suffer? She stands continually between Truth and us:
Reason dares not show herself (...) bears the sway. We see only (...) pleases,
and those that are led by her know (...) they suffer from her by woeful
experience. (...) would be a very happy composition to make (...) her, to give
her (...) pleasures, on (...) she made you feel (...) of her (...) a word,
there is nothing so inconsistent with happiness, as a fine lively and too
heated imagination.

Possess yourself with a true notion of things, and take not up with the
sentiments of the people: form your own judgment without giving into received
opinions, and get over the prejudices of your infancy. When you feel yourself
under any uneasiness, take the following method: I have found the use of it:
Examine into the occasion of your trouble; strip it of all the disguise that is
about it, and of all the embroidery of imagination, and you will find that it
is generally nothing at all, or at least great allowances are to be made. Value
things only according to their real worth. We have a great deal more reason to
complain of our false notions than of our fortune; it is very frequently not so
much things that hurt us, as the opinion that we have of them.

In order to be happy, we must think rightly: we owe a great respect to the
common opinions, when they concern religion; but we ought to think very
differently from the vulgar in what ^egar^^ morality and the happiness of life.
By ^^e vulgar, I mean every body that has a low and vulgar way of thinking; the
court is filled with such sort of creatures; and the world talks of nothing ^ut
fortune and credit: all the cry (...), "Go on, make haste forwards:" wher^as
Wisdom says, Take up with (...) an obscure but quiet life; yet (...) hurry of
the world, avoid a c^oud. (...) all the recompense of virtue; the main part of
it lies in the testimony of your own conscience. A great virtue is surely
enough to comfort you for the loss of a little glory.

Be assured, that the greatest science is to know how to be independent. "I
have learnt," said one of the Ancients, to be my own friend, so I shall never
be alone. You must provide yourself some resources against the inquietudes of
life, and some equivalent for the goods, you had depended on. Secure yourself a
retreat and place of refuge in your own breast; you can always return thither,
and be sure to find yourself again. When the world is less necessary to you, it
will have less power over you: when you do not, by some solid inclinations,
place your dependence on yourself, you depend upon every thing else.

Use yourself to solitude: there is nothing more useful and necessary to weak^^
the impression that sensible objects make upon us. You should therefore from
time to time retire from the world to be alone. Assign some hours in the day
for reading, and for making your own reflections. "Reflection," says a Father
of the Church, is the eye of the soul; it lets light and truth into it. -- "I
will lead him into solitude," says Wisdom, "and there I will speak to his
heart." It is there indeed where Truth gives her instructions; where prejudices
vanish, where prepossession wears off, and where opinion, that governs all,
begins to lose its influence. When one considers the uselessness and
insignificancy of life, one is forced to say with Pliny, It is much better to
pass one's life in doing nothing at all, than in doing trifles of nothing.

I have told you already, Daughter, that happiness consists in peace of mind:
you cannot enjoy the pleasures of the mind without health of mind: every thing
almost is a pleasure to a sound mind. If you would live with tranquillity, these
are the rules you are to observe. The first is, not to give yourself up to
things that please; to use them only occasionally; not to expect too much from
the men, for fear of being disappointed; to be your own principal friend.
Solitude too will ensure you tranquillity, and is a friend to wisdom: it is
within you that ^eace and Truth take up their abode. Avoid the great world,
there is no security in it; it always awakens some sentiment or other that we
had almost crushed; there are but too many people in it that encourage
looseness; the more one converses with it, the more authority do-one's passions
gain; it is hard to resist the attack of vice when it comes so well attended:
in a word, one comes back from it much weaker, less modest, and more unjust,
far having been among the men. The world easily (...) its poison into tender
souls. We should likewise shut up all the avenues to the Passions; it is much
easier to keep them off, than vanquish them; and though one should be happy
enough to banish them, yet from the time that they made their impression, they
make us pay dear for their abode. The first motions of them is what cannot be
refused to Nature, but she often carries her influence too far: and when you
come to yourself again, you find abundant reason to repent.

One should always have some resources and last shifts: calculate your strength
and your courage; and for this end, in all cases where you have any
apprehensions, consider every thing at the worst. Wait for the misfortune that
may happen to you with firmness: look it bravely in the face; view it in all
its most terrible circumstances, and do not let yourself (...) under it.

A favorite raised to the height of grandeur was showing his riches to a
friend. As he took out a box, he said to him, Here it is that my treasure lies.
His friend p^^ssed him to show it him, and her allowed him (...) open the box;
there was nothing in it but an old ragged coat. His friend seemed surprised at
it: the favorite said to him, When fortune shall send me back to my original
condition, I am ready for it. What a noble (...) is it to consider every thing
at the worst; and fuel fortitude enough in (...) self to stand the (...).

How strongly soever you (...) any thing, begin with examining the thing (...)
wish: set before your eyes the good which it promises you, and the evils that
follow it: remember the passage of Horace, Pleasure goes before you, but keeps
her retinue out of sight. You will cease to fear, as soon as ever you cease to
desire. Depend upon it, a wise man does not run after felicity, but makes his
own happiness; it must be your (...) doing, and it is in your own power.
Remember that a very small matter will serve for all the (...) needs of life,
but there must be an infinite deal (...) satisfy the imaginary needs of
opinion; and that you will much sooner reduce your desire^ to the level of your
fortune, than raise your fortune to the level of your desires. If honors and
riches could satiate us, we might heap them up; but the thirst for them
increases by acquiring them he that desires most, is certainly the most
indigent.

Young persons live upon hope. M. de la Roche^^^cault says, that it carries one
an agreeable road to the end of life. It would be indeed short enough, if hope
did not lengthen it; it is a very comfortable sentiment, but may prove
dangerous, by occasioning you often a great many disappointments. The least
evil that happens from it is, that we often lose what we possess, by waiting
for what we desire.

Our self-love makes us bli^^ to ourselves, and diminishes all our defects. We
live with them as we do with the perfumes that we wear, we do not sm^ll them;
they only incommode others: to see them in their right (...) we must see them
in other people. View (...) own imperfections with the same eyes wi^h which you
view those of others: be always (...) in keeping to this rule, it will accustom
you to equity. Examine your own nature, and make the best of your defects;
there is none of them but may be tacked to some virtues, and be made to favor
them. Morality does not propose to destroy nature, but to perfect it. Are you
vainglorious? Make use of that sentiment to raise yourself above the
weaknesses of your sex, and to avoid the faults that abuse it. Every unruly
passion has a pain and shame annexed to it, which solicit you to quit it. Are
you timorous? Turn that weakness into prudence; let it keep you from exposing
yourself. Are you lavish? Do you love to give? It is easy to turn prodigality
into generosity. Give with choice and judgment; but do not neglect indifferent
people: lend when it is necessary; but give to such (...) cannot return your
kindness; by so doing (...) with your inclination, and do good actions: there
is no weakness, but, if you please, virtue can make a good use of it.

In the afflictions which befall you, and which make you sensible of your little
stock of merit, instead of fretting and opposing the opinion that you have of
yourself to the injustice which you pretend has been done you, consider that
the persons who are the authors of it are better able to judge of you than you
are yourself; that you should sooner believe them than self-love, which always
flatters; and that with regard to what concerns yourself, your enemy is nearer
truth than you are; that you should have no merit in your own eyes, but what
you have in other people's. One has too great a disposition to flatter one's
self, and men are (...) near themselves to judge impartially (...) the case.

These are general (...) for opposing the vices of the mind; but your (...)
should be to perfect your heart and your ^^^ments: it depends on your heart to
make your virtue sure and lasting; it is properly that which forms your
character; and to make yourself mistress of it, observe this method. When you
feel yourself agitated with a strong and violent passion, desire it to allow
you a little time, and compound with your weakness; if without hearing it a
moment, you are for sacrificing every thing to your reason and your duty, there
is room to fear that your passion may rebel, and grow stronger than ever. You
are under its command, and must manage it with address: you will receive more
help than you think of from such a conduct: you will find some sure remedies
even in your passion. If it be that of hatred, you will see that you have not
altogether so much reason to hate and revenge yourself, as you at first
imagined. If by misfortune it be the contrary sentiment that has seized you,
there is no passion which furnishes you surer remedies against itself.

If your heart has the misfortune to be attacked by love, these are the
remedies to stop its progress: Think that its pleasures are neither solid nor
constant; they quit you; and if this was all the harm they would do you, it is
enough. In passions the soul proposes itself an object, and is more intimately
united to it either by desire or enjoyment, than it is to its own being; it
places all its felicity in its possession, and all its misery in the loss of
the object. Yet this felicity of the imagination, this good of the soul's
choice, is neither solid nor lasting: it depends upon others; it depends upon
yourself; and you cannot answer either for others or for yourself.

Love in the beginning offers you nothing but flowers, and hides all the danger
from you; it imposes on you; it always takes some form which is not its own:
the heart being in secret intelligence with it conceals its inclination from
you, for fear of alarming your reason and modesty. You fancy it is a mere
amusement; it is only the person's wit or good sense that pleases us. In a
word, Love is almost always unknown till he has got the mastery. As soon as he
comes to be felt, fly that instant, and hearken not to the complaints of your
heart: Love is not rooted out of the soul with ordinary efforts, it has too
many partisans within us: as soon as it has surprised you, every thing is on
its side against you, and nothing will serve you against Love. It is the most
cruel situation a rational person can be in; where there is nothing to support
you; where you have no spectator but yourself. You must summon up your courage
immediately, and remember that you must make a much more sorrowful use of it,
if you yield to your passion in the least.

Reflect upon the fatal consequences of passions, and you will find but too
many examples to instruct you; but we are often convinced of our mistake,
without being cured of our passion. Reckon up, if possible, the evils, that
flow from Love: (...) imposes on the reason; it fills the soul and the senses
with trouble; it takes away the flower of innocence it (...) virtue; it (...)
the reputation, shame, being almost always the consequence of Love. Nothing
debases you to such a degree, and sinks you to much below yourself, as the
Passions: they degrade you: there is nothing but reason that can maintain your
dignity. It is far more unhappy to (...) need of one's courage to bear a
misfortune, than to void it; the pleasure of doing one's duty is a comfort to
you; but never applaud yourself, for fear of being humbled. Remember that you
carry your enemy about with you; stick strictly to a conduct that may answer
for you to yourself. Avoid plays and passionate representations; you must not
see what you would not feel; music, poetry, all this is the retinue of sensual
pleasure. Use yourself to reading on solid subjects, to fortify your reason.

Do not converse with your Imagination; it will paint Love to you with all its
charms; it is all (...) and illusion when she makes the representation: there
is always a great drawback when you quit her to come to the reality. St.
Augustine has given us a description of his condition, when he was minded to
quit love and pleasures. He says, that what he loved presented itself to him
under a charming figure; (...) represents what passed in his heart in such
moving terms, that there is no reading it without danger. One must pass
slightly over the pictures of Pleasure; she is always to be feared, even (...)
the very time we are taking measures against her; and when we are fullest of
the disasters she has occasioned, we are still to mistrust ourselves. The
passion is apt to get ground by the examining of one's self; forgetfulness is
the only (...) to be taken against Love: you must call yourself seriously to
account, and say, What do I mean to do with the inclination that is seizing me?
Are not such and such misfortunes sure to attend me, if I have the weakness
yield to it.

Borrow forces and succor from your enemy and the very nature of Love; if you
would not fl^tter him, he will supply you with them. Strip him of all the
charms that your fancy gives him; lend him nothing, give him no favor, and you
will see he will have but little left. After this, think no more of him: take a
firm resolution to fly from him; and depend upon it, we are as strong as we
resolve to be. Diversion and simple amusements are necessary; but we must shun
all pleasures that affect the heart.

It is not always our faults that ruin us, but the manner of our conduct after
we have committed them. An humble acknowledgment of our faults disarms
resentment, and stops the violence of anger. Women that have had the misfortune
to deviate from their duty* to break through decorum, to part with their virtue
and modesty, own so much regard to custom, and ought to have such a sense of
their breach of (...) city, as to appear with a mortified air; it is a sort of
satisfaction that the public expects from them; it is sure to remember your
faults whenever you appear to forget them. Repentance insures a change of your
conduct; prevent the malignity (...) is natural to mankind; put your^^^^ the
(...) that their pride allots you, they (...) you humbled; and when you have
made yourself so to their hands, they will have no more to say to you: but she
that is proud after committing faults, calls them to mind, and makes them
immortal.

Let us now pass, my daughter, to the Social Duties. I thought I was in the
first place to draw you out of the common education and the prejudices of
childhood, and that it was necessary to fortify your reason, and give you some
solid principles to support you. I thought most of the disorders of (...) were
owing to false opinions; that false opinions produced loose sentiments; and
that when the understanding is not enlightened, the heart is exposed to
passions: that there must be some truths fixed in the mind to preserve us from
error, and that one must have some sentiments in the heart to keep out the
passions. When you have once a knowledge of truth, and a love for justice,
there is no danger of all the other virtues.

The first duty of civil life is to take care of others; such as live only for
themselves fall into contempt, and are neglected by every body. If you are for
requiring too much from others, they will refuse you every thing, their
friendship, their affections, and their services. Civil life is a mutual
intercourse of good offices: the most valuable part of mankind go still
further: by promoting the happiness of others, you insure you own; it is the
truest politics to think in this manner.

Nothing can be more odious than people that make every body see that they live
only for themselves. An extravagant self-love is the source of great crimes;
some degrees lower it occasions vices; but let there be never so little a spice
of it in a person, it impairs all the virtues and charms of society.

It Is impossible to make a friendship with persons who have a predominant
self-love, and take care to show it; and yet we can never strip ourselves of it
entirely; as long as we are attached to life, we shall be attached to ourselves.

But the^^ is a qualified self-love, that is not exercised at the ex^^^ce of
others.

We fancy we exalt ourselves by depressing our equals: th^s makes us censorious
and envious. Goodnature turns to more account than malignity. Do good when it
is in your power; speak well of all the world, and never judge with rigor.
Such acts of goodness and generosity frequently repeated will gain you at last
a great and excellent reputation. All the world is engaged to commend you, to
extenuate your defects, and enhance your good qualities. You should found your
reputation upon your own virtues, and not upon the demerit of others; consider
that their good qualities take nothing at all from you, and that the diminution
of your reputation can be imputed to no body but yourself.

One of the things that contributes most to make us unhappy is, that we depend
too much upon the men; it is the source too of our injustice. We pick quarrels
with them, not on account of what they owe us, or of that they have promised
us, but on account of what we have hoped from them. We depend absolutely upon
our hopes, which occasion us abundance of disappointments.

^e not (...) in your judgments, and give no (...) to (...) never give in to
the first appearance of things, nor be in haste to condemn a^^ body. ^emember
that there are things probable which are not true, as there are things true
which (...) not probable.

We should, in our private judgments, imitate the equity of solemn judgments.
Judges never decide without having examined, heard and confronted the witnesses
with the parties concerned; but we, without any commission, ^et up for empires
of reputation; and every proof is sufficient, every authority appears good,
when the business is to condemn. Prompted by our natural malignity, we fancy
that we give ourselves what we take away from others: hence arises animosities
and enmities; for every thing is sure to be known.

Be equitable therefore in your judgments; the same justice that you do to
others, they will return to you. Would you have them think and speak well of
you, never speak ill o^ any body.

Civility, which is an imitation of charity, is another of the social virtues:
it puts you above others when you have it in a more eminent degree; but it is
practiced and maintained at the expense of self-love. Civility is always
borrowing something from yourself, and turning it to the advantage of others.
It Is one of the great bonds of society, and the only quality that makes one
safe and easy in the intercourse of life.

We naturally love to govern; it is an unjust inclination. Whence have we our
night to pretend to exalt ourselves above other^. The^^ (...) but one just and
allowable superiority, it is that which virtue gives you; have more goodness and
generosity than others; be beforehand (...) them more in services than
benefi^s; it is (...) raise yourself. A great disinterestedness (...) you as
independent, and raises you higher (...) the amplest fortune: nothing sinks
(...) a fondness for our own interest.

The qualities of the heart have the greatest concern in the commerce of life:
the understanding does not endear (...) to others, and you frequently see men
very (...) with great parts; they are for giving you a good opinion of
themselves; they are for getting an ascendant over and depressing others.

Though humility has only been considered as a christian virtue, it must be
owned to be a social virtue; and so necessary a one, that without i^ it is a
very ticklish matter to have to do with you. It Is the conceit that you have of
yourself which makes you maintain your rights with so (...) arrogance, and
entrench on those of other people.

We must never be strict in calling any body to account. Exact civility does
not insist on all that is due to you. Do not be afraid of being beforehand
with your friends; if you have a mind to be a true friend, never insist on any
thing too stiffly; but that your behavior may not be inconsistent, as it
expresses your inward disposition, make often serious reflections on your
weaknesses, and take yourself to pieces. This examination will make you
entertain sentiments of humility for yourself, and of indulgence with regard to
others.

Be humble without being bashful. Shame is a secret pride; and pride is an
error with regard to one's own worth, and an injustice with regard to what one
has a mind to appear to others.

(...) advantage very desirable; but it is a (...) it with too much ardor, and
do nothing but with a view to it: we ought to content ourselves with deserving
it. We should not discourage sensibility for glory; it is the surest help we
have to virtue; but the business is to make choice of true glory.

Accustom yourself to see what is above you without either admission or envy;
and what is below you without contempt. Do not let the pomp of greatness impose
on you; none but little souls fall down and worship grandeur; admiration is
only due to virtue.

To use yourself to value men by their proper qualities, consider the condition
of a person loaded with honors, dignities and riches, who seems to want
nothing at all, but really wants every thing, by being destitue of true goods,
of those internal qualities that are necessary to the enjoyment and use of
them: he suffers a much as if his poverty was real, so long as he has the sense
of poverty, and is wishing for more. There is nothing worse, says one of the
Ancients, than poverty in the midst of riches, because the evil lies in the
mind. The man that is in this situation feels all the evils of opinion, without
enjoying the goods of fortune; he is blinded by error, and tormented by his
passions: (...) a reasonable person who has nothing at all, but substitutes
wise and solid reflections to supply the place of riches and honors, enjoys a
tranquillity which nothing can equal: the happiness of the one, and the misery
of the other, come only (...) their different manner of thinking.

If you find yourself disposed to resentment and revenge, strive to keep down
that sentiment; there is nothing so mean as to revenge one's self. If you meet
with ill-treatment from any body, you owe them only contempt; it is a debt easy
to be paid. If they have offended you only in slight matters, you owe them
indulgence; but there are certain seasons in life when you must meet with
injuries; seasons when the friends for (...) you have done most, fall soul upon
and (...) you: in such a case (...) having done (...) can to (...) not be (...)
disputing with them, (...) ought to court the esteem of one's friends; but when
you find people that will only view you though their prejudices, when you have
disputes with such (...) and fiery imaginations as will admit of nothing but
what favors their injustice, you have nothing to do but retire and set your
heart at rest. Do what you will, you will get nothing from them but discontent.
When you thus suffer from their illusage and shame of recanting, comfort
yourself in your innocence, and the assurance that you have not offended. Think
that if your worth was not greater at the time they raised you, it is not at
all less now they are for crushing you: you should, without being more
mortified at it, pity them, and not be exasperated i^ possible, but say, "They
see in a wrong light." Consider that with good qualities one may at last get
over resentment and envy. Let the hopes you draw from virtue keep up your
courage, and be your consolation.

Do not think of revenging yourself any way (...) by using more moderation in
your conduct, than those that attack you have malice. None but sublime souls
are touched with the glory of pardoning injuries.

(...) yourself to deserve your own esteem, the better to console yourself for
the esteem which others deny you. You can allow yourself but one sort of
vengeance; it is that of doing good to such as have offended you: it is the most
exquisite revenge, and the only one that is allowable: you gratify your
passion, and you entrench upon no virtue. Caesar has set us an example of it;
his lieutenant Labien^s deserted from him at a time that he stood in most need
of him, and went over to Pompey, leaving great riches in Caesar's camp. Caesar
sent them after him, with a message to tell him, that was the manner of
Caesar's revenge.

It Is prudent to make a good use of other people's faults, even when they do us
mischief; but very often they only begin the wrongs, and we finish them; they
give us indeed a right against themselves, but we make an ill use of it: we are
for taking too much advantage of their faults. This is an injustice and a
violence that makes the standers by against us. If we suffered with moderation
all the world would be for us, and the faults of those that attack us would be
doubled by our patience.

When you know that your friends have not treated you as they ought, take no
notice of it; as soon as eve^ you show that you perceive it, their malignity
increases, and you give a loose to their hatred* whereas by dissembling it, you
flatter their self-love; they enjoy the pleasure of imposing on you; they fancy
themselves your superiors, as long as they are not discovered; they triumph in
your mistake, and feel another pleasure in not ruining you quite. By not ^^^ing
them see that you know them, you give them time to repent and come to
themselves; and there needs nothing but a seasonable piece of service, and a
different manner of taking things, to make them more attached to you than ever.

Be inviolable in your word; but to gain it an entire confidence, remember that
you must be extremely scrupulous in keeping it. Show your regard to truth even
in things indifferent; and consider that there is nothing so despicable as to
deviate from it. It Is a common saying, that lying shows that people despise
God, and standing in fear of man; and that the man who speaks truth and does
good resembles the Deity. We should likewise avoid swearing; the bare word of
an honest person should have all the credit and authority of an oath.

Politeness is a desire of pleasing: nature gives it, education and the world
improve it. Politeness is a supplement to Virtue. They say it came into the
world when that daughter of Heaven abandoned it. In ruder times, when Virtue
bore a greater sway, they knew less of Politeness; it came in with
Voluptuousness: it is the daughter of Luxury and Delicacy. It has been
disputed, whether it approaches nearest to vice or virtue. Without pretending
to decide the question, or define politeness, may I be allowed to speak my
sentiments of it? I take it to be one of the greatest bonds of society, as it
contributes most to the peace of it; it is a preparation to charity, and (...)
imitation too of humility. True politeness is modest; and as it aims to please,
it knows that the way to carry its point, is to show that we do not prefer
ourselves to others, but give them the first rank in our esteem.

Pride keeps us off from society: our self love gives us a peculiar rank, which
is always disputed with us. Such a high esteem of ourselves as makes others
feel it, is almost always punished with an universal contempt. Politeness is
the art of reconciling agreeably what we owe to others, and what one owes to
one's self; for these duties have their bounds, which when they exceed, it is
flattery with regard to others, and pride with regard to yourself; it is the
most seducing quality in nature.

The most polite persons have generally a good deal of sweetness in their
conversation, and engaging qualities: it is the girdle of Venus; it sets off,
and gives graces and charms to all that wear it; and with it you cannot fail to
please.

There are several degrees of politeness. You carry it to a higher point in
proportion to the delicacy of your way of thinking: it distinguishes itself in
all your behavior, in your conversation, and even in your silence.

Perfect politeness forbids us to display our parts and talents with assurance;
it even borders upon cruelty, to show one's self happy when we have certain
misfortunes before our eyes. Conversation in the world is enough to polish our
outward behavior; but there must be a good deal of delicacy to form a
politeness of mind. A nice politeness formed with art and taste, will make the
world excuse you a great many failings, and improve your good qualities. Such
as are defective in point of behavior have the greater need of solid
qualities, and make slow advances in gaining a reputation. In a word,
politeness costs but little, and is of vast advantage.

Silence always becomes a young person (...) is a modesty and dignity in
keeping it; you fit in judgment upon others, and run no hazard yourself: but
guard yourself against a proud and insulting silence; it should be the result
of your prudence, and not the consequence of your pride. But as there is no
holding our peace always, it is fit for us to know that the principal rule for
speaking well is to think well.

When your notions are clear and distinct, your discourse will be so too; let a
proper decorum and modesty run through them. In all your discourses pay a
regard to received customs and prejudices; expressions declare the sentiments
of the heart, and the sentiments form the behavior.

Be particularly careful not to set up for a joker; it is an ill part to act,
and by making others laugh, we seldom make ourselves esteemed. Pay a great deal
more attention to others than to yourself, and think how to set them out rather
than to shine yourself: we should learn how to listen to other people's
discourse, and not betray an absence of mind either by our eyes or our manner.
Never dwell upon stories: if you chance to tell any, do it in a genteel and
close manner; let what you say be new, or at least give it a new turn. The
world is full of people, that are dinning things into your ears, without saying
any thing to entertain the mind. Whenever we speak, we should take care either
to please or instruct; when you call for the attention of the company, you
should make them amends by (...) agreeableness of what you say: an indifferent
discourse cannot be too short.

You may approve what you hear but should very seldom admire it: admiration is
proper to blockheads. Never let your discourse have an air of art and cunning;
the greatest ^^^dence lies in speaking little, and showing more diffidence of
one's self than of other people. An upright conduct, and a reputation for
p^o^ity, gains more confidence and esteem, and at the long run more advantages
too in point of fortune, than any by ways. Nothing makes you so worthy of the
greatest matters, and raises you so much above others, as an exact probity.

Use yourself to treat your serva^^^ with kindness and humanity. It Is a saying
of one of the Ancients, that we ought to consider them as unhappy friends.
Remember that the vast difference between you and them is owing merely to
chance; never make them uneasy in their state of life, or add weight to the
trouble of it. There is nothing so poor and mean as to be haughty to any body
that is in your service.

Never use any harsh language; it should never come out of the mouth of a
delicate and polite person. Servitude being settled in opposition to the
natural equality of mankind, it behooves us to soften it. What right have we to
expect our servants should be without faults, when we are giving them instances
every day of our own? Let us rather bear with them. When you show yourself in
all your humors and fits of passion, (for we often lay ourselves open before
our servants) how do you expose yourself to them. Can you have any right
afterward to reprimand them? A mean familiarity with them i^ indeed ever to be
avoided; but you owe them assistance, advice, and bounties suitable to their
condition and wants.

One should keep up authority in one's family, but it should be a mild
authority. We should not indeed always threaten without punishing, for fear of
bringing our treats into contempt; but we should not call in authority till
persuasion has failed. Remember that humanity and christianity put all the
world on the same foot. The impatience and heat of youth, joined to the false
notion they give you of yourself, make you look upon your servants as creatures
of a different species; but how contrary are such sentiments to the modesty
that you owe to yourself, and the humanity you owe to others.

Never relish or encourage the flattery of servants; and to prevent the
impression which their fawning speeches frequently repeated may make upon you,
consider that they are hirelings paid to serve your weaknesses and pride.

If by misfortune, Daughter, you should not think sit to follow my Advice and
Precepts, though they be lost upon you, they will still be useful to myself, as
laying me under new obligations. There reflections are fresh engagements to me
to exert myself in the way of virtue. I fortify my reason even against myself;
for I am now under a necessity of following it, or else (...) expose myself to
the shame of having known it, and yet been false to it.

There is nothing, my Daughter, more mortifying than to write upon subjects
that put me in mind of all my faults: by laying them open to you, I give up my
right to reprimand you; I (...) you with arms against myself. And I (...)
freely to use them, if you see any vices in (...) inconsistent with the virtues
that I recomm^nd to you; for all Advice and precepts want authority, when they
are not supported by example.

END OF THE MARCHIONESS DE LAMBERT'S "ADVICE TO HER DAUGHTER."

