Two Lectures ON THE PROPHECIES THAT REMAIN TO BE FULFILLED. DELIVERED IN THE
BOROUGH OF SOUTHWARK, AS ALSO AT THE CHAPEL IN GLASS-HOUSE YARD, LONDON, IN THE
YEAR M DCC LXXXIX.

By ELHANAN WINCHESTER.

Glory to GOD in the highest, that there is Peace on Earth and good will to
Men. NORWICH: PRINTED BY JOHN TRUMBULL, M DCC XCII.

LECTURES ON THE PROPHECIES THAT REMAIN TO BE FULFILLED.
LECTURE I. Prophecies of the final Restoration of all men; collected from the
Sacred Scriptures. With some brief Observations upon them.
THE next thing that claims our attention after the prophecies of the New
Heaven, New Earth, and New Jerusalem, and which is by far the most important
subject of prophecy, is, The final restoration of fallen Intelligences.

This appears to be the very design of God in the new creation, and the descent
of the holy city from heaven to the new earth, as has been already shown: The
Reader will observe that the Author in these two Lectures has reference to some
parts of his other Lectures, delivered previous to these. -- The whole course
of them that have been published in London, contain four large octavo volumes.
-- But few sets have ever reached America. (...).
and indeed, if this hypothesis is true, and these prophecies are to be
understood in their plain, literal sense, it will be impossible to gainsay the
general restoration, which stands evidently connected with the new creation.
For why should the earth, the habitation of men, be renewed, unless it is the
pleasure of God to renew and restore mankind to dwell upon it? And to what
purpose should the holy city, the habitation of God, and the Lamb, and the
saints, descend from heaven, unless with a view to this grand event? The
argument drawn from the restoration of the natural and material creation, to
that of the rational and moral, is to me highly conclusive and convincing. But
in the account of the new creation, God does not leave us to our reason alone,
to draw the conclusion of the restoration of men from those premises before
mentioned, viz. the Renovation of the earth and heaven, and the descent of the
holy city, how rational and conclusive soever such a consequence would have
been; but reveals in plain terms his glorious design, and the reason why he
would have his tabernacle with men, viz. That he might dwell with them, and
that they might be his people, and that God himself might be with them, and be
their God: and that be might wipe away all tears from their eyes, and forever
abolish death, sorrow, crying and pain, (which are the very component parts of
misery) and that be might make all things new.

These things I have considered in the two preceding Lectures, and I really
think, for my own part, that if the Scriptures of divine truth afforded no
other conscience of this glorious doctrine, THE UNIVERSAL RESTORATION, than
what is found in the two last Chapters of the Revelation of St. John, there is
enough to lay a foundation for our faith and hope in this matter, and
especially as God commanded those words to be written in particular, and gave
them the epithet of faithful and true sayings.

But we have no need to confine ourselves to these chapters, nor to this book;
for the times of the restitution of all things shall come, of which St. Peter
informs us, that God has spoken by the mouth of all his holy prophets since
the world began: Acts iii. 21. And this glorious purpose of God, being time
which he has had in view from the beginning, and seeing that it is of the
highest importance both to the honor of the great Creator, and the happiness
of his creatures, we may expect to find the knowledge of it communicated to men
through all the sacred writings, beginning with the first display of the light
of the gospel, and opening and increasing as that increased. For this purpose
let us carefully and heartily survey the prophetic writings upon this subject,
beginning with Moses, and coming down to St. John; one leading the van, and the
other bringing up the rear. And if we find that the plain sense of prophecy
bids us look for the restoration of all mankind at last, to a state of
subjection to God, and consequently deliverance from sin and its consequences,
and a return to holiness and happiness, let us not reject the idea because it
has not been generally received by mankind, but rejoice, and give praise to
God, who has revealed it for our comfort and satisfaction.

The first prophecy that I shall mention, and which is the foundation of all
the rest, is Genesis iii. 15. -- And I will put enmity between thee and the woman,
and between thy seed and her seed: It (or, He) shall bruise thy head, and thou
shall bruise his heel.

This was the first intimation of mercy to the parents of mankind after their
fall, and may with propriety be called, The Gospel preached by JEHOVAH.

Christ is without all doubt the very person intended by the Seed of the woman;
and by his bruising the serpent's head, the total destruction of Satan's
kingdom, works, etc. must be meant, as I apprehend; nor can I see how this
threatening to the serpent can be consistent with the common idea of the
greater part of the human race being left to all eternity under the power and
dominion of the devil. Bruising the serpent's head is certain death to him; and
applied to Satan, cannot mean less than the total destruction of his dominion,
designs, and influence; and a full reparation for all the damage that he has
done to the human race, and to the person of Christ himself. A bruise of the
heel is very painful, but the bruise of the head is mortal. This distinction,
which was made by the great Judge himself, implies, that however great the
mischief done by Satan to mankind, and Christ as their head and representative,
might be, it should be healed; (and consequently the misery occasioned by sin
could not endure to all eternity;) and that Christ's victory over sin and Satan
should be perfect and complete. But if sin and misery are to last to all
eternity, and hold their dominion over the greater part of mankind, we should
be almost tempted to reverse the text, and say, that however Christ and his
religion might bruise the serpent's tail, and give a temporary shock to his
kingdom, yet that finally he should recover his strength and dominion, and be
able to stand against the Prince of princes, and in spite of all his endeavors
maintain his usurped authority, and keep possession of his vast empire, and
hold his numerous subjects in their state of vassalage.

But as several passages in the writings of the Apostles are the best
expositions of this prophecy that ever were written, I shall mention them here,
that you may see how the sacred writings agree upon this important point.

Heb. ii. 14, 15. Forasmuch then as the children are partakers of flesh and
blood, he also himself likewise took part of the same: that through death he
might destroy him that had the power of death, that is the devil: And deliver
them who through, fear of death were all their life time subject to bondage.

1 John iii. 8. He that commits sin is of the devil: for the devil sins
from the beginning. For this purpose the Son of God was manifested, that he
might destroy the works of the devil.

From these passages it appears evident to me, that one of our Savior's
designs in what he has done and suffered, and is now doing, and will do
hereafter, is to destroy and abolish the kingdom of Satan and darkness, sin,
and misery out of the universe, until neither the name nor consequences of evil
shall remain in all the wide creation. For if the devil himself be ever
destroyed, to exist no more as a devil, and sin, which is his work be also
totally destroyed by the Son of God, then how can the consequences of
transgression endure to all eternity?

But I must dwell no longer upon this first promise, but pass to notice that
Gospel which the Scripture preached to Abraham, Isaac, add Jacob, in full
expectation that God would justify the heathen through faith, I shall first
collect the several passages, with St. Paul's comment upon them, and then make
some very brief observations.

When God first called Abram from out of his country, and from among his
kindred, he made him several great promises for his comfort and encouragement,
and concluded with these most gracious words, And in thee shall all the
families of the earth be blessed. See Genesis xii. 1, 2, 3.

When Abraham had obeyed the voice of God, and had endured that most severe
trial of offering up his son Isaac upon the altar, then it pleased JEHOVAH to
confirm his several promises made at different times to Abraham with a most
solemn oath, and this among the rest. And because he could swear by no greater,
he swear by himself, thus giving him the firmest possible foundation for his
faith to lay hold upon, By Myself have I sworn, faith JEHOVAH, for because thou
have done this thing, and have not with held thy son thine only son: That in
blessing I will bless thee, etc. -- And in thy seed shall all the nations of
the earth be blessed: because thou have obeyed my voice. Genesis xxii. 15 -- 18.

The same glorious promise was renewed to Isaac in these words, And I will
perform the oath which I swear unto Abraham thy father; etc. And in thy seed
shall all the nations of the earth be blessed. Because that Abraham obeyed my
voice, etc. Genesis xxvi. 3, 4, 5.

And the same was confirmed to Jacob, in nearly the same words, And in thee,
and in thy seed shall all the families of the earth be blessed. See Genesis
xxviii. 13, 14, 15.

It is no wonder that the Apostle calls this, The Gospel, or good news; For if
any tidings from heaven ever deserved the name of good news, surely those words
spoken by God to the Fathers do.

The Apostle's commentary upon the promises made to Abraham may be read in Romans
iv. and Gal. iii. but I shall only recite two passages out of the latter
chapter: And the scripture foreseeing that God would justify the heathen
through faith, preached before the gospel unto Abraham, saying, In thee shall
all nations be blessed. ver. 8.

Now to Abraham and his seed were the promises made: he faith not, And to
seeds, as of many: but as of one, And to thy seed, which is Christ. ver. 16.

It is evident that according to these promises all nations, tribes and
families of the earth are to be blessed in Christ Jesus; who was the son and
seed of Abraham, as well as the promised seed of the woman. The Apostle Peter
informs the Jews that the covenant which Go! made with the fathers, had this
most gracious; promise included therein, And in thy seed shall all the kindreds
of the earth be blessed. Acts iii. 25. All nations, families, and kindreds of
the earth, appear to me to intend all people and persons without any exception.

Their being blessed in ihe seed of Abraham, intends their being blessed in
Christ Jesus; and their being blessed in Christ most intend their final
salvation, for I cannot see how they can be blessed in Christ, if they are to
be annihilated and wholly destroyed out of existence, or, (which is worte)
doomed to endless misery, woe and pain. They may be under the curse and
condemnation, and even punishment and misery for age, and yet the promise be at
last fulfilled; but if they are to be cursed as long as God exists, I think it
would be hard to prove that ever they shall be blessed at all.

All nations have never yet been blessed in the seed of Abraham, still less all
kindreds and families; many of whom were totally extirpated, and wholly cut off
from the earth before Christ came into the world: but if the scriptures are
true that God has remembered his covenant for ever, the word which he
commanded to a thousand generations, or ages, Psalm. cv. 8. then these promises
may be fulfilled in the new earth, if not before; for not more than an hundred
and fifty generations have passed since the creation.

Let us always remember, that no length of time, distance of place, or change
of circumstances in creatures, can make the promises of the great Creator void
and of none effect. All his words must be fully accomplished at last, how long
soever the time may be. But those who imagine that unless the promises of God
are all accomplished before the day of Judgment they cannot be fulfilled at
all, have but narrow ideas of their vast extent, and amazing importance.

Since then all nations, families, and kindreds of the earth are to be blessed
in Christ, but have never yet obtained the blessing, these prophecies yet
remain to be fulfilled, and therefore they must be hereafter accomplished; and
their full accomplishment involves therein the final salvation of all mankind.

This appears conclusive to me, and I do not see how the force of it can be
fairly evaded.

The next passages that I shall notice, are those which extend the mercy of God
beyond his wrath such are Exodus xx. 5, 6. Visiting the iniquity of the fathers
upon the children unto the third and fourth generation of them that hate me;
and showing mercy unto thousands of them that love me, and keep my
commandments. See also Deuteronomy. v. 9, 10.

These words plainly extend the mercy of God far beyond his wrath, even as
thousands are beyond three or four.

Psalm. xxx. 5. For his anger endures but a moment; in his favor is life:
weeping may endure for a night, but joy comes in the morning.

-- ciii. 8, 9. JEHOVAH is merciful and gracious, slow to anger, and plenteous
in mercy. He will not always chide; neither will he keep his anger for ever.

Jer. iii. 12. For I am merciful, faith JEHOVAH, and I will not keep anger for
ever.

Lam. iii. 31. For JEHOVAH will not cast off for ever.

Ezekiel. xvi. 42. So will I make my fury toward thee to rest, and my jealousy
shall depart from thee, and I will be quiet, and will be no more angry.

These and many other texts not only speak of an entire cessation of the anger
of God, but even represent the time as short, compared with the duration of his
mercy: but there must be some strange additions, to make these passages speak
consistent with the doctrine of endless misery; in fact we must be obliged
nearly to reverse them all to make them compatible with that most dreadful idea.

There are more than forty passages of scripture where it is said of the mercy
of God, that it endures for ever. This is the chorus or burden of the song in
Psalm. cxxxvi. where it is repeated in every verse. Now mercy must be allowed to
respect misery, and is the form that love puts on toward the beloved objects,
when in distress and misery. It cannot properly be exercised toward those who
never fell, nor any more upon them who are already perfectly recovered; and
therefore fallen creatures, objects of God's love, are the only proper subjects
of it. And so long as love endures toward creatures in misery, so long will
mercy have place; and this will be forever, or during all the ages that misery
remains. Mercy according to this plan, will outlive all wrath, pain, and
misery, and will reconcile all creatures; and will then return back to its
original form and name, Love; in which it will remain to eternity.

But if endless misery be a truth, we must reverse all these passages, and say,
that The mercy of God endures but a moment, even for the short term of a man's
life, but his wrath endures for ever; follows the sinner to all eternity; and
shall never be appeased, nor leave any room for the exercise of mercy!

Moses calls upon the nations to rejoice with God's people, saying, Rejoice, O
ye nations, with his people; Deuteronomy. xxxii. 43. thereby intimating that the
designs of God toward the nations of the earth were such as might lay a
foundation for joy and rejoicing; and there are several intimations in the five
books of Moses of God's favor toward the nations the earth, which my time
will not permit me to mention.

The name or character of God, as proclaimed by Himself to Moses, is beautiful
beyond description, end exhibits as grand and lovely a picture of the amiable
perfections of the Deity as any we find in the Scriptures: --

And JEHOVAH passed by before him, and proclaimed, JEHOVAH, JEHOVAH GOD,
merciful and gracious, long-suffering, and abundant in goodness and truth.
Keeping mercy for thousands, (of ages) forgiving iniquity, transgression and
sin, and that will by no means clear the guilty; visiting the iniquity of the
fathers upon the children, unto the third and to the fourth generation. Exodus
xxxiv. 6, 7.

And when Israel rebelled against God, and he was just going to swear that the
congregation then alive should never enter into the land of Canaan, he
nevertheless first revealed to Moses his glorious purpose toward mankind, in
these blessed words: But as truly as I live, all the earth shall be filled with
the glory of JEHOVAH, Number. xiv. 21. Which I take to be the fame that is
prophesied of by Isaiah, chap. xi. 9. and by Habakkuk, chap. ii. 14. and by
Malachi, chap. i. 11.

These prophrecies shall all have their accomplishment in the time of the
Millenium, which shall last a thousand years. But glorious as that period shall
be, it will be only a specimen or type of the glory of the new heavens and
earth; which I have already considered.

But it is time to pass on to the book of Psalms, and to the writings of the
prophets; where we shall find many declarations of God's favor to all mankind,
and many prophecies of their being brought at last to a state of subjection and
obedience to their great Creator; and consequently into a state of happiness.

The book of Psalms is so excellent and comprehensive, that there are but few
matters of importance but what are touched upon therein; and though at first
sight one might think that it was intended wholly for the purpose of treating
upon subjects of contemplation and practical religion; yet upon a closer
inspection we find that it abounds in prophecies of various kinds; a great
number of which respect the Redeemer in his various states of humiliation,
exaltation -- the success of his gospel -- and the universality of his empire.
And it would be strange, if so important a subject as the universal subjection
of men to the Messiah was not mentioned. But so frequently is this great event
alluded to in that book, that were I to confine myself entirely thereto, I
should find matter enough for this present Lecture, and many more.

In the second Psalm, God says to his Son, Ask of me and I shall give thee the
heathen for thine inheritance, and the uttermost parts of the earth for thy
possession. ver. 8.

This request has been made, and the Father has given all things into the
hands of Christ, for the express purposes of their being subdued, humbled, made
subject to God, and being brought back again to the service and enjoyment of
their great Creator.

Receiving this gift, and thus on his part engaging to bring all back again,
the Lord Jesus Christ freely came into the world to do and suffer the will of
the Father.

In Psalm xxii. Our Savior's lamentation on the cross, and his sufferings are
foretold, and many particular circumstances of the same described in the most
pathetic language; but toward the close of that wonderful Psalm, he is
represented as breaking out in the most rapturous manner and joyful strains,
when he considered the consequences of his death and sufferings: in which are
these remarkable words.

All the ends of the world shall remember and turn unto JEHOVAH: and all the
kindreds of the nations shall worship before thee. For the kingdom is
JEHOVAH'S; and he is the governor among the nations. All they that be sat upon
earth shall eat and worship; all they that go down to the dust shall bow before
him; and none can keep alive his own soul. A seed shall serve him; it shall be
accounted to JEHOVAH for a generation. ver. 27, 28, 29, 30.

In these words we have an important prophecy, that in consequence of what
Christ has done and suffered, and what he will do as Mediator, all the ends of
the world shall remember, and turn unto JEHOVAH, and all the kindreds of the
nations shall worship before him. These expressions are almost as general as
words can express, and take in the whole race of men, and the things foretold
of them are such as are inconsistent with a state of endless misery, viz. that
they shall remember, or think on their ways, lament their iniquities, reflect
on the goodness and mercy of God, and the sufferings of Christ; and in
consequence freely and heartily turn to JEHOVAH, and worship before him, giving
praise and adoration to him that sits upon the throne, and to him that
suffered upon the cross. For as the kingdom belongs unto JEHOVAH, and all men
are his creatures, therefore he has a right to their highest praises, and their
noblest services; he claims them for his own, and will have them; for who shall
withstand the Governor of the universe, who does his pleasure both in heaven
and in earth?

As all that live are bound to worship God, and shall finally do so, as
certainly as they shall eat, so if they die before they have submitted to him,
death shall not prevent the fulfillment of the divine purposes; for all that go
down to the dust shall bow before him. And as none is capable of keeping alive
his own soul, he that has the power of life and death in his own hands, is
determined that all shall certainly bow and submit to him whether alive on
earth, or gone down to the dust.

Here we find also that a peculiar seed shall serve God, who shall be the first
fruits of his creatures, and shall be accounted to him as a chosen generation;
not to the exclusion of the rest; for the general submission of all is first
mentioned, and then this seed is particularly distinguished. And this
distinction of the special and general redemption and salvation, runs through
the whole bible, as in intelligent reader may easily perceive.

Psalm xlv. treats wholly of Christ, his church, the success of his gospel, his
subduing power, and the spread of his kingdom.

How beautiful and grand are the following words, as addressed by the Father to
the Son!

Gird thy sword upon thy thing, O most mighty, with thy glory and thy majesty.
And in thy majesty ride prosperously, because of truth and meekness and
righteousness; and thy right hand shall teach thee terrible things. Thine
arrows are sharp in the heart of the king's enemies; whereby the people fall
under thee. Thy throne, O God, is for ever and ever: the scepter of thy kingdom
is a right scepter ver. 3, 4, 5, 6.

Christ here represented as armed with power and might, wisdom and
righteousness, truth and meekness, sufficient to subdue and conquer his most
stubborn foes, and cause them to become his willing subjects.

There is another passage in this beautiful Psalm that has given me a great
deal of pleasure, and that is, that not only the royal spouse, the bride of
Christ, shall be brought into the king's presence, but. The virgins her
companions that follow her shall be brought; With gladness and rejoicing shall
they be brought: they shall enter into the king's palace. ver. 14, 15. These
words appear to me to testify that many others besides the chosen bride shall
enter with gladness and rejoicing at last into the presence of their King, and
be for ever happy.

The xlvii. Psalm is an excellent piece of sacred poetry, and, I am apt to
think, describes the ascension and glory of Christ, and his universal
government over the earth; and the close of it looks forward to that great day
when all shall submit to God, -- The princes of the people are gathered
together, even the people of the God of Abraham: for the shields of the earth
belong unto God: he is greatly exalted. ver. 9.

These words intimate that as God is the great and rightful proprietor of all,
so that finally all the princes of the people shall gather together to adore
him. This prophecy shall be partly fulfilled in the Millenium, when all nations
shall gather together to serve the Lord; but completely in the new earth, when
the kings of the earth shall bring their glory and honor into the heavenly
city; and the glory and honor of the nations which they shall govern.

Psalm lxiv. 9. is worth reading in this place, And all men shall fear and
shall declare the work of God: for they shall wisely consider of his doing.
These prophecies certainly intimate, that however long men may refuse to fear
God, and to be wise, yet they shall all be truly wise at last.

Psalm lxv. 1, 2, 3. Praise waits for thee, O God, in Zion: and unto thee
shall the vow be performed. O thou that hear prayer, unto thee shall all
flesh come. Iniquities prevail against me: as for our transgressions, thou
shall purge them away.

This is a noble and very important prophecy, and includes several grand events
therein, especially these three, 1. That the vows which have been so often made
to God, and shamefully broken, shall be at last performed to his acceptance. 2.
That unto him shall all flesh without exception come, voluntarily dedicating
themselves to his service, in consequence of his hearing their cries and
granting them deliverance, and 3. That although iniquities have greatly
prevailed against mankind, and even the best, yet finally all our
transgressions shall be purged away.

Psalm lxvi. 3, 4. Through the greatness of thy power shall thine enemies
submit themselves unto thee. All the earth shall worship thee, and shall sing
unto thee: they shall sing to thy name.

This is a glorious prophecy of the universal subjection, and humble submission
of all God's creatures to him, in consequence of the greatness of his power.
And lest any should pretend that only a forced subjection is intended, there is
not only the expression of their submitting themselves unto God, which imphes a
voluntary act, but a declaration that all the earth shall worship God, and sing
to him, and his name, which certainly supposes a state of happiness, according
to the plain meaning of the text.

A similar passage is found in Psalm lxxxvi. 9. All nations whom thou have made
shall come and worship before thee, O JEHOVAH: and shall glorify thy name. If
there are any nations and people whom God has not made, they are evidently
excepted from this prophecy and promise, but else I cannot see why this is not
as express a promise of universal worship and adoration being given to God by
all nations, and of their coming voluntarily, and glorifying his name by
cheerful obedience, as we could wish. One would think that nothing need be
plainer, and yet many pay no more attention to these express prophecies, than
though they were not written.

(...) a most important prophecy in Psalm cxxxviii. 4, 5. that may well be
connected with the foregoing, -- All the kings of the earth shall praise thee,
O JEHOVAH, when they shall hear the words of thy mouth. Yea, they shall sing in
the ways of JEHOVAH, for great is the glory of JEHOVAH.

It is evident this prophecy has never been fulfilled, nor never can be unless
the universal restoration of men is true; for the greater part of the kings of
the earth have been so far from praising God, and walking in his ways, that
they have been the farthest from all appearance of true piety of any of the
human race; and have been the greatest rebels against him, and the most
obstinate, wicked and tyrannical being that ever existed: and so have lived and
died. But if all of them shall be brought to submit to JEHOVAH, and to praise
him with heart and voice, and to hear and obey the words of his mouth, and to
sing in his ways, and to behold and delight in his great glory, as this
prophecy declares; then who can doubt of the restoration of all the lower
classes of mankind? For if the greatest rebels shall be subdued, certainly by
parity of reasoning, much more the less rebellious. And if all the haughty
tyrants that ever wort a crown, or wielded sword or scepter, shall hear the
voice of God so as to praise him freely and heartily, I cannot see but the
universal subjection of all their subjects to the Great King, is proved to a
demonstration.

Psalm cxlv. is one of the most beautiful Psalms in the book, and contains
excellent sentences, and among the rest, some charming declarations of God's
universal goodness to his creatures, and faithful prophecies that they shall
all praise his name, and sing of his righteousness and goodness: -- And men
shall speak of the might of thy terrible acts: and I will declare thy
greatness. They shall abundantly utter the memory of thy great goodness, and
shall sing of thy righteousness. JEHOVAH is gracious, and full of compassion;
flow to anger, and of great mercy. JEHOVAH is good to all: and his tender
mercies are over all his works. All thy works shall praise thee, O JEHOVAH, and
thy saints shall bless thee. ver. 6, 7, 8, 9, 10.

God is universally good to his creatures, and the time shall come when they
shall be sensible of it, and shall praise his name with all their hearts, and
with their noblest powers fulfill his blessed commands, and glorify him for
evermore. But all these expressions appear to me entirely inconsistent with the
doctrine of endless misery. For how can God be said to be gracious, full of
campossrom, slow to anger, and of great mercy, good to all, and extending his
tender mercies over all his works, it he has no designs of grace and salvation
all? And how is it possible that all his works shall praise him, if a
considerable part of his noblest works shall never be brought to love him, but
shall eternally, and while God exists, remain his irreconcilable enemies,
blaspheming his name, in a state of endless, unavailing misery?

The book of Psalms abounds with prophecies upon this subject, many of which I
have passed over for the sake of brevity; and the very last verse in the book,
though it stands in our transiation in the form of an exhortation or command,
Let every thing that has breath praise the Lord; yet it might be rendered,
perhaps with more propriety, Every thing that has breath shall praise JAH.
Hallelujah. Psalm cl. 6. In this light it is a glorious, certain, and very
extensive prophecy: Words cannot be more universal, than every thing that has
breath: The word shall implies the certainty of the accomplishment of it, and
the matter on subject of the prophecy is most glorious, they shall praise JAH;
they shall adore their great Creator, with all their hearts and tongues,
according to his will, and shall give him the glory which is due to his name.
And is not this prophecy absolutely inconsistent with any of God's creatures
always continuing his sors, and remaining in a state of misery during the whole
of their existence?

But besides these and many other prophecies, the very exhortations with which
the book of Psalms abounds, to all people, nations, and tongues, to praise and
magnify, adore and bless God, are strong arguments to prove the Universal
Restoration: For, why are those exhortations given, if they are never to be
complied with? And why are all exhorted to praise God for his goodness, love,
mercy, kindness, and compassion, if they are not all to share in the same? Many
other passages might be produced, and arguments advanced out of this divine
book to prove the glorious doctrine true. But my plan will not suffer me to
enlarge. The hints I have given are sufficient to show that it is by no means
overlooked among the great variety of noble and important subjects treated of
therein.

I come next to consider some of the prophecies of Isaiah upon this very
interesting subject; and as he is commonly called, The evangelical Prophet, we
may expect if this great event was revealed to any of the prophets, it was to
him: And as St. Peter declares that God has spoken of it by the mouth of all
his boly Prophets, since the world began, Acts iii. 21. we may be sure of
sinding it in his prophecy.

But I must not think of reciting all the intimations that God has been
graciously pleased to give us by the mouth or pen of this sublime prophet, of
his merciful designs toward the whole human race; but consine myself to a few
of the most important.

The first I shall quote, is, chap. xxv. 6, 7, 8. -- And in this mountain shall
JEHOVAH of hosts make unto all people a feast of sat things, a feast of wines
on the lees; of fat things full of marrow, of wines on the le 3 well resined.
And he will destroy in this mountain the face of the covering cast over all
people, and the vail that is spread over all nations. He will swallow up death
in victory; and Adonai JEHOVAH will wipe away tears from off all faces; and the
rebuke of his people shall he take away from off all the earth: for JEHOVAH
has spoken it.

This is a very extensive and important prophecy: it began to be fulfilled at
the commencement of the gospel dispensation; is now fulsilling; and will be
more fully accomplished in the time of the Millenium, when the knowledge of God
shall be universal. But its complete accomplishment seems to be reserved for
that dispensation of which I have already treated, the new heaven and earth,
when the New Jerusalem shall descend, and the tabernacle of God shall be with
men, and he will dwell with them; and they shall be his people, and God himself
shall be with them, and be their God; and when God shall wipe away all tears
from their eyes; when there shall be no more death, neither sorrow, not crying,
neither shall there be any more pain; for the former things shall be passed
away; and all things shall be made new. It is evident that lsaiah and St. John
soake of the same time or period, and nearly in the same words. The Gaspel
feast is a rich and noble feast, and the blessings of it are free for all, and
designed for all, as God has a regard for all, and Christ died for all; and the
darkness and ignorance shall be removed from the minds and hearts of all people
and nations; death, even all kinds of destruction shall be swallowed up in
victory; tears shall be wiped away from all faces, by the kind and powerful
hand of God, who alone can perform a work so great and glorious; all weeping,
sorrow, and rebuke shall forever cease. This the mouth of JEHOVAH has spoken;
and it cannot fail of being accomplished.

Then shall be fulfilled another glorious prophecy spoken by the same prophet,
chap. xl. 5. And the glory of JEHOVAH shall be revealed, and all fleth shall
see it together: for the mouth of JEHOVAH has spoken it. This prophecy like
the other is of great latitude and extent: it began to have us accomplishment,
at our Lord's coming forth to the work of the ministry, but it cannot be said
to be fully accomplished till all flesh, or men, have not only beheld the glory
or salvation of God, but have seen it together, which cannot be but in the new
earth.

Then, when Christ shall have entirely finished his work as Mediator, all flesh
shall behold the glory of God together, and be made partakers of his salvation.

The next passage that I shall mention out of this divinely inspired prophet,
is one that I am persuaded is foundation enough to build the important doctrine
upon, even though no other of equal force could be found in scripture. Chap.
xiv. 22, 23, 24.

Look unto me, and be ye saved, all the ends of the earth: for I am God, and
there is none else. I have sworn by myself, the word is gone out of my mouth in
righteousness, and shall not return, That unto me every knee shall bow, every
tongue shall swear. Surely shall The reader may perceive that I have left out
two words which the translators have added to complete the sense, as they
supposed; the sense is complete without any addition whatever; but the words
they added were not full enough to correspond with the rest of the text. They
have addled the words one, and men, which as the common reader may see, are
printed in a different character. The words to correspond with the rest of the
text should be every one or every tongue; and all men, but leave these words
out and the sense is the same, because the words every knee and every tongue
are expressed in verse 23, and must consequently be understood in the 24th
verse.
saw, In Jehovah have I righteousness and strength: even to him shall come; and
all that are incensed against him shall be ashamed.

In this glorious prophecy there is first a general invitation given by
Jehovah, (whom I take here by the parallel passages in the New Testament, to be
the Son of God, the Savior of mankind) to all people, to look to him, and be
saved: The ends of the earth are invited, and salvation is promised to all who
truly look to the glorious Savior for such a blessing.

If the common Arminian system was the whole truth, no more need to have been
added; it would have been enough to have said, There is a general provision
made for all men; and all the ends of the earth are invited to look to me, and
such as look shall be saved; and as for the rest they shall have their choice,
and I shall exert myself no farther in their behalf. But the words go much
beyond an invitation, for that might be given, and yet take no certain effect
upon the greater part, as we frequently see. But the great Savior being
determined to put an end to all rebellion, and bring every creature to a state
of subjection and obedience, has not wholly rested the matter there, but to
put it out of all doubt, has in the most solemn manner sworn by Himself, and
sent forth the word from his mouth in righteousness, never to return void, but
to accomplish his glorious purposes in the most absolute manner. His fixed
resolution is, that every knee without exception shall bow to him as their
Lord; and every tongue shall swear allegiance and fealty to his righteous and
just government In the first piece that ever I published upon this delightful
subject, I introduced this part of the passage, and argned in the following
manner upon it; of which I have yet seen no cause to be ashamed. If we observe
the words, we shall find that God here promises to bring all creatures to
return again to their allegiance; not one shall to endless eternity remain in
rerebellion against him; for swearing to him, plainly supposes a hearty
returning. Therefore. If every knee shall bow, and every tongue shall swear,
then not one shall remain to all eternity in opposition to God. But the first
is true; therefore also the last. Thus as long as rebellion against God lasts,
misery must last also. But rebellion against God will not last to all eternity.
Neither then will misery last to all eternity. See my Sermon on the Seed of the
Woman bruising the Serpent's head. Printed in Philadelphia, 1781. page 13.
.

Every knee and every tongue, are words of the most ample signification, and if
they do not intend all persons without exception, it is impossible to express
that idea by any words in our language. And I believe all allow that the
expressions here are absolutely universal and the only dispute is what the
expressions, bowing the knee, and swearing with the tongue intend. Some suppose
that they intend no more than being brought before the bar of Christ, and
giving up their accounts to the great Savior and Judge of all men: and it must
be confessed this is evidently included; and the words are cited by St. Paul in
his epistle to the Romans in that light: -- Chap. xiv. 10, 11, 12. But why do
thou judge thy brother? or why do thou set at naught thy brother? for we
shall all stand before the judgment seat of Christ. For it is written, As I
live. says the Lord, every knee shall bow to me, and every tongue shall
confess to God. So then every one of us shall give account of himself to God:
This was sufficient for the apostle's purpose in the subject he was then upon;
and we all know from the Scriptures that the dispensation of judgment must pass
upon all men here or hereafter: And I suppose, and think I have made it
evident, that the judgment of those who do not hearken to the invitations of
the gospel, is one of the means by which the Savior of mankind will bring his
soes to submit to him; and if so, then the quotation of this text by St. Paul;
in the fore cited passage of the epistle to the Romans, is so far from being
contradictory to the ideas I have of the text, that it is perfectly consistent
there with. But St. Paul by no means supposed that being brought to judgment,
and giving account of ourselves to God, was the whole meaning of the prophet;
for he has cited the same passage in a much fuller manner in the epistle to the
Philippians, in which he makes it signify much more than being judged, even to
comprehend hearty submission, adoration, and the most noble and free
confession, for the most important purposes; for the glory of God the Father,
and the honor of the great Redeemer, and I may add, for their own happiness,
according to the language of the prophet. Because Jesus so humbled himself as
to make himself of no reputation, to take upon him the form of a servant, and
to be made in the likeness of men, and being thus degraded as to be found in
the fashion of a man, he humbled himself still more, and became obedient unto
death; yea, that his humiliation might be the greatest that was possible, he
submitted to death in its most painful and shameful, yea, and most accursed
form, the death of the Cross; a punishment inflicted by the Romans only upon
slaves, in case of the most atrocious crimes. Wherefore God also has highly
exalted him; and has given him a name which is above every name; That at (or
in) the name of Jesus, every knee should bow, of things in heaven, and things
in earth, and things under the earth; And that every tongue should confess that
Jesus Christ is Lord, to the glory of God the Father. Phil. ii. 7 -- 11.

Here the expressions are very full and particular, every knee in heaven,
earth, and under the earth, shall bow, and submit to Jesus; they shall bow in
his name, and pay him implicit homage and adoration; and every tongue shall do
more than give an account to the Judge -- they shall confess that he is Lord --
even their Lord -- to the glory of God the Father!

Every word here used seems to imply a willing and not a forced subjection, as
bowing in the name of Jesus, and confessing him to be Lord of all, to the glory
of God the Father. There is not the least intimation of any exception, all
shall bow and confess, and in the same manner, even in the name of Jesus, and
for the same design and end, the glory of God the Father. I can see no
difference in the text with respect to this subjection and obedience, between
those in heaven, those on earth, and those under the earth; either all are
willing and free, or none, for any thing that appears in the text. And indeed I
am astonished that any can imagine that God can be pleased and glorified, and
Christ rewarded and satisfied, with a forced subjection, what would not even
please an earthly monarch. I might say in this case as God did respecting
offering the blind, lame, and sick, Offer it now unto thy governor, will he be
pleased with thee, or accept thy person? says JEHOVAH of hosts. Mal. i. 8. God
always required the most excellent things to be offered to him, and in the most
free and willing manner; and as he requires the whole heart, mind, and
strength, to be freely dedicated to him, it is not likely that he will accept
of a nominal, unwilling, and forced subjection and service.

To return to the prophecy of Isaiah.

Whatever be the meaning of the words, unto me every knee shall bow, and every
tongue shall swear; they shall certainly be accomplished in the very sense
which he intended; yea, they must, or the oath of God is made void at once,
which would be horrid to suppose. Even concerning his word he says, For as the
rain comes down, and the snow from heaven, and returns not thither, but
waters the earth, and makes it bring forth and bud, that it may give seed to
the sower, and bread to the eater; So shall my word be that goes forth out of
my mouth: it shall not return unto me void, but it shall accomplish that which
I please, and it shall prosper in the thing whereto I sent it. Isai. iv. 10,
11. And if the word of God shall certainly accomplish his intention at last,
none can imagine that his most solemn oath shall be void. The bowing of the
knee implies both submission and adoration; and swearing fealty and allegiance,
supposes pardon, reception, and protection, on the part of the monarch; and a
hearty returning from rebellion, renouncing all other jurisdiction, true hearty
subjection, allegiance, and obedience on the part of the rebel. And however
kings of the earth may be deceived, and imposed upon by false oaths, feigned
submission, and forced unwilling subjection, it cannot be the case with the
great Supreme.

If this be allowed to be the true meaning of the text, I think the doctrine of
the universal restoration is evident. And if we read and consider the foregoing
and following words, we shall find that salvation and not damnation stands
connected with this promise and oath of God; he does not swear that they shall
always remain his enemies, but on the contrary that they shall become his
subjects; and that every tongue shall not only swear, but shall surely say, "In
JEHOVAH have I righteousness and strength:" which surely is inconsistent with
endless damnation, but perfectly consistent with salvation. God does not say,
They shall never come, but on the contrary, To him shall come; and all men are
understood, by every knee, and every tongue; they shall all come to him, and
own him their Lord, and declare that in him is their righteousness and
strength: and if this does not imply their salvation, I know not what does; for
if looking to him is sufficient to save them, certainly coming to him can do no
less; and if any doubt remained, the universal declaration of every tongue,
that, "In JEHOVAH have I righteousness and strength;" would be, I think, fully
sufficient to set it aside, and show that all should be made partakers of
salvation. And as for that expression, that all that are incensed against him
shall be ashamed; which many suppose intimates that some shall be left out, who
shall not be delivered, but always remain under the power of sin and shame;
this may be easily, explained by a similar passage in Ezekiel. xvi. where God
promises to Jerusalem, that he will remember his covenant, that he made with
her in the days of her youth, and that he will establish unto her an
everlasting covenant, which is certainly a state of salvation and happiness
beyond all dispute; yet he immediately adds, Then thou shall remember thy ways
and be ashamed, when thou shall receive thy sisters, thine elder and thy
younger: and I will give them unto thee for daughters; but not by thy covenant:
And I will establish my covenant with thee; and thou shall know that I am
JEHOVAH; That thou may remember and be confounded, and never open thy mouth
any more because of thy shame, when I am pacified toward thee for all that thou
have done, says Adonai JEHOVAH. ver. 60, 61, 62, 63.

Here it is plainly seen that a certain sense of shame and confusion of face,
in those who have been guilty of high rebellion against the God of love and
goodness, when they come to be made sensible of it, and to have a manifestation
of pardon and forgiveness, is perfectly consistent with a state of happiness
and reconciliation. Thus a sense of shame, is so far from making salvation
void, that it is consistent with God's being entirely pacified toward them for
all that they have done, and with their being joined to him in an everlasting
covenant.

I might add much more upon this important prophecy of Isaiah, but having dwelt
long upon it, I must pass on, to other passages, deserving our notice.

This same inspired writer makes the death of Christ and his justifying grace
of equal extent, JEHOVAH has laid on him the iniquity of us all; even all of
us who like sheep have gone astray, and have turned every one to his own way.
He shall see of the travail of his soul, and shall be satisfied: by his
knowledge shall my righteous servant justify many (or the many); for he shall
bear their iniquities, Chap. liii. 6, 11.

It is plain that our Lord will not finally lose his labor, nor shed his blood
in vain. The Prophet declared as positively that he should justify the many, as
that he should bear their iniquities. And what the Prophet foretold, the
Apostle confirmed in that prophetic chapter, Romans v. which may be considered as
the best comment upon this text that has ever been written. Therein he declares
that, As by the offense of one, Judgment came upon all men to condemnation,
even so by the righteousness of one, the free gift came upon all men to
justification of life. ver. 18.

But perhaps some might say, This is only general provision, and there is no
certainty that they shall ever become actual partakers of it. To prevent this,
and to testify the universal restoration in the plainest manner, he adds, For
as by one man's disobedience many were made sinners, so by the obedience of one
shall many be made righteous. -- ver. 19 Here he asserts, not only that all who
became corrupted and condemned by the offense of one, have a provision made for
their justification and happiness in Christ, but that they shall as certainly
become righteous at last, as they have been actually sinners. So God has
greatly purposed, and his will must be done. And to confirm us, if possible,
still more in this idea, the great Apostle says, Moreover the law entered, that
the offense might abound. But where sin abounded grace did much more abound.
ver. 20. Here the Apostle speaks like a Prophet, in the same grand and glorious
style; he speaks of things not yet come to pass, as though they were already
fulfilled, to show the absolute certainty of their accomplishment, So God spoke
to Abraham, A father of many nations have I made thee. Genesis xvii. 5. -- Romans
iv. 17. Though at that time Isaac was not born; but he was a father of many
nations before him whom he believed, even God who quickens the dead, and
calls those things that be not, as though they were. So Isaiah says, Unto us
a child is born, unto us a son is given, etc. Isai. ix. 6. And hundreds of
passages might be found of the like nature in the sacred writings, which we
must never interpret by mood and tense, and suchlike little criticisms.

The Apostle to the Hebrews says, Thou have put all things in subjection under
his feet. For in that he put all in subjection under him, he left nothing that
is not put under him. But now we see not yet all things put under him. Heb. ii.
8. And the same reasoning may be applied to the superabounding of grace over
sin; it is done in the sight of God, it certainly shall be completely performed
at last, but we do not yet behold it; far from it; sin has hitherto abounded
much more than grace; but the scale will turn, and grace shall abound much more
than sin From this text alone an argument may be drawn in favor of the
universal restoration that cannot easily be answered, and as it has stood in my
printed works for nine years, without ever having been fairly answered, I will
take the liberty of transcribing it here. It is evident that sin has abounded
to the destruction of all men; now if grace abounds much more, it is evident
that all must be at last restored thereby; otherwise there is no shadow of
truth in the words. Therefore if grace shall abound more than sin, it must be
as extensive; and more powerful: But the first is true: therefore the last
also. Sermon on the Seed of the Woman bruising the Serpent's head.
Philadelphia, 1781.
.

But as though St. Paul was determined that none should remain ignorant of the
matter that should read this epistle, he farther adds, That as sin has reigned
unto death, even so might grace reign through righteousness unto eternal life,
by Jesus Christ our Lord. ver. 21.

Many will allow that Christ's redemption is so far for all men as to give them
the blessing of temporal life; but St. Paul here declares that grace shall
reign to eternal life, even as sin has reigned unto death: and none will deny
but sin has certainly reigned unto death over all men: (however differently
they may explain the word death) then grace must reign through righteousness,
unto eternal life, over all men.

Christ must see of the travail of his soul, and must be fully satisfied and
contented; and who can tell how capacious the soul of Christ is? He will not,
must not, cannot lose the souls of men, whom the father gave him; whom he
redeemed with his own precious blood; and whom he has engaged to bring back to
God again. For such is the will of the Father that sent him, and it must be
done at last.

If it can be proved from Scripture that the Father has not given all the race
of men into the hands of Christ, and that he has not shed his blood for all;
then I will give up the restoration of all; but otherwise I cannot, unless I
renounce the present ideas I have of the prophecies; and I have no reason to do
that from past events; and I shall rest a while to see how things go on, before
I give up, what I trust I have learned from the holy scriptures. I cannot think
otherwise but what God will fulfill the prophecies that are yet to be
accomplished, in the same manner as he has those which have been already
brought to pass.

I shall notice but one more prophecy in the book of Isaiah, in favor of the
Universal Restoration; and that (one would think) is enough to convince any
unprejudiced mind, that wrath toward all God's creatures, is limited, and must
at length have an end.

For I will not contend for ever, neither will I be always wroth: for the
spirit should fail before me, and the souls which I have made. chap. lvii. 10

Here is a general declaration, that God will not contend for ever, neither be
always wroth; and for this he gives a plain reason, founded in his love and
pity toward the works of his hands; the spirit should fail before me, and the
souls that I have made.

I shall treat very briefly upon this text, because I have dwelt so long upon
those which I have already considered.

Some may say, that God only speaks of his peculiar people, that he will not
contend with them forever, nor be always wroth with his chosen. But it is
evident that he speaks of such who went on frowardly in the way of their own
hearts; whose ways he saw, and promised to heal them, and to restore comforts
unto them, and to their mourners. And the reason he gives why he will not
contend for ever, nor be always wroth, is general, and founded upon the
relation that God stands in to his creatures as their Creator and Father. And
as he is the Father of all spirits, and Creator of all souls, the same reason
in this respect subsists toward all alike. And it is worthy of our notice,
that no reason is given in this text, why he will not contend for ever, not be
always wroth, but what equally applies to one as well as another. And I say
now, as I have said more than once in my writings, Those who venture to
contradict their Maker in this assertion, and say, that he will contend
forever, and will be always wroth, ought to be able at least to assign as good
a reason for it, as he has to the contrary, and consequently prove him not to
be the universal Maker and Father of mankind. This would be doing the work
effectually, and would lay such a firm foundation for the doctrine of endless
misery, as could not easily be overthrown. But as this can never be done by
Scripture. I think we may affirm with the utmost certainty, according to this
prophecy, that God will not contend with his creatures for ever, nor be always
wroth with them; lest the spirit should fail before him, and the souls which he
has made. And this text concludes as strongly against annihilation or
destruction, as it does against endless damnation: For in either case the
spirit must fail for ever of attaining to the end for which God designed it,
and it creation would be in vain, and to no purpose.

The Truth is, that God will subdue All; bring every knee to bow, and tongue to
swear; and thus as all shall submit to him, become reconciled to his
government, and obedient to his laws, all contention shall cease; which cannot
be the case till all creatures yield to their Creator, as he will never give up
any of his rights.

Thy mercy, O JEHOVAH, endures for ever: forsake not the works of thine own
hands. Psalm cxxxviii. 8. It is a great consolation to think that God's mercy
endures for ever; and that he will have a desire to the works of his hands, and
will not forsake them, until he has performed all his pleasure, in them and
for them; which shall issue in his own glory, and their felicity.

I shall dwell no longer on the prophecy of Isaiah: for though there are many
other passages therein that intimate the Universal Restoration, some of which I
have noticed already in this work, yet as other parts of Scripture demand our
attention, I shall pass to mention some of the most material prophecies that
are yet to be considered respecting this most important event. For though I
consider the texts already cited as sufficient of themselves to prove the
doctrine of the Restoration true, yet it must give great pleasure and
satisfaction to the friends of this glorious system, to see a point of this
amazing magnitude confirmed by a great number of passages.

The prophecy of Jeremiah has not very much in it that appears to me directly
to relate to this subject. He may be called, The mourning prophet. His book is
chiefly filled with accounts of black crimes, and dreadful judgments;
nevertheless there are four or five chapters that contain many very gracious
promises; yet as they chiefly and most directly relate to the happy state of
Judah and Israel in the time of the Millenium, and have been considered in that
light, I shall pass them over here. For as the Millenium itself shall in many
instances be a beautiful type and figure of the New Earth, and final happy
state of mankind, and the glorious recovery of the twelve tribes shall be a
picture of the general restoration, the same promises that confirm the former
may in many instances be applied to the latter event.

That declaration of God by Jeremiah, Chap. iii. 12, For I am merciful, says
JEHOVAH, and I will not keep anger for ever: has been already mentioned among
other passages of the same nature; and well deserves a place here, for it is
like the sun shining out of a cloud.

And something of the same kind appears in the book of lamentations, where we
should least expect it. For JEHOVAH will not cast off for ever. But though he
cause grief, yet will he have compassion according to the multitude of his
mercies: For he does not afflict willingly, nor grieve the children of men.
Lam. iii. 31, 32, 33.

These words appear to me, to be without limitation of time, or persons. God
never afflicts willingly, nor grieves the children of men in any stage of their
existence. Why then does he afflict and grieve them at all? The answer is, It
is necessary for their good. This, if admitted as true, settles the point at
once; for if God always afflicts the children of men for their good and never
merely for his own pleasure then the doctrine of the Restoration is true. And
would it not be absurd to say, That although God does not willingly afflict and
grieve the children of men in this life, but does all for their good; yet as
soon as they depart into another state of existence, he afflicts them in the
severest manner, willingly, and takes pleasure in putting them to the utmost
torture, without having the least eye to their advantage? But if it be
universally true, that he will not cast eff for ever; but although he may cause
grief and sorrow for a time, yet finally he will have compassion, according to
the multitude of his mercies, then there is a glorious design, even in his
judgments, and that design can be no other than the reclaiming and restoring
his fallen creatures.

There are several threatenings and promises made to the some people and
nations in the prophecy of Jeremiah, that I could never reconcile together upon
any other plan than the general Restoration: If any person can do it, I am
ready to receive light. I will just mention them, and show wherein the
difficulty lies, and leave them to your consideration.

Jer. xlviii. 42. Moab shall be destroyed from being a people, because he has
magnified himself against JEHOVAH. This seems to be a threatening of their
total destruction from off the face of the earth: and this is repeated more
particularly, and confirmed in the most solemn and awful manner by God, in the
prophecy of Zephaniah, chap. ii. 8, 9. I have heard of the reproach of Moab,
and the revilings of the children of Ammon, whereby they have reproached my
people, and magnified themselves against their border. Therefore as I live,
says JEHOVAH of hosts, the God of Israel, surely Moab shall be as Sodom, and
the children of Ammon as Gomorrah, even the breeding of nettles, and salt pits,
and a perpetual desolation.

This threatening has been executed, and neither the name or nation of Moab or
Ammon is to be found on earth, having been totally destroyed, This is
consistent with Jer. xlvi. 28. Fear thou not, O Jacob my servant, says
JEHOVAH:: for I am with thee: for I will make a full end of all the nations
whither I have driven thee; but I will not make a full end of thee, but correct
thee in measure; etc. Here you see the distinction between Israel and other
nations, they were to be wholly cut off, to be utterly destroyed: a full end
was to be made of them, not to Jacob; a seed and remnant had a promise of being
spared and preserved.

But these same nations of Moab and Ammen that are thus threatened with total
and final destruction, and who do not exist on earth at present, are promised a
restoration, and return of their captivity in the latter days, Yet will I bring
again the captivity of Moab, in the latter days, faith JEHOVAH, Jer. xlviii.
47. -- And afterward I will bring again the captivity of the children of
Ammon, faith JEHOVAH. chap. xlix. 6.

The same threatenings and promises are made to Elam, I will cause Elam to be
dismayed before their enemies, and before them that seek their life; and I will
bring evil upon them, even my fierce anger, says JEHOVAH: and I will send the
sword after them, till I have consumed them. chap. xlix. 37. Here is a full
declaration of their being totally consumed from the face of the earth.

But it shall come to pass in the latter days that I will bring again the
captivity of Elam, says JEHOVAH. ver. 39.

Now if any can show how the captivity of nations that long ago have entirely
perished from the earth can be returned in the latter days, unless the system
of the new earth and the restoration be true, I should for one be glad to be
informed of it. In the mean time, as I cannot see how these promises can be
fulfilled respecting Moab, Ammon and Elam, (as it is evident they never yet
have been) unless their restoration in the manner I have laid it down is true;
so I can see no reason why these three nations should be distinguished from the
rest that have in like manner perished; and therefore I conclude that they are
mentioned as specimens and examples, and that the whole shall be sharers
together of the future restoration and deliverance, even as they have shared
together in punishment and destruction.

But the most remarkable prophecy of this kind is found in Ezekiel, chap. xvi.
where God speaks of the sins of Sodom, and her daughters, the cities of the
plain: and mentions that he took them away, as he saw good, by fire and
brimstone from heaven; which was a fact well known through the world at the
time it happened, and was a dreadful warning to all nations to avoid sin. The
sins of Sodom and her daughters, are compared with the sins of Jerusalem and
her daughters, and the crimes of the latter are found far to exceed, both in
number and malignity, and being committed against greater light and love, were
much more aggravated. Yet God promises to bring again the captivity of Sodom
and her daughters, the cities of the plan; Samaria and-her daughters, the
cities of Israel; and Jerusalem and her daughters, the cities of Judah, at the
same time, and that they should embrace each other in the arms of love and
sincere affection. And akhough the idea of the restoration of the persons of
Samaria and Jerusalem might be evaded, by saying that the return of their
descendants was intended, yet no such evasion can be used respecting Sodom and
her daughters, as they were wholly destroyed by fire and brimstone, and none of
them escaped, and consequently not one of their descendants is now on earth.
The restoration of those very persons of Sodom. etc. who were destroyed, being
here intended, (for what else can possibly be meant?) we are obliged to
understand the return of the captivity of Jerusalem and Samaria here mentioned,
in the same manner, for the restoration of those very sinners of those cities,
who were destroyed and cut off for their great transgressions; or else how can
they know, receive, and delight in each other?

This glorious return of their captivity as described in this chapter, I refer
to the new earth; after the judgment, and conflagration, and the ages of
punishment are past. Then all the nations of the old earth still become
inhabitants of the new, and their long captivity under the worst of tyrants,
sin, death, hell and pain, shall be returned in the highest and best sense of
the words; which is indeed the only fair and reasonable sense, as far as I can
see, that can be put upon the words.

I might say much more here, but as my design is to discourse upon these very
remarkable predictions of Ezekiel respecting Sodom, Samaria, and Jerusalem, and
their daughters by themselves, I shall say no more upon that subject now, but
shall refer you to the words of the prophecy. Ezekiel. xvi. 44 -- 63 And if after
reading and attentively considering the matter, you can make any thing else to
be the meaning of the words so as to hold and run through the whole in harmony
and perfect consistency, then you will perform a task to which I have never yet
found any person equal, whether by word or writing; and, from what I have seen
hitherto, I am ready to judge is morally impossible.

Ezekiel has many wonderful passages, wherein the greatest mercies are promised
to succeed the most terrible judgments, and many wherein it is expressly
intimated that the end and great design of God in all the destructions
threatened is, that they might know JEHOVAH; and this being a salutary and
saving knowledge, I take all those passages as proofs of the final restoration
of those who are thus destroyed on purpose, seemingly, that they might know the
Lord. (See in this light Psalm. ixxxiii. and the observations which I have made
upon the same.)

But as I have taken notice of many of these passages already in the course of
the Lectures, and as this discourse has been already long, and I have something
yet to add to it, I shall take my leave for the present of this excellent
Prophet, whose prophecies have afforded me abundance of delight and improvement.

Daniel's prophecy is the next that we come to: he speaks of the kingdom which
Christ shall receive of the Father, And there was given him dominion and glory,
and a kingdom, that all people, nations, and languages should serve him; his
dominion is an everlasting dominion, which shall not pass away, and his kingdom
that which shall not be destroyed. The saints of the Most High shall take the
kingdom, and possess the kingdom for ever, even for ever and ever. And the
kingdom and dominion, and the greatness of the kingdom under the whole heaven
shall be given to the people of the saints of the Most High; whose kingdom is
an everlasting kingdom, and all dominions shall serve and obey him. Dan. vii.
14, 18, 27.

The Prophet declares that all people, nations and languages shall serve the
glorious Messiah, when he shall come in glory, and that the saints shall posses
the kingdom for ever, or for an age, which shall be in the Millenium, when they
shall reign with Christ a thousand years; even for ever and ever, or for ages
of ages; these periods carry us far beyond the Millenium, even to the new
earth, where Christ and his saints shall reign together for ages of ages,
before the kingdom shall be delivered up to the Father, that God may be all in
all. And during the continuance of this kingdom, all adverse powers must be
brought into subjection, for Christ must reign till all his enemies are put
under his feet. See Rev. xxii. 5. compared with 1 Cor. xv. 24 -- 28. And as the
design of this kingdom of ages, after the judgment, is to restore and make all
things new, (as I have shown,) therefore these prophecies of Daniel must be
understood to reach to that glorious period when God shall be all in all, and
all dominions shall serve and obey him. And this to me appears to include their
return to God and goodness, and consequently to happiness.

Hosea is a wonderful prophet to reconcile Judgment and mercy together; the
most dreadful threatenings are denounced against the same people and persons to
whom afterward the greatest promises are made. This in my opinion, can only be
reconciled upon the supposition that judgment shall be finally succeeded by
mercy. To one that never read the prophet Hosea with this view, his writing
must appear a continued chain of contradictions.

In the first chapter God says, I will no more have mercy upon the house of
Israel. Ye are not my people, and I will not be your God. ver. 6, 9. Yet
directly after it is added, And it shall come to pass that in the place where
it was said unto them, Ye are not my people, there it shall be said unto them,
Ye are the sons of the living God. ver. 10.

By the threatenings we should conclude that no mercy could possibly reach
them, but when we turn our attention to the promises we see cause to change our
mind.

In the second chapter God promises to betroth those to him for ever, whom
before he declared that he had cast entirely off, yea, to betroth them in
righteousness, and in judgment, and in loving kindness, and in mercies; yea,
even to betroth them to himself in faithfulness, and to give them to know him,
whom to know is life eternal: And farther he says, And I will have mercy upon
her that had not obtained mercy; and I will say to them who were not my people,
Thou art my people, and they shall say, Thou art my God. See ver. 19, 20.23.
And the apostle explains this as constituting them heirs of salvation, and
vessels of mercy, on whom he would make the riches of his glory known, though
before they had been vessels of wrath: and to this purpose he quotes these very
passages, saying, As he faith in Osee, I will call them My people, who were not
my people; and her Beloved, who was not beloved. And it shall come to pass,
that in the place where it was said unto them, Ye are not my people; there
shall they be called The children of the living God. Romans ix. 25, 26. And
consequently those same persons who were rejected shall become heirs of
salvation.

In chap. iv. 17. it is said, Ephraim is joined to idols, let him alone. This
looks dark, as though God had left Ephraim to himself to be eternally undone.

In the vth chapter, it is said, And the pride of Israel, does testify to his
face: therefore shall Israel and Ephraim fall in their iniquity; Judah also
shall fall with them. They shall go with their slocks and their herds to seek
JEHOVAH; but they shall not find him; he has withdraw himself from them. ver.
5, 6. There would appear little or no hope of the recovery of those who shall
fall in their iniquity, and who shall seek JEHOVAH and shall not find him, from
whom he has withdrawn himself. And the threatening is expressed in a still
more terrible manner toward the close of the chapter, For I will be unto
Ephraim as lion, and as a young lion to the house of Judah: I even I will tear
and go away, I will take away, and none shall rescue him ver. 14. Who would not
be ready to conclude from this verse, that certainly these people were undone
and lost for ever? and especially since God by the same prophet says, Yea, woe
also to them when I depart from them! Chap. ix. 12. Inevitable and eternal
destruction, would seem their portion, and that God once departed in such an
awful manner, would never return again. But the 15th verse of the vth chapter,
changes the scene, declares the intention of God in withdrawing himself, and
shows plainly that it is only for a time, till the divine purpose therein shall
be fulfilled. I will go and return to my place, till they acknowledge their
offense, and seek my face: in their affliction they will seek me early. This
passage dispels the gloom, and shows thst God has a design in all his
judgments, even to bring offenders to feel and acknowledge themselves guilty,
and to seek his face; then his mercy shall be displayed, and he will return to
them again with his loving favor.

This is the constant tenor of the book, all the way through: but I must only
mention some of the most striking passages.

Chap. vii. 13. Woe unto them! for they have fled from me: destruction unto
them! because they have transgressed against me: though I have redeemed them,
yet they have spoken lies against me, This passage (as well as most others in
this prophecy) represents them as the most wicked apostates, and abandoned
sinners, and that destruction was their certain portion; and in chap. x. 8. the
Lord says, And they shall say to the mountains, Cover us; and to the hills,
Fall on us. And yet, O how kindly does God speak of this same people in chap.
xi. even when he had their basest transgressions full in view? And my people
are bent to backsliding from me: though they called them to the Most High, none
at all would exalt him. This was very grievous, and highly provoking; but what
are the next words? How shall I give thee up, Ephraim? how shall I deliver
thee, Israel? how shall I make thee as Admah? how shall I set thee as Zeboim?
mine heart is turned within me, my repentings are kindled together. I will not
execute the fierceness of mine anger, I will not return to destroy Ephraim: for
I am God and not man; the Holy One in the midst of thee. ver. 7, 8, 9.

In Chap. xiii. God sets forth his loving kindnesses toward them, then their
great ingratitude and rebellion, and then he threatens them in the most severe
and dreadful manner, and then immediately promises to help, heal, recover,
ransom, and restore them.

-- Yet I am JEROYAH, thy God, from the land of Egypt, and thou shall know no
God but me: for there is no savior beside me. I did know thee in the
wilderness, in the land of great drought. According to their pasture, so were
they filled, and their heart was exalted; therefore have they forgotten me.
Therefore I will be unto them as a lion: as a leopard by the way will I observe
them. I will meet them as a bear bereaved of her whelps, and will rend the caul
of their heart. and there will I devour them like a lion: the wild beast shall
tear them. ver. 4, 5, 6, 7, 8. Words can hardly be more terrible: the
threatenings are of the most dreadful kind, and we should be apt to think it
impossible that any help or deliverance could ever be found for a people so
sinful, and whom God seems engaged utterly to destroy, and that without remedy.
Yet the very next words, are kind expressions of grace and mercy, and afford
hopes of help and salvation, O Israel, thou have destroyed thyself; but in me
is thine help. I will be thy king: where is any other that may save thee in all
thy cities? ver. 9, 10.

Now how are these promises consistent with the threatenings immediately
before, unless the doctrine of the restoration be true? how is it possible that
both can be accomplished upon any other system? yet both most be fulfilled, one
as well as the other; or else they are not equally alike true.

The state of Ephraim is again represented as most desperate and deplorable,
insomuch that death and hell, or entire destruction, must be their inevitable
portion; The iniquity of Ephraim is bound up; his sin is hid. The sorrows of a
travailing woman shall come upon him: he is an unwise son; for he should not
stay long in the place of the breaking forth of children. ver. 12, 13. Nothing
can be more finely imagined to set forth the miserable condition of those who
are confirmed in their sins, and who have trifled away their time, and
foolishly neglected the season of grace, wherein they might have been
delivered, and as it were borne out of sin and misery, into a state of peace
and selicity; they are compared to children who have come to the birth, but who
by not coming forth in time, perish and die without remedy. Yet even this state
of Ephraim shall not frustrate the divine counsels; though death and hell have
swallowed them up as their lawful prey; and they to all human appearance are
gone for ever, beyond the reach of mercy or hope. But what says God? I will
ransom them from the power of the grave, (or hell, the original word being the
same for both) I will redeem them from death: O death, I will be thy plagues, O
grave, (or hell) I will be thy destruction: repentance shall be hid from mine
eyes. ver. 14.

Here we find that instead of death and hell destroying Ephraim for ever, as we
might have expected from the preceding words, God declares that he will finally
ransom Ephraim from the power of hell, and will redeem them from all that bears
the lateful name of death; and to put the matter cut of all doubt, and to show
that it is his intention to deliver all from these tyrants, he promises, to
destroy them without repentance, that so they may never be able to receive or
hold any more captives. When this prophecy shall be fulfilled, There shall be
no more death, neither sorrow, nor crying, neither shall there be any more
pain: all things shall be made new, and God shall wipe away all tears from off
all faces, and death of every kind shall be wholly swallowed up of victory. See
Rev. xxi. 4, 5. compared with Isaiah xxv. 8. 1 Cor. xv. 54, 55.

Then God shall say of Ephraim, I will heal their backsliding, I will love them
freely: for mine anger is turned away from him. Hosea xiv. 4. O glorious
period, when wrath shall no more be known: when the boundless ocean of the free
love of God shall overflow all his creatures, even those who have been the most
stubborn and rebellious! -- Who is wise, and he shall understand these things?
prudent, and he shall know them? ver. 9. These are things worthy of being
understood and known; are of the greatest importance to all mankind, tend to
the declarative glory of God, and the comfort and consolation of all that love
their fellow creatures.

Thus far I have just run over the larger prophecies on this most blessed
subject. I think enough has been advanced to prove the certainty of God's
intention finally to restore all mankind; and though much more might be added,
I shall for bear at present, and conclude with the beautiful words of the
prophet Micah, chap. vii. 18, 19. --

Who is a God like unto thee, that pardons iniquity, and passes by the
transgression of the remnant of his heritage? He retains not his anger for
ever, because he delights in mercy. He will turn again, he will have
compassion upon us; he will subdue our iniquities; and thou will cast all their
sins into the depths of the sea.

END OF THE FIRST LECTURE
LECTURE II. New Testament prophecies in favor of the doctrine of the
Universal Restoration.
IN the last Lecture I ranged over the prophecies of the Old Testament in
favor of the General Restoration, as far as the prophecy of Hosea. I had
intended to give a sketch of it from the writings of all God's holy prophets,
by whose mouth St. Peter assures us, that God has spoken of the Restitution of
all things ever since the world began. Acts iii. 21.

But passing over the rest of the minor prophets, without any observations upon
what they have said respecting this important subject, I shall come immediately
to the writings of the evangelists and apostles of our Lord, and attend to what
they and their Master have declared on this head. But let me here advertise
you, that you are not to expect that I shall consider all that the New
Testament writers have advanced in favor of it, but only those passages which
I consider is propherical, to which I shall briefly attend.

The first prophecy that we meet with on this subject, is St. Matt. i. 21. And
she shall bring forth a son, and thou shall call his name JESUS, for be shall
save his people from their sins.

This all-benignant prophecy is a counterpart to Genesis iii. 15. We find one at
the beginning of the Old Testament, and the other at the beginning of the New.
These two passages are the foundation stones of the great doctrine of
salvation; and all other prophecies respecting this matter, are but larger
comments and explications of them. We see by comparing these texts together,
that the Seed of the Woman, and the Virgin's Son, are the same person, and
JESUS is the Savior's name. One prophecy declares that He shall bruise the
Serpent's head, or destroy the devil and his works: and the other, that He
shall save his people from their sins.

If all men are his people, and the sheep of his pasture, and the purchase of
his blood, and were given to him by the Father, then this prophecy is plainly
and fully to the purpose, and clearly proves the final restoration and
deliverance of all men from their sins, and of course from their miseries; and
shall as certainly be absolutely fulfilled as any prediction was ever justified
by its corresponding event.

Need I spend time here, to prove that all men are the people of our Lord and
Savior, in all these respects? All things were made by him; and without him
was not any thing made that was made. He was in the world, and the world was
made by him, and the world knew him not.. St. John i. 3.10.

God created all things by Jesus Christ. Ephesians. iii. 9.

For by him were all things created, that are in heaven, and that are in earth,
visible, and invisible, whether they be thrones, or dominions, or
principalities, or powers: all things were created by him, and for him. Col. i.
16.

God has in these last days spoken unto us by his Son, whom he has appointed
heir of all things, by whom also he constituted the ages. Who being the
brightness of his glory, and the express image of his person, and upholding all
things by the word of his power, when he had by himself purged our sins, sat
down on the right hand of the Majesty on high. Heb. i. 1, 2, 3.

It appears to me from these passages, that if creation and preservation can
make it proper for Christ to call all mankind his people, then they all are his
people, in these respects, at least.

And if this be denied by any who think lower of JESUS than I do, and who may
say, that the works of creation and providence ought not to be ascribed to him
in any sense, yet they will allow that the Father was proprietor of all things;
and if he gave, or gives them to his Son Jesus Christ, they are nevertheless
truly and properly his. Let us view the Scriptures on this head, and we shall
have reason to acknowledge that all men are certainly the people of Jesus; and
consequently he shall save all mankind from their sins.

All things are delivered unto me of my Father. St. Matt. xi. 27. St. Luke, x.
22.

The Father loves the Son, and he has given all things into his hand. St.
John, iii. 35.

Jesus knowing that the Father had given all things into his hands, and that he
was come from God, and went to God. chap. xiii. 3.

As thou have given him power over all flesh, that he should give eternal life
to as many as thou have given him. chap. xvii. 2.

These passages all relate to the same thing: there is indeed some little
difference in the expressions: but as the words delivered and given, are
perfectly synonymous, as all must allow, there can be no difference in the
meaning. All things are given into the hands of JESUS; they were presented to
him by the Father, and he has universal power over them. All men are certainly
included in the expression all things; though all things may include much more
than all men.

So that all men are the people of JESUS, as they are given him by the Father,
and delivered into his gracious hands for the best of purposes and as he has
power given him over them all: as he himself says, All power is given unto me
in heaven and in earth. St. Matt. xxviii. 18.

All men are Christ's people, inasmuch as he took part of the common flesh and
blood of all; and thus the birth of Jesus was good news to all, and was so
proclaimed by the angel. Fear not: for behold I bring you good tidings of great
joy, which shall be to all people. For unto you is born this day, in the city
of David, a Savior, who is Christ the Lord. Glory to God in the highest, and
on earth peace, good will toward men. St. Luke ii. 10, 11, 14.

If all men were not interested in the salvation of Christ, how could his birth
be good news of great joy to all people?

But there is another sense in which all men are the people of JESUS. He died
for all, and purchased them with his own precious blood, which he freely shed
on the cross for their redemption; as is evident from the following plain texts.

2 Cor. v. 14, 15. For the love of Christ constrains us; because we thus
judge, that if one died for all, then were all dead: And he died for all, that
they who live should not henceforth live unto themselves, but unto him who died
for them and rose again. 1 Timothy ii. 5, 6. For there is one God, and one
Mediator between God and men, the man Christ Jesus; Who gave himself a ransom
for all, to be testified in due time. Heb. ii. 2. But we see Jesus, who was
made a little lower than the angels, for the suffering of death, crowned with
glory and honor: that he by the grace of God should taste death for every man.
1 John, ii. 1, 2. And if any man sin we have an advocate with the Father, Jesus
Christ the righteous: And he is the propitiation for our sins: and not for
our's only, but also for the sins of the whole world. Christ having bought all
men with his own blood, they are not their own, they belong to him, who died
for their sins, and was raised again for their justification.

All men are the people of JESUS, forasmuch as he makes intercession for all,
is engaged in their cause, and interests himself in their behalf.

Thus in all these instances all men are the people of Jesus, and therefore if
this prophecy be true, he shall save all men from their sins.

He shall save his people from their sins. But all men are his people:
Therefore he shall save all men from their sins.

I have taken some pains in the consideration of this prophecy of the angel, as
it is very important; and if I have proved my premises, the consequences are
evident.

The next prophecy that I shall notice under this head, is that of our blessed
Savior, who was the greatest Prophet that ever spoke to men; and whose words
are all words of the greatest truth, and cannot fail of being accomplished at
last.

St. John, vi. 37, 38, 39. All that the Father gives me, shall come to me; and
him that comes to me, I will in no wise cast out. For I came down from heaven,
not to do mine own will, but the will of him that sent me. And this is the
Father's will who has sent me, that of all which he has given me I should
lose nothing, but should raise it up again at the last day.

It has been before proved, from the plainest texts, that all things were
given to Christ and delivered to him of the Father; and here he declares that
all shall come to him in such a manner as not to be cast out. And that as the
Father, on the one hand, has given him all, so on the other hand, he has
engaged to bring all back to God again, according to his will. And he assures
us that the will of the Father is that of all which he has given to his Son,
he should lose nothing; and as the Savior came down from heaven to perform
this will of the Father, there can be no doubt but it shall be accomplished at
last.

As for the small variation of the words from given to gives, of which some
would fain take advantage, as though Christ did not mean just the same here, by
gives, as where he used the words given and delivered, it is nothing to the
purpose; for as the sense is perfectly the same, and differs only in the timing
of the verb, it shows the weakness of the cause which depends upon such
criticisms. For whether the words, gives, has given, or shall give, are used,
the sense is the same; for the prophets frequently substitute one tense for
another, as has been shown in many instances; the present for the future, and
the past for the present, etc.

This prophecy of our Lord, is very important and interesting, and certainly
holds forth great things, and to me appears sufficient to establish the
doctrine of the Restoration. God's will is, that all men shall be saved, and
come to the knowledge of the truth. i Tim. ii. 4. This will of God our Savior
came to perform: and it shall finally be accomplished, however long it may be
resisted, and apparently frustrated. All things and consequently all men,
belong to Christ, being given to him by the Father; and all that the Father
gives to Christ shall come to him in such a manner as in no wise to be cast
our, and shall therefore be saved by him.

The next prophecy of our blessed Savior that I shall consider, is that which
is written in St. John xii. 32. And I, if I be lifted up from the earth, will
draw all men unto me; our glorious Redeemer, that great Prophet, had often
before prophesied of his death, and of the manner and circumstances thereof: He
had foretold that he should be betrayed into the hands of sinful men, and that
they should mock, scourge, and crucify him; that he should suffer a violent
death, and the third day should rise again. These things he had frequently
mentioned: But in this text he utters a grand prediction of what should be the
consequence of his being thus lifted up, as Moses lifted up the serpent in the
wilderness; viz. that he should certainly at last draw all men unto himself.
This was a part of the joy that Was set before him, and for the sake of which
he endured the cross, despising the shame. He beheld in prospect Satan's empire
fallen and destroyed; and all brought back again to God, being drawn by him in
due season; for as he gave himself a ransom for all, to be testified in due
time; (1 Timothy ii. 6.) so he will draw all unto himself in the fullness of the
ages: for he shall see of the travail of his soul, and shall be satisfied: He
shall justify the multitude whose iniquities he has borne. Isai. liii. 11.

This is the reward which he was to have for all his pain and sorrow. And who
that loves Jesus, would wish him to be deprived of that infinite and
inconoeivable pleasure which he must have in seeing all men come to him, and
obtain eternal life, through his sufferings and death?

It was for this reason that he had power given him over all flesh, that he
should give eternal life to all, without, exception, whom, the Father had given
him; St. John xvii. 2. And if any thing can be proved from express words of
Scripture, it is plain that all things were given into his hands for that very
purpose.

There are two or three ways that those who are averse to the doctrine of the
General Restoration endeavor to evade or destroy the force of this prophecy
which I am now upon; but the attempts are so weak they are hardly worth notice.
One is this, that all does not intend all without exception. But this is
answered by St. Paul, Heb. ii. 8. Thou have put all things in subjection under
hit feet. For in that he put all in subjection under him, ME LEFT NOTHING THAT
IS NOT PUT UNDER him. So that having the judgment of such a reasoner as St.
Paul on my side, I shall be very little concerned at this evasion.

Others say, that nothing more was intended by our Lord in this prediction, but
that if he was lifted up on the cross, a great multitude of people would be
drawn together to behold him. This is a pretty conceit indeed! so suppose our
Lord just having heard a voice from heaven, should comfort himself with this
consolation tending so greatly to mitigate his sufferings! What should we think
of our Lord if we could receive this as the meaning of the text? We should
always take care not to indulge low and unworthy, mean and little ideas of the
words of Christ. Would you not think a man bereaved of his reason, or
exceedingly hardened and trifling, who being doomed to suffer a cruel and very
shameful as well as painful death, should console himself with the thought,
that a vast number of spectators should be present to behold him suffer? The
idea is too ridiculous to dwell upon.

There are others who say the meaning of the words must be that Christ will
draw all men before his judgment seat. But why was this connected with his
suffering death on the cross? The words must intend a kind of drawing of all
men that could not have taken place unless he had suffered that kind of death;
and also such an event as gave him the highest possible pleasure, and
encouraged him to bear his sufferings for the sake of seeing its
accomplishment. Now both these ideas meet, if Jesus shall draw all men without
exception to himself, to be saved, but not else.

For it is through (or in consequence of) his death upon the cross that men
shall be drawn to him to be saved; and this shall afford him the highest
pleasure. In consequence of his thus humbling himself, and becoming obedient
unto death, even the death of the cross, he has the highest glory, honor, and
power given to him as Mediator; and shall have the pleasure of drawing all to
himself, of saving all from their sins. And in his name every knee shall bow,
of things in heaven, and things in earth, and things under the earth; and every
tongue shall confess that Jesus Christ is Lord, to the glory of God the Father.
Phil. ii. 10, 11. And as no man can say that Jesus is the Lord, but by the Holy
Ghost. 1 Cor. xii. 3. and as all shall truly confess him Lord, to the glory of
God the Father, it follows that all shall so come to Christ as to be saved by
him; which was the thing to be proved. Thus he that was lifted up on the cross
shall attract all men to himself, for the most glorious purposes; and shall
reveal the glory of the Lord to them, "And all flesh shall see the salvation of
God." St. Luke, iii. 6.

Behold the Lamb of God, who takes away the sin of the world! St. John i. 29.
For God so loved, the world, that he gave his only begotten Son, that whosoever
believes in him should not perish, but have everlasting life. For God sent not
his son into the world to condemn the world; but that the world through him
might be saved. Chap. iii. 16, 17.

We know that this is indeed the Christ, the Savior of the world chap. iv. 42.

This is a most glorious view of the sufferings of Christ; and considered as
necessary in order to draw all men to him to be saved, they are highly
important.

There are many other sayings among the words of Christ savourable to the
doctrine of the universal restoration; but as the three prophecies I have
already considered are very full and plain to the purpose, I shall leave them
to your meditation, and proceed to mention a few of those prophetical sayings
written by the Apostles upon this head.

The only passage I shall notice in the book of Acts, is chap. iii. 20, 21. And
he shall send Jesus who before was preached unto you; Whom the heavene must
receive until the times of the restitution of all things, which God has spoken
by the mouth of all his holy prophets since the world began.

The restitution of all things is a truth, or there could be no times and
seasons appointed for it. The restitution of all things includes the
restoration of man. This is one of the great subjects of prophecy. God has not
only revealed it in general, but has spoken of it by the mouth of all his holy
prophets since the world began. Therefore it is revealed in the old testament
as well as in the new. It was spoken by the prophets, and confirmed by Christ
and his Apostles, and is a subject of the greatest importance of any in all
prophecy, since God has declared it from the beginning, and it has been
revealed to all his prophets. It is very clear that it does not reser to any
thing that has already taken place, since our Lord and Savior must come from
heaven to perform the important work. Restitution of all things is bringing
every thing back to as good a state, at least, as that wherein they were placed
at first by God. It is most certainly a change for the better, and never for
the worse. This important work is not to be done instantaneously, but in times,
seasons, and ages, and every thing in its proper order.

These propositions appear to me naturally to rise out of the text, and many
discourses might be written from them.

Some have said, that the Restitution of all things in this passage cannot mean
what I have supposed it does, and only refers to the dispensation of grace in
the present time before the second coming of Christ, because he must be
retained in the heavens until the times of Restitution of all things are past;
(as they would explain the words:) But as no such idea is proved from the text,
the general testimony of scripture gives me authority to say that Christ shall
be retained in the heavens until the times, ages, or seasons of Restitution
arrive, or commence; but by no means till they end; as such a proposition would
be entirely contrary to the whole system of prophecy

The next prophecy in order upon this great subject is Romans v. 18, 19, 20, 21.
But this I have already considered. Let none say that this is no prophecy: for
the expressions, so by the obedience of one shall many be made righteous; are
as true and positive a prophecy, as it is a melancholy fact, that by one man's
disobedience many were made sinners. If one be a true history, the other is of
consequence a true prophecy. Where sin abounded grace did much more abound: is
a glorious prophecy that puts the past tense for the future, to show the
absolute certainty of its fulfillment, as though it was already done. It must be
confessed to be a prophecy, for there never yet was a time when grace abounded
as much as sin, far less much more.

Sin has reigned unto death: this is certain; so shall grace reign through
righteousness; not only so far as to make eternal life possible to all, but
certain for all, or else the reign of grace would not be so extensive and
powerful as that of sin.

I come next to that very grand and glorious prophecy, Romans viii. 21. Because
the creature itself also shall be delivered from the bondage of corruption into
the glorious liberty of the children of God.

I shall take the liberty of reading the foregoing and following verses and the
brief remarks which I made upon them in my fermon, called, The Gospel preached
by the Apostles.

Ver. 19 -- 23. For the earnest expectation of the creature, ( or the creation)
waits for the manifestation of the sons of God. For the creature ( or the
creation) was made subject to vanity; not willingly, but by reason of him who
has subjected the same in hope: because the creature ( or the creation) itself
shall be delivered from the bondage of corruption, into the glorius liberty of
the children of God. For we know that the whole creation groaneth, and
travaileth in pain together until now: and not only they but ourselves also,
which have the first fruits of the Spirit; even we ourselves groan within
ourselves, waiting for the adoption, to wit, the redemption of our body.

'I would observe, on this text:

1. That it is evident, that the whole creation stands here distinguished from
the sons or children of God, who are spoken of apart.

2. That the creation is now subject unto vanity, misery, pain, death, and
destruction: that under this burden it groaneth and travaileth in pain to be
delivered from the same.

3. That the creation is only subjected to this state of misery for a time, and
has hopes of deliverance; and, therefore, waits for the manifestation of the
sons of God, with earnest expectation.

4. That a time shall certainly come, when the creature itself ( or the whole
creation) shall be delivered from the bondage of corruption; from sin, with all
its concomitants and consequences, into the glorious liberty of the sons of
God; which cannot imply less than a total and final deliverance from sin,
guilt, pain, sorrow, misery, destruction, and death of every kind; for all
these the sons of God are freed from.

5. If the whole creation is thus delivered, the souls and bodies of all men
(the children of God excepted, who are spoken of apart, and are the patterns
and first fruits) must be necessarily included; as also all intelligences. For
who can rationally suppose, that the inferior parts of the creation shall be
delivered, and the more noble and valuable parts be left under the power and
bondage of sin and corruption, while God exists?

6. We evidently see, that the children of God, who have the first fruits of
the Spirit, who now bitterly groan for deliverance from sin and its
consequences, for perfect and complete redemption, both of soul and body, which
none can attain till the morning of the resurrection, shall be first delivered;
and be the patterns and first fruits of that general deliverance and liberty,
which shall be finally given to the whole creation.

Thus, if the whole creation shall at length be delivered from the bondage of
corruption, into the glorious liberty of the children of God; we that have the
first fruits of the Spirit, may draw consolation from that source; For surely,
if God designs to deliver the whole creation, much more will be deliver us, to
whom he has already given his Spirit: and we shall become a kind of first
fruits of his creatures.

Lastly, We may observe, that those who have the first fruits of the Spirit,
wait for the adoption, to wit, the redemption, resurrection, or change of this
earthly body. As the Apostle says to the Philippians; For our conversation is
in heaven, from whence we look for the Savior, the Lord Jesus Christ; who
shall change our vile body, that it may be fashioned like unto his glorious
body, according to the working whereby he is able even to subdue all things
unto himself; Phil. iii. '20, 21.'

Romans xi. Is a wonderful chapter, and is full of grace and truth, and contains
promises of great mercy and favor to the reprobate part of the nation of
Israel, whom God has shut up in unbelief, that he might have mercy upon them
all; But as I purpose to discourse particularly on that chapter, I shall pass
over it at present; only I recommend to you to read it attentively, and see if
it does not appear evidently favorable to the general restoration: for if the
Jews that were cut off, shall be grafted in again, and are concluded, (or shut
up) in unbelief for purposes of mercy and grace, can we think that all other
nations that die in unbelief must remain so to eternity? Will God make so great
a difference between those whole cases are so nearly alike?

The next great New Testament prophecy of the final subjection, and as I
believe, restitution of all things, is in 1 Cor. xv. 22, 23, 24, 25, 26, 27, 28.

For as in Adam all die, even so in Christ shall all be made alive. But every
man in his own order; Christ the first fruits; afterward they that are Christ's
at his coming. Then the end, when he shall have delivered up the kingdom to
God, even the Father; when he shall have put down all rule, and all authority,
and power. For he must reign till he has put all enemies under his seet. The
last enemy that shall be destroyed is death, (or, Death the last enemy shall be
destroyed.) For he has put all things under his feet. But when he faith, all
things are put under him, it is manifest that he is excepted who did put all
things under him. And when all things shall be subdued unto him, then shall the
Son also himself, be subject unto him that put all things under him, that God
may be all in all.

This passage seems to contain in miniature the whole great and glorious plan
from beginning to end. The loss that we sustained by our connection with the
first Adam, shall at last be fully repaired by the second Adam. Some reckon
that loss greater, and some loss; but this prophecy applies unself to all
according to their ideas: for whatever life we lost in him, we shall regain in
Christ. But this renovation shall be carried on in the most beautiful order
imaginable. At the coming of Christ all his saints shall be entirely renewed in
body as well as spirit, and shall be totally delivered from all the
consequences of sin: and in due time the creature itself also, or the whole
creation, shall in like manner be delivered from the bondage of corruption, all
moral and natural, evil, into the glorious liberty of the children of God, as
you have heard; for Christ must reign until all shall submit to him, and all
that bears the name of death shall be destroyed. Then shall he deliver the
kingdom to the Father, that God may be all in all. This great event is the
closing scene, as far as divine Revelation carries us; and I design to close
this course of Lectures on the prophecies with a discourse on this very sublime
subject, and shall therefore pass it over for the present.

Three passages in the epistles of St. Paul that have long appeared to me as
grand predictions of the universal subjection, reheading and reconciliation of
all things, are Ephesians i. 10. Col. i. 20 and Phil. ii. 9, 10, 11. Perhaps
there may be some who will not like to consider them in the light of
prophecies; but if declarations made by divine authority of great things not
brought about at the time when they are spoken of, are prophecies, then these
are so to all intents; for the things therein declared have not yet been
fulfilled; but that is no argument that they never shall be. I shall therefore
consider them as glorious prophecies, not yet accomplished.

In the last of these passages, which I had occasion to consider in the former
Lecture, the apostle mentions and enumerates all intelligences in the most
particular manner -- every knee, and every tongue, of things in heaven, and
things in earth, and things under the earth. If these do not comprehend all
intelligences in the universe, I do not know what expressions can be used to
convey that idea. And their bowing in the name of Jesus, and confessing him
Lord, to the glory of God the Father, to me evidently implies, or rather,
plainly expresses their submission and willing obedience to him, and their
adoration of him.

And in the first of the beforementioned passages, the apostle speaks to the
Ephesians, that God, that great and glorious Being, who works all things
after, or according to the counsel of his own will, had made known to them the
mystery of his will, according to his good pleasure which he has purposed in
himself, That in the dispensation of the fullness of times, he might gather
together in one, (or re-head) all things in Christ, both which are in heaven,
and which are on earth; even in him. This great event is spoken of as certainly
determined by the divine will, and it was therefore revealed or made known,
though the actual and full accomplishment of it was future, yea, and at a great
distance of time; even in the dispensation of the fullness of times. This cannot
therefore refer to any thing that actually took place at the ascension of
Christ, (as some would have us believe) but to what shall be performed before
he shall deliver up the kingdom to the Father. Every thing must be re-headed in
Christ; his whole army shall be brought back again from all their wanderings
and rebellions, and shall willingly rally, and range themselves under the
standard of their great leader and head. And as it is impossible for them so to
do until their league with hell and death is broken, and they are delivered
from the love and power of sin, which can have no connection with the holy Lord;
therefore I conclude their final restoration from this text.

The other passage, Col. i. 20. in its connection appears to me as luch a strong
proof of a real universal reconciliation taking place throughout the universe,
between all creatures and their God, and also among themselves, that I almost
wonder how it should ever be explained away, as meaning little or nothing. It
is so extensive that there can be no exception; and surely all things being
reconciled to God, is inconsistent with any of them being miserable to all
eternity!

I shall present the text before you in its connection, and some remarks which I
made upon it in my sermon before mentioned.

The Apostle, in the first chapter, having mentioned Jesus Christ, and
redemption through him; goes on to tell the church, who Jesus was, what he had
done, and would do, in these words; Who is the image of the invisible God, the
firstborn of every creature. For by him were all things created that are in
heaven, and that are in earth, visible and invisible; whether they be thrones,
or dominions or principalities, or powers: all things were created by him, and
for him. And he is before all things, and by him all things consist. And he is
the head of the body, the church; who is the beginning, the firstborn from the
dead: that in all things he might have the pre-eminence. for it pleased the
Father, that in him should all fullness dwell: and having made peace through the
blood of his cross, by him to RECONCILE ALL THINGS UNTO HIMSELF; by him I say,
whether they be things in earth, or things in heaven: Col. i. 15 -- 20.

If the Apostle had known, that the intention of God, actually to reconcile all
things to himself by Jesus Christ, who had made peace through the blood of his
cross, would have been disputed, he could hardly have expressed himself, in a
manner more calculated to destroy the very foundation of the dispute for ever.
He informs us plainly, what he means by all things, viz. all the things or
being that were created by Christ, whether in heaven, or in earth; whether to
us visible or invisible; whether thrones or dominions, or principalities, or
power: all these being created by him, were also created for him, for his glory
and parise; he was head over them all. Some of them fell; thereby the whole
glorious chain and connection was broken: God's wrath was revealed against sin,
his just indignation burned as a fire. Fallen creatures hated God and goodness,
as also all those of their fellow creatures who were still attached to their
Creator: consequently, a fierce war was waged, between the two armies that
before were one. In order to lay the foundation of a firm and eternal peace,
Christ came and suffered, and has made peace by the blood of his cross, and
has opened a way for actual reconciliation to take place. He is now engaged in
the great work of subduing his foes, which he will finally complete, and thus
reconcile all things again to God; both celestial, or those that were created
in heaven; and terrestial, or those that were created on earth: And as they
shall all be reconciled to God, so also to each other; and thus all shall be
restored to their original harmony, beauty, and perfection. Now, who does not
plainly see, that the final extent of this reconciliation must be as large as
creation itself, since the Apostle evidently use the same form of expression in
describing the one as the other? And this idea is never contradicted. Now, by
the some rule that you will say, that the all things that shall be reconciled
to God by Christ, both in heaven and in earth, are only some things; one may
tell you, that he only created some things, and have just the same reason for
his assertion. And besides, What are those things in heaven, that need
reconciling to God -- if they are not the very things that the the Lord Jesus
created in heaven, and who kept not that first estate? It is plain then, that
St. Paul, without giving us the least notice of any design that he had of
varying the meaning of the expression, all things; has applied it both to the
creation and reconciliation of intelligences, without the smallest apparent
difference: And can any rational person suppose, that a man of his character as
a writer, and divinely inspired with the Holy Ghost, should deal so unfairly in
a matter of such infinite importance, as to use an expression in an unlimited
sense, four or five times, as though he would fix that idea in our minds; and
then, in a moment without giving the smallest hint, should make use of it in a
very different and partial manner, and condemn all as heretics, that should not
understand that he did so: even though it was impossible for any one to
perceive, either by the subject or manner of expression, that he used it in a
different sense, and that he would never condescend to explain it? -- They that
can think so, must; I cannot.

The declaration of St. Paul to Timothy, if it has not the form, has all the
substance and essence of a prophecy. And it may be observed that the epistles
to Timothy abound with great and important prophecies. He foretells in his first
epistle the apostasy of the church of Rome in the plainest manner; chap. iv. 1,
2, 3. And in the second, he speaks no le's plainly of the defection of the
protestant churches, and the state of mankind in these latter days. chap. vi. 1
-- 7. These two important, though melancholy prophecies were delivered with
great seriousness and certainty, and have been remarkably fulfilled, and are
fulfilling in these days. It is however matter of great consolation to find
that St. Paul's character as a prophet is hereby so firmly established, that we
may safely believe what he declares to us as the will of God, respecting the
final salvation, or restoration of mankind.

I cannot but consider that grand passage in his first epistle, chap. ii. 1 --
8. taken altogether, as such a foundation for the doctrine I am now upon, as
never can be overthrown by all the art of man. First, he exhorts us to make
supplications, prayers, intercessions, and giving of thanks for all men; for
kings and for all that are in authority: etc. for which he gives this reason
For this is good and acceptable in the sight of God our Savior (or Restorer);
who will have all men to be saved (or restored), and to come unto the knowledge
of the truth. It is therefore good and acceptable in the sight of God our
Savior to pray for all men, because he will have all men to be restored, and
as a mean thereto he will have them to come to the knowledge of the trurh; and
therefore there is the highest encouragement for us to pray for all men, which
otherwise there could not be. Now since it is the will of God that all men
should be saved or restored, and come to the knowledge of the truth, and it is
also plain, that he works all things after the counsel of his own will; and
does according to his will in the army of heaven, and among the inhabitants of
the earth: and none can stay his hand, or say unto him, What do thou? and
his counsel shall stand, and he will do all his pleasure: (See Ephesians. i. 11.
Dan. iv. 35. Isai. xlvi. 10.) What can possibly prevent the salvation, or
restoration of all men?

Some will not allow the words to be read, who will have all men to be saved,
but that he wills that all men should be saved; and some would insinuate as
though God had two contrary wills, one being his revealed will, that all men
should be saved, and the other his secret and efficacious will, that many
should be finally lost. While others say, that it is indeed the will and
pleasure of God, and what would be agreeable to him, that all men should be
saved, but that they being moral agents have power to frustrate the will of
God, But though I freely grant, man is a moral agent, otherwise he could not be
a subject of rewards and punishments; and I also allow that his will may for a
time suspend the will of God respecting his salvation, yet it cannot finally
frustrate it; for God's will must be done, And though man's being a moral agent,
is the true reason why he is wrong at all, or continues so a moment, yet that
can be no proof that he shall be able to all eternity to withstand the will of
God, and if that be done at last it is enough to save the credit of the
prophecy. If a parent has a stubborn child, and he corrects him with a will to
reclaim him, though he stands out for a long time, yet if he be brought at last
to yield, the parents will, as to the design, shall be as truly accomplished as
though the child had resigned the first minute. Thus it is with respect to the
will of God, he will never yield the point until his pleasure shall be fully
performed.

After St. Paul has declared what the will of God is, respecting the final
restoration of all men, he proceeds to set before us the foundation there is
laid for its accomplishment.

For there is one God, and one Mediator between God and men, the Man Christ
Jesus; Who gave himself a ransom for all, to be testified in due time, (or, a
testimony for its proper season)

Many arguments might be drawn from these words in favor of the universal
restoration; as from the consideration of there being a God of infinite wisdom,
power, and goodness, the Father and Creator of all, whose determinate will and
counsel it is that all men should be saved, and come to the knowledge of the
truth. And the more effectually to perform this will, he has ordained as a
Mediator, the Man Christ Jesus, the Anointed Savior, who being a partaker of
both natures, is well qualified to perform the great work: and who for that
purpose gave himself a ransom for all: and although this has been long hidden
from men, yet it is a testimony for its proper time and season, and shall be
made known and become efficacious to all.

Then the Apostle goes on to tell Timothy, that he was appointed an Apostle to
the Gentiles, and a preacher of this doctrine, and that in faith and verity,
and that he testified the truth in Christ, and did not lie nor deceive. And
then to close the whole, and to connect our practical duty with the belief of
this great truth, he adds, I will therefore that men pray every where, lifting
up holy hands, without wrath and doubting.

As much as though he should say,

Since it is the will of God that all men should be saved, and come to the
knowledge of the truth, and that Christ Jesus is the great Mediator appointed
to bring about this purpose of God, and he has already given himself a ransom
for all, to be testified in due time; and I am appointed to proclaim this good
news; since these things are so, it is my desire and wish, that men would pray
every where for the accomplishment of these divine purposes, lifting up holy
hands without wrath, and without doubting. And as it is impossible to pray for
the salvation or restoration of all men without doubting, unless we believe
that all shall be restored, and as St. Paul has commanded us to pray for it
without doubting, it is evident that we ought to believe it firmly; and as we
ought not to believe any thing unless it be true, it seems infallibly to
follow, that all men without exception shall be restored, and shall come to the
knowledge of the truth.

In this same epistle, chap. iv. 9, 10, 11. the Apostle writes thus, This is a
faithful saving, and worthy of all acceptance. For therefore we both labor
and suffer reproach, because we trust in the living God, who is the Savior of
all men, especially of those that believe. These things command and teach.

This passage confirms the idea that we drew from the other, viz. that God will
have all men to be saved, and to come to the knowledge of the truth, He is the
great restorer of all men, especially of those who now believe in him. But if
he is the Savior or Restorer of believers only, why is it said, especially of
those that believe? These stand distinguished from all men, of whom he is the
Savior or Restorer. These things the Apostle preached, and exhorted Timothy to
command and teach them. This fully answers those who wish to have them kept
secret. But is it not strange that those who believe God to be the Savior or
Restorer of all men, and trust in him as such, should suffer reproach for so
doing? Yet thus it was in the days of St. Paul, and so it is now. Yet it still
remains a faithful saying, and it is worthy of all acceptance: and equally
concerns all, as all are interested therein.

In the epistle to the Hebrews, there is a passage which must be considered as
a prophecy not yet fulfilled; for the Apostle assures us that we do not yet see
it, and therefore as it must be seen, it remains to be accomplished.

Heb. ii. 8. Thou have put all things in subjection under his seet. For in that
he put all is subjection under him, he left nothing that is not put under him.
But now we see not yet all things put under him.

This text is another specimen of the manner of the sacred writers in speaking
of things that are to come as though they were already accomplished, to show
their certainty: But lest any person should suppose the event actually done,
and that nothing more was designed to take place than what has already been, he
says, But now we see not yet all things put under him. All things must yield to
him, without exception; for all includes the whole, and nothing shall be lest.
This reasoning of the apostle respecting the word all, is a key to all those
important places of Scripture, where the same word is used, where the
redemption of mankind is treated of, or any doctrine of importance; for unless
the word all was used in its proper natural sense in all such passages, we
should be frequently led thereby into error and uncertainty, and into great
mistakes. The universal subjection here spoken of, is something that has not
yet taken place, and is consistent with happiness, since all things are to be
thus brought into subjection: But all things cannot be miserable, though all
may be happy; and since all alike are to be put in subjection, the text
evidently implies universal happiness. And to open a way for this, Jesus
Christ, by the grace of God, tasted death for all. And as all are purchased by
his blood, so he has power over all, to give eternal life to all whom the
Father has given to him; who are all, without any exception.

And the apostle says in this same epistle, chap. x. 12, 13. But this man after
he had offered one sacrifice for sins, for ever sat down at the right hand of
God: From henceforth expecting till his enemies be made his footstool.

The glorious Savior who has died for all, will finally subdue all; and his
greatest enemies shall submit to him, and humble themselves before his feet. He
will abase the proud, and bring every knee to bow to him, and every tongue to
swear; and then he will resign the kingdom to the Father, that God may be all
in all.

I must now draw toward a close, and passing over the short epistles of St.
James, Peter, John, and Jude, as I did most of the minor prophets in the Old
Testament, I shall come down to the book of the Revelation of St. John. And
having already discoursed largely upon the new heaven, new earth, and New
Jerusalem, and the gracious designs of God in the new creation, etc. I shall
have the less to remark upon the contents of that sacred book, and the several
passages therein which are in favor of the general restoration.

It is worthy of notice, that our Savior Jesus is frequently styled in this
book The Alpha and Omega; the beginning and the end; the first and the last.
Chap. i. 8.17. xxi. 6, xxii. 13. These words appear to me to intimate, that as
he was with the Father before the world began, or before the beginning of the
creation, and consequently before sin, misery, pain, and death existed; so he
shall remain when they have no more being. They shall all be destroyed by his
power; he shall outlive all enmity, and shall conquer all his foes: Death the
last enemy shall be destroyed; and if the very last of all be destroyed, there
can be none left in existence. And there shall be no more death, neither
sorrow, nor crying, neither shall there be any more pain: for the former things
are passed away. chap. xxi. 4. If we may venture to believe these words
generally and literally to be a ture prophecy, the controversy is settled at
once; for if neither any thing bearing the name of death, neither sorrow, nor
crying, nor pain shall be found in being, then most certainly none of God's
creatures can be miserable to all eternity.

The distinction which is made in this book between the elect or sealed ones,
and the great multitude whom no man could number, of all nations, and kindreds,
and peoples, and tongues, who yet were saved though they stood in a different
order, gave me a most wonderful turn of mind, when I first observed and
seriously considered it. I saw that the many should be finally saved, though
only the few in the first degree. I beheld these as two distinct bodies; their
number, situation, and songs were clearly different; one was a small certain
number, the other an innumerable multitude; the one stood with the Lamb on
Mount Sion, the other before the throne; one sung a new song that no man could
learn but the hundred forty and four thousand, who were redeemed from the
earth, and from among men, saying, Thou art worthy; for thou wast slain, and
have redeemed us unto God by thy blood, out of every kindred, and tongue, and
people, and nation: And have made us unto our God, kings and priests; and we
shall reign on the earth: And the other, Salvation to our God, who sits upon
the throne, and unto the Lamb. See chap. xiv. 1 -- 5. chap. vii. chap. v. 8, 9,
10.

Time will not permit me now to enter minutely into the consideration of these
and several other passages in this book: but there is one text that must not be
passed over without some remarks, as it contains a most glorious vision of a
scene charming beyond description, which St. John heard and saw, and which
shall finally be realized: --

Chap. v. 13. And every creature who is in heaven, and on the earth, and under
the earth, and such as are in the sea, and all that are in them, heard I
saying, Blessing, and honor, and glory, and power, be unto him that sits
upon the throne, and unto the Lamb for ever and ever.

These words are so plain and full, that very little need be said upon them. It
is obvious that the expressions are as universal as possible; every creature in
heaven, on earth, and under the earth, and such as are in the sea, and all that
are in them, must comprehend all intelligent beings throughout the universe;
and their unseigned and joyful ascription of Blessing, and honor, and glory,
and power to him that sits upon the throne, and to the Lamb for ever and
ever, not only shows them to be willing subjects of God and the Lamb, but that
they shall at that time be completely happy under his government, and shall
praise him with thankful hearts and cheerful voices. Every thing that has
breath shall praise the Lord. Hallelujah. This is so inconsistent with endless
misery, that it is impossible they should ever stand together: for either every
thing that has breath shall never praise JEHOVAH, or an end must be put to sin
and misery.

But as nothing can be plainer than that all creatures without exception shall
praise God, and ascribe to him the glory due to his name; therefore I conclude
with the highest degree of moral certainty that sin, sorrow, misery, pain, and
all kinds of death must have an end, and all rational intelligences be
reclaimed, and restored to the favor and enjoyment of God; and shall praise
him through all ages, in the noblest strains of gratitude and love.

I shall conclude this Lecture with the words of the pious and ingenious Mr.
Brook, in his elegant and entertaining work, called THE FOOL or QUALITY.

And thus, on the grand and final consummation, when every will shall be
subdued to THE WILL OF GOOD TO ALL, our JESUS will take in hand the resigned
chordage of our hearts; he will tune them as so many instruments, to the song
of his own sentiments, and will touch them with the finger of his own divine
feelings. Then shall the wisdom, the might, and the goodness of our God, become
the wisdom, might, and goodness of all his intelligent creatures; the happiness
of each shall mlutiply and overflow, in the wishes and participation of the
happiness of all; the universe shall begin to sound with the song of
congratulation; and all voices shall break forth in an eternal hallelujah of
praise, transcending praise, and glory, transcending glory, to God and the
Lamb! There shall be no lapse thenceforward, no falling away for ever; but God
in his Christ, and Christ in his redeemed, shall be a will and a wisdom, and an
action and a mightiness, and a goodness and a graciousness, and a glory rising
on glory, and a blessing rising on blessedness, through an ever beginning to a
never ending ETERNITY.

THE END.
Advertisement.
THE Subscriber by the request of a number of Gentlemen, intends issuing
proposals for printing the whole of MR. WINCHESTER'S works, which comprise four
volumes, consisting of forty Lectures, on the following terms.

Viz. To publish them in monthly numbers, each number to contain two Lectures;
the whole course comprising eighteen numbers, [exclusive of the two Lectures
now published;] they will receive the impression on the same size paper, page
and type, that the foregoing Lectures are now printed on, and will answer to
bind with them. The price will be but one shilling and three pence each number,
to be paid monthly, which will make the whole amount twenty five shillings,
stitched in blue, although the London edition sells for Eight Dollars. A syllabus
of the whole Lectures will be published in the proposals.

As the Author in the course of the work, has entered into the developement of
some of the most sublime passages in scripture, and the subjects treated on
altogether new and interesting -- the terms such that it will be in the power
of all who have a desire, to become subscribers -- when in this enlightened age
of the world, Liberty of conscience, that giorious privilege of thinking and
reading for ourselves, is by our new Coustitution, equally granted to each
citizen of the United States -- the Editor slatters himself that his proposals
will be approbated, and meet with a generous subscription from an impartial
Public.

JOHN TRUMBULL.
December 12th, 1792.

