THE ART OF CHEESE-MAKING, TAUGHT FROM ACTUAL EXPERIMENTS, BY WHICH More and
Better Cheese May be made from the same Quantity of Milk.

CONCORD: Printed by GEORGE HOUGH, under Protection of the Statute.

Sold at his Office wholesale and retail. 1793.

THE Art of Cheese-Making.
CHEESE being so valuable an article in the products of a Farm, too much care
cannot be taken that it be made in the best and most profitable manner.

TO assist those who are already Cheese-makers, in making more and better than
they do at present, as well as to inform the learner and buyer, is the design
of the following rules: Rules selected from the approved practice of
distinguished dairy women -- of dealers in Cheese -- and writers on the
subject, both in England and America.

THOSE who wish to be benefited by a knowledge of the art of Cheese-making,
must attend to these main concerns: 1st. That the milk be of proper warmth.
2dly. That the maw-skin or runnet-bag be good. 3dly. That due time be given to
the earning or gathering of the curd in the tub or pan. 4thly. That the Cheese
be kept warm when young, and cool when old. -- By strict attention to these
four points, they can scarcely fail of making good Cheese.

IN the first place, they must see to it that the milk be of proper warmth. The
standard for this is what is well known by the term of milk-warm. If in summer
it should come from the Cow in a hotter state than this, cool spring water in
the proportion of three or four quarts to the milk of twenty Cows, must be put
into it; and if it is cooler than milk-warm, a proper quantity of milk must be
warmed for the purpose of making the whole so; taking proper care that it does
not boil, as boiling injures the quality of milk for making either good Butter
or Cheese.

THE milk being at this proper degree of warmth, (called milk-warm) three or
four hands full, or rather a quart, of gook fine salt, is to be put into the
milk before the runnet is put in. A late English writer directs the above
quantity of three or four hands full for the milk of twenty Cows, and in
proportion for a greater or less number; but has not prescribed sufficient,
unless he means to have double hands full, which will amount to nearly a quart.
-- However, the dairy-woman must use her best judgment if she finds this
quantity not sufficient, and use more. Secondly, in this stage, about a tea cup
full of runnet, made as hereafter described, must be put into this salted milk,
and all be well stirred together. After this, the whole must, in the third
place, remain in a state of rest one hour and an half at least; two hours will
be better* and more Cheese will be formed: Three, four and five hours have been
sometimes taken, and profitably, for the time of rest or earning. Instead of
breaking the curd in the tub or pan, cut it from top to bottom with a long
wooden knife, in about ten divisions, crossing them in the same manner with the
wooden knife in about six divisions; by this means the wind will evaporate, and
the whey will separate. -- Then press the curd down with the hand and a large
sieve, or a very coarse cloth which covers the whole curd, lading out part of
the whey. When all the Curd is got at the bottom of the tub, (by pressure of
the hand) let all the whey be taken from it; then let it stand one quarter of
an hour, for the curd to settle, drain, and get solid, before you break it into
the vat: If any bits of slip curd happen to be swimming in the whey, which do
not sink with the rest, it had better be put away with the whey, than put to
the Cheese, as it will not cement or join with the solid curd. -- All slip-curd
dissolves or melts, and if left in, it is detrimental.

AFTER it has, as above directed, drained at the bottom of the tub one quarter
of an hour, let it be cut in slices, and put into a cloth in the vat or hoop,
laying it even and squeezing it down to make it firm and close; then put it
into the press, and no more is needful, except turning it several times in the
first 48 hours, while it is pressing. The finest, fattest and best Cheese is
made in this way. The more time is bestowed in earning or forming the curd in
the tub, the more solid will the Cheese be -- and shortening the time makes it
less so. 4thly. When Cheese goes from the press, let it be kept in as warm a
state as you can, till it has had a sweat, or has become pretty dry, and
stiffish; it is warmth that makes Cheese ripe, improves the color, and causes
Cheese to cut flakey, the surest sign of excellent quality. If possible, let
not hard Cheese be kept in the same room with soft: A dampness arises from new,
moist Cheese, which is detrimental to the improving state the hard is getting
into, making it very apt to chill, and get thick coated, and often spotted.

CHEESE never tastes agreeably until it has had a sweat; such as has always
been kept in a cold state, eats chill, flat-tasted, and insipid: A south
aspect, or a room over a kitchen-fire, is much best, till Cheese has got
tolerably hard, and has had a sweat; a cool shady room, or even a plaster
floor, is best after it has had a sweat, 'till such time as the weather gets
too cool. Cheese very seldom heaves, or gets puffy, after it has had a sweat
and got cool again: The fat that melts with heat, closes the pores of Cheese
made open by harsh air, and keeps it mellow afterward. The sweat of Cheese
should not be rubbed or scraped off, unless it has sweat to a violent degree,
as it keeps the Cheese mellow, and always improves the flavor. Frost is very
detrimental to Cheese.

THE above are the most necessary directions, and without due attention to them
a good Cheese cannot be made. What follows are some general observations, that
will further assist the young dairy-mistress to become perfect in this
profitable art.

1. IT is very common to scald Cheese in the curd. This is needless, provided
time has been before given to sink the curd solid in the tub -- in bringing the
curd, and having the milk of proper warmth.

2 NEVER leave your bowl or dipper in the tub after you have put the runnet in;
it gathers a curd called slip curd, being of a smooth, slippery nature, and
however fine you may make it, yet, if it remains in the Cheese, it dissolves
into water, and forms holes or eyes in the Cheese, and makes the Cheese appear
loose -- taking a long time before it becomes hard.

3. THE greatest mischief in Cheese-making lies here, the milk is often
disturbed before its proper time, and sometimes when the whole is in a state of
slip-curd, or slippery curd, which is a state all curd is in before it becomes
solid curd, or curd fit to make Cheese with. The state in which you stir or
disturb it, in that state the curd will remain; it never improves as curd, or
becomes better after it is disturbed or removed from its state of rest.

4. THERE are many ways of making or preparing the maw skin or runnet-skin. The
best and most approved, is, as soon as the maw is cold, (when taken from the
calf) let it be a little rinced or swilled in water; rub the maw well with
salt, then fill it, and afterward cover it with salt; do not let it, in
drying, be too near a fire; if heated too much, it hurts the quality, and gives
a rancid taste.

5. TO prepare the runnet for use, take pure spring water, in proportion to the
runnet you intend to use, about two skins to a gallon of water; boil the water,
(which makes it softer or more pure) make it with salt into brine that will
swim an egg -- then let it stand till the heat is gone off, to about the heat
of blood-warm; then put your maw-skin in, either cut in pieces or whole,
letting it steep for twenty four hours, and it will be fit for use -- put such
a quantity into the milk as you judge necessary for rendering your quantity of
milk into curd; observing, that too much runnet makes the Cheese strong, and
liable to heave; too little runnet makes it very mild, and must have more time
to stand, before it is broke or sunk -- about a tea-cup full is the rule, to
ten cows milk. If a quantity of runnet is made for use, let it be put into
bottles, until you want it.

6. Annatto is used in coloring Cheese. "It is, often in its pure state, of a
very fattening nature, and improves Cheese to a great degree, in quality as
well as color. The method in which it is used in coloring Cheese, is, take a
piece of Spanish annatto, which appears in form of a stone, then take a bowl of
milk, dip the annatto a little into it, then take a pebble, or hard rag-stone,
on which rub the wet annatto, washing off the annatto into the bowl, till it
becomes of a deep color; then put that into the tub, or pan of milk you make
Cheese of, (before you put in the runnet or salt) in such quantity as will make
the whole of a pale orange color, which will get deeper, or increase in color
after the Cheese is made." One good property the annatto partakes of, it
neither affects the Cheese in taste or smell. Cheese is often impregnated with
sage, by bruising the leaves and mixing the juice with milk, which gives it a
green color, and an agreeable taste. Marigold flowers are bruised and used in
the same way.

7. Much of the quality of Cheese depends upon the milk, where the cow is in
health, has a rich pasture -- cool stream or spring at which she may constantly
drink -- enjoy cool shades -- is never heated in driving -- is thoroughly
milked -- feeds in the night -- is pastured near home, eats no bitter weeds,
but has access to herbs which are medicinal to her and enrich her milk; she
will give such as makes excellent Cheese. "Some cows in England afford three
hundred weight of Cheese annually, others four and five hundred."

8. Let not Cheese be exposed to the immediate heat of the sun -- or lie near a
hot wall, or in a harsh cold air* especially when in a moist state.

9. Saltpetre is apt to give Cheese a sourish taste -- and if too much is put
in, and the Cheese exposed to too great heat, will cause a fermentation.

10. If Cheese swells on taking from the press, it must be pierced with an iron
or wooden needle, in several places, and returned again to the press. But the
most powerful preventative to the having of Cheese, is by carefully observing
the rules laid down in this book -- by seeing that the runnet is not too strong
-- nor too much put into the Cheese; that it is well pressed and salted.

11. If the whey is green (when no coloring material has been put into the
milk) you may be certain your Cheese is properly come.

12. Cheese is very apt to split, and become hard, when salted in the curd, and
if the slip curd is in the Cheese, both mixing together become water, and cause
holes, putrefaction, and swelling.

13. Sour milk injures Cheese as well as that which is too cold.

14. Rich Cheese will not dry so fast as lean, nor (...) as thin. Cheese (...)
turned.

THE above are the principal rules to be observed in Cheese making and if
carefully followed, cannot fail to reform a country in its general practice, so
as to make more and better Cheese, especially for market. They are the result
of the long experience of many. A good dairy-woman will soon discover, (...)
her present (...) of Cheese (...) best -- and time and observation will render
her mistress of this important (...) to any agricultural country.


