

THE YOUNG GENTLEMAN's PARENTAL MONITOR; CONTAINING, I. LORD CHESTERFIELD's
ADVICE TO HIS SON ON MEN AND MANNERS; ON THE PRINCIPLES OF POLITENESS; AND ON
THE ART OF ACQUIRING A KNOWLEDGE of the WORLD, II. MARCHIONESS DE LAMBERT's
ADVICE TO HER SON. III LORD BURGHLEY's TEN PRECEPTS TO HIS S^^


LONDON: PRINTED. HARTFORD, Reprinted and Sold BY, NATHANIEL PATTEN, M.DCC.XC^^

ADVERTISEMENT.
THE abilities of LORD CHESTERFIELD to inculcate such precepts as should form
the mind and fashion the manners of youth* are too universally admired to need
encomium. In the ADVICE of that noble EARL to his SON, there are to be found
such judicious remarks on men, manners, and things, connected with so intimate
a knowledge of the world, that the sentiments, considered as maxims, form a
very valuable system of education.

But as the observations of different writers on the same subject are mutually
illustrative of each other; to render the following work still more acceptable,
the MARCHIONESS DE LAMBERT's "Advice to her Son," a tract particularly
recommended by Lord CHESTERFIELD to HIS SON, is annexed.

That nothing might be wanting to render the following work complete, the
PRECEPTS of Lord BURLEIGH to his SON are added, as highly estimable on the
subjects of manners and education. T^ most ordinary sentiments of so dignified
a chara^ acquire weight; but when a series of well-digested Precepts, the
result of great knowledge and extensive experience, are delivered for the
guidance of a Son in the momentous concerns of life and happiness, the
Preceptor claims our esteem, and his opinions our reverence.

CONTENTS.
ABSENCE of Mind Page 1 Attention 2 Awkwardness of different kinds 5
Bashfulness 7 Company 10 Good Company defined 11 Rules for Behavior in Company
12
Rules for Conversation 13 Talking ibid Learn the Characters of Company before
you talk much 14 Telling Stories, and Digressions ibid Never seize people by
the Button ibid Long Talkers and Whisperers ibid Inattention to Persons
speaking 15 Never interrupt any Speaker 16 Adopt rather than give the Subject
ibid Conceal your Learning ibid Contradict with Politeness 17 Avoid Argument,
if possible ibid Always debate with Temper ibid Observe local Propriety 18
Jokes, Bons Mots, etc. ibid Avoid Egotism ibid Never seem dark and mysterious
20 Look People in the Face when speaking 21 Never retail private Scandal ibid
Never indulge general Reflections ibid M^m^^ry should be held in contempt 22
Swearing equally wicked and illiberal ibid Sneering 23 Talk not of your own,
nor other' Domestic Affairs 23 Explicitness in Conversation ibid Secrecy ibid
Adapt your Conversation to the Company 24 Never suppose yourself the Subject or
Laugh of the Company ibid Exterior Seriousness 25
Economy ibid Friendship 27 Good-Breeding 29 Graces 34 Art of Pleasing ibid
Address 35 Choice of Amusements 36 Carving 37 Chit-Chat ibid Cleanliness 38
Compliments ibid Diction 39 Dress and Dancing ibid Drinking of Healths 41 A
Modest Assurance is necessary 42 Hurry ibid Laughter 43 Letter-writing ibid
Nickname 44 Pronunciation and Speaking 45 Spelling 46 Style ibid Writing 47
Vulgar Expressions ibid Cautions against sundry odd Habits 48
Knowledge of the Word 49 How to acquire a Knowledge of the World 50 Never show
a Contempt for any one ibid Make no man feel his Inferiority 51 Never expose
People's Weakness or Infirmities ibid Study Command of Temper and Countenance
52 Judge of other Men's by your own Feelings 53 Av^d seeing an Affront, if
possible 55 Dissemble Resentment toward Enemies 56 Trust not too much to any
Man's Honesty 57 Study the Passions and Foibles of both Sexes ibid Flatter the
Vanity of all 58 Suspect those vho remarkably affect any Virtue 59 Be upon your
Guard against proffered Friendships ibid Never believe a Man who swears to the
Truth of a Thing 60 Shun riotous Connections 61 seeming Ignorance very
frequently necessary ibid A Conformity and Flexibility of Manners very useful
62 Spirit 63 Never neglect old Acquaintance 64
Lying ibid Dignity of Manners 66 Romping, Waggery, etc. 67 Pride ibid Flattery
68 Frivolous Curiosity, etc. ibid Gentleness of Manners with Firmness of Mind
69 Deliver Commands with Mildness 70 Ask a Favor, or solicit a right with
Softness ibid Check a Hastiness of Temper 71 Behavior toward Friends and
Enemies ibid Be civil, easy, and frank with Rivals 72
Moral Character ibid Commonplace Observations 74 Religion 75 Matrimony ibid
Courts and Cottages 76
Oratory 77 Pedantry 79 Never pronounce arbitrarily ibid Affect not to prefer
the Ancients to the Moderns 80 Reason not from the Authority of Ancient Poets
or Historians ibid Abstain from learned Ostentation 81
Pleasure ibid Prejudices 84 Religion 85 Employment of Time 86 Laziness 87
Reading ibid Transacting Business 88 Method 89 Frivolousness 91
Vanity 92 Virtue 93 Useful Miscellaneous Observations on Men and Manners 95
The Marchioness De Lambert's Advice to her Son 101 Lord Burghley's Ten Precepts
to his Son 141
LORD CHESTERFIELD's ADVICE TO HIS SON.
ABSENCE OF MIND.
AN Absent Man is generally either a very weak, or a very affected man; he is,
however, a very disagreeable man in company. He is defective in all the common
offices of civility; he does not enter into the general conversation, but
breaks into it from time to time, with some starts of his own, as if he waked
from a dream. He seems wrapped up in thought, and possibly does not think at all:
he does not kno^ his most intimate acquaintance by sight, or answers them as if
he were at cross-purposes. He leaves his hat in one room, his cane in another,
an^ would probably leave his shoes in a third if his buckles, though awry, did
not save them. This is a sure indication, either of a mind so weak that it
cannot bear above one object at a time; or so affected, that it would be
supposed to be wholly engrossed by some very great and important objects. Sir
Isaac Newton, Mr. Lock, and perhaps five or six more since the Creation, may
have had a right to absence, from the intense thought their investigations
required; but such liberties cannot be claimed by, nor will be tolerated in,
any other persons.

No man is, in any degree, fit for either business or conver^ation, who (...)
comm^nd his attention (...) the p^t object, be (...) what i^ (...) When I see a
man ab^ent in mind, I c^ose to be absent in body; for it is almost impossible
for me to stay in the room, as I cannot stand inattention and awkwardness.

I would rather be in company with a dead man than with an absent one; for if
the dead man affords me no pleasure, at least he shows me no contempt; whereas
the absent man very plainly, though silently, tells me that he does not think
me worth his attention. Besides, an absent man can never make any observations
upon the characters, customs, and manners of the company. He may be in the best
companies all his lifetime (if they will admit him), and never become the
wiser: we may as well converse with a deaf man, as an absent one. It is indeed
a practical blunder to address ourselves to a man, who, we plainly perceive,
neither hears, minds, nor understands us.

ATTENTION.
A MAN is fit for neither business or pleasure, who either cannot, or does not
command and direct his attention to the present object, and, in some degree,
banish, for that time, all other objects from his thoughts. If at a ball, a
supper, or a party of pleasure, a man were to be solving, in his own mind, a
problem in Euclid, he would be a very bad companion, and make a poor figure in
that company; or if, in studying a problem in his closet, he were to think of a
minuet, I am apt ^o believe that he would make a very poo^ mathematician*

There (...) ^ame ^ough for eve^ything, ^n the course of the day, if you do but
one (...) at ^ce: but there is not time enough in the year, if you will do two
things at a time.

This steady and undissipated attention to one object is a sure mark of a
superior genius; as hurry, bustle, and agitation, are the never-failing
symptoms of a weak and frivolous mind.

Indeed, without attention nothing is to be done: want of attention, which is
really want of thought, is either folly or madness. You should not only have
attention to every thing, but a quickness of attention, so as to observe, at
once, all the people in the room, their motions, their looks, and their words;
and yet, without staring at them, and seeming to be an observer. This quick and
unobserved observation is of infinite advantage in life, and is to be acquired
with care; and, on the contrary, what is called absence, which is a
thoughtlessness and want of attention about what is doing, makes a man so like
either a fool or a madman, that, for my part, I see no real difference. A fool
never has thought; a madman has lost it; and an absent man is, for the time,
without it.

In short, the most material knowledge of all, ^ mean the knowledge of the
world, is never to be acquired without great attention: and I know many old
people, who, though they have lived long in the world, are but children still
as to the knowledge of it, from their levity and inattention. Certain forms,
which all people comply with, and certain arts, which all people aim at, hide,
in some degree, the truth, and g^ve a general exterior resemblance to almost
every body. Attention and sagacity must see through that veil, and discover the
natural character.

Add to this, there are little att^ntions which are infinitely engaging, and
which sensibly affect that degree of pride and self-love which is inseparable
from human nature; a^ they are unquestionable proofs of the regard and
consideration which we have for the persons to whom we pay them. As for
example: Suppose you invited any body to dine or sup with you, you ought to
recollect if you had observed that they had any favorite dish, and take care
to provide it for them: and when it came, you should say, You seemed to me, at
such and such a place, to give this dish a preference, and therefore I ordered
it. -- This is the wine that I observed you liked, and therefore I procured
some." Again: Most people have their weaknesses; they have their aversions or
their likings to such or such things. If we were to laugh at a man for his
aversion to a cat or cheese (which are common antipathies) or, by inattention
or negligence, to let them come in his way where we could prevent it; he would,
in the first case, think himself insulted, and in the second, slighted; and
would remember both. But, on the other hand, our care to procure for him what
he likes, and to remove from him what he dislikes, shows him that he is at
least an object of our attention, flatters his vanity, and perhaps makes him
more you^ friend, than a more important service have done. The more trifling
these things are, the more they prove your attention for the person, and are
consequently the more engaging. Consult your own breast, and recollect how
these little attentions, when shown you by others, flatter that degree of
self-love and vanity from which no man living is free. Reflect how they incline
and attract you to that person, and how you are propitiated afterward to all
which that person says or does. The same causes will have the same effects in
your favor.

AWKWARDNESS OF DIFFERENT KINDS.
MANY very worthy and sensible people have certain odd tricks, ill habits, and
awkwardnesses in their behavior, which excite a disgust to, and dislike of
their persons, that cannot be removed or overcome by any other valuable
endowment or merit which they may possess.

Now awkwardness can proceed but from two ^uses: either from not having kept
good compa^^, or from not having attended to it.

When an awkward fellow first comes into a room, it is highly probale, that his
sword gets between his legs, and throws him down, or makes him stumble, at
least; when he has recovered the accident, he goes and places himself in the
very place of the whole room where he should not; there he soon lets his hat
fall down, and in taking it up again, throws down his cane; in recovering his
cane, his hat falls a second time; so that he (...) a quarter of an hour before
he is in order again. If he drinks tea or coffee, he certainly scalds his
mouth, and lets either the cup or the sacer fall, and spills the tea or coffee
in his breeches. At dinner, his awkwardness distinguishes itself particularly,
as he has more to do; there he holds his knife, fork, and spoon, differently
from other people; eats with his knife to the great danger of his mouth, picks
his teeth with his fork, and puts his spoon, which has been in his throat
twenty times, into the dishes again. If he is to carve, he can never hit the
joint; but, in his vain efforts to cut through the bone, scatters the sauce in
every body's face. He generally daubs himself with soup and grease, though his
napkin is commonly stuck through a button-hole, and tickles his chin. When he
drinks, he infallibly coughs in his glass, and besprinkles the company. Besides
all this, he has strange tricks and gestures; such as snuffing up his nose,
making faces, putting his fingers in his nose, or blowing it and looking
afterward in his handkerchief, so as to make the company sick. His hands are
troublesome to him when he has not something in them, and he does not known
where to put them; but they are in perpetual motion between his bosom and his
breeches: he does not wear his clothes, and, in short, does nothing like other
people. All this, I own, is not in any degree criminal; but it is highly
disagreeable and ridiculous in company, and ought most carefully to be avoided
by whoever desires to please.

From this account of what you should not do, you may easily judge what you
should do; and, a due attention to the manners of people of fashion, and who
have seen the world, will make it habitual and familiar to you.

There is, likewise, an awkwardness of expression and words most carefully to
be avoided; such as false English, bad pronunciation, old sayings, and common
proverbs; which are so many proofs of having kept bad and low company. For
example: If instead of saying, that tastes are different, and that every man
has his own peculiar one, you should let off a proverb, and say, that what is
one man's meat is another man's poison; or else, every one as they like, as the
good man said when he kissed his cow; every body would be persuaded that you
had never kept company with any body above footmen and housemaids.

There is likewise an awkwardness of the mind, that ought to be, and with care
may be avoided; as, for instance, to mistake or forget names. To speak of Mr.
What-d'ye-call Him, or Mrs. Thingum, or How-d'ye call Hear, is excessively
awkward and ordinary. To call people by improper titles and appellations is so
too; as, My Lord for Sir, and Sir for My Lord. To begin a story or a narration
when you are not perfect in it, and cannot go through with it, but are forced,
possibly, to say in the middle of it, I have forgot the rest, is very
unpleasant and bungling. One must be extremely exact, clear, and perspicuous in
every thing one says; otherwise, instead of entertaining or informing others,
one only tires and puzzles them.

BASHFULNESS.
BASHFULNESS is the distinguished character of an English booby, who appears
frightened out of his wits if people of fashion speak to him, and blushes and
stammers without being able to give a proper answer; by which means he becomes
truly ridiculous, from the groundless fear of being laughed at.

There is a very material difference between modesty and an awkward
bashfulness, which is as ridiculous as true modesty is commendable* it is as
absurd to be a simpleton as to be an impudent fellow; and we make ourselves
contemptible, if we cannot come into a room and speak to people without being
out of countenance, or without embarrassment. A man who is really diffident,
timid, and bashful, be his merit what it will, never can push himself in the
world; his despondency throws him into inaction, and the forward, the bustling,
and the petulant, will always precede him. The manner makes the whole
difference. What would be impudence in one man, is only a proper and decent
assurance in another. A man of sense, and of knowledge of the world, will
assert his own rights, and pursue his own objects, as steadily and intrepidly
as the most impudent man living, and commonly more so; but then he has art
enough to give an outward air of modesty to all he does. This engages and
prevails, whilst the very same things shock and fail, from the over-bearing or
impudent manner only of doing them.

Englishmen, in general, are ashamed of going into company. When we avoid
singularity, what should we be ashamed of? And why should not we go into a
mixed company with as much ease, and as little concern, as we would go into our
own room? Vice and ignorance are the only things we ought to be ashamed of:
while we keep clear of them, we may venture any where without fear or concern.
Nothing sinks a young man into low company so surely as bashfulness. If he
thinks that he shall not, he most surely will not please.

Some, indeed, from feeling the pain and inconveniences of bashfulness, have
rushed into the other extreme, and turned impudent; as cowards sometimes grow
desperate from excess of danger: but this is equally to be avoided, there being
nothing more generally shocking than impudence. The medium between these two
extremes points out the well-bred man, who always feels himself firm and easy
in all companies; who is modest without being bashful, and steady without being
impudent.

A mean fellow is ashamed and embarrassed when he comes into company, is
disconcerted when spoken to, answers with difficulty, and does not know how to
dispose of his hands; but a gentleman who is acquainted with the world, appears
in company with a graceful and proper assurance, and is perfectly easy and
unembarrassed. He is not dazzled by superior rank; he pays all the respect that
is due to it, without being disconcerted; and can converse as easily with a
king as with any one of his subjects. This is the great advantage of being
introduced young into good company, and of conversing with our superiors. A
well-bred man will convese with his inferiors without insolence, and with his
superiors with respect, and with ease. Add to this, that a man of a gentleman
like behavior, though of inferior parts, is better received than a man of
superior abilities, who is unacquainted with the world. Modesty and a polite
easy assurance should be united.

COMPANY.
TO keep good company, especially at your first setting out is the way to
receive good impressions. Good company is not what respective sets of company
are pleased either to call or think themselves. It consists chiefly (though not
wholly) of people of considerable birth, rank, and character; for people of
neither birth nor rank are frequently and very justly admitted into it, if
distinguished by any peculiar merit, or eminency in any liberal art or science.
So motly a thing is good company, that many people, without birth, rank, or
merit, intrude into it by their own forwardness, and others get into it by the
protection of some considerable person. In this fashionable good company, the
best manners and the purest language are most unquestionably to be learned: for
they establish and give the TON to both, which are called the language and
manners of good company, neither of them being ascertained by any legal
tribunal.

A company of people of the first quality cannot be called good company, in the
common acceptance of the phrase, unless they are the fashionable and
accredited company of the place; for people of the first quality can be as
silly, as ill-bred, and as worthless, as people of the meanest degree: and a
company, consisting wholly of people of very low condition, whatever their
merit or talents may be, can never be called good company; and therefore should
not be much frequented, though by no means despised.

A company wholly composed of learned men, though greatly to be respected, is
not meant by the words good company: they cannot have the easy and polished
manners of the world, as they do not live in it. If we can bear our parts well
in such a company, it will be proper to be in it sometimes, and we shall be
more esteemed in other companies for having a place in that.

A company consisting wholly of professed wits and poets, is very inviting to
young men who are pleased with it, if they have wit themselves; and if they
have none, are foolishly proud of being one of it. But such companies should be
frequented with moderation and judgment. A wit is a very unpopular
denomination, as it carries terror along with it; and people are as much afraid
of a wit in company as a woman is of a gun, which she supposes may go off of
itself, and do her a mischief. Their acquaintance, however, is worth seeking,
and their company worth frequenting; but not exclusively of others, nor to such
a degree as to be considered only as one of that particular set.

Above all things, endeavor to keep company with people above you; for there
you rise, as much as you sink with people below you. When I say company above
you, I do not mean with regard to their birth, but with regard to their merit,
and the light in which the world considers them.

There are two sorts of good company; one which is called the BEAU MONDE, and
consists of those people who have the lead in cour^s, and in the gay part of
life; the other consists of those who are distinguished by some peculiar merit,
or who excel in some particular or valuable art or science.

Be equally careful to avoid that low company which, in every sense of the
word, is low indeed; low i^^ rank, low in parts, low in manners, and low in
merit. Vanity that source of many of our follies, and of some of ^^r crimes,
has sunk many a man into company in every light infinitely below him, for the
sake of being the first man in it. There he dictates, is applauded, and
admired; but he soon disgraces himself, and disqualifies himself for any better
company.

Having thus pointed out what company you should avoid, and what company you
should associate with, I shall next lay down a few CAUTIONS TO BE OBSERVED IN
ADOPTING THE MANNERS OF A COMPANY.

WHEN a young man, new in the world, first gets into company, he determine^ to
conform to and imitate it. But he too often mistakes the object of his
imitation. He has frequently heard the absurd term of genteel and fashionable
vices. He there observes some people who shine, and who in general are admired
and esteemed; and perceives that these people are rakes, drunkards, or
gamesters; he therefore adopts their vices, mistaking their defects for their
perfections, and imagining that they owe their fashion and their l^stre to
these genteel vices. But it is exactly the reverse; for these people have
acquired their reputation by their parts, their learning, their good-breeding,
and other real accomplishments: and are only blemished and lowered in the
opinions of all reasonable people by these general and fashionable vices. It is
therefore plain that, in these mixed characters, the good part only makes
people forgive, but not approve the bad.

If a man should, unfortunately, have any vices, he ought at least to be
content with his own, and not adopt other people's. The adoption of vice has
ruined ten times more young men, than natural inclinations.

Let us imitate the real perfections of the good company into which we may get;
copy their politeness, their carriage, their address, and the easy and
well-bred turn of their conversation; (...) we should remember, that, let them
shine (...) ^^^ght, their vices, if they have any, are (...) blemishes, which
we should no more en^ (...) to imitate, than we would make artificial ^arts
upon our faces, because some very handsome man had the misfortune to have a
natural one upon his. We should, on the contrary, think how much handsomer he
would have been without it.

Having thus given you instructions for making you well received in good
company, I proceed next to lay before you, what you will find of equal use and
importance in your commerce with the world, some directions, or

RULES FOR CONVERSATION.
Talking
WHEN you are in company talk often, but never long; is that case, if you do
not please, (...) least you are sure not to tire your ^earers.

Learn the characters of company before you talk much.
Inform yourself of the characters and situations of the company, before you
give way to what your imagination may prompt you to say. There are, in all
companies, more wrong heads than right ones, and many more who deserve, than
who like censure. Should you therefore expatiate in the praise of some virtue,
which some in company notoriously want; or declaim against any vice, which
others are notoriously infected with; your reflections, however general and
unapplied, will, by being applicable, be thought personal, and levelled at
those people. This consideration points out to you sufficiently, not to be
suspicious and captious yourself, nor to suppose that things, because they may,
are therefore meant at you.

Telling stories and digressions.
Tell stories very seldom, and, absolutely, never but where they are very apt,
and very short. -- Omit every circumstance that is not material, and beware of
digressions. To have frequent recourse to narrative, betrays great want of
imagination.

Seizing people by the button.
Never hold any body by the button, or the hand, in order to be heard out; for,
if people are not willing to hear you, you had much better hold your tongue
than them.

Long talkers and whisperers.
Long talkers generally single out some unfortunate man in company to whisper,
or at least, in a half voice, to convey a continuity of words to. This is
excessively ill-bred, and, in some degree, a fraud; conversation-stock being a
joint and common property But if one of these unmerciful talkers lays hold of
you, hear him with patience (and at least seeming attention), i^ he is worth
obliging; for nothing will oblige him more than a patient hearing, as nothing
wo^ld hurt him more than either to leave him in the midst of his discourse, or
to discover your impatience under your affliction.

Inattention to persons speaking.
There is nothing so brutally shocking, nor so little forgiven, as a seeming
inattention to the person who is speaking to you; and I have known many a man
knocked down for a much slighter provocation than that inattention which I
mean. I have seen many people, who, while you are speaking to them, instead of
looking at, and attending to you, fix their eyes upon the ceiling, or some
other part of the room, look out of the window, play with a dog, twirl their
snuff box, or pick their nose. Nothing discovers a little, f^tile, frivolous
mind more than this, and nothing is so offensively ill-bread: it is an explicit
declaration on your part, that every the most trifling object deserves your
attention more than all that can be said by the person who is speaking to you.
Judge of the sentiments of hatred and resentment which such treatment must
excite in every breast where any degree of self love dwells. I repeat it again
and again, that sort of vanity and self love is inseparable from human nature,
whatever may be its rank or condition; even your footman will sooner forget and
forgive a beating, than any manifest mark of slight and contempt. Be,
therefore, not only really, but seeming and manifestly attentive to whoever
speaks to you.

Never interrupt any speaker.
It is considered as the height of ill-manners to interrupt any person while
speaking, by speaking yourself, or calling off the attention of the company to
any new subject. This, however, every child knows.

Adopt rather than give the subject.
Take, rather than give, the subject of the company you are in. If you have
parts, you will show them, more or less, upon every subject; and if you have
not, you had better talk sillily upon a subject of other people's than of your
own choosing.

Conceal your learning from the company.
Never display your learning, but on particular occasions. Reserve it for
learned men; and let even these rather extort it from you, than appear forward
to display it. Hence you will be deemed modest, and reputed to possess more
knowledge than you really have. Never seem wiser or more learned than your
company. The man who affects to display his learning, will be frequently
questioned; and, if found superficial, will be ridicu^ed and despised; if
otherwise, he will be deemed a pedant. Nothing can lessen real merit (which
will always show itself) in the opinion of the world, but an ostentatious
display of it by its possessor.

Contradict with politeness.
When you oppose or contradict any person's assertion or opinion, let your
manner, your air, your terms, and your tone of voice be soft and gentle, and
that easily and naturally, not affectedly. Use palliatives when you contradict;
such as, "I may be mistaken, I am not sure, but I believe, I should rather
think, etc." Finish any argument or dispute with some little good-humoured
pleasantry, to show that you are neither hurt yourself, nor meant to hurt your
antagonist; for an argument kept up a good while often occasions a temporary
alienation on each side.

Avoid argument, if possible.
Avoid, as much as you can, in mixed companies, argumentative, polemical
conversations; which certainly indispose, for a time, the contending parties
toward each other; and, if the controversy grows warm and noisy, endeavor to
put an end to it by some genteel levity or joke.

Always debate with temper.
Arguments should never be maintained with heat and clamor, though we believe
or know ourselves to be in the right; we should give our opinions modestly and
coolly; and if that will not do, endeavor to change the conversation, by
saying, We should not be able to convince one another, nor is it necessary that
we should, so let us talk of something else.

Local propriety to be observed.
Remember that there is a local propriety to be observed in all companies; and
that what is extremely proper in one company may be, and often is, highly
improper in another.

Jokes, bons mots, etc.
The jokes, bons mots, the little adventures, which may do very well in one
company, will seem flat and tedious when related in another. The particular
characters, the habits, the ca^t of one company may give merit to a word, or a
gesture, which would have none at all if divested of those accidental
circumstances. Here people very commonly err; and fond of something that has
entertained them in one company, and in certain circumstances, repeat it with
emphasis in another, where it is either insipid, or, it may be, offensive, by
being ill-timed or misplaced. Nay, they often do it with silly preamble: I will
tell you an excellent thing; or, I will tell you the best thing in the world
This raises expectations, which, when absolutely disappointed, make the relator
of this excellent thing look, very deservedly, like a fool.

Egotism.
Upon all occasions avoid speaking of yourself, if it be possible. Some,
abruptly, speak advantageously of themselves, without either presence or
provocation. This is downright impudence. Others proceed more artfully, as they
imagine; forging accusations against themselves, and complaining of calumnies
which they never heard, in order to justify themselves, and exhibit a catalogue
of their many virtues. They acknowledge, indeed, it may appear odd that they
should talk (...) of themselves; it is what they have a great aversion to, and
what they could not have do^^, if they had not been thus unjustly and
scandalously abused. This thin veil of (...) drawn before vanity, is much too
transparent to conceal it, even from those who have but a modera^^ share of
penetration.

Others go to work more modes^^y and more ^^ily still; they confess themselves
guilty of all the cardinal virtues, by first degrading them into weaknesses,
and then acknowledging their misfortune in being made up of those weaknesses.
They cannot see people laboring under misfortunes, without sympathizing with,
and endeavoring to help them. They cannot see their fellow creatures in
distress without relieving them; though, truly, their circumstances cannot very
well afford it. They cannot avoid speaking the truth, though they acknowledge
it to be sometimes imprudent. In short, they confess that, with all these
weaknesses, they are not fit to live in the world, much less to prosper in it.
But they are now too old to pursue a contrary conduct, and therefore they must
^ub on as well as they can.

Though this may appear too ridiculous and outre even for the stage, yet it is
frequently met with upon the common stage of the word. This principle of vanity
and pride is so strong in human nature, that it descends even to the lowest
objects; and we often ^ee people fishing for praise, where, admitting all they
say to be true, no just praise is to be caught. One perhaps affirms, that he
has rode post an hundred miles in six hours: probably, this is a falsehood;
but, even supposing it to be true, what then? Why, it must be admitted that he
is a very good post-boy, that is all. Another asserts, perhaps not without a
few oaths, that he has drank six or eight bottles of wine at a sitting. It
would be charitable to believe such a man a liar; for if we do not, we must
certainly pronounce him a beast.

There are a thousand such follies and extravagancies which vanity draws people
into, and which always defeat their own purpose. The only method of avoiding
these evils, is never to speak of ourselves. But when, in a narrative, we are
obliged to mention ourselves, we should take care not to drop a single word
that can dirictly or indirectly be construed as fishing for applause. Be our
characters what they will, they will be known; and nobody will take them upon
our own words. Nothing that we can say ourselves will vanish our defects, or
add luster to our perfections; but on the contrary, it will often make the
former more glaring, and the latter obscure. If we are silent upon our own
merits, neither envy, indignation, nor ridicule will obstruct or allay the
applause which we may really deserve. But, if we are our own panegyriste upon
any occasion, however artfully dressed or disguised, every one will conspire
against us, and we shall be disappointed of the very end we aim at.

Be not dark or mysterious.
Take care never to seem dark and mysterious; which is not only a very
unamiable character, but a very suspicious one too: if you seem mysterious with
others, they will be really so with you, and you will know nothing. The height
of abilities is to have a frank, open, and ingenous exterior, with a prudent,
and reserved interior; to be upon your own guard, and yet, by a seeming natural
openness, to put people off of theirs. The majority of every company will avail
themselves of every indiscreet and unguarded expression of yours, if they can
turn it to their own advantage.

Look people in the face when speaking.
Always look people in the face when you speak to them; the not doing it is
thought to imply conscious guilt; besides that you lose the advantage of
observing, by their countenances, what impression your discourse makes upon
them. In order to know people's real sentiments, I trust much more to my eyes
than to my ears; for they can say whatever they have a mind I should hear; but
they can seldom help looking what they have no intention that I should know.

Scandal.
Private scandal should never be received nor retailed willingly; for though
the defamation of others may, for the present, gratify the malignity or the
pride of our hearts, yet cool reflection will draw very disadvantageous
conclusions from such a disposition: In scandal, as in robbery, the receiver is
always thought as bad as the thief.

Never indulge general reflections.
Never in conversation attack whole bodies of any kind; for you may thereby
unnecessarily make yourself a great number of enemies. Among women, as among
men, there are good as well as bad, and it may be, full as many, or more good
than among men. This rule holds as to lawyers, soldiers, parsons, cou^tiers,
citizens, etc. They are all men, subject to the same passions and sentiments,
differing only in the manner, according to their several educations; and it
would be as imprudent as unjust to attack any of them by the lump. Individuals
forgive sometimes; but bodies and societies never do. Many young people think
it very gente^l and witty to abuse the Clergy; in which they are extremely
mistaken; since, in my opinion, parsons are very like men, and neither the
better nor the worse for wearing a black gown. All general reflections upon
nations and societies are the trite, threadbare jokes of those who se^ up for
wit without having any, (...) to commonplace. Judge of individuals from yo^^
own knowledge of them, and not from their se^^ profession, or denomination.

Mimicry.
Mimicry, which is the common and favorite amusement of little, low minds, is
in the utmost contempt with great ones. It is the lowest and most illiberal of
all buffoonery. We should neither practice it, nor applaud it in others.
Besides that, the person mimicked is insulted* and, as I have often observed to
you before, an insult is never forgiven.

Swearing.
We may frequently hear some people in good company interland their
conversation with oaths, by way of embellishment, as they suppose; but we must
observe too, that those who do so, are never those who contribute in any degree
to give that company the denomination of good company. They are generally
people of low education* for swearing, without having a single temptation to
plead, is as silly, and as ^^liberal, as it is wicked.

Sneering.
Whatever we say in company, if we say it with ^ supercilious, cynical face* of
an embarrassed countenance, or a silly disconcerted grin, it will be ill
received. If we mutter i^, or utter it indistinctly and ungracefully, it will
be still worse received.

Talk not of your own nor other persons' private affairs.
Never talk of your own or other people's domestic affairs; yours are nothing
to them but tedious; theirs are nothing to you. It is a tender subject; and it
is a chance if you do not touch somebody or other's sore place. In this case,
there is no trusting to specious appearances, which are often so contrary to
the real situation of things between men and their wives, parents and their
children, seeming friends, etc. that, with the best intentions in the world, we
very often make some very disagreeable blunders.

Explicitness.
Nothing makes a man look sillier in company, than a joke or pleasantry not
relished, or not understood; and, if he meets with a profound silence when he
expected a general applausea* or, what is still worse, if he is desired to
explain the joke or bon mot, his awkward and embarrassed situation is easier
imagined than described.

Secrecy.
Be careful how you repeat in one company what you hear in another.

Things seemingly indifferent may, by circulation, have much graver
consequences than may be imagined. There is a kind of general tacit trust in
conversation, by which a man is engaged not to report any thing out of it,
though he is not immediately enjoined secrecy. A retailer of this kind draws
himself into a thousand scrapes and discussions, and is shily and indifferently
received wherever he goes.

Adapt your conversation to the company.
Always adapt your conversation to the people you are conversing with; for I
suppose you would not talk upon the same subject, and in the same manner, to a
bishop, a philosopher, a captain, and a woman.

Never suppose yourself the subject or laugh of the company.
People of an ordinary, low education, when they happen to fall into good
company, imagine themselves the only object of its attention: if the company
whispers, it is, to be sure, concerning them; if they laugh, it is at them; and
if any thing ambiguous, that by the most forced interpretation can be applied
to them, happens to be said, they are convinced that it was meant at them; upon
which they grow out of countenance first, and then angry. This mistake is very
well ridiculed in the Stratagem, where Scrub says, "I am sure they talked of
me, for they laughed consumedly." A well-bred man seldom thinks, but never
seems to think himself slighted, undervalued, or laughed at in company, unless
where it is so plainly marked out, that his honor obliges hm to resent it in a
proper manner. On the contrary, a vulgar man is captious and jealous; eager and
impetuous about trifles. He suspects himself to be slighted; thinks every thing
that is said meant at him; if the company happens to laugh, he is persuaded
they laugh at him; he grows angry and testy, says something very impertinent,
and draws himself into a scrape, by showing what he calls a proper spirit, and
asserting himself. The conversation of a vulgar man also always favors
strongly of the lowness of his education and company. It turns chiefly upon his
domestic affairs, his servants, the excellent order he keeps in his own family,
and the little anecdotes of the neighborhood; all which he relates with
emphasis, as interesting matters. He is a man-gossip.

Seriousness.
A certain degree of exterior seriousness in looks and motions gives dignity,
without excluding wit and decent cheerfulness. A constant smirk upon the face,
and a whiffling activity of the body, are strong indications of futility.

ECONOMY.
A FOOL squanders away, without credit or advantage to himself, more than a man
of sense spends with both. The latter employs his money as he does his time,
and never spends a shilling of the one, nor a minute of the other, but in
something that is either useful or rationally pleasing to himself or others.
The former buys whatever he does not want, and does not pay for what he does
want. He cannot withstand the charms of a toy-shop* snuff^boxes, watches, heads
of canes, etc. are his destruction. His servants and tradesmen conspire with
his own indolence to cheat him: and, in a very little time, he is astonished,
in the midst of all the ridiculous superfl^i^ies, to find himself in want of
all the real comforts and necessaries of life.

Without care and method, the largest fortune will not, and with them almost
the smallest will supply all necessary expenses. As far as you can possibly,
pay ready money for every thing you buy, and avoid bills. Pay that money too
yourself, and not through the hands of any servant; who always either
stipulates poundage, or requires a present for his good word, as they call it.
Where you must have bills (as for meat and drink, clothes, etc.) pay them
regularly every month, and with your own hand. Never from a mistaken economy,
buy a thing you do not want, because it is cheap; or, from a silly pride
because it is dear. Keep an account, in a book, of all that you receive, and of
all that you pay; for no man who knows what he receives, and what he pays, ever
runs out. I do not mean that you should keep an account of the shillings and
half-crowns which you may spend in chair-hire, operas, etc. they are unworthy
of the time, and the ink, that they would consume; leave such minutiae to dull,
penny-wise fello^: but remember, in economy, as well as in every other part of
life, to have the proper attention to proper objects, and the proper contempt
for little ones.

FRIENDSHIP.
YOUNG persons have commonly an unguarded frankness about them, which makes
them the easy prey and bubbles of the artful and experienced: they look upon
every knave or fool who tells them that he is their friend, to be really so;
and pay that profession of simulated friendship with an indiscreet and
unbounded confidence, always to their loss, often to their ruin. Beware of
these proffered friendships. Receive them with great civility, but with great
incredulity too; and pay them with compliments, but not with confidence. Do not
suppose that people become friends at first sight, or even upon a short
acquaintance. Real friendship is a slow grower; and never thrives, unless
ingrafted upon a stock of known and reciprocal merit.

There is another kind of nominal friendship among young people, which is warm
for the time, but luckily of short duration. This friendship is hastily
produced, by their being accidentally thrown together, and pursuing the same
course of riot and debauchery. A fine friendship, truly! and well cemented by
drunkenness and lewdness. It should rather be called a conspiracy against
morals and good manners, and be punished as such by the civil magistrate.
However, they have the impudence and the folly to call this confederacy a
friendship. They lend one another money for bad purposes; they engage in
quarrels, offensive and defensive, for their accomplices; they tell one another
all they know, and often more too; when of a sudden, some accident disperses
them, and they think no more of each other, unless it be to betray and laugh at
their imprudent confidence.

When a man uses strong protestations or oaths to make you believe a thing,
which is of itself so probable that the bare saying of it would be sufficient,
depend upon it he deceives you, and is highly interested in making you believe
it, or else he would not take so much pains.

Remember to make a great difference between companions and friends; for a very
complaisant and agreeable companion may, and often does, prove a very improper
and a very dangerous friend. People will, in a great degree, form their opinion
of you, upon that which they have of your friends; and there is a Spanish
proverb, which says very justly, Tell me who you live with, and I will tell you
who you are. One may fairly suppose, that a man who makes a knaves or a fool
his friend, has some thing very bad to do, or to conceal. But at the same time
that you carefully decline the friendship of knaves and fools, if it can be
called friendship, there is no occasion to make either of them your enemies,
wantonly and unprovoked; for they are numerous bodies; and I would rather choose
a secure neutrality, than alliance or war with either of them. You may be a
declared enemy to their vices and follies, without being marked out by them as
a personal one. Their enmity is the next dangerous thing to their friendship.
Have a real reserve with almost every body; and have a seeming reserve with
almost nobody; for it is very disagreeable to seem reserved, and very dangerous
not to be so. Few people find the true medium: many are ridiculously mysterious
and reserved upon trifles; and many imprudently communicative of all they know.

GOOD-BREEDING.
GOOD-BREEDING has been very justly defined to be the result of much
good-sense, some goodnature, and a little self-denial for the sake of others,
and with a view to obtain the same indulgence from them.

Good-breeding alone can prepossess people in our favor at first sight; more
time being necessary to discover greater talents. Good-breeding, however, does
not consist in low bows and formal ceremony; but in an easy, civil, and
respectful behavior.

Indeed, good-sense in many cases must determine good-breeding; for what would
be civil at one time, and to one person, would be rude at another time, and to
another person; there are, however, some general rules of good-breeding. As for
example: To answer only Yes, or No, to any person, without adding, Sir, My
Lord, or Madam (as it may happen), is always extremely rude; and it is equally
so not to give proper attention and a civil answer when spoken to: such
behavior convinces the person who is speaking to us, that we despise him, and
do not think him worthy of our attention, or an answer.

A well-bred person will take care to answer with complaisance when he is
spoken to; will place himself at the lower end of the table, unless bid to go
higher; will first drink to the lady of the house, and then to the master; he
will not eat awkwardly or dirtily, nor sit when other stand; and he will do all
this with an air of complaisance, and not with a grave ill natured look, as if
he did it all unwillingly.

There is nothing more difficult to attain, or so necessary to possess, as
perfect good-breeding; which is equally inconsistent with a stiff formality, an
impertinent forwardness, and an awkward bashfulness. A little ceremony is
sometimes necessary; a certain degree of firmness is absolutely so; and an
outward modesty is extremely becoming.

Virtue and learning, like gold, have their intrinsic value; but if they are
not polished, they certainly lose a great deal of their luster; and even
polished brass will pass upon more people than rough gold. What a number of
sins does the cheerful, easy, good-breeding of the French frequently cover!

My Lord Bacon says, That a pleasing figure is a perpetual letter of
recommendation. It is certainly an agreeable sore-runner of merit and smooths
the way for it.

A man of good-breading should be acquainted with the forms and particular
customs of courts. At Vienna, men always make curtsies, instead of bows, to the
Emperor: in France, nobody bows to the King, or kisses his hand; but in Spain
and England, bows are made, and hands are kissed. Thus every court has some
peculiarity, which those who visit them ought previously to inform themselves
of, to avoid blund^rs and awkwardnesses.

Very few, scarcely any, are wanting in the respect which they should show to
those whom they acknowledge to be infinitely their superiors. The man of
fashion, and of the world, expresses it in its fullest extent; but naturally,
easily, and without concern: whereas a man who is not used to keep good
company, expresses it awkwardly; one sees that he is not used to it, and that
it costs him a great deal: but I never saw the worst-bred man living guilty of
^olling, whistling, scratching his head, and such like indecencies in company
that (...) respected. In such companies, therefore, the only point to be
attended to is to show that respect which every body means to show, in an easy,
unembarrassed, and graceful manner.

In mixed companies, whoever is admitted to make part of them, is, for the time
at least, supposed to be upon a footing of equality with the rest; and
consequently, every one claims, and very justly, every mark of civility and
good-breeding. Ease is allowed, but carelessness and negligence are strictly
forbidden. If a man accosts you, and talks to you ever so dully or frivolously,
it is worse than rudeness, it is brutality, to show him, by a manifest
inattention to what he says, that you think him a fool or a blockhead, and not
worth hearing. It is much more so with regard to women; who, of whatever rank
they are, are entitled, in consideration of their sex, not only to an
attentive, but an officious good-breeding from men. Their little wants,
likings, dislikes, preferences, antipathies, fancies, whims, and even
impertinencies, must be officiously attended to, flattered, and, if possible,
guessed at and anticipated by a well-bred man. You must never usurp to yourself
those conveniences and agremens which are of common right; such as the best
places, the best dishes, etc. but, on the contrary, always decline them
yourself, and offer them to others; who, in their turns, will offer them to
you; so that, upon the whole, you will, in your turn, enjoy your share of
common right.

The third sort of good-breeding is local, and is variously modified in not
only different countries, but in different towns of the same country. But it
must be founded upon the two former sorts* they are the matter, to which, in
this case, fashion and custom only give the different shapes and impressions.
Whoever has the first two sorts will easily acquire this third sort of
good-breeding, which depends singly upon attention and observation. It is
properly the polish, the luster, the last finishing strokes of good-breeding. A
man of sense, therefore, carefully attends to the local manners of the
respective places where he is, and takes for his models those persons whom he
observes to be at the head of the fashion and good-breeding. He watches how
they address themselves to their superiors, how they accost their equals and
how they treat their inferiors; and lets none of those little niceties escape
him, which are to good-breading what the last delicate and masterly touches are
to a good picture, and which the vulgar have no notion of, but by which good
judges distinguish the master. He attends even to their air, dress, and
motions, and imitates them liberally, and not fervilely: he copies, but does
not mimic. These personal graces are of very great consequence. They anticipate
the sentiments before merit can engage the understanding; they captivate the
heart, and give rise. I believe, to the extravagant notions of Charms and
Philtres. Their effects were so surprising, that they were reckoned
supernatural.

In short, as it is necessary to possess learning, honor, and virtue, to gain
the esteem and admiration of mankind, so politeness and good-breeding are
equally necessary to render us agreeable in conversation and common life. Great
talents are above the generality of the world, who neither possess them
themselves, nor are competent judges of them in others: but all are judges of
the lesser talents, such as civility, affability, and an agreeable address and
manner; because they feel the good effects of them, as making society easy and
agreeable.

To conclude: be assured that the pr^ounde^ learning, without good-breeding, is
unwelcome and tiresome pedantry; that a man who is not perfectly well-bred is
unfit for good company, and unwelcome in it; and that a man who is not
well-bred is full as unfit for business as for company.

Make then good-breeding the great object of your thoughts and actions. Observe
carefully the behavior and manners of those who are distinguished by their
good-breeding: imitate, nay, endeavou^ to excel, that you may at least reach
them; and be convinced that good-breeding is to all worldly qualifications,
what charity is to all christian virtues. Observe how it adorns merit, and how
often it covers the want of it.

GRACES.
Art of pleasing.
THE desire of pleasing is at least half the art of doing it; the rest depends
only upon the manner, which attention, observation, and frequenting good
company will teach. Those who are lazy, careless, and indifferent whether they
please or not, we may depend upon it, will never please. The art of pleasing is
a very necessary one to possess, but a very difficult one to acquire. To do as
one would be done by, is the surest method of pleasing. Observe carefully what
pleases us in others, and probably the same things in us will please others. If
we are pleased with the complaisance and attention of others to our humors,
our tastes, or our weaknesses; the same complaisance and attention on our parts
to theirs, will equally please them. Let us be serious, gay, or even trifling,
as we find the present humor of the company: this is an attention due from
every individual to the majority. The art of pleasing cannot be reduced to a
receipt; if it could, that receipt would be worth purchasing at any price. Good
sense and goodnature are the principal ingredients; and our own observation,
and the good advice of others, must give the right color and taste to it.

The graces of the person, the countenance, and the way of speaking, are
essential things: the very same thing said by a genteel person in an engaging
way, and gracefully and distinctly spoken, would please; which would shock if
muttered out by an awkward figure, with a sullen serious countenance. The Poets
represent Venus as attended by the Three Graces, to intimate, that even beauty
will not do without. Minerva ought to have three also; for, without them,
learning has few attractions.

If we examine ourselves seriously, why particular people please and engage us
more than others of equal merit, we shall always find, that it is because the
former have the Graces, and the latter not. I have known many a woman, with an
exact shape, and a symmetrical assemblage of beautiful features, please nobody;
while others, with very moderate shapes and features, have charmed every body.
It is certain that Venus will not charm so much without her attendant Graces,
as they will without her. Among men, how often has the most solid merit been
neglected, unwelcome, or even rejected for want of them! while slimsy parts,
little knowledge, and less merit, introduced by the Graces, have been received,
cherished, and admired!

We proceed now to investigate what th^se Graces are, and to give some
instructions for acquiring them.

Address.
A man's fortune is frequently decided for ever by his first address. If it is
pleasing, people are burried involuntarily into a persuasion that he has a
merit, which possibly he has not; as, on the other hand, if it is ungraceful,
they are immediately prejudiced against him; and unwilling to allow him the
merit which, it may be, he has. The worst bred man in Europe, should a Lady
drop her fan, would certainly take it up and give it to her: the best bred man
in Europe could do no more. The difference, however* would be considerable: the
latter would please by his graceful ad^^ess in presenting it; the former would
be laughed at for doing it awkwardly. The carriage of a gentleman should be
genteel, and his motions graceful. He should be particularly careful of his
manner and address, when he presents himself in company. Let them be respectful
without meanness, easy without too much familarity, genteel, without
affectation, and insinuating without any seeming art or design. Men, as well as
women, are much oftener led by their hearts than by their understandings. The
way to the heart is through the senses; please their eyes and their ears, and
the work is half done.

Choice of amusements.
A gentleman always attends even to the choice of his amusements. If at cards,
he will not play at cribbage, all-fours, or putt; or, in sports of exercise, be
seen at skittles, football, leap-frog, cricket, driving of coaches, etc. for
he knows that such an imitation of the manners of the mob will indelibly stamp
him with vulgarity. I cannot likewise avoid calling playing upon any musical
instrument illiberal in a gentleman. Music is usually reckoned one of the
liberal arts, and not unjustly; but a man of fashion who is seen piping or
fiddling at a concert degrades his own dignity. If you love music, hear it; pay
fiddlers to play to you, but never fiddle yourself. It makes a gentleman appear
frivolous and contemptible, leads him frequently into b^d company, and wastes
that time which might otherwise be well employed.

Carving.
However trifling some things may seem, they are no longer so, when above half
the world thinks them otherwise. Carving, as it occurs at least once in every
day, is not below our notice. We should use ourselves to carve adroitly and
genteelly, without hacking half an hour across a bone, without bespattering the
company with the sauce, and without overturning the glasses into your
neighbors pockets. To be awkward in this particular, is extremely disagreeab^^
and ridiculous. It is easily avoided by a little attention and use; and a man
who tells you gravely that he cannot carve, may as well tell you that he cannot
blow his nose; it is both as easy and as necessary.

Chit-chat.
Study to acquire that fashionable kind of small-talk, or chit-chat, which
prevails in all polite assemblies, and which, trifling as it appear, is of use
in mixed companies, and at table. It turns upon the public events of Europe,
and then is at its best; very often upon the number, the goodness or badness,
the discipline or the clothing of the troops of different princes; sometimes
upon the families, the marriages, the relations of princes and considerable
people; and sometimes the magnificence of public entertainments, balls,
masquerades, etc. Upon such occasions, likewise, it is not amiss to know how to
parler cuisinae, and to be able to dissert upon the growth and flavor of
wines. These, it is true, are very little things; but they are little things
that occur very often, and therefore should be said avec gentillesse et grace.

Cleanliness.
The person should be accurately clean; the teeth, hands, and nails, should be
particularly so; a dirty mouth has real ill consequences to the owner, for it
infallibly causes the decay, as well as the intolerable pain of the teeth; and
is very offensive, for it will most in^vitably stink. Nothing looks more
ordinary, vulgar, and illiberal, than dirty hands, and ugly, uneven, and ragged
nails; the ends of which should be kept smooth and clean ((...) tipped with
black), and small segments (...); and every time that the hands are wiped, ^ub
the skin round the the nails backwards, that it may not grow up, and shorten
them too much. Upon no account whatever put your fingers in your nose or ears.
It is the most shocking, nasty, vulgar rudeness that can be offered to company.
The ears should be washed well every morning; and in blowing your nose, never
look at it afterward.

These things may perhaps appear too insignificant to be mentioned; but when it
is remembered that a thousand little nameless things, which every one feels but
no one can describe, conspire to form that whole of pleasing. I think we ought
not to call them trifling. Besides, a clean shirt and a clean person are as
necessary to health as not to offend other people. I have ever held it as a
maxim, and which I have lived to see verified, that a man who is negligent at
twenty, will be a sloven at forty, and intolerable at fifty years of age.

Compliments.
Attend to the compliments of congratulation, or condolance, that you hear a
well bred man make to his superiors to his equals, and to his inferiors; watch
even his countenance and his tone of voce, for they all conspire in the main
point of pleasing. There is a certain distinguishing diction of a man of
fashion: he will not content himself with saying, like John Trott, to a new
married man, Sir, I wish you much joy; or to a man who has lost his son, "Sir,
I am sorry for your loss;" and both with a countenance equally unmoved* but he
will say in effect the same thing, in a more elegant and less trivial manner,
and with a countenance adapted to the occasion. He will advance with warmth,
vivacity, and a cheerful countenance, to the new-married man, and embracing
him, perhaps say to him, If you do justice to my attachment to you, you will
judge of the joy that I feel upon this occasion, better than I can express it,
etc. To the other in affliction he will advance slowly, with a grave composure
of countenance, in a more deliberate manner, and with a lower voice perhaps
say, I hope you do me the justice to be convinced, that I fell whatever you
feel, and shall ever be affected where you are concerned.

Diction.
There is a certain language of conversation, a fashionable diction, of which
every gentleman ought to be perfectly master, in whatever language he speaks.
The French attend to it carefully, and with great reason; and their language,
which is a language of phrases, helps them out exceedingly. That delicacy of
diction is characteristical of a man of fashion and good company.

Dress and dancing.
Dress is one of the various ingredients that contribute to the art of
pleasing, and therefore an object of some attention; for we cannot help forming
some opinion of a man's sense and character from his dress. All affectation in
dress implies a ^law in the understanding. Men of sense carefully avoid any
particular character in their dress; they ^e accurately clean for their own
sake, but all the rest is for the sake of other people. A man should dress as
well, and in the same manner, as the people of sense and fashion of the place
where he is: if he dresses more than they, he is a fop: if he dresses less, he
is unpardonably negligent: but of the two, a young fellow should be rather too
much than too little dressed; the excess of that side will wear off, with a
little age and reflection.

The differ^ce in dress between a man and a fop is, that the fop values himself
upon his dress; and the man of sense laughs at it, at the same time that he
knows he must not neglect it: there are a thousand foolish customs of this
kind, which, as they are not criminal, must be complied with, and even
cheerfully, by men of sense. Diogenes the Cynic was a wise man for despising
them, but a fool for showing it.

We should not attempt to rival, or to excel a fop in dress; but it is
necessary to dress, to avoid singularity and ridicule. Great care should be
taken to be always dressed like the reasonable people of our own age in the
place where we are, whose dress is never spoken of one way or another, as
neither too negligent, or too much studied.

Awkwardness of carriage is very alienating, and a total negligence of dress
and air, an impertinent insult upon custom and fashion. Women have great
influence as to a man's fashionable character; and an awkward man will never
have their votes, which are very numerous, and oftener counted than weighed.

When we are once well-dressed for the day, we should think no more of it
afterward; and, without any stiffness for fear of discomposing that dress, we
should be as easy and natural as if we had no clothes on at all.

Dancing, likewise, though a silly trifling thing, is one of those established
follies which people of sense are sometimes obliged to conform to; and if they
do, they should be able to perform it well.

In dancing, the motion of the arms should be particularly attended to, as
these decide a man's being genteel or otherwise, more than any other part of
the body. A twist or stiffness in the wrist will make any man look awkward. If
a man dances well from the waist upwards, wears his hat well, and moves his
head properly, he dances well. Coming into a room and presenting yourself to a
company should be also attended to, as this always gives the first impression,
which is often indelible. Those who present themselves well, have a certain
dignity in their air, which, without the least seeming mixture of pride, at
once engages and is respected.

Drinking of of healths.
Drinking of healths is now growing out of fashion, and is deemed unpolite in
good company. Custom once had rendered it universal, but the improved manners
of the age now render it absurd and vulgar. What can be more rude or ridiculous
than to interrupt persons at their meals with an unnecessary compliment?
Abstain, then, from this ^l^y custom where you find it disused; and use it only
at those tables where it continues general.

Assurance.
A steady assurance is too often improperly styled impudence. For my part, I
see no impudence, but, on the contrary, infinite utility and advantage, in
presenting one's self with the same coolness and unconcern in any and every
company: till one can do that, I am very sure that one can never present one's
self well. Whatever is done under concern and embarrassment, must be ill done;
and, till a man is absolutely easy and unconcerned in every company, he will
never be thought to have kept good, nor be very welcome in it. Assurance and
intrepidity, under the white banner of seeming modesty, clear the way to merit,
that would otherwise be discouraged by difficulties in its journey; whereas
barefaced impudence is the noisy and blustering harbinger of a worthless and
senseless usurper.

Hurry.
A man of sense may be in haste, but can never be in a hurry, because he knows,
that whatever he does in a hurry he must necessarily do very ill. He may be in
haste to dispatch an affair, but he will take care not to let that haste hinder
his doing it well. Little minds are in a hurry, when the object proves (as it
commonly does) too big for them; they run, they heat, they puzzle, confound,
and perplex themselves; they want to do every thing at once, and never do it at
all. But a man of sense takes the ^ime necessary for doing the thing he is
about well.

Laughter.
(...) there is nothing so illiberal, and so ill-bred, as audible laughter.
True wit or sense never yet made and body laugh; they are above it; they please
the mind, and give a cheerfulness to the countenance. But it is low buffoonery,
or silly accidents, that always excite laughter; and that is what people of
sense and breeding should show themselves above. A man's going to sit down, in
the supposition that he has a chair behind him, and falling down upon his
breech for want of one, sets a whole company a laughing, when all the wit in
the world would not do it; a plain proof, in my mind, how low and unbecoming a
thing laughter is; not to mention the disagreeable noise that it makes, and the
shocking distortion of the face that it occasions.

Many people, at first from awkwardness, have got a very disagreeable and silly
trick of laughing whenever they speak: and I know men of very good parts, who
cannot say the commonest thing without laughing; which makes those who do not
know them take them at first for natural fools.

Letter-writing.
It is of the utmost importance to write letters well; as this is a talent
which daily occurs, as well in business as in pleasure; and inaccuracies in
orthography, (...) with them.

The best (...) Cardinal d'Ossat, (...) Bussy Rabutin. Cicero's Epistles to
Atticus, and to his familiar friends, are the best examples in the friendly and
the familiar style. The simplicity and clearness of the Letters of Cardinal
d'Ossat show how letters of business ought to be written. For gay and amusing
letters, there are none that equal Comte Bussy's and Madame Sevigne's. They are
so natural, that they seem to be the extempore conversations of two people of
wit, rather than letters.

Neatness in folding up, sealing, and directing letters, is by no means to be
neglected. There is something in the exterior even of a letter that may please
or displease, and consequently deserves some attention.

Nickname.
There is nothing that a young man at his first appearance in the world has
more reason to dread, and therefore should take more pains to avoid, than
having any ridicule fixed on him. In the opinion even of the most rational men
it will degrade him, but ruin him with the rest. Many a man has been undone by
acquiring a ridiculous nickname. The causes of nicknames among well-bred men,
are generally the little defects in manner, elocution, air or address. To have
the appellation of muttering, awkward, ill-bred, absent, left-legged, annexed
always to your name, would injure you more than you imagine: avoid then these
little defects, and you may set ridicule at defiance.

Pronunciation in speaking.
To acquire a graceful utterance, read aloud to some friend every day, and beg
of him to interrupt and correct you whenever you read too fast, do not observe
the proper stops, lay a wrong emphasis, or utter your words unintelligibly. You
may even read aloud to yourself, and tune your utterance to your own ear. Take
care to open your teeth when you read or speak, and articulate every word
distinctly; which last cannot be done but by sounding the final letter. But
above all, study to vary your voice according to the subject, and avoid a
monotony. Daily attention to these articles will, in a little time, render them
easy and habitual to you.

The voice and manner of speaking, too, are not to be neglected; some people
almost shut their mouths when they speak, and mutter so that they are not be
understood; others speak so fast, and sputter, that they are not to be
understood neither: some always speak as loud as if they were talking to deaf
people; and others so low, that one cannot hear them. All these habits are
awkward and disagreeable, and are to be avoided by attention; they are the
distinguishing marks of the ordinary people, who have had no care taken of
their education. You cannot imagine how necessary it is to mind all these
little things; for I have seen many people, with great talents, ill-received
for the want of having these talents; and others well-received, only from their
little talents; and who had no great ones.

Spelling.
Orthography, or spelling well, is so absolutely necessary for a man of
letters, or a gentleman, that one false spelling may fix a ridicule on him for
the remainder of his life. Reading carefully will contribute, in a great
measure, to preserve you from exposing yourself by false spelling; for books
are generally well-spelled, according to the orthography of the times.
Sometimes words, indeed, are spelle^ ^e^tly by different authors, but those
instances are rare; and where there is only one way of spelling a word, should
you spell it wrong, you will be sure to be ridiculed. Nay, a woman of a
tolerable education would despise and laugh at her lover, if he should send her
an ill-spelled billet doux.

Style.
Style is the dress of thoughts; and let them be never so just, if your style
is homely, coarse, and vulgar, they will appear to as much disadvantage and be
as ill-received as your person, though never so well proportioned, would, if
dressed in rags, dirt, and tatters. It is not every understanding that can
judge of matter; but every ear can an does judge, more or less, of style.

Mind your diction, in whatever language you either write or speak; contract a
habit of correctness and eligance. Consider your style, even in the freest
conversation, and most familiar letters. After, at least, if not before you
have said a thing, reflect if you could not have said it better.

Writing.
Every man who has the use of his eyes and his right hand, can write whatever
hand he pleases. Nothing is so ungentleman-like as a school-boy's scrawl. I do
not desire you to write a stiff, formal hand, like that of a schoolmaster, but
a gentell, legible, and liberal character, and to be able to write quick. As to
the correctness and elegancy of your writing, attention to grammar does the
one, and to the best authors, the other. Epistolary correspondence should be
easy and natural, and convey to the persons just what we would say if we were
with them.

Vulgar expressions.
Vulgarism in language is a certain characteristic of bad company, and a bad
education. Proverbial expressions, and trite sayings, are the flowers of the
rhetoric of a vulgar man. Would he say, that men differ in their tastes; he
both supports and adorns that opinion by the good old saying, as he
respectfully calls it, that "What is one man's meat is another man's poison."
If any body attempts being smart, as he calls it, upon him; he gives them tit
for tat, aye, that he does. He has always some favorite word for the time
being; which, for the sake of using often, he commonly abuses; such as vastly
angry, vastly kind, vastly handsome, and vastly ugly. Even his pronunciation of
proper words carries the mark of the beast along with it. He calls the earth,
earth; he is obleiged, not obliged to you. He goes to wards, and not toward
such a place. He sometimes affects hard words, by way of ornament, which he
always mangles like a learned woman. A man of fashion never has recourse to
proverbs and vulgar aphorisms* uses neither favorite words nor hard words; but
takes great care to speak very correctly and grammatically, and to ponounce
properly, that is, according to the usage of the best companies.

Cautions against sundry odd habits.
Humming a tune within ourselves, drumming with our fingers, making a noise
with our feet, and such awkward habits, being all breaches of good manners are
therefore indications of our contempt for the persons present, and consequently
should not be practiced.

Eating very quick, or very slow, is cha^^cteristic of vulgarity: the former
infers poverty; the latter, if abroad, that you are disguested with your
entertainment; and if at home, that you are rude enough to give your friends
what you cannot eat yourself. Eating soup with your nose in the plate is also
vulgar. So likewise is smelling to the meat while on the fork, before you put
it in your mouth. If you dislike what is sent upon your plate, leave it; but
never by smelling to, or examining it, appear to tax your friend with placing
unwholesome provisions before you.

Spitting on the floor or carpet is a filthy practice, and which, were it to
become general, would render it as necessary to change the carpets as the
table-cloths; not to add, it will induce our acquaintance to suppose, that we
have not been used to genteel furniture; for which reason alone, if for no
other, a man of liberal education should avoid it.

To conclude this article: Never walk fast in the streets, which is a mark of
vulgarity, ill-befitting the character of a gentleman or a man of fashion,
though it may be tolerable in a tradesman.

To stare any person full in the face, whom you chance to meet, is an act also
of ill-breeding; it would seem to bespeak as if you saw something wonderful in
his appearance, and is therefore a tacit reprehension.

Keep yourself free likewise from all odd tricks or habits; such as scratching
yourself, putting your fingers to your mouth, nose, and ears, thrusting out
your tongue, snapping your fingers biting your nails, rubbing your hands,
sighing aloud, an affected shivering of your body, gaping, and many others,
which I have noticed before; all which are imitations of the manners of the
mob, and degrading to a gentleman.

KNOWLEDGE OF THE WORLD.
WE should endeavor to hoard up, while we are young, a great stock, of
knowledge; for though during that time of dissipation we may not have occasion
to spend much of it, yet a time will come when we shall want it to maintain us.

The knowledge of the world is only to be acquired in the world, and not in a
closet. Books alone will never teach it you; but they will suggest many things
to your observation, which might otherwise escape you; and your own
observations upon mankind, when compared with those which you will find in
books, will help you to fix the true point.

To know mankind well* requires full as much attention and application as to
know books, and it may be, more sagacity and discernment. I am at this time
acquainted with many elderly people, who have all passed their whole lives in
the great world, but with such levity and inattention, that they know no more
of it now than they did at fifteen. Do not flatter yourself, therefore, with
the thoughts that you can acquire this knowledge in the frivolous chit-chat of
idle companies; no, you must go much deeper than that, You must look into
people as well as at them. Search, therefore, with the greatest care, into the
character of all those whom you converse with; endeavor to discover their
predominant pa^^ons, their prevailing weaknesses, their vanities, their
follies, and their humors; with all the right and wrong, wise and silly
springs of human actions, which make such inconsistent and whimsical beings of
us rational creatures.

There are no persons so insignificant and inconsiderable, but may, some time
or other, and in something or other, have it in their power to be of use to
you; which they certainly will not, if you have once shown them contempt.
Wrongs are often forgiven, but contempt never is. Our pride remembers it for
ever. Remember, therefore, most carefully to conceal your contempt, however
just, wherever you would not make an implacable enemy. Men are much more
unwi^ling to have their weaknesses and there imperfections known, than their
crimes; and if you hint to a man that you think him silly, ignorant, or even
ill-bred or awkward, he will hate ^^u more, and longer, than if you tell him
plainly that you think him a rogue.

Nothing is more insulting than to take pains to make a man feel a mortifying
inferiority in knowledge, rank, fortune, etc. In the ^st, it is both ill-bred
and ill-natured, and in the two latter articles it is unjust, they not being in
his power. Good-breeding and goodnature incline us rather to raise people up
to ourselves, than to mortify and dress them. Besides, it is making ourselves
so many friends, instead of so many enemies. A constant attention to please, is
a most necessary ingredient in the art of pleasing: it flatters the self-love
of those to whom it is shown; it engages and captivates, more than things of
much greater importance. Every man is, in some mea^ure, obliged to discharge
the social duties of life; but these attentions are voluntary acts, the
free will offering of good-breeding and good nature; they are received,
remembered, and returned as such. Women, in particular, have a right to them;
and any omission in that respect is downright ill-breeding.

We should never yield to that temptation, which to most young men is very
strong, of exposing other people's weaknesses and infirmities, for the sake
either of diverting the company, or of showing our own superiority. We may, by
that means, get the laugh on our side so, the present, but we shall make
^nemies by it for ever; and even those who laugh ^ith us, ^ill, upon
reflection, fear and despise is: it is (...) ^ed, and a good heart desires
rather to conce^ ^han expose other peoples weaknesses or misfortun^* If we have
wit, we should use it (...) please, and not to hurt: we may shine, like the sun
in the Temperate Zones, without scorching.

There are many inoffensive arts which are necessary in the course of the
world, and which he who practices the earliest, will please the most, and ri^e
the s^onest. The spirits and vivacity of youth are apt to neglect them as
useless, or reject them as troublesome; but subsequent knowledge and experience
of the world remind us of their importance, commonly when it is too late. The
principal of these things is the mastery of one's temper, and that coolness of
mind, and serenity of countenance, which hinders us from discovering by words,
actions, or even looks, those passions or sentiments by which we are inwardly
moved or agitated; and the discovery of which gives cooler and ^bler pe^p^ such
infinite advantages over us, not only in great business, but in all the most
common occurrences of life. A man who does not possess himself enough to hear
disagreeable things, without visible marks of anger and change of countenace,
or agreeable ones without sudden bursts of joy, and expansion of countenance,
is at the mercy of every artful knave, or pert coxcomb* the former will ^ovoke
or please you by design, to catch unguarded words or looks; by which he will
easily ^pher the secrets of your heart, of which you should keep the key
yourself, and trust it with no man living. The latter will, by his absurdity,
and without intending it, produce the same discoveries, of which other* people
will avail themselves.

If you find yourself subject to sudden starts of passion, or madness (for I ^e
no difference between them but in their duration), resolve within yourself, at
least, never (...) ^peak one word while you feel that emotion within (...)*

In short, make yourself absolutely master of your temper and your countenance,
so far, at least, as that no visible change do appear in either, whatever you
may feel inwardly. This may be difficult, but it is by no means impossible; and
as a man of sense never attempts impossibilities on one hand, on the other he
is never discouraged by difficulties: on the contrary, he redoubles his
industry and his diligence; he perseveres, and infallibly prevails at last. In
any point which prudence bids you p^rsue, and which a manifest utility attends,
let difficulties only animate your industry, not deter you from the pursuit. If
one way has failed* try another; be active, persevere, and you will conquer^*
Some people are to be reasoned* so^ flattered, some intimidated, and some ^zed
into a thing; but in general, all are to be brought into it at last, if
skilfully applied to, properly managed, and indefatigably attacked in their
several weak places. The time should likewise be judiciously chosen: every man
has his mollia tempora, but that is far from being all day long; and you would
choose your time very ill, if you applied to a man about one business, when his
head was full of another, or when his heart was full of grief, anger, or any
other disagreeable sentiment.

In order to judge of the inside of others, study your own; for men in general
are very much alike; and though one has one prevailing passion, and another has
another, yet their operations are much the same; and whatever engages or
disgusts, pleases or offends you in others, will mutatis mutandis, engage,
disgust, please, or offend others, in you. Observe, with the utmost attention,
all the operations of your own mind, the nature of your passions, and the
various motives that determine your will; and you may, in a great degree, know
all mankind. For instance: do you find yourself hurt and mortified, when
another makes you feel his superiority, and your own inferiority, in knowledge,
parts, rank, or fortune? you will certainly take great care not to make a
person whose good will, good word, interest, esteem, or friendship you would
gain, feel that superiority in you, in case you have it. If disagreeable
insinuations, sly sneers, or repeated contradictions, ^a^e and irritate you,
would you use them where you wished to engage, and please? Surely not* and I
hope you wish to engage and please almost u^iv^rsally. The temptation of saying
^ smart and ^y thing, (...) bon mot and the malicious applause with which it is
commonly received, have made people who can say them, and, still o^tener^
people who thing they can, but cannot, and yet try, more enemies, and imp^aca^e
(...) too, than ^ay ^her thing that I know of. When such things then shall
^appen to be said at your expense (as sometimes they certainly will) reflect
seriously upon the sentiments of uneasiness, anger, and resentment which they
excite in you; and consider whether it can be prudent, by the same means, to
excite the same sentiments in others against you. It is a decided folly to lose
a friend for a jest; but, in my mind, it is not a much less degree of folly to
make an enemy of an indifferent and neutral person for the sake of a bon mot.
When things of this kind happen to be said of you, the most prudent way is to
seem not to suppose that they are meant at you, but to dissemble and conceal
whatever degree of anger, you may feel inwardly; and should they be so plain
that you cannot be supposed ignorant of their meaning, to join in the laugh of
the company against yourself, acknowledge the hit to be a fair one, and the
jest a good one, and play of the whole thing in seeming good humor; but by no
means reply in the same way; which only shows that you are hurt, and publishes
the victory which you might have concealed. Should the thing said, indeed
injure your honor or moral character, remember there are but two alternatives
for a gentleman and a man of parts -- extreme politeness, or a duel.

If a man notoriously and designedly insults and affronts you, knock him down;
but if he only injures you, your best revenge is to be extremely civil to him
in your outward behavior, though at the same time you counterwork him, and
return him the compliment, perhaps with intere^, This is not perfidy or
dissimulation: it would be s^, if you were, at the same time, to make
professions of esteem and friendship to this man; which I by no means
recommend, but, on the contrary, abhor. All acts of civility are, by common
consult, understood to be no more than a conformity to custom, for the quiet
and convenience of society, the agremens of which are not to be disturbed by
private dislikes and jealousies. Only women and little minds pout and sp^r for
the entertainment of the company, that always laughs at, and never pities them.
For m^ own part, though I would by no means give up any point to a competitor,
yet I would pious myself upon showing him rather more civility the to another
man. In the first place, this behavior infallibly makes all the laughers of
your side, which i^ a considerable party: and in the next place, it certainly
pleases the object of the competition, be it either man or woman; who never
fail to say, upon such an occasion, that they must own you have behaved
yourself very handsomely in the whole affair.

In short, let this be one invariable rule of your conduct: Never to show the
least symptom of resentment, which you cannot, to a certain degree, gratify;
but always to smile where you cannot strike. There would be no living in the
world, if one could not conceal, and even dissemble the just causes of
resentment, which one meets with every day in an active and busy life. Whoever
cannot master his humor, should leave the world, and retire to some hermitage
in an unfrequented desert. By showing an unavailing and sullen resentment, you
authorize the resentment of those who can hurt you, and whom you cannot hurt;
and give them that very pretense, which perhaps they wished for, of breaking
with and injuring you; whereas the contrary behavior would lay them under the
restraints of decency at least, and either shackle or expose their malice.
Besides, captiousness, sullenness, and pouting, are most exceedingly illiberal
and vulgar.

Though men are all of one composition, the several ingredients are so
differently proportioned in each individual, that no two are exactly alike; and
no one, at all times, like himself. The ablest man will, sometimes, do weak
things; the proudest man, mean things; the honest man, ill things; and the
wickedest man, good things. Study individuals then, and if you take (as you
ought to do) their outlines from their prevailing passion, suspend your last
finishing strokes till you have attended to and have discovered the operations
of their inferior passions, appetites, and humors. A man's general character
may be that of the honest man in the world; do not dispute it; you might be
thought envious or ill-natured; but, at the same time, do not take this probity
upon trust, to such a degree as to put your life, fortune, or reputation in his
power. This honest man may happen to be your rival in power, in interest, or
love; three passions that often put honesty to most severe trials, in which it
is too often cast; but first analyze this honest man yourself, and then only
you will be able to judge, how far you may, or may not, with safety trust him.

If you would particularly gain the affection and friendship of particular
people, whether men or women, endeavor to find out their predominant
excellency, if they have one, and their prevailing weakness, which every body
has; and do justice to the one, and something more than justice to the other.
Men have various objects in which they may excel, or at least would be thought
to excel; and though they love to hear justice done to them where they know
that they excel, yet they are most and best flattered upon those points where
they with to excel, and yet are doubtful whether they do or not. As for
example: Cardinal Richelieu, who was undoubtedly the ablest statesman of his
time, or perhaps of any other, had the idle vanity of being thought the best
poet too; he envied the great Corneille his reputation, and ordered a criticism
to be written upon the Cid. Those, therefore, who flattered skilfully, said
little to him of his abilities in state affairs, or at least but en pass^nt,
and as it might naturally occur. But the incense which they gave him, the smoke
of which they knew would turn his head in their favor, was as a bell esprit and
a poet. Why? Because he was sure of one excellency, and distrustful as to the
other.

You will easily discover every man's prevailing vanity, by observing his
favorite topic of conversation; for every man talks most of what he has most a
mind to be thought to excel in. Touch him but there, and you touch him to the
quick.

Women have in general but one object, which is their beauty; upon which scarce
any flattery is too gross for them to swallow. Nature has hardly formed a woman
ugly enough to be insensible to flattery upon her person; if her face is so
shocking, that she must, in some degree, be conscious of it, her figure and her
air, she trusts, makes ample amends for it. If her figure is deformed, her
face, she thinks, counterbalances it. If they are both bad, she comforts
herself that she has graces; a certain manner; a je ne s^ais quoi, still more
engaging than beauty. This truth is evident from the studied and elaborate
dress of the ugliest women in the world. An undoubted, uncontested, conscious
beauty is, of all women, the least sensible of flattery upon that head; she
know^ it is her due, and is therefore obliged to nobody for giving it her. She
must be flattered upon her understanding; which though she may possibly not
doubt of herself, yet she suspects that men may distrust.

Do not mistake me, and think that I mean to recommend to you abject and
criminal flattery: no, flatter nobody's vices or crimes; on the contrary, abhor
and discourage them. But there is no living in the world without a complaisant
indulgence for people's weaknesses, and innocent though ridiculous vanities. If
a man has a mind to be thought wiser, and a woman handsomer than they really
are, their error is a comfortable one to themselves, and an innocent one with
regard to other people; and I would rather make them my friends, by indulging
them in it, than my enemies, by endeavoring (and that to ^o purpose) to
undeceive them.

Suspect, in general, those who remarkably affect any one virtue; who raise it
above all others, and who, in a manner, intimate that they possess it
exclusively. I say, suspect them; for they are commonly impostors: but do not
be sure that they are always so; for I have sometimes known Saints really
religious, Blusterers really brave, Reformers of manners really honest, and
Prudes really chaste. Pry into the recesses of their hearts yourself, as far as
you are able, and never implicitly adopt a character upon common fame; which,
though generally right as to the great outlines of characters, is always wrong
in some particulars.

Be upon your guard against those who, upon very ^^light acquaintance, obtrue
their unasked and unmerited friendship and confidence upon you; for they
probably ^ram you with them only for their own eating; but at the same time do
not roughly reject them upon that general supposition. Examine further, and see
whether those unexpected offers flow from a warm heart and a silly head, or
from a designing head and a cold heart; for knavery and folly have often the
same symptoms. In the first case, there is no danger in accepting them --
valiant quantum valere pussunt. (...) the latter case, it may be useful to
accept them, and artfully to turn the battery upon him who raised it.

If a man uses strong oaths or protestations to make you believe a thing which
is of itself so likely and probable that the bare saying of it would be
sufficient, depend upon it he lies, and is highly interested in making you
believe it; or else he would not take so much pains.

There is an incontinency of friendship among young fellows, who are associated
by their mutual pleasures only, which has, very frequently, bad consequences. A
parcel of warm hearts and unexperienced heads, heated by convivial mirth, and
possibly a little too much wine, vow, and really mean at the time, eternal
friendships to each other, and indiscreetly pour out their whole souls in
common, and without the least reserve. The confidences are as indiscreetly
repealed as they were made; for new pleasures and new places soon dissolve this
ill cemented connection, and then very ill uses are made of these rash
confidences. Bear your part, however, in young companies; nay, exce^, if you
can, in all the social and convivial joy and festivity that become youth. Trust
them with your love-tales, if you please; but keep your serious views secret.
Trust those only to some tried friend, more experienced than yourself, and who,
being in a different walk of life from you, is not likely to become your rival;
for I would not advise you to depend so much upon the heroic virtue of mankind,
as to hope, or believe, that your competitor will ever be your friend, as to
the object of that competition.

A seeming ignorance is very often a most necassary part of worldly knowledge.
It is, for instance, commonly advisable to seem ignorant of what people offer
to tell you; and when they say, Have not you heard of such a thing? to answer,
No; and to let them go on, though you know it already. Some have a pleasure in
telling it, because they think they tell it well; others have a pride in it, as
being the sagacious discoveries; and many have a vanity in showing that they
have been, though very undeservedly, trusted: all these would be disappointed,
and consequently displeased, if you said, Yes. Seem always ignorant (unless to
one most intimate friend) of all matters of private scandal and defamation,
though you should hear them a thousand times; for the parties affected always
look upon the receiver to be almost as bad as the thief; and whenever they
become the topic of conversation, seem to be a skeptic, though you are really a
serious believer; and always take the extenuating part. But all this seeming
ignorance should be joined to thorough and extensive private informations; and,
indeed, it is the best method of procuring them; for most people have such a
vanity in showing a superiority over others, though but for a moment, and in
the merest trifles, that they will tell you what they should not, rather than
not show that they can tell what you did not know; besides that, such seeming
ignorance will make you pass for incurious, and consequently undesigning.
However, fish for facts, and take pains to be well informed of every thing that
passes; but fish judiciously, and not always, nor indeed often, in the shape of
direct questions; which always put people upon their guard, and, often
repeated, grow tiresome. But sometimes take the things that you would know for
granted; upon which somebody will, kindly and officiously, set you right:
sometimes say, that you have heard so and so; and at other times seem to know
more than you do, in order to know all that you want: but avoid direct
questioning as much as you can.

Human nature is the same all over the world but its operations are so varied
by education and habit, that none must see it in all it^ dresses, in o^der to
be intimately acquainted with it. The pas^on of ambition, for instance, is the
same in a ^tier, a soldier, or an ecclesiastic; but from their different
educations and habits, they will take very different methods to gra^ify it.
Civility, which is a disposition to accommodate and oblige others, is
essentially the same in every country* but good-breeding, as it is called,
which is the manner of exerting that disposition, in different in almost every
country, and merely local* and every man of sense imitates and conforms to that
local good-breeding of the place which he is at. A conformity and flexibility
of manners is necessary in the course of the world; that is, with regard to all
things which are not wrong in themselves. The versatile ingenium is the most
useful of all. It can turn itself instantly from one object to another,
assuming the proper manner for each. It can be serious with the grave, cheerful
with the gay, and trifling with the frivolous.

Indeed, nothing is more engaging than a cheerful and easy conformity to
people's particular manners, habits, and even weaknesses; nothing (to use a
vulgar expression) should come amiss to a young fellow. He should be, for good
purposes, what Alcibiades was commonly for bad ones -- a Protens, assuming with
ease, and wearing with cheerfulness, any shape. Heat, cold, luxury, abstinence,
gravity, gaiety, ceremony, easiness, learning, trifling, business, and
pleasure, are modes which he should be able to take, lay aside, or change
occasionally, with as much ease as he would take or lay aside his hat.

Young men are apt to think that every thing is to be carried by spirit and
^igour; that art is meanness, and that versatility and complai^ance are the
refuge of pusillanimity and weakness. This most mistaken opinion gives an
indelicacy, an abruptness, and a roughness to the manners. Fools, who can never
be undeceived, retain them as long as they live; reflection, with a little
experience, makes men of sense shake them off soon. When they come to be a
little better acquainted with themselves, and with their own species, they
discover, that plain right reason is, nine times in ten, the fettered and
sh^ckled attendant of the triumph of the heart and the passions; consequently,
they address themselves nine times in ten to the conqueror, not to the
conqered: and conquerors, you know, must be applied to in the gentlest* the
most engaging, and the most insinuating manner.

But, unfortunately, young men are as apt to think themselves wise enough, as
drunken men are to think themselves sober enough. They look upon spirit to be a
much better thing than experience; which they call coldness. They are but half
mistaken; for though spirit without experience is dangerous, experience without
spirit is languid and defective. Their union, which is very rare, is
perfection: you may join them, if you please; for all my experience is at your
service; and I do not desire one grain of your spirit in return. Use them both,
and let them reciprocally animate and check each other. I ^ean here, by the
spirit of youth, only the vivacity and presumption of youth; which hinder them
from seeing the difficulties or dangers of an undertaking: but I do not mean
what the silly vulgar call spirit, by which they are captious, jealous of their
rank, suspicious of being under-valued, and tart (as they call it) in their
repartees upon the slightest occasions. This is an evil and a very silly
spirit, which should be driven out, and transferred to an herd of fwine.

To conclude: Never neglect or despise old, for the sake of new or more shining
acquaintance; which would be ungrateful on your part, and never forgiven o^
theirs. Take care to make as many personal friends, and as few personal
enemies, as possible. I do not mean by personal friends, intimate and
confidential friends, of which no man can hope to have half a dozen in the
whole course of his life; but I mean friends, in the common acceptance of the
word; that is, people who speak well of you, and who would rather do you good
than harm, consistently with their own interest, and no further.

LYING.
NOTHING is more criminal, mean, or ridiculous, than Lying. It is the
production either of malice, cowardice, or vanity; but it generally misses of
its aim in every one of these views; for lies are always d^tected sooner or
later. If we advance a malicious lie, in order to affect any man's fortune or
character, we may, indeed, injure him for some time; but we shall certainly be
the greatest sufferers in the end: for as soon as we are detected, we are
blasted for the infamous attempt; and whatever is said afterward to the
disadvantage of that person, however true, passes for calumny. To lie, or to
equivocate (which is the same thing), to excuse ourselves for what we have said
or done, and to avoid the danger of the shame that we apprehend from it, we
discover our fear as well as our falsehood; and only increase, instead of
avoiding, the danger and the shame; we show ourselves to be the lowest and
meanest of mankind, and are sure to be always treated as such. I^ we have the
misfortune to be in the wrong, there is something ^ble in frankly owning it* it
is the only way of ^^oning for it, and the only way to be forgiven. To remove a
present danger, by equivocating, evading, or shuffling, is somet^ing so
despicable, and betrays so much fear, that whoever practices them deserves to
be chastised.

There are people who indulge themselves in another sort of lying, which they
reckon innocent, and which in one sense is so; for it hurts nobody but
themselves. This sort of lying is the spurious offspring of Vanity begotten
upon Folly. Those people deal in the mavelous. They have seen some things
that never existed; they have seen other things which they never really saw,
though they did exist, only becau^^ they were thought worth seeing. Has any
thing remarkable been said or done in any place, or in any company, they
immediately present and declare themselves eye or ear witnesses of it. They
have done feats themselves, unattempted, or at least unperformed, by others.
They are always the heroes of their own fables; and think that they gain
consideration, or at least present attention by it. Whereas, in truth, all that
they get is ridicule and contempt, not without a good degree of distrust: for
one must nat^^ally conclude, that he who will ^^ll any lie from idle vanity,
will not scruple telling a greater for interest. Had I really seen any thing so
v^ry extraordinary as to be almost incred^^le, I would keep it to myself,
rather than, by telling it, give any one body room to doubt for one minute of
my veracity. It is most certain, that the reputation of chastity is not so
necessary for a woman* as that of veracity is for a man, and with reason; for
it is possible for a women to be virtuous, though not strictly chaste: but it
is not possible for a man to be virtuous without strict veracity. The slips of
the poor women are sometimes mere bodily frailties; but a lie in a man is a
vice of the mind, and of the heart.

Nothing but truth can carry us through the world with either our conscience or
our honor unwounded. It is not only our duty, but our interest; as a proof of
which, it may be ob^erved, that the greatest fools are the greatest liars. We
may safely judge of a man's truth by his degree of understanding.

DIGNITY OF MANNERS.
A CERTAIN dignity of manners is absolutely necess^r^* to make even the most
valuabl^ chara^t^r either re^pected or respectable in the world.

Horse-play, romping, frequent and loud fits of laughter, jokes, waggery, and
indiscriminate familiarity, will sink both merit and knowledge into a degree of
contempt. They compose at most a merry fellow, and a merry fellow was never yet
a respectable man. Indiscriminate familiarity either offends your superiors, or
else dubs you their dependent and led-captain. It gives your inferiors just*
but troublesome and improper claims of equality. A joker is near akin to a
buffoon; and neither of them is the least related to wit. Whoever is admitted
or sought for, in company, upon any other account than that of his merit and
manners, is never respected there, but only made use of. -- We will have
such-a-one, for he sings prettily; we will invite such-a-one to a ball, for he
dances well; we will have such-a-one at supper, for he is always joking and
laughing; we will ask another, because he plays deep at all games, or because
he can drink a great deal. These are all vilifying distinctions, mortifying
preferences, and exclude all ^ide as of esteem and regard. Whoever is had (as
it is called) in company, for the sake of any one thing singly, is singly that
thing, and will never be considered in any other light; and consequently never
respected, let his merits be what they will.

Dignity of manners is not only as different from pride as true courage is from
blustering, or true wit from joking, but ^s absolutely inconsistent with it;
for nothing valifies and degrades more than pride. The pretensions of the proud
man are oftener treated with sneer and contempt, than with indignation -- as we
offer ridiculously too little to a tradesman who asks ridiculously too much for
his goods; but we do not haggle with one who only asks a just and reasonable
price.

Abject flattery and indiscriminate ostentation degrade, as much as
indiscriminate contradiction and noisy debate disgust; but a modest assertion
of one's own opinion, and a complaisant acquiescence to other people's preserve
dignity.

Vulgar low expressions, awkward motions and address, vilify as they imply
either a very low turn of mind, or low education and low company.

Frivolous curiosity about trifles, and a laborious attention to little
objects, which neither require nor deserve a moment's thought, lower a man; who
from thence is thought (and not unjustly) incapable of greater matters.
Cardinal Retz very sagaciously marked out Cardinal Chig^ for a little mind,
from the moment that he told him he had wrote three years with the same pen,
and that it was an excellent good one still.

A certain degree of exterior seriousness in looks and motions gives dignity,
without excluding wit and decent cheerfulness, which are always serious
themselves. A constant smirk upon the face, and a whiffling activity of the
body, are strong indications of futility. Whoever is in a hurry shows that the
thing he is about is too big for him. Haste and hurry are very different things.

To conclude: A man who has patiently been kicked may as well pretend to
courage, as a man blasted by vices and crimes may to dignity of any kind. But
an exterior decency and dignity of manners will even keep such a man longer
from sinking, than otherwise he would be: of such consequence is Decorum, even
though affected and put on.

GENTLENESS OF MANNERS, WITH FIRMNESS OR RESOLUTION OF MIND.
I DO not know any one rule so unexceptionably useful and necessary in every
part of life, as to unite Gentleness of Manners with Firmness of Mind. The
first alone would degenerate and sink into a mean, timid complaisance and
passivenes^, if not supported and dignified by the latter; which would also
deviate into impetuosity and bruta^ity, if not tempered and softened by the
other: however, they are seldom united. The warm, c^leric man, with strong
animal spirits, des^ the first, and thinks to carry all before him (...) the
last. He may possibly, by great accide^ now and then succeed, when he was only
weak and timid people to deal with; but his general fate will be, to shock,
offend, be hated, and fail. On the other hand, the cunning, crafty man thinks
to gain all his ends by gentleness of manners only: he becomes all things in
all men; he seems to have no opinion of his own, and servilely adopts the
present opinion of the present person; he insinuates himself only into the
esteem of fools, but is soon detected, and surely despised by every body else.
The wise man (who differs as much from the cunning as from the choleric man)
alone joins softness of manners with firmness of mind.

The advantages arising from an union of these qualities are equally striking
and obvious. For example* If you are in authority, and have a right to command,
your commands delivered with mildness and gentleness will be willingly,
cheerfully, and consequently well obeyed; whereas, if given brutally, they will
rather be interpreted the executed. For a cool, steady resolution should show,
that where you have a right to command you will be obeyed; but, at the same
time, a gentleness in the manner of enforcing that obedience should make it a
cheerful one, and soften, as much as possible, the mortifying consciousness of
inferiority.

If you are to ask a favor, or even to solicit your due, you must do it with a
grace, or you will give those who have a mind to refuse you, a pretense to do
it, by resenting the manner; but, on the other hand, you must, by a steady
perseverance and decent tenaciousness, show firmness and resolution. The right
motives are seldom the true ones of men's actions, especially of people in high
stations; who often give to importunity and fear what they would refuse to
justice or to merit. By gentleness and softness engage their hearts, if you
can; at least prevent the pretense of offense; but take care to show resolution
and firmness enough to extort from their love of ease, or their fear, what you
might in vain hope for from their justice or goodnature. People in high life
are hardened to the wants and distresses of mankind, as surgeons are to their
bodily pains; they see and hear of them all day long, and even of so many
simulated ones, that they do not know which are real and which are not. Other
sentiments are therefore to be applied to, than those of mere justice and
humanity: their favor must be captivated by the Graces; their love of ease
disturbed by unwearied importunity, or their fears wrought upon by a decent
intimation of implacable, cool, resentment. This precept is the only way I know
in the world, of being loved without being despised, and feared without being
hated. It constitutes the dignity of character, which every wise man must
endeavor to establish.

To conclude: If you find that you have a hastiness in your temper, which
unguardedly breaks out into indiscreet sallies, or rough expressions, to either
your superiors, your equals, or your inferiors, watch it narrowly, check it
carefully, and call the Graces to your assistance. At the first impulse of
passion, be silent till you can be soft. Labor even to get the command of your
countenance so well, that those emotions may not be read in it: a most
unspeakable advantage in business! On the other hand, let no complaisance, no
gentleness of temper, no weak desire of pleasing on your part -- no wheedling,
coaxing, nor flattery on other people's make you recede one jot from any point
that reason and prudence have bid you pursue; but return to the charge,
persist, persevere, and you will find most things attainable that are possible.
A yielding, timid meekness is always abused and insulted by the unjust and
unfeeling; but when sustained by firmness and resolution, is always respected,
commonly successful.

In your friendships, and connections, as well as in your enmities, this rule
is particularly useful; let your firmness and vigor preserve and invite
attchments to you; but, at the same time, let your manner hinder the enemies of
your friends and dependents from becoming yours: let your enemies be disarmed
by the gentleness of your manner, but let them feel at the same time the
steadiness of your just resentment; for th^^e is great difference between
bearing m^^ice, which is always ungenerous, and a resolute self-defence, which
is always prudent and justifiable.

Some people cannot gain upon themselves to be easy and civil to those who are
either their ^^vals^ competitors, or opposers* though, independently of those
accidental circumstances, they would like and esteem them. They betray a
shyness and an awkwardness in company with them, and catch at any little thing
to expose them* and so, from temporary and only occasional opponen^s, make them
their personal enemies. This is exceedingly weak and detrimental, as, indeed,
is all humor in business; which can only be carried on successfully by
unadulterated good policy and right reasoning. In such situations I would be
more particularly civil, easy, and frank, with the man whose designs I
traversed: this is commonly called generosity and magnanimity, but is, in
truth, good-sense and policy. The manner is often as important as the matter,
sometimes more so: a favor may make an enemy, and an in^ury may make a friend,
according to (...) different manner in which they are severally done. In fine,
gentleness of manners with firmness of mind is a short but full description of
human perfection on this ^^de of religious and moral duties.

MORAL CHARACTER.
THE Moral Character of a man should be not only pure, but, like Caesar's wife,
unsuspected. The least speck or blemish upon it is fatal. Nothing degrades and
villifies more, for it excites and unites detestation and contempt. There are,
however, wretches in the world proffigate enough to explode all notions of
moral good and evil; to maintain that they are merely local, and depend
entirely upon the customs and fashions of different countries: nay, there are
still, if possible, more unaccountable wretches; I mean those who affect to
preach and propagate such absurd and infamous notions without believing them
themselves. Avoid as much as possible the company of such people, who reflect a
degree of discredi^ and infamy upon all who converse with them. But as you may
sometimes by accident fall into such company, take great care that no
complaisance, no good humor, no warmth of festal mirth, ever make you seem
even to acquiesce, much less approve or applaud, such infamous doctrines. On
the other hand, do not debate, nor enter into serious argument, upon a subject
so much below it* but content yourself with telling them that you know they are
not serious; that you have a much better opinion of them than they would have
you have; and that you are very sure they would not practice the doctrine they
preach. But put your private mark upon them, and shun them for ever afterward.

There is nothing so delicate as a man's moral character, and nothing which it
is his interest so much to preserve pure. Should he be suspected of injustice,
malignity, perfidy, lying, etc. all the parts and knowledge in the world will
never procure him esteem, friendship, or respect. I therefore recommend to you
a most scrupulous tenderness for your moral character, and the utmost care not
to say or do the least thing that may ever so slightly taint it. Show yourself
upon all occasions the friend, but not the bully of Virtue. Even Colonel
Chartres (who was the most notorious blasted rascal in the world, and who had
by all sorts of crimes amassed immense wealth) sensible of the disadvantage of
a bad character, was once heard to say, that though he would not give one
farthing for virtue, he would give ten thousand pounds for a character; because
he should get a hundred thousand pounds by it. Is it possible, then, that an
honest man can neglect what a wiser rogue would purchase so dear?

There is one of the vices abovementioned into which people of good education,
and in the main, of good principles, sometimes fall, from mistaken notions of
skill, dexterity and self-defence; I mean lying; though it is inseparable
attended with more infamy and loss than any other. But I have before given you
my sentiments very freely on this subject; I shall therefore conclude this head
with entreating you to be scrupulously jealous of the purity of your moral
character; keep it immaculate, unblemished, unsullied, and it will be
unsuspected Defamation and calumny never attack where there is no weak place;
they magnify, but they do not create.

COMMONPLACE OBSERVATIONS.
NEVER use, believe, or approve Commonplace Observations. They are the common
topics of witlings and coxcombs; those who really have wit have the utmost
contempt for them, and scorn even to laugh at the pert things that those
would-be wits say upon such subjects.

Religion is one of their favorite topics; it is all priestcraft, and an
invention contrived and carried on by priests of all religions for their own
power and profit: from this absurd and false principle flow the commonplace
insipid jokes and insults upon the clergy. With these people every priest of
every religion is either a public or a concealed unbeliever, drunkard, and
whoremaster; whereas I conceive that priests are extremely like other men, and
neither the better nor the worse for wearing a gown or a surplice; but if they
are different from other people, probably it is rather on the side of religion
and morality, or at least decency, from their education and manner of life.

Another common topic for false wit and cold raillery is matrimony. Every man
and his wife hate each other cordially, whatever they may pretend in public to
the contrary. The husband certainly wishes his wife at the devil, and the wife
certainly cuckolds her husband. Whereas I presume, that men and their wives
neither love nor hate each other the more, upon account of the form of
matrimony which has been said over them. The cohabitation, indeed, which is the
consequence of matrimony, makes them either love or hate more, accordingly as
they respectively deserve it; but that would be exactly the same, between any
man and woman who lived together without being married.

It is also a trite commonplace observation, that courts are the seats of
falsehood and dissimulation. That like many I might say most commonplace
observations is false. Falsehood and dissimulation are certainly to be found at
courts; but where are they not to be found? Cottages have them, as well as
courts; only with wor^e manners. A couple of neighboring farmers in a village
will contrive and practice as many tricks to overreach each other at the next
market, or to supplant each other in the favor of the 'Squire, as any two
courtiers can do to ^upplant each other in the favor of their Prince. Whatever
poets may write, or fools believe, of rural innocence and truth, and of the
perfidy of courts, this is undoubtedly true -- That shepherds and ministers are
both men* their nature and passions the same, the modes of them only different.

These and many other commonplace reflections upon nations, or professions, in
general (which are at least as often false as true) are the poor refuge of
people who have neither wit nor invention of their own, but endeavor to shine
in company by second hand finery. I always put these pert jackanapes's out of
countenance, by looking extremely grave, when they expect that I should laugh
at their pleasantries; and by saying, Well* and so? as if they had not done,
and that the sting were still to come. This disconcerts them, as they have no
resources in themselves, and have but one set of jokes to live upon. Men of
parts are not reduced to these shifts, and have the utmost contempt for them:
they find proper subjects enough for either useful or lively conversations;
they can be witty without satire or commonplace, and serious without being
dull.

ORATORY.
ORATORY, or the art of speaking well, is useful in every situation of life,
and absolutely necessary in most. A man cannot distinguish himself without it
in parliament, in the pulpit, or at the bar; and even in common conversation, he
who has acquired an easy and habitual eloquence, and who speaks with propriety
and accuracy, will have a great advantage over those who speak inelegantly and
incorrectly. The business of oratory is to persuade; and to please is the most
effectual step toward persuading. It is very advantageous for a man who speaks
in public to please his hearers so much as to gain their attention; which he
cannot possibly do, without the assistance of oratory.

It is certain that by study and application every man may make himself a
tolerable good orator, eloquence depending upon observation and care. Every man
may, if he pleases, make choice of good instead of bad words and phrases, may
speak with propriety instead of impropriety, and may be clear and perspicuous
in his recitals, instead of dark and unintelligible; he may have grace instead
of awkwardness in his gestures and deportment: in short, it is in the power of
every man, with pains and application, to be a very agreeable instead of a very
disagreeable speaker; and it is well worth the labor to excel other men in
that particular article in which they excel best.

Demosthenes thought it so essentially necessary to speak well, that though he
naturally stuttred, and had weak lungs, he resolved by application to overcome
those disadvantages. He cured his stammering by putting small pebbles in his
mouth, and gradually strengthened his lungs by daily using himself to speak
loudly and distinctly for a considerable time. In stormy weather he often
visited the seashore, where he spoke as loud as he could, in order to prepare
himself for the noise and murmurs of the popular assemblies of the Athenians,
before whom he was to speak. By this extraordinary care and attention* and the
constant study of the best authors, he became the greatest oratory that his
own, or any other age or country have produced.

Whatever language a person uses, he should speak it in its greatest purity,
and according to the rules of grammar; nor is it sufficient that we do not
speak a language ill, we must endeavor to speak it well; for which purpose we
should read the best authors with attention, and observe how people of fashion
and education speak. Common people, in general, speak ill; they make use of
inelegant and vulgar expressions, which people of rank never do. In numbers
they frequently join the singular and plural together, and confound the
masculine with the feminine gender, and seldom make choice of the proper tense.
To avoid all these faults we should read with attention, and observe the turn
and expressions of the best authors; nor should we pass over a word we do not
perfectly understand, without searching or enquiring for the exact meaning of
it.

It is said, that a man must be born a poet, but it is in his own power to make
himself an orator; for to be a poet requires a certain degree of strength and
vivacity of mind; but that attention, reading, and labor, are sufficient to
form an orator.

PEDANTRY.
EVERY excellency and every virtue has its kindred vice or weakness; and, if
carried beyond certain bounds, sinks into the one or the other. Generosity
often runs into profusion, economy into avarice, courage into rashness,
caution into timidity, and so on; -- insomuch that I believe there is more
judgment required for the proper conduct of our virtues, than for avoiding
their opposite vices. Vice, in its true light is so deformed, that it shocks at
first sight; and would hardly ever seduce us, if it did not at first wear the
^ask of some virtue. But virtue is in itself so beautiful, that it charms us at
first sight; engages us more and more upon further acquaintance, and, as with
other beauties, we think excess impossible: it is here that judgment is
necessary to moderate and direct the effects of an excellent cause. In the same
manner great learning, if not accompanied with sound judgment, frequently
carries us into error, pride, and pedantry.

Some learned men, proud of their knowledge, only speak to decide, and give
judgment without appeal; the consequence of which is, that mankind, provoked by
the insult, and injured by the opp^ession, revolt; and in order to shake off
the tyranny even call the lawful authority in question. The m^re you know, the
modester you should be; and that modesty is the surest way of gratifying your
vanity. Even where you are sure, seem rather doubtful* represent, but do not
pronounce; and if you would convince others, seem open to conviction yourself.

Others, to show their learning, or often from the prejudices of a school
education, where they hear of nothing else, are always talking of the Ancients
as something more than men, and of the Moderns as ^^mething less. They are
never wit^out a cl^ssic or two in their pockets; they stick to the old good
(...); they read none of the modern tr^sh; (...) will show you plainly that no
improvem^t ^s b^n made, in any one art or science, these la^t seven hundred
years. I would by no means have you disown your acqu^intance with the Ancients,
but still less would I have you brag of an exclusive intimacy with them. Speak
of the Moderns without contempt, and of the Ancients without idolatry; judge
them all by their merits, but not by their a^es; and if you happen to have an
Elzevir c^assic in your pocket, neither show it nor mention it.

Some great scholars, most absurdly, draw all their maxims, both for public and
private life, from what they call parallel cases in the ancient authors;
without considering, that, in the first place, there never were, since the
Creation of the World, two cases exactly parallel; and in the next place, that
there never was a case stated, or even known by any historian with every one of
its circumst^ces; which, however, ought to be know^ in ord^r to be reasoned
from. Reason upon the case it^elf, and the several circumstances that attend
it, and act accordingly; but not from the autho^ity of ancient poets or
historians. Take into your consideration, if you please, cases seemingly
analogous; but take them as helps only, not as guides.

There is another species of learned men, who, though less dogmatical and
supercilious, are not less impertinent. These are the communicative and shining
pedants, who adorn their conversation, even with women, by happy quotations of
Greek and Latin, and who have cont^acted such a familiarity with the Greek and
Roman authors, that they call them by certain names or epithets denoting
intimacy; as old Homer; that sly rogue Horace; Ma^o, instead of Virgil; Naso,
instead of Ovid. These are often im^tated by coxcombs, who have no learning at
all; but who have got some names and some scraps of ancient authors by heart,
which they improperly and impertinently retail in all companies, in hopes of
passing for ^cholars. If, therefore, you would avoid the accusation of pedantry
on one hand, or the suspicion of ignorance on the other, abstain from learned
ostentation. Speak the language of the company you are in; speak it purely, and
unlarded with any other. Never seem wiser, nor more learned than the people you
are with. Wear your learning, like your watch, in a private pocket; and do not
pull it out and strike it meekly to show that you have one. If you are asked
what o'clock it is, tell it; but do not proclaim it hourly and unasked, like
the watchma^.

PLEASURE.
MANY young people adopt pleasures, for which they have not the least taste,
only bec^se they are called by that name. They often mistake so totally, as to
imagine that debauchery is pleasure. Drunkenness, which is equally destruct^ve
to body and mind, is certainly a fine pleasure! Gaming, which draws us into a
thousand scrapes, leaves us pennyless, and gives us the air and manners of an
outrageous madman, is another most exquisite plea^ure.

Pleasure is the rock which most young people split upon; they ^unch out with
crowded sails in quest of it, but without a compass to direct their course, or
reason sufficient to steer the vessel: therefore pain and shame, instead of
pleasure, are the returns of their voyage.

A man of pleasure, in the vulgar acceptance of that phrase, means only a
beastly drunkard, an abandoned rake, and profligate swearer: we should weigh
the present enjoyment of our pleasures against the unavoidable consequences of
them, and then let our common sense determine the choice.

We may enjoy the pleasures of the table and wine, but stop short of the pains
inseparably annexed to an excess in either. We may let other people do as they
will, without formally and sententiously rebuking them for it; but we must be
firmly resolved not to destroy our own faculties and constitution, in
compliance to those who have no reg^rd to their own. We may play to give us
leisure, but not to give us pain; we may play for trifles in mixed companies to
amuse ourselves and conform to custom. Good company are not fond of having a
man reeling drunk among them; nor is it agreeable to see another tearing his
hair, and blaspheming for having lost at play more than he is able to pay; or a
rake with half a nose crippled by coarse and infamous debauches. Those who
pr^ctise and brag of these things make no part of good company; and are most
unwillingly, if ever, admitted into it. A real man of fashion and pleasure
observes decency; at least, he neither borrows nor affects vices; and if he is
so unfortunate as to have any, he gratifies them with choice, delicacy, and
secrecy.

We should be as attentive to our pleasures as to our studies. In the la^ter,
we should observe and reflect upon all we read; and in the former, be watchful
and attentive to every thing we see and hear; and let us never have it to say,
as some fools do, of things that were said and done before their faces, That
indeed they did not mind them, because they were thinking of something else.
Why were they thinking of something else? And if they were, why did they come
there? Wh^rever we are, we should (as it is vulgarly expressed) have our ears
and our eyes about us. We should listen to every thing that is said, and see
every thing that is done. Let us observe, without being thought observes, for
otherwise people will be upon their guard before us.

All gaming, field-sports, and such other amusements, where neither the
understanding nor the senses have the least share, are frivolous, and the
resources of little minds, who either do not think, or do not love to think.
But the pleasures of a man of parts either flatter the senses or improve the
mind.

There are liberal and illiberal pleasures, as well as liberal and illiberal
arts. Soot^sh drunkenness, indiscriminate gluttony, driving ch^che^, ru^tic
sports, such as fox chaces, horse races, (...) are infinitely below the honest
and industrious pro^essions of a tailor and a shoemaker.

The more we apply to business the more we relish our pleasures; the exercise
of the mind in the morning, by study, whets the appetite for the pleasures of
the evening, as the exercise of the body whets the appetite for dinner.
Business and pleasure, rightly understood, mutually assist each other --
instead of being enemies, as foolish or dull people often think them. We cannot
taste pleasure truly unless we earn them by previous business; and few people
do business well who do nothing else. But when I speak of pleasures, I always
mean the elegant pleasures of a rational being, and not the brutal ones of a
swine.

PREJUDICES.
NEVER adopt the notions of any hooks you may read, or of any company you may
keep, without examining whether they are just or not; as you otherwise will be
liable to be hurried away by prejudices, instead of being guided by reason, and
quietly cherish error, instead of seeking for truth.

Use and assert your own reason; reflect, examine, and analize every thing, in
order to form a sound and mature judgment; let no ipse dixi^ impose upon your
understanding, mislead your actions, or dictate your conversation. Be early,
what, if you are not, you will when too late wish you had been. Consult your
^eason betimes: I do not say that it will always prove an unerring guide, for
human reason is not in^allible; but it will prove the least erring guide that
you can follow. Books and conversation may assist it; but adopt neither blindly
and implicitly: try both by that best rule, which God has given to direct us,
Reason. Of all the troubles, do not decline, as many people do, that of
thinking. The herd of mankind can hardly be said to think: their notions are
almost all adoptive; and in general I believe it is better that it should be
so; as such common prejudices contribute more to order and quiet, than their
own separate reasonings would do, uncultivated and unimproved as they are.

Local prejudices prevail only with the herd of mankind, and do not impose upon
cultivated, inf^med, and reflecting minds: but then there are notions equally
false, though not so glaringly absurd, which are entertained by people of
superior and improved understandings, merely for want of the necessary pains to
investigate, the proper attention to examine, and the penetration requisite to
determine the truth. Those are the prejudices which I would have you guard
against, by a manly exertion and attention of your reasoning faculty.

RELIGION.
ERRORS and mistakes, however gross, in matters of opinion, if they are
sincere, are to be pitie^, but not punished nor laughed at. The blindness of
the understanding is as much to be pitied as the blindness of the eyes; and it
is neither laughable nor criminal for a man to lose his way in either case.
Charity bids us endeavor to set him right, by arguments and persuasions; but
charity at the same time forbids us either to punish or ridicule his
misfortune. Every man seeks for truth, but God only knows who has found it. It
is unjust to persecute, and absurd to ridicule people for their several
opinions, which they cannot help entertaining upon the conviction of their
reason. It is he who tells or acts a lie that is guilty, and not he who
honestly and sincerely believes the lie.

The object of all public worships in the world is the same; it is that great
Eternal Being who created every thing. The different manners of worship are by
no means subjects of ridicule. Each sect thinks his own the best: and I know no
infallible judge in this world to decide which is the best.

EMPLOYMENT OF TIME.
HOW little do we reflect on the use and value of time! It is in every body's
mouth, but in few people's practice. Every fool who slatterns away his whole
time in nothings, frequently utters some trite commonplace sentence to prove
at once the value and the fleetness of time. The sundials all over Europe have
some ingenious inscription to that effect; so that nobody squanders away their
time without frequently hearing and seeing how necessary it is to employ it
well, and how irrecoverable it is if lost. Young people are apt to think they
have so much time before them, that they may squander what they please of it,
and yet have enough left; as great fortunes have frequently seduced people to
ruinous profusion. But all these admonitions are useless, where there is not a
fund of good-sense and reason to suggest rather than receive them.

Time is precious, life short, and consequently not a single moment should be
lost. Sensible men know how to make the most of time, and put out their whole
sum either to interest or pleasure; they are never idle, but continually
employed either in amusements or study. It is an universal maxim, that idleness
is the mother of vice. It is, however, certain, that laziness is the
inheritance of fools, and nothing can be so despicable as a sluggard. Cato the
Censor, a wise and virtuous Roman, used to say, there were but three actions of
his life that he regretted: The first was, the having revealed a secret to his
wife; the second, that he had once gone by sea when he might have gone by land;
and the third, the having passed one day without doing any thing.

Take care of the pence, for the pounds will take care of themselves, was a
very just and sensible reflection of old Mr. Lowndes, the famous Secretary of
the Treasury under William III. Anne. and George I. I therefore recommend to
you to take care of minutes, for hours will take care of themselves. Be doing
something or other all day long; and not neglect half hours and quarters of
hours, which at the year's end amount to a great sum. For instance: There are
many short intervails in the day between studies and pleasures: instead of
sitting idle and yawning in those intervals, snatch up some valuable book, and
continue the reading of that book till you have got through it; never burden
your mind with more than one thing at a time: and in reading this book, do not
run over it superficially, but read every passage twice over at least; do not
pass on to a second till you thoroughly understand the first, nor quit the book
till you are master of the subject; for unless you do this, you may read it
through and not remember the contents of it for a week. The books I would
particularly recommend among others, are the Marchioness Lambert's Advice to
her Son and Daughter, Cardinal Reiz's Maxi^, Rochefoucault's Moral Reflections,
Brayers's Characters. Fontenella's Plurality of Worlds, Sir Josiah Child on
Trade, Bolingbroke's Work^; for style, his Remarks on the History of England,
under the name of Sir John Oldcastle; Puffendorff's Jus Gentium, and Grotius de
Jure Bell^ et Pacis: the last two are well translated by Barbeyra^. For
occasional half-hours or less, read works of invention, wit and humor; but
never waste your minutes on trifling authors, either ancient or modern.

Nor are pleasures idleness, or time lost, provided they are the pleasures of a
rational being; on the contrary, a certain portion of time employed in those
pleasures, is very usefully employed.

Whatever business you have, do it the first moment you can; never by halves,
but finish it without interruption if possible. Business must not be sauntered
or trifled with; and you must not say to it, as Felix did to Paul, At a more
convenient season I will speak to thee. The most convenient season for business
is the first; but study and business, in some measure, point out their own
times to a man of sense: time is much oftener squandered away in the wrong
choice and improper methods of amusement and pleasures.

Dispatch is the soul of business; and nothing contributes more to dispatch
than method. Lay down a method for every thing, and stick to it inviolably, as
far as unexpected incidents may allow. Fix one certain hour and day in the week
for your accounts, and keep them together in their proper order; by which means
they will require very little time, and you can never be much cheated. Whatever
letters and papers you keep, pocket and tie them up in their respective
classes, so that you may instantly have recouse to any one. Lay down a method
also for your reading, for which you allot a certain share of your mornings;
let it be in a consistent and consecutive course, and not in that desultory and
immethodical manner, in which many people read scraps of different authors upon
different subjects. Keep a useful and short common place-book of what you read,
to help your memory only, and not for pedantic quotations. Never read history
without having maps, and a chronolagical book or tables lying by you, and
constantly recurred to; without which History is only a confused heap of facts.

You will say it may be, as many young people would, that all this order and
method is very troublesome, only fit for dull people, and a disagreeable
restraint upon the noble spirit and fire of youth. I deny it; and assert on the
contrary, that it will procure you both more time and more taste for your
pleasures; and so far from being troublesome to you, that after you have
pursued it a month, it would be troublesome to you to lay it aside. Business
whets the appetite, and gives ^ taste to pleasures, as exercise does to food;
and business can never be done without method: it raises the spirit, for
pleasures; and a spectacle, a ball, an assembly, will much more sensibly affect
a man who has employed, than a man who has lost, the preceding part of the day;
nay, I will venture to say, that a fine lady will seem to have more charms to a
man of study or business, than to a saunterer. The same listlessness runs
through his whole conduct, and he is as insipid in his pleasures as inefficient
in every thing else.

I hope you earn your pleasures, and consequently taste them; for, by the way,
I know a great many men who call themselves men of pleasure, but who, in truth,
have none. They adopt other people's indiscriminately, but without any taste of
their own. I have known them often inflict excesses upon themselves, because
they thought them genteel; though they sat as awkwardly upon them as other
people's clothes would have done. Have no pleasures but your own, and then you
will shine in them.

Many people think that they are in pleasures, provided they are neither in
study nor in business. Nothing like it; they are doing nothing, and might just
as well be asleep. They contract habitudes from laziness, and they only
frequent those places where they are free from all restraints and attentions.
Be upon your guard against this idle profusion of time; and let every place you
go to be either the scene of quick and lively pleasures, or the school of your
improv^ments: let every company you go into either gratify your senses, extend
your knowledge, or refine your manners.

If by accident two or three hours are sometimes wan^ing for some useful
purpose, borrow them from your sleep. Six, or at most, seven hours sleep is,
for a constancy, as much as you or any body can want: more is only laziness and
dozing; and is both unwholesome and stupifying. If by chance your business or
your pleasures should keep you up till four or five o'clock in the morning,
rise exactly at your usual time, that you may not lose the precious morning
hours; and that the want of sleep may force you to go to bed earlier the next
night.

Above all things guard against frivolousness. The frivolous mind is alwa^s
busied, but to little purpose; it takes little objects for great ones, and
throws away upon trifles that time and attention which only important things
deserve. Knick-knacks, butterflies, shells, insects, etc. are the objects of
their most serious researches. They contemplate the dress, not the characters
of the company they keep. They attend more to the decorations of a play, than
to the sense of it; and to the ceremonies of a court, more than to its
politics. Such an employment of time is an absolute loss of it.

To conclude this subject: Sloth, indolence, and effeminacy are pernicious, and
unbecoming a young fellow; let them be your ressource forty years hence at
soonest. Determine, at all events, and however disagreeable it may be to you in
some respects, and for some time, to keep the most distinguished and
fashionable company of the place you are at, either for their rank or for their
learning, or le bell esp^it et le gout. This gives you credentials to the best
companies wherever you go afterward.

Know the true value of time: snatch, seize, and enjoy every moment of it. No
idleness, no laziness, no procrastination: never put off till tomorrow what
you can do today. That was the rule of the famous and unfortunate Pensionary
De Wit; who by strictly following it found time not only to do the whole
business of the Republic, but to pass his evenings at assemblies and suppers,
as if he had had nothing else to do or think of.

VANITY.
BE extremely on your guard against vanity, the common failing of inexperienced
youth; but particularly against that kind of vanity which dubs a man a coxcomb;
a character which, once acquired, is more indelible than that of the
priesthood. It is not to be imagined by how many different ways vanity defeats
its own purposes. One man decides peremptorily upon every subject, betrays his
ignorance upon many, and shows a disgusting presumption upon the rest: another
desires to appear successful among the women: he hints at the encouragement he
has received from those of the most distinguished rank and beauty, and
intimates a particular connection with some one: if it is true, it is
ungenerous; if false, it is infamous: but in either case he destroys the
reputation he wants to get. Some flatter their vanity by little ext^aneous
objects, which have not the least relation to themselves; such as being
descended from, related to, or acquainted with, people of distinguished merit,
and eminent characters. They talk perpetually of their grandfather such-a-one,
their uncle such a-one, and their intimate friend Mr. such-a-one, whom,
possibly, they are hardly acquainted with. But admitting it all to be as they
would have it, what then? Have they the more merit for those accidents?
Certainly not. On the contrary, their taking up adventitious, proves their want
of intrinsic merit; a rich man never borrows. Take this rule for granted, as a
never-failing one, that you must never seem to affect the character in which
you have a mind to shine. Modesty i^ the only sure bait, when you angle for
praise. The affectation of courage will make even a brave man pass only for a
bully; as the affectation of wit will make a man of parts pass for a coxcomb.
By this modesty I do not mean timidity, and awkward bashfulness. On the
contrary, be inwardly firm and steady, know your own value, whatever it may be,
and act upon that principle; but take great care to let nobody discover that
you do know your own value. Whatever real merit you have, other people will
discover; and people always magnify their own discoveries, as they lessen those
of others.

VIRTUE.
VIRTUE is a subject which deserves your and every man's attention. It consists
in doing good, and in speaking truth; the effects of it, therefore, are
advantageous to all mankind, and to one's self in particular. Virtue makes us
pity and relieve the misfortunes of mankind; it makes us promote justice and
good order in society; and, in general, contributes to whatever tends to the
real good of mankind. To ourselves it gives an inward comfort and satisfaction,
which nothing else can do, and which nothing can rob us of. All other
advantages depend upon others, as much as upon ourselves. Riches, power, and
greatness may be taken away from us by the violence and injustice of others, or
by inevitable accidents; but virtue depends only upon ourselves, and nobody can
take it away from us. Sickness may deprive us of all the pleasures of the body;
but it cannot deprive us of our virtue, nor of the satisfaction which we feel
from it. A virtuous man, under all the misfortunes of life, still finds an
inward comfort and satisfaction, which makes him happier than any wicked man
can be with all the other advantages of life. If a man has acquired great power
and riches by falsehood, injustice and oppression, he cannot enjoy them:
because his conscience will torment him, and constantly reproa^h him with the
means by which he got them. The stings of his conscience will not even let him
sleep quietly; but he will dream of his crimes; and in the day^time, when
alone, and when he has time to think, he will be uneasy and melancholy. He is
afraid of every thing; for, as he knows mankind must hate him, he has reason to
think they will hurt him if they can. Whereas if a virtuous man be ever so poor
and unfortunate in the world, still his virtue is its own reward, and will
comfort him under all afflictions. The quiet and satisfaction of his conscience
make him cheerful by day, and sleep sound of nights: he can be alone with
pleasure, and is not afraid of his own thoughts. Virtue forces her way, and
shines through the obscurity, of a retired life; and, sooner or letter, it
always is rewarded.

To conclude: -- Lord Shaftesbury says, that he would be virtuous for his own
sake, though nobody were to know it* as he would he clean for his own sake,
though nobody were to see him.

USEFUL MISCELLANEOUS OBSERVATIONS ON MEN AND MANNERS, Selected from Lord
CHE^TERFIELD's LETTERS.
A MAN who does not solidly establish, and really deserve, a character of
truth, probity, good manners, and good morals, at his first setting out in the
world, may impose, and shine like a meteor for a short time, but will very soon
vanish, and be extinguished with contempt. People easily pardon, in young men,
the common irregularities of the senses; but they do not forgive the least vice
of the heart.

The greatest favors may be done so awkwardly and bunglingly as to offend; and
disagreeable things may be done so agreeably as almost to oblige.

There are very few Captains of Foot who are not much better company than ever
Descartes or Sir Isaac Newton were. I honor and respect such superior
genuises; but I desire to converse with people of this world, who bring into
company their share, at least, of cheerfulness, good-breeding, and knowledge of
mankind. In common life, one much oftener wants small money, and silver, than
gold. Give me a man who has ready cash about him for present expenses;
six-pences, shillings, half-crowns, and crowns, which circulate easily; but a
man who has only an ingot of gold about him, is much above common purposes, and
his riches are not handy nor convenient. Have as much gold as you please in one
pocket, but take care always to keep change in the other; for you will much
oftener have occasion for a shilling than for a guinea.

Advice is seldom welcome, and those who want it the most always like it the
least.

Envey is one of the meanest and most tormenting of all passions, as there is
hardly a person existing that has not given uneasiness to an envious breast;
for the envious man cannot be happy while he beholds others so.

A great action will always meet with the approbation of mankind, and the
inward pleasure which it produces is not to be expressed.

Humanity is the particular characteristic of great minds; little vicious minds
abound with anger and revenge, and are incapable of feeling the exalted
pleasure of forgiving their enemies.

The ignorant and the weak only are idle; those who have acquired a good stock
of knowledge alwas desire to increase it. Knowledge is like power in this
respect, that those who have the most are most desirous of having more.
Idleness is only the refuge of weak minds, and the holiday of fools.

Every man has a natural right to his liberty; and whoever endeavors to ravish
it from him, deserves death more than the robber who attacks us for our money
on the highway.

Modesty is a commendable quality, and generally accompanies true merit; it
engages and captivates the minds of people; for nothing is more shocking and
disgustful, than presumption and impudence. A man is despised who is always
commending himself, and who is the hero of his own story.

Not to perform our promise is a folly, a dishonor, and a crime. It is a
folly, because no one will rely on us afterward; and it is a dishonor and a
crime, because truth is the first duty of religion and morality: and whoever is
not possessed of truth, cannot be supposed to have any one good quality, and
must be held in detestation by all good men.

Wit may create many admirers, but makes few friends. It shines and dazzles
like the noonday sun, but, like that too, is very apt to scorch, and therefore
is always feared. The milder morning and evening light and heat of that planet
sooth and calm our minds. Never seek for wit: if it presents itself, well and
good; but even in that case, let your judgment interpose; and take care that it
be not at the expense of any body. Pope says very truly. "There are whom heaven
has blessed with store of wit,
"Yet want as much again to govern it."
And in another place, I doubt with too much truth, "For wit and judgment ever
are at strife,
"Though meant each other's aid, like man and wife."


A proper secrecy is the only mystery of able men; mystery is the only secrecy
of weak and cunning ones.

To tell any friend, wife, or mistress, any secret with which they have nothing
to do, is discovering to them such an unretentive weakness, as must convince
them that you will tell it to twenty others, and consequently that they may
reveal it without the risk of being discovered. But a secret properly
communicated only to those who are to be concerned in the question will
probably be kept by them, though they should be a good many. Little secrets are
commonly told again, but great ones generally kept.

A man who tells nothing, or who tells all, will equally have nothing told him.

If a fool knows a secret, he tells it because he is a fool; if a knave knows
one, he tells it wherever it is his interest to tell it. But women and young
men are very apt to tell what secrets they know, from the vanity of having been
trusted. Trust none of these, wherever you can help it.

In your friendships, and in your enmities, let your confidence and your
hostilities have certain bounds: make not the former dangerous, nor the latter
irreconcilable. There are strange vicissitudes in business!

Smooth your way to the head through the heart. The way of reason is a good
one; but it is commonly something longer, and perhaps not so sure.

Spirit is now a very fashionable word: to act with spirit, to speak with
spirit, means only to act rashly, and to talk indiscre^tly. An able man shows
his spirit by gentle words and resolute actions: he is neither hot nor timid.

Patience is a most necessary qualification for business; many a man would
rather you heard his story than granted his request. One must seem to hear the
unreasonable demands of the petulant, unmoved, and the tedious details of the
dull, untired. That is the least price that a man must pay for a high station.

It is always right to detect a fraud, and to perceive a folly; but it is often
very wrong to expose either. A man of business should always have his eyes
open, but must often seem to have them shut.

In courts, (and every where else) bashfulness and timidity are as prejudicial
on one hand, as impudence and rashness are on the other. A steady assurance and
a cool intrepidity, with an exterior modesty, are the true and necessary medium.

Never apply for what you see very little probability of obtaining; for you
will, by asking improper and unattainable things, accustom the Ministers to
refuse you so often, that they will find it easy to refuse you the properest
and most reasonable ones. It is a common, but a most mistaken rule at Court, to
ask for every thing in order to get something: you do get something by it, it
is true; but that something is, refusals and ridicule. -- This maxim, like the
former, is of general application.

A cheerful, easy countenance and behavior are very useful: they make fools
think you a good-natured man; and they make designing men think you an
undesigning one.

There are some occasions in which a man must tell half his secret, in order to
conceal the rest; but there is seldom one in which a man should tell it all.
Great skill is necessary to know how far to go, and where to stop.

Ceremony is necessary, as the outwork and defense of manners.

A man's own good breeding is his best security against other people's
ill-manners.

Good-breeding carries along with it a dignity, that is respected by the most
petulant. Ill-breeding invites and authorizes the familiarity of the most
timid. No man ever said a pert thing to the Duke of Marlborough. No man ever
said a civil one (though many a flattering one) to Sir Robert Walpole.

Knowledge may give weight, but accomplishments only give luster; and many more
people see than weigh.

Most arts require long study and application; but the most useful art of all,
that of pleasing requires only the desire.

It is to be presumed, that a man of common sense who does not desire to
please, desire nothing at all; since he must know that he cannot obtain any
thing without it.

A skilful negociator will most carefully distinguish between the little and
the great objects of his business; and will be as frank and open in the former,
as he will be secret and pertinacious in the latter. -- This maxim holes
equally true in common life.

The Due de Sully observes very justly, in his Memoirs, that nothing
contributed more to his rise, than that prudent economy which he had observed
from his youth; and by which he had always a sum of money beforehand, in case
of emergencies.

It is very difficult to fix the particular point of economy; the best error
of the two, is on the parsimonious side. That may be corrected, the other
cannot.

The reputation of generosity is to be purchased pretty cheap; it does not
depend so much upon a man's general expense, as it does upon his giving
handsomely where it is proper to give at all. A man, for instance, who should
give a servant four shillings, would pass for covetous, while he who gave him a
crown wo^ld be reckoned generous; so that the difference of those two opposite
characters turns upon one shilling. A man's character, in that particular,
depends a great deal upon the report of his own servants; a mere trifle above
common wages makes their report favorable.

Take care always to form your establishment so much within your income, as to
leave a sufficient fund for unexpected contingencies, and a prudent liberality.
There is hardly a year, in any man's life, in which a small sum of ready money
may not be employed to great advantage.

ADVICE. OF A MOTHER TO HER SON. BY THE MARCHIONESS DE LAMBERT. A TRACT
PARTICULARLY RECOMMENDED TO HIS SON BY LORD CHESTERFIELD.

ADVICE. OF A MOTHER TO HER SON.
WHATEVER care is used in the education of children, it is still too little to
answer the end: to make it succeed, there must be excellent governors; but
where shall we find them, when princes find it difficult to get and keep them
for themselves? Where can we meet with men so much superior to others, as to
deserve to be entrusted with their conduct? Yet the first years of a man's life
are precious, since they lay the foundation of the merit of the rest.

There are but two seasons of life in which truth distinguishes itself for our
advantage: in youth, for our instruction; and in our advanced years, to comfort
us. In the age that pass^^ reign, truth generally quits us for the time.

Two celebrated P. Bouhours and P. Cheminals.
men, out of their friendship to me, have had the care of your education; but
as they were obliged to follow the method of studies settled in Colleges, they
applied themselves more in your early youth to improve your mind with learning,
than to make you know the word, or instruct you in the decorums of life.

I am going, my son, to give you some precepts, for the conduct of yours: read
them without thinking it a trouble. They are not dry lectures, that carry the
air of a mother's authority; they are rather the advice of a friend, and have
this merit, that they come from my heart.

At your entering the world, you must certainly propose to yourself some end or
other: you have too much sense to care to live without any design at all; nor
can you aspire to any thing more becoming and worthy of you than glory. It Is a
noble view for you to entertain; but it is fit for you to know what is meant by
the term, and what notion you frame of it.

It Is of various kinds, and each profession has a glory that is peculiar to it.
In yours, my son, it means the glory that attends valor. This is the glory of
heroes; it makes a brighter figure than any other; it always carries with it
the true marks of honor, and the recompenses it deserves; Fame seems to have
no tongue but to sound their praise; and when you arrive at a certain degree of
reputation, every thing you do is considerable. All the world has agreed to
give the pre-eminence to military virtues; it is no more than their due. They
cost dear enough; but there are several ways of discharging their obligations.

Some engage in the profession of arms, merely to avoid the shame of
degenerating from their ancestors; others follow it not only out of duty but
inclination. The first scarce ever raise themselves above their rank in the
world: it is a debt they pay, and they go no further. The others, flushed with
hopes, and carried on by ambition, march a giant's pace in the road of glory.
Some propose only to make their fortune: others have their advancement and
immortality itself in view. Such as stint themselves to the making a fortune,
never have a very extensive merit. A man that does not aim at raising to
himself a great name, will never perform any great actions. And such as go
carelessly on in the road of their profession, suffer all the fatigues, without
acquiring either the honor or recompense that naturally attend it.

If people understood their own interest rightly, they would not lay a stress
upon raising a f^rtune, but would in all professions have their glory and
reputation in view. When you attain to a certain degree of merit, and it is
generally known, the great glory and reputation you have acquired never fails
to make your fortune. A man cannot have too much ardour to distinguish himself,
nor can his desires of advancement be encouraged by hopes that are too
flattering.

There must be great views to give a great vigor to the soul; it is not easy
otherwise to make it exert itself. Let your love of glory be ever so eager and
active, you may still fall short of your aim; yet though you should advance but
half way, it is always glorious to have dared.

There is nothing so improper for a young man as that modesty which makes him
fancy he is not capable of great things. This modesty is a faintness of soul,
which hinders it from exerting itself, and running with a swift career toward
glory. Agesilaus was told that the king of Persia was the greatest king: Why
should he be greater than me (replied he), so long as I have a sword by my
side? There is a superior genius and merit in some persons, that tells them
nothing is impossible for them.

Great names are not formed in a day; nor is it Valor alone that makes
extraordinary men: She begins indeed to form them, but other virtues must
concur to finish them.

The notion of a hero is inconsistent with the character of a man without
justice, probity, and magnanimity. It Is not enough to have a name for your
valor; you must have a name likewise for your probity. All the virtues must
unite together to form a hero. Valor, my son, is not to be inspired by advice;
it is a gift of nature -- but such a one that a person may possess it in the
highest degree, and yet deserve very little esteem in other respects.

The g^nerality of young men fancy they are obliged ^o nothing else, when once
they have acquired the military virtues; and that they are allowed to be
unjust, rude, and unmannerly. Do not carry the prerogative of the sword too
far; it gives you no exemption from other obligations.

Take care, my son, to be in reality what others promise or pretend to be; you
have patterns set you in your own family. Your ancestors distinguished
themselves by all manner of virtues, as well as by those of their profession.
Their blood runs in your veins; remember always what you owe to your race, and
think that you are not to take up with being an ordinary man; you are not like
to get off at so cheap a rate. T^ merit of your ancestors will enhance your
glory (...) if you degenerate, it will be your shame: they ^rve equally to put
your virtues and your failin^ in a fuller light.

A nobl^ b^th does a man less honor than it exacts of him to ^ve, and to boast
of one's family, is to glory in the merit of others.

You will find, my son, all the paths that lead to glory traced out and trod
already before you; there is not a greater treasure than a good name, and the
reputation of one's ancestors. They have put you in a capacity of attaining to
any thing; it is not enough to equal them, you must go beyond them, and arrive
to the goal, I mean the honors which they were at the point of enjoying, when
they were carried off by an untimely death.

Great fortunes are so seldom innocent, that I easily forgive your ancestors
for not leaving you any. I have done all I could to bring out affairs into some
order; a point in which women can distinguish themselves no way but by
economy. I shall do my utmost to discharge every duty incumbent upon me in my
circumstances: I shall leave you as much as is fitting for you, if you are so
unhappy as to have no merit; and enough in all reason, if you have the virtues
I wish you.

As I desire nothing upon earth so much as to see you a perfectly honest man,
let us see what sort of conduct is necessary to give one a title to that
character, that we may know what we ought to do to deserve it. I improve myself
by these reflections; and may perhaps be one day happy enough to change my
precepts into examples.

She that exhorts another ought to lead the way herself. A Persian ambassador
asked the wife of Leonidas, Why they paid such honors to the women at
Lacedaemon? ''Tis (replied she) because 'they have entirely the forming of the
men. A Greek lady showed her jewels to Phocion's mother, and asked to see
here is: The noble Athenian pointed to her children, and said to her, 'These are
my finery and jewels.' I hope, my son, to find in time a like subject of glory
in you. But let us return to the obligations which men are obliged to discharge.

There is a certain order in these obligations. A man should know how to live
with his superors, his equals* and his inferiors, as well as with himself. With
his superiors he should know how to please without sinking into meanness,
should show an esteem and friendship to his equals, should condescend to his
inferiors so as not to let them feel the weight of his superiority, and should
keep up a dignity with himself.

All these obligations are still inferior to the veneration you owe to the
Supreme Being. Religion is a correspondence settled between God and man, by the
favors of God to men, and the worship that men pay to God. Souls of a superior
genius have noble sentiments for the Deity, and pay him a worship peculiar to
themselves, very different from that of the vulgar: it all comes from their
heart, and is directed immediately to God. Moral virtues are very precarious
without the christian to support them. I do not recommend to you a piety
blended with weakness and superstition; I only insist, that the love of order
should make you submit your understanding and sentiments to God, and should
show itself in every part of your conduct; it will inspire justice into you,
and justice is the basis of all other virtues.

The generality of young men think to distinguish themselves nowadays by
assuming a libertine air, which degrades them among men of sense: Such an air,
instead of arguing a superiority of understanding, shows only the depravity of
the heart. People never attack religion, but when they have an interest to
attack it: Nothing makes a man happier than to have his understanding
convinced, and his heart affected with it; it is of excelent use in every season
and circumstance of life. Such as are not happy enough to believe as they
ought, do yet find it reasonable to submit to the established religion: They
know that what is miscalled prejudice has a great vogue in the world, and ought
to be treated with respect.

A libertine way of thinking, and licentiousness of manners, ought to be
banished under the present reign.

The behavior of the Sovereign is a sort of law to regulate that of others; it
enjoins whatever he practices, and forbids what he declines doing. The failings
of princes are multiplied, and their virtues are renewed by imitation. Though
courtiers should be debauched in their sentiments, there is still a politeness
reigning at court, which serves to throw a veil over vice. We have the good
fortune to be born in an age when purity of morals and a respect for religion
are necessary to please the Prince.

I might, my son, in the order of your du^^es, insist on what you own to me,
but I would derive it entirely from your heart. Consider the condition in which
your father left me: I had sacrificed all that belonged to me to raise his
fortune, and I lost my all at his death. I saw myself left alone, destitute of
any support. I had no friends but his; and I found by experience, that few
persons are capable of being friends to the dead. I met with enemies in my own
family: I had a lawsuit upon my hands against potent adversaries, and my whole
fortune depended on the event. I gained it at last without any power of my own,
and without any cringing to others. In a word, I made the best I could of my
ill circumstances; and as soon as my own fortune was mended, I set myself to
make yours. Give me the same share in your friendship, that I shall give you
in my little fortune.

I will have no affected respect: I would have all your regards to me come not
from constraint, but purely from your heart. Let them proceed entirely from
your inclinations, without being influenced by any motive of interest. In
short, take care of your own glory, and I Will take care of every thing else.

You know how to conduct yourself with your superiors: but there are still some
instructions to be given with regard to the duty you owe your Prince. You are
of a family that has sacrificed their all for him. As for the persons on whom
you depend, the first merit is to please.

In subaltern employments you have no way to support yourself but by being
agree^ble: Masters are just like mistresses; whatever services you have done
them, they cease to love you as soon as you cease to please them.

There are various sorts of dignity, and they require as various kinds of
respect.

There are real and personal dignities, and there are dignities of institution:
There is always a respect due to persons in elevated stations, but it is merely
an outward respect: Our real respect and esteem is due only to merit. When
fortune and virtue have concurred to r^ise a man to a high post, there is a
double empire in the case, which commands a double submission; but let not the
glittering of grandeu^ dazzle and impose upon you.

There are some mean souls that are always crouching and grovelling before
grandeur. One ought to separate the man from the dignity, and see what he is
when he is stripped of it. There is another greatness very different from that
which power and authority give. It Is neither birth nor riches that distinguish
men; the only real and true superiority among them is merit.

The character of an honest man is a nobler title than any that fortune can
bestow. In subaltern posts one is necessarily dependent: one must make one's
court to the ministers, but it must be made with dignity. I shall never give
you any ^^inging lectures; it is your services that should speak for you, and
not any unbecoming submissions.

Men of merit, when they make their court to Ministers, do them an honor, but
scoundrels disgrace them. Nothing is more agreeable than to be a friend of
persons of dignity; but what lays the foundation of this friendship, is a
desire to please them.

Let your acquaintance be with persons that are above you; you will by that
means get a habit of respect and politeness. People are too careless when they
converse with their equals; they grow dull for want of exerting their parts.

I do not know whether one may hope to find friends at court. As for persons of
eminent dignity, their post exempts them from a great many duties, and covers
abundance of their failings. It Is good to examine into men to know them
thoroughly, and see them with their every day's merit about them. The
favorites of fortune impose upon you, when you look upon them at a distance;
the distance puts them in a point of view that is favorable to them: Fame
always enhances their merit, and flattery deifies them. Examine them near, and
you will find them to be but men. What a number of ordinary creatures do we find
at court! To rectify one's notions of greatness, one must view it near; you will
cease immediately either to desire or fear it.

Let not the failings of great men corrupt you, but rather teach you to correct
your own. Let the ill use which they make of their estates teach you to despise
riches, and keep yourself within bounds. Virtue seldom has the direction of
their expenses.

Among the infinite number of tastes invented by luxury and sensuality, why has
there not been one formed for relieving the miserable? Does not humanity itself
make you feel the necessity of assisting your fellow creatures? Good-natured
and generous tempers are more sensible of the obligation that lies upon them to
do good, than they are of all the other necessities of life. Marcus Aurelius
thanked the Gods for his having always done good to his friends, without making
them wait for it. It Is the great felicity of grandeur when others find their
fortune in our's: I cannot (said that Prince) have any relish of a happiness
that nobody shares in but myself.

The most exquisite pleasure in nature is to make the pleasure of others; but
for this end one must not be too fond of the goods of fortune. Riches never
were the parent of virtue, but virtue has often been the cause of riches. What
use, too, do the generality of great men make of the glory of their station?
They put it all in exterior marks, and in an air of pride. Their dignity sits
heavy on them and depresses others; whereas true greatness is humane; it is
always easy of access, and condescends even to stoop to you: such as really
enjoy it, are at their ease, and make others so too as well as themselves.
Their advancement does not cost their any virtue, and the nobleness of their
sentiments had formed, and in a manner habituated them to it beforehand. Their
elevated station seems natural to them, and nobody is a suffer by it.

Titles and dignities are not the bonds that unite us to men, or gain them to
us: Without merit and beneficence to recommend our grandeur to them, we have
but a precarious tenure of their friendship; and they will only seek to
indemni^y themselves at our expense, for the homage which they have been forced
to pay to the post, rather than to the man that enjoys it, whom they will not
fail to arraign freely, and condemn in his absence. If envy be the motive that
makes us love to lessen the good qualities of men in great posts, it is a
passion we ought to oppose, and render them the justice that they deserve. We
fancy frequently that we have no grudge but against the men, when indeed our
malignity is owing to their places: Persons in great posts never yet enjoyed
them with the good liking of the world, which only begins to do them justice
when they are out of place. Envy in suite of itself pays a homage to greatness,
at the same time that it seems to despise it; for to envy places is to honor
them. Let us not out of discontent condemn agreeable stations, which have no
fault but that we are not in them ourselves. -- It Is time now to pass to the
duties of society.

Men have found it necessary as well as agreeable to unite for the common good:
They have made laws to restrain ^he wicked; they have agreed amongst themselves
as to the duties of society, and have annexed an honorable character to the
practice of those duties. He is the honest man that observes them with the most
exactness, and the instances of them multiply in proportion to the degree and
nicety of a person's honor.

Virtues are linked together, and have a sort of alliance with one another:
What constitutes a hero is the union of all the virtues. After prescribing the
duties necessary for their common security, men set themselves to make their
conversation agreeable, and settled certain rules of politeness and living to
be observed by persons of birth and quality.

There are some failings, against which no precepts are to be given: There are
certain vices that are unknown to men of honor. Probity, fidelity in keeping
one's word, and a love of truth, are subjects that I think I need not insist
on, and recommend to you: You know that a man of honor knows not what it is to
tell a lie. What eulogiums does not the world give, and give deservedly, to
lovers of truth: The man, say they, that does good and speaks truth, resembles
the Deity, whose essential properties are goodness and truth. We are not indeed
obliged always to speak what we think, but we must always think what we speak.
The true use of speech is to promote truth. When a man has acquired a
reputation for veracity, his word is taken implicitly; it has all the authority
of an oath, and the world receives what he says with a sort of religious
respect.

Falsehood in actions is full as inconsistent with a love of truth as falsehood
in words. Men of honor are never false; what indeed have they to disguise? Nor
are they fond of showing themselves, because, sooner or later, true merit will
make its way.

Remember that the world will sooner pardon you your failings, than the
affectation of pretending to virtues which you have not in reality. Falsehood
affects to put on the air of truth, but a false man's professions go no further
than his looks and discourses; whereas a man of veracity's are made good by his
actions. It has been said a long time ago, that hypocrisy is an homage which
vice pays to virtue: But the principal virtues are not of themselves sufficient
to qualify a man to please; he must have likewise agreeable and engaging
qualities.

When one aims at gaining a great reputation, one is always in a state of
dependence on the opinion of others. It is very difficult for a man to rise to
honors by his services, unless he has friends to set them forth, and a manner
of behavior proper to recommend them.

I have told you already, that in subaltern posts a man cannot support himself
but by a knack of pleasing; as soon as ever he is neglected, he becomes from
that moment inconsiderable: There is nothing so disagreeable as to show a too
great fondness for one's self, and expose one's vanity, so as to make people
see that we like ourselves above all the world, and that every thing centers in
us.

A man with a great deal of wit may make himself very disagreeable, when he
only employs it to find out the failings of others, and expose them publicly.
As for this sort of men who only show their wit at other people's expense, they
ought to consider that no body's life is so perfectly without a blemish, as to
give him a right to censure another man's.

Rallery makes a part of the amusements of conversation, but is a very nice
matter to manage. Persons that want to traduce, and love to rally, have a
secret malignity in their heart. The most agreeable rallery in nature gives
offense, if it advances a step too far; so easy is the transition from the one
to the other. A false friend often abuses the liberty of banter, and reflects
upon you: In all cases of this nature, the person that you attack has the sole
right of judging whether you are in jest or no; the moment that he takes
offense, it ceases to be rallery; it is a downright affront.

Rallery should never be used but with regard to failings of so little
consequence, that the person concerned may be merry on the subject himself.
Nice rallery is a decent mixture of praise and reproach; it touches slightly
upon little failings, only to dwell the more upon great qualities. Monsieur de
la Rochefoucault says, that the man who dishonours another, does less mischief
than he that ridicules him: I should be of his opinion for this reason, that it
is not in any body's power to dishonor another; it is not the discourse or
reflections of others; it is only our own conduct that can dishonor us. The
causes of dishonor are known and certain, but ridicule is entirely arbitrary:
It depends on the manner how objects appear to us, and on our manner of
thinking and taking them. There are some people that may be said to wear always
spectacles of ridicule, and see every thing through them: it is not so much the
fault of objects as the fault (...) ^ersons that view them in such a light:
This is so (...) that such persons as appear ridiculous in cert^^^ ^^mpanies,
would be admired in others, where there are men of sense and merit.

A man's humor too contributes much to the making him agreeable or otherwise;
dark and sour humors, that have a spice of malevolence in them, are vastly
disagreeable.

Humor is the disposition with which the soul receives the impression of
objects; good-natured tempers take nothing ill; their indulgence is of benefit
to others, and supplies them with what they want in themselves.

The generality of mankind imagine, that it is to no purpose to attempt to
correct their humor; they say 'I was born so,' and fancy this excuse is enough
to justify their not taking any pains about it. Such tempers must infallibly
displease; men owe you nothing, any farther than you are agreeable to them. The
way to be so is to forget one's self, to put others upon subjects which they
like, to make them pleased with themselves, to set them out with advantage, and
allow them the good qualities which others dispute their having. They believe
you give them what the world does not allow them: Their merit seems in some
sort to be of your creation, whilst you exalt them in the opinion of others:
But this is never to be pushed so far as to commence flattery.

Nothing pleases so much as sensible tender persons trying to make a friendship
with others.

Take care to carry yourself in such a manner, that your behavior may at once
make a tender of your own friendship, and invite the friendship of others. You
can never be an amiable man without knowing how to be a friend, without a taste
and knowledge of friendship. It Is this corrects the vices of society; it
softens the roughness of people's natures; it brings down their vanity, and
makes them know themselves. All the obligations of honor are included in the
obligations of perfect friendship.

In the hurry and bustle of the world, take care, my son, to have a sure friend
to whisper truth to your soul: Be always ready to hear the advice of your
friends. The owning of faults is no hard matter for persons that find a fund
within themselves to mend them: Think that ^^u have never done enough, when you
find that you can still do better. No body takes a reproof so kindly as he that
deserves most to be commended. If you are happy enough to find a true friend,
you have found a treasure; his reputation will secure your own: He will answer
for you to yourself; he will alleviate all your troubles, and multiply all your
pleasures. But if you would deserve a friend, you must know how to be one.

All the world is complaining of the want of friends, and yet scarce any body
gives himself the trouble of bringing the necessary dispositions to gain and
preserve them. Young men have their companions, but they very rarely have any
friends: Pleasures are what unite them, but pleasures are not ties worthy of
friendship. I do not pretend to make a dissertation on this subject; I only
touch slightly on some duties of civil life: I refer you to your own heart,
which will put you upon desiring a friend, and make you feel the necessity of
having one. I depend upon the niceness of your sentiments to instruct you in
the duties of friendship.

If you would be perfectly an honest man, you must think of keeping yourself
within bounds, and placing it on a good object. Honesty consists in waiving
one's own rights, and paying a regard to those of others. If you set up to be
happy alone, you will never be so; all the world will dispute your happiness
with you: but if you are for making the world happy as well as yourself every
body will assist you. All vices whatever flatter self-love, and all the virtues
agree to attack it; valor exposes it; modesty lowers it; generosity throws it
away; moderation mortifies it; and zeal for the public sacrifices it to the
good of society.

Self-love is a preferring of one's self to others* as honesty is the
preferring of others to one's self. There are two kinds of self-love; the one
natural, lawful, and regulated by justice and reason; the other vicious and
corrupt. Our first object is certainly ourselves; it is only reflection that
calls us back to justice. We don't know how to love ourselves; we either carry
our self-love too high, or exercise it improperly. To love one's self as one
ought is to love virtue; to love vice is to strike in with a blind and mistaken
love.

We have sometimes seen persons advance themselves by ill ways; but if vice is
preferred, it is not for any length of time; corrupt persons ruin themselves by
the very means, and with the same principles that raised them. If you would be
happy with security, you must be so with innocence. There is no power sure and
lasting but that of virtue.

There are some amiable tempers that have a fine and natural congruity with
virtue: Those to whom nature has not been so bountiful must be watchful over
their conduct, and know their true interest, to be able to correct an evil
disposition. Thus the understanding rectifies the heart.

The love of esteem is the life and soul of society; it unites us to one
another: I want your approbation, you stand in need of mine. By forsaking the
converse of men, we forsake the virtues necessary for society; for when one is
alone, one is apt to grow negligent; the world forces (...) to have a guard
over yourself.

Politeness is the most necessary quality for conversation; it is the art of
employing the exterior marks of breeding, which after all gives us no assurance
of a man's inward qualities. Politeness is an imitation of honesty, and shows a
man in his out^side, such as he ought to be within; it discovers itself in
every thing, in his air, in his discourse, and in his actions.

There is politeness of understanding, and a politeness of manners: That of the
understanding consists in saying curious and ingenious things; that of manners,
in saying things of a flattering nature, and an agreeable turn.

I do not confine politeness to that intercourse of civilities and compliments,
which is settled by common use; they are made without meaning, and received
without any sense of obligation: People are apt to over-do the matter in this
sort of intercourse, and abate of it upon experience.

Politeness is a desire to please the persons with whom we are obliged to live,
and to behave ourselves in such a manner, that all the world may be satisfied
with us* our superiors with our respects; our equals with our esteem; and our
inferiors with our kindness and condescension. In a word, it consists in a care
to please, and say what is proper to every body. It sets out their good
qualities; it makes them sensible that you acknowledge their superiority; when
you know how to exalt them, they will set you out in their turn; they will give
you the same preference to others, which you are pleased to give them to
yourself, their self love obliges them to do so.

The way to please is not to display your superiority; it is to conceal it from
being perceived. There is a great deal of judgment in being polite; but the
world will excuse you at an easier rate.

The generality of people require only certain manners that please: if you have
them not, you must make up the defect with the number of your good qualities.
There must be a great deal of merit to get over a clownish awkward behavior.
Never let the world see that you are fond of your own person: A polite man
never finds time to talk of himself.

You know what sort of politeness is necessary to be observed to the women. At
present it looks as if the young men had made a vow not to practice it, it is a
sign of a careless education.

Nothing is more shameful than a voluntary rudeness; but let them do their
worst, they can never rob the women of the glory of having formed the finest
gentlemen of the last age. It Is to them that they owed all the complaisance of
behavior, the delicacy of inclinations, and the fine gallantry of wit and
manners which were then remarkable.

At present, indeed, exterior gallantry seems to be banished; the manners of
the world are different, and every body has lost something by the change; the
women the desire of pleasing, which was the source of their charms; and the men
the complaisance and fine politeness, which is only to be acquired in their
conversation. The generality of men fancy that they owe them neither probity
nor fidelity: it looks as if they had a license to betray them, without
affecting their honor. Whoever would think fit to examine into the motives of
such a conduct, would find them very scandalous. They are faithful to one
another, because they are afraid, and know they shall be called to an account;
but they are false to the women without fear of suffering, and without remorse.
This shows their probity to be only forced, to be rather the effect of fear
than the love of justice: and accordingly, if we examine close into such as
make a trade of gallantry, we shall find them frequently to be men of no
honor; they contract ill habits; their manners are corrupted: they grow
indifferent to truth, and indulge themselves in their habitual neglect of their
word and oaths.

What a trade is this! where the least ill thing that you do, is to seduce the
women from their duty, to dishonor some, to make others despera^e, where a
sure calamity is oftentimes all the recompense of a sincere and constant
affection.

The men have no reason to find so much fault with the women; for it is by them
that they lose their innocence. If we except some women that seem destined to
vice from their cradle, the rest would live in a regular practice of their
duty, if the men did not take pains to turn them from it: but, in short, it is
their business to be on their guard against them. You know that it is never
allowable to dishonor them; if they have had the weakness to trust you with
their honor, it is a confidence that you ought not to abuse. You owe it to
them, if you have reason to be satisfied with them; you owe it to yourself, if
you have reason to compain of them. You know, too that by the laws of honor
you must fight with equal weapons; you ought not therefore to expose a woman to
dishonor for her amor, since she can never expose you for yours.

I must, however, caution you against incurring their hatred; it is violent and
implacable. There are some offenses which they never pardon, and people run a
greater risk than they imagine, in wounding their honor; the less their
resentment breaks out, the more terrible is it; by being held in, it grows the
fiercer. Have no quarrel with a sex that knows so well how to resent and
revenge themselves; and the rather, because the women make the reputation of
the men, as the men make that of the women.

It Is a happy talent, but very rarely to be met with, to know how to manage the
point of praise, to give it agreeably and with justice. The morose man does not
know how to praise* his judgment is spoiled by his temper. The flatter, by
praising too much, ruins his own credit, and does honor to nobody. The vain
man deals out his praises only to receive others in return; he shows too
plainly that he praises merely out of affectation. Shallow understandings
esteem every thing, because they know not the value of things: they cannot make
either their esteem or contempt pass in the world. The envious wretch praises
nobody, for fear of putting others on a level with himself. An honest man
praises in the right place: he feels more pleasure in doing justice, than in
raising his own reputation by lessening that of others. Persons that reflect,
and are nice upon this article, are very sensible of all these differences. If
you would have your praises of any body be of service to you, always praise out
of the regard you have for others, and not out of any regard to yourself.

One should know how to live with one's competitors; there is nothing more
common than to wish to raise one's self above them, or to try to ruin them: But
there is a much nobler conduct; it is never to attack them, and always strive to
exceed them in merit; it is a handsome action to yield them the place which you
think is due to them.

An honest man chooses rather to neglect his own fortune, than to fail in a
point of justice. Dispute about glory with yourself, and strive to acquire new
virtues, and to improve the merit of those which you have already.

One must be very cautious in the article of revenge; it is often of use to
make one's self feared; but it is almost always dangerous to revenge one's
self. There is not a greater weakness than to do all the mischief that we can.
The best manner of revenging an injury is not to imitate the person that did
it. It Is a fight worthy of honesty men to oppose patience to passion, and
moderation to justice. An extravagant hatred puts you beneath the persons you
hate. Do not justify your enemies; do nothing that can excuse them; they do us
less mischief than our own faults. Little souls are cruel, but clemency is the
virtue of great men. Caesar said, that the most agreeable fruit of his
victories was the having it in his power to give people their lives who had
attempted his own. There is nothing more glorious and exquisite than this kind
of revenge: it is the only one that men of honor allow themselves to take. As
soon as your enemy repents and makes his submission, you lose all manner of
right to revenge.

The generality of mankind bring nothing into the intercourse of life but their
weakness, which serves for society. Honest men form an intimacy by their
virtues, the ordinary sort of men by their pleasures, and villains by their
crimes.

Good-fellowship and gaming have their excess and their dangers: Love has
others peculiar to itself; there is no playing always with beauty; it sometimes
commands imperiously. There is nothing more shameful in a man than excessive
drinking, and drawing his reason, which ought to be the guide of his life. To
give up one's self to voluptuousness is to degrade one's nature. The surest way
to avoid it is not to grow familiar with it; one would think the voluptuous
man's soul was a charge to him.

As for gaming, it is the destruction of all decorum. The prince forgets his
dignity at it, and the woman her modesty. Deep play carries with it all the
social vices. They rendezvous at certain hours to hate and ruin one another;
it is a great trial of probity; and few people have preserved theirs unspotted
in a course of gaming.

The most necessary disposition to relif^ pleasures, is to know how to be
without them. Sensual pleasure is out of the way of reasonable persons. Let
your pleasures be ever so great, remember still to expect some melancholy
affair to disturb them, or some vexatious one to end them.

Wisdom makes use of the love of glory to guard against the meanness into which
sensuality hu^ries a man. But one must set to work betimes to keep one's self
free from passions; they may in the beginning be under command, but they
domineer at last: They are more easy to be overcome than satisfied.

Keep yourself from envy, it is the lowest and most shameful passion in the
world; it is always disowned. Envy is the shadow of glory, as glory is the
shadow of virtue. The gratest sign that a man is born with great qualities is
to say, that he has no envy in his nature.

A man of quality can never be amiable without liberality. The covetous man
cannot fail of being disagreeable. He has within him an obstacle to all
virtues: he has neither justice nor humanity. When once a man gives up himself
to avarice, he renounces glory: it is said, there have been illustrious
villains, but that there never were any illustrious misers.

Though liberality is a gift of nature, yet if we had a disposition to the
contrary vice, we might by good sense and reflection correct it.

The covetous man enjoys nothing. Money has been said to be a good servant,
though an ill master: but it is good on account of the use we can make of it.

The covetous wretch is more tormented than the poor man. The love of riches is
the root of all vices, as disinterestedness is the first principle of all
virtues.

Riches must be immense, in order to be entitled to the first place among the
goods of life: they are indeed the first object of the desires of the greatest
part of mankind; yet virtue, glory, and a great reputation, are vastly
preferable to all the gifts of fortune.

The most sensible pleasure of honest men is to do good, and relieve the
miserable. What a wide difference is there between having a little more money,
or losing it for one's diversion, and the parting with it in exchange for the
reputation of goodness and generosity? It Is a sacrifice that you make to your
glory. Deny yourself something to lay up a fund for your liberality; it is an
excellent point of economy, which naturally tends to advance you, and gain you
a good character.

A great reputation is a great treasure. We must not imagine that a great
fortune is necessary to enable one to do good; all the world can do it in their
several stations, with a little attention to themselves, and others; fix this
inclination in your heart, and you will find wherewith to gratify it: occasions
enough offer themselves before you, and there are but too many unhappy persons
that solicit you.

Liberality distinguishes itself in the manner of giving. The liberal man
doubles the merit of a present by the good will with which he makes it: the
covetous wretch spoils it by his regret at parting with it. Liberality never
ruined any body. Families are not raised by avarice, but they are supported by
justice, moderation, and integrity. Liberality is one of the duties of a noble
birth. When you do good, you only pay a debt; but still prudence is to govern
you in such cases; the principles of profuseness are not shameful, but the
consequences of it are dangerous.

There are few men know how to live with their inferiors. The great opinion
that we entertain of ourselves makes us look upon all below us as a distinct
species; but how contrary are such sentiments to humanity! If you would raise
yourself a great name, you must be affable and easy of access; your military
profession gives you no dispensation in this point. Germanicus was adored by
his soldiers. To learn what they thought of him, he walked one evening through
his camp, and overheard what they said at their little meals, where they take
upon them to pass their judgment on their general; 'he went says Tacitus) to
enjoy his reputation and glory.'

You must command by example, rather than authority: Admiration forces men to
imitation much sooner than command: To live at your ease, and treat your
soldiers harshly, is to be their Tyrant, and not their General.

Consider with what view authority was first instituted, and in what manner it
should be exercised; it is virtue, and the natural respect which the world pays
to it, that made men consent to obedience. You are an usurper of authority, if
you do not possess it upon that sooting. In an empire where reason shall
govern, all the world should be on a level, and no distinction be paid but to
virtue.

Humanity itself suffers by the vast difference that fortune has put between
one man and another. It Is not any dignity or haughtiness, but your merit, that
should distinguish you from the vulgar. Consider the advantages of a noble
birth and high station only as goods which fortune lends you, and not as
distinctions annexed to your person, and that make a part of yourself. If your
quality raises you above the ordinary world, think how much you have in common
with other men by your weaknesses, which confound you with them: let justie
then stop the motions of your pride, which would distinguish you from them.

Know that the first laws which you ought to obey are those of humanity:
Remember that you are a man, and that you command over men. When the son of
Marcus Aurelius lost his preceptor, the courtiers found fault with him for
weeping on that occasion. Marcus Aurelius said to them, Allow my son to be a
Man, before he comes to be an Emperor.

Forget always what you are, when humanity requires it of you; but never forget
it when true glory calls upon you to remember it. In fine, if you have any
authority, use it only for the happiness of oaths. Admit them near you, if you
are great yourself, instead of keeping them at a distance: never make them feel
their inferiority; and live with them as you would have your superiors live
with you.

The greatest p^rt of mankind do not know how to live with themselves: all
their care is rather how to get rid of themselves, and they spend their time in
seeking for happiness in exterior objects. You should, if it ^e possible, fix
your felicity within yourself, and find in your own breast an equivalent for
the advantages which fortune denies you: you will be more easy as to them; but
it must be a principle of reason that brings you thus to yourself, and not an
aversion for mankind.

You love solitude; they reproach you with being too private; I do not find
fault with your taste, but you must not let the social virtues suffer from it.
Retire into yourself, says Marcus Aurelius; practice often this retreat of the
soul, you will improve yourself by it. Have some maxim to call up your reason,
and fortify your principles upon occasion. Your retirement makes you acquainted
with good authors; judicious men do not crowd their minds indifferen^ly with
all sorts of learning, but choose their subject.

Take care that your studies influence your manners, and that all the profit of
your reading be turned to virtue. Try to find out the first principles of
things, and do not subject yourself servilley to the opinions of the vulgar.

Your ordinary reading should be history, but always use reflection with it. If
you only think of filling your memory with facts and polishing your mind with
the thoughts and opinions of the ancients, you will only lay up a magazine of
other people's notions: one quarter of an hour's reflection improves and forms
the mind more than a great deal of reading. A want of learning is not ^o much
to be dreaded, as error and false jud^^ments.

R^^^^ct^on is the guide that leads to truth; consider facts only as
authorities to support reason, or as subjects to exercise it.

History will instruct you in your business; but after you have d^^wn from it
all the advantage proper for your prefe^^ion, there ^s a moral use to be made
of it, which is of much greater consequence to you.

The first science of man is human nature* Leave politics to Ministers, and
wha^ belongs to grandeur to Princes; but do you find out the man in the prince;
observe him in one course of common life; see how low he s^^ks when he gives
himself up to his passions. An irregular conduct is always followed with dis^^^
consequence^.

To study history is to study the passions and opinions of men: it is to examine
them thoroughly; it is to pull the mask of their actions, which appeared great
whilst they were ^^ited, and consecrated as it were by success, but often
become contemptible when the motive of them is known. There is nothing more
ambiguous than the actions of men. We must trace them up to their principles if
we would know them rightly. It Is necessary to be sure of the spirit of our
actions before we glory in them.

We do little good, and a great deal of ill; and have the knack too of spoiling
and depraving the little good that we do.

See Princes in history, and elsewhere, as so many actors on the stage; they no
way concern you, but by the qualities which we have in common with them. This
is so true, that such historians as have set themselves to describe them rather
as men than kings, and show them to us in their private life, give us the most
pleasure: we find ourselves out in them: we love to see our own weaknesses in
great men. This con^oles us in some measure for our own lowness, and raises as
in some sort to their elevation. In short, consider a history as a register of
times and a picture of manners; you may discover yourself there, without any
offense to your vanity.

I shall exhort you, my son, rather to take pains with your heart, than to
improve your understanding; that ought to be the great study of your life. The
true greatness of man lies in the heart; it must be elevated by aspiring to
great things, and by daring to think ourselves worthy of them. It Is as becoming
to encourage a little vanity within one's self, as it is ridiculous to show it
to others.

Take care to have thoughts and sentiments worthy of you. Virtue raises the
dignity of man, and vice degrades him. If one was unhappy enough to want an
honest heart, one ought for one's own interest to correct it: nothing makes a
man truly valuable but his heart, and nothing but that can make him happy;
since our happiness depends only on the nature of our inclinations. If they are
such as lead you to trifling passions, you will be the sport of their vain
attachments: they offer you flowers; but always (as Montaigne says) mistrust
the treachery of your pleasures.

We must not indulge ourselves long in things that please us; the moment that
we give ourselves up to them, we lay the foundation of our sorrows. The
generality of mankind employ the first part of their life in making the rest of
it miserable. You must not abandon reason in your pleasures, if you would find
it again in your troubles.

In short, keep a strict guard over your heart; it is the source of innocence
and happiness. You will not pay too dear for the freedom of your mind and
heart, though you purchase it by the sacrifice of your pleasures, as was the
saying of an ingenious ma^^. Never expect then to reconcile sensuality, with
glory, or the charm of voluptuousness with the recompense of virtue. However,
when you bid adieu to pleasures, you will find in other things satisfaction
enough to make you amends. There are various sorts of it: Glory and truth have
their pleasures; they are the delights of the soul and heart.

Learn likewise to reverence and stand in awe of yourself. The foundation of
happiness is laid in the peace of the mind, and secret testimony of the
conscience. By the word conscience, I mean the inward sense of a nice honor,
which assures you that you have nothing to reproach yourself with. Again, how
happy is it to know how to live with one's self, to renew your acquaintance
there with pleasure, and quit yourself for a time with regret! The world then
indeed is less necessary to you; but take care it does not make you out of
humor with it. One must not entertain an aversion for men; they will desert
you when you desert them: You have still occasion for them; you are not either
of an age or profession to do without them; but when one knows how to live
one's self as well as with the world, they are two pleasures that support one
another.

A passion for glory may contribute greatly to your advancement and happiness;
but it may likewise make you unhappy and dispicable, if you know not how to
govern it: it is the most active and lasting of all our inclinations. The love
of glory is the last passion that quits us; but we must not confound it with
vanity. Vanity aims at the approbation of other people; true glory at the
secret testimony of the conscience. Endeavor to gratify the passion that you
have for (...), make sure of this inward testimony; your tribunal is seated in
your own breast, why then should you seek it elsewhere? You can always be a
judge of your own worth. Let men dispute your good qualities if they please; as
they do not know you, you can easily console yourself. It is not of so much
consequence to be thought an honest man, as to be one. Such as do not mind the
approbation of other people, but only aim at deserving it, take the surest way
to obtain both. What affinity is there between the greatness of man, and the
littleness of the things which make the subject of his glorying? There is
nothing so ill suited as his dignity and the vanity that he derives from an
infinite number of trifling things: a glory so ill-grounded shows a great want
of merit. Persons that are truly great are not subject to the infatuations of
vainglory.

One must, if it be possible, my son be content with one's condition in the
world: there is nothing more rare and valuable than to find persons that are
satisfied with it. It Is our own fault. There is no condition of life so bad,
but it has one good side. Every situation has its point of view; we should
place it in that favorable light, and shall find that it is not the fault of
our situations, but purely our own. We have much more reason to complain of our
own temper than of fortune. We lay all the blame upon events, when all the
fault lies upon our own discontent; the evil is within us, let us not seek for
it any where else. By qualifying our temper, we often change our fortune. It is
much easier for us to adjust ourselves to things, than to adjust things to
ourselves. A great application to find out a remedy frequently irritates the
disease, and the imagination conspires with the pain to increase and fortify
it. A dwelling upon misfortunes renews them, by making them present to the
mind. An useless struggling to get out of our circumstances, makes us slower in
contracting an acqaintance with them, which would make them sit easy on us. One
must always give way to misfortunes; have recourse to patience: it is the only
way to alleviate them.

If you would do yourself justice, you will be content with your situation. I
dare say, that after the loss we have suffered, if you had another mother you
would be still fuller of complaints. Reflect on the advantages of your
condition, and you will be less sensible of the difficulties of it. A wise man,
in the same circumstances with others, has more advantages, and feels fewer
inconveniences than they.

You may depend upon it that there is no condition, but has its troubles; it is
the situation of human life; there is nothing pure and unblended in it. It Is to
pretend to exempt one's self from the common law of our nature to expect a
constant happiness. The very persons that you think the happiest would hardly
appear so to you, if you knew the exact situation of their fortune or their
heart. Those that are raised the highest are frequently the most unhappy. With
great employments and vulgar maxims one is always restless and uneasy: it is not
places, but reason that removes anxiety from the mind. If you are wise, fortune
can neither increase nor diminish your happiness.

Judge by yourself, and not by the opinions of others. Misfortunes and
disorders arise from false judgments, false judgments from our passions, and
passions from our conversation with mankind; you always come from them more
perfect than you were before. To weaken the impression that they make upon you,
and to moderate your desires and inquietudes, consider that time is continually
running away with your pains as well as your pleasures; that every moment,
young as you are, carries off a part of yourself, that all things are
perpetually sinking into the abyss of past time, thence never to return again.

All that you see greatest on earth meets with the very same treatment as
yourself. The honors, the dignities, the precedences settled among men, are
mere shows and ceremonies, without any reality; do not imagine that they are
qualities inseparable from their being. Thus ought you to consider such as are
above you; but take in your view likewise an infinite number of miserable
wretches that are below you: the difference between you and them is owing only
to chance, but pride and the great opinion we have of ourselves make us think
that the good condition we are in is no more than our due, and consider every
thing that we do not enjoy as a robbery of what should belong to us: you cannot
but see plainly that nothing is more unreasonable than such an imagination.
Enjoy, my son, the advantages of your circumstances; but suffer patiently the
inconveniences that attend them: Consider that wherever there are men, there
are unhappy creatures. Enlarge your mind, if possible, so far as to foresee and
know all the accidents that can befall you. In a word, remember that a man's
happiness depends on his manners and conduct; but the highest felicity is to
seek for it in the paths of innocence, and there one never fails to find it.

END OF THE MARCHIONESS OF LAMBERT's ADVICE TO HER SON.
TEN PRECEPTS GIVEN BY WILLIAM LORD BURGHLEY, LORD HIGH TREASURER OF ENGLAND,
TO HIS SECOND SON, ROBERT CECIL. AFTERWARD THE EARL OF SALISBURY.

LORD BURGHLEY's TEN PRECEPTS.
SON ROBERT,
THE virtuous inclination of thy matchless mother, by whose tender and goldly
care thy infancy was governed, together with thy education under so zealous and
excellent a tutor, puts me in rather assurance than hope, that you are not
ignorant of that summum bonum, which is only able to make thee happy as well in
thy death as life; I mean, the true knowledge and worship of thy Creator and
Redeemer, without which all other things are vain and miserable: so that, thy
youth being guided by so sufficient a teacher, I make no doubt but he will
furnish thy life with divine and moral documents. Yet, that I may not cast off
the care beseeming a parent toward his child, or that you should have cause
to derive thy whole felicity and welfare rather from others, than from whence
thou receivedst thy breath and being, I think it fit and agreeable to the
affection I bear thee, to help thee with such rules and advertisements for the
squaring of thy life, as are rather gained by experience than by much reading;
to the end that entering into this exorbitant age, thou may be the better
prepared to shun those scandalous courses whereunto the world, and the lack of
experience, may easily draw thee. And because I will not confound thy memory* I
have reduced them in Ten Precepts; and, next unto Moses' Tables, if thou
imprint them in thy mind, thou shall reap the benefit, and I the content. And
they are these following:

I.
WHEN it shall please God to bring thee to man's estate, use great providence
and circumspection in choosing thy wife; for from thence will spring all thy
future good or evil: and it is an action of life, like unto a stratagem of war,
wherein a man can err but once. If ^hy estate be good, match near home and at
leisure; if weak, far off and quickly. Enquire diligently of her disposition,
and how her parents have been inclined in their youth. Let her not be poor, how
generous soever; for a man can buy nothing in the market with gentility. Nor
choose a base and uncomely creature altogether for wealth; for it will cause
contempt in others, and loathing in thee. Neither make choice of a dwarf, or a
fool; for by the one thou shall beget a race of pigmies, the other will be thy
continual disgrace; and it will irke thee to hear her talk; for thou shall find
it to thy great grief, that there is nothing more fulsome than a she-fool.

And, touching the guiding of thy house, let thy hospitality be moderate; and,
according to the means of thy estate, rather plentiful than sparing, but not
costly; for I never knew any man grow poor by keeping an orderly table. But
some consume themselves through secret vices, and their hospitality bears the
blame. But banish swimish drunkards out of thine house, which is a vice
imparing health, consuming much, and makes no show. I never heard praise
ascribed to the drunkard, but for the well-bearing of his drink; which is a
better commendation for a brewer's horse or a dray-man, than for either a
gentleman or a serving-man. Beware thou spend not above three or four parts of
thy revenues, nor above a third part of that in thy house; for the other two
parts will do no more than defray thy extraordinaries, which always surmount
the ordinary by much: otherwise thou shall live, like a rich beggar, in
continual want. And the needy man can never live happily nor contentedly; for
every disaster makes him ready to mortgage or sell; and that gentleman who
sells an acre of land sells an ounce of credit: for gentility is nothing else
but ancient riches; so that if the foundation shall at any time sink, the
building must need follow. So much for the First Precept.

II.
BRING thy children up in learning and obedience, yet without outward
austerity. Praise them openly, reprehend them secretly. Give them good
countenance and convenient maintenance according to thy ability, otherwise thy
life will seem their bondage; and what portion thou shall leave them at thy
death, they will thank Death for it, and not thee. And I am persuaded that the
foolish cockering of some parents, and the over-stern carriage of others,
causes more men and women to take ill courses, than their own vicious
inclinations. Marry thy daughters in time, lest they marry themselves. And
suffer not thy sons to pass the A^ps; for they shall learn nothing there but
pride, blasphemy, and atheism: and if by travel they get a few broken
languages, that shall profit them nothing more than to have one meat served in
diverse dishes. Neither, by my consent, shall thou train them up in wars; for he
that sets up his rest to live by that pr^fession, can hardly be an honest man
or a good christian: besides, it is a science no longer in request than use;
for soldiers in peace are like chimneys in summer.

III.
LIVE not in the country without corn and cattle about thee; for he that
puts his hand to the purse for every expense of household, is like him that
keeps water in a sieve: and what provision thou shall want, learn to buy it
at the best hand; for there is one penny saved in four, betwixt buying in the
need, and when the markets and seasons serve fittest for it. Be not served with
kinsmen, or friends, or men entreated to stay; for they expect much, and do
little: nor with such as are amorous; for their heads are intoxicated. And keep
^ther too few, than one too many. Feed them well, and pay them with the most;
and then thou may boldly require service at their hands.

IV.
LET thy kindred and allies be welcome to thy house and table. Grace them with
thy countenance, and further them in all honest actions; for by these means
thou shall so double the band of nature, as thou shall find them so many
advocates to plead an apology for thee behind thy back. But shake off those
glowworms, I mean parasites and sycoyhants, who will ^eed and ^awn upon thee
in thy prosperous hours, but in adverse storms they will shelter thee no more
than an arbo^r in winter.

V.
BEWARE of suretyship for thy best friends. He th^^ pays another man's debts,
seeks his own decay Bu^ if thou can not otherwise choose, rather lend thy
money thyself upon good bonds, although thou borrow it; (...) shall thou secure
thyself and pleasure thy friend. Neither borrow money of a neighbor or a
friend, but of a stranger; where paying for it, thou shall hear no more of it;
otherwise thou shall eclipse thy credit, lose thy freedom, and pay as dear as
to another. But in borrowing of money be precious of thy word: for he that has
care of keeping days of payment, is lord of another man's purse.

VI
UUDERTAKE no suit against a poor man without receiving much wrong; for,
besides that thou make him thy compeer, it is a base conquest to triumph
where there is small resistance. Neither attempt law against any man before
thou be fully resolved that thou have right on thy side, and then spare not for
either money or pains, for a cause or two so followed and obtained, will free
thee from suits great part of thy life.

VII.
BE sure to keep some great man thy friend, but trouble him not for trifles.
Compliment him often with many, yet small gifts, and of little charge. And if
thou have cause to be^tow any great gratuity, let it be something which may be
daily in sight; otherwise, in this ambitious age, thou shall remain like a hop
without a pole, live in obscurity, and be made a football for every insulting
companion to sourn at.

VIII.
TOWARD thy superiors, be humble, yet generous; with thine equals, familiar,
yet respective. Toward thine inferiors show much humanity, and some
familiarity; as to bow the body, stretch forth the hand, and to uncover the
head, with such like popular compliments. The first prepares thy way to
advancement: the second makes thee known for a man well bred: the third gains a
good report, which, once got, is easily kept; for right humanity takes such
deep root in the minds of the multitude, as they are more easily gained by
unprofitable courtesies than by churlish benefits. Yet I advise thee not to
affect or neglect popularity too much. Seek not to be Essex: shun to be Raleigh.

IX.
TRUST not any man with thy life, credit, or estate; for it is mere folly for a
man to enthrall himself to a friend, as though, occasion being offered, he
should not dare to become thine enemy.

X.
BE not scurrilous in conversation, nor satirical in thy jests: the one will
make thee unwelcome to all company: the other pulls on quarrels, and gets the
hatred of thy best friends: for suspicious justs (when any of them favor of
truth) leave a bitterness in the minds of those which are touched. And albeit I
have already pointed at this inclusively, yet I think it necessary to leave it
to thee as a special caution; because I have seen many so prone to quip and
gird, as they would rather lose their friend than their jest. And if perchance
their boiling brain yield a quaint scoff, they will travail to be delivered of
it as a woman with child. These nimble fancies are but the froth of wit.


