An ACCOUNT OF THE RISE, PROGRESS, AND TERMINATION, OF THE MALIGNANT FEVER,
Lately prevalent in Philadelphia. BRIEFLY STATED FROM AUTHENTIC DOCUMENTS.

PHILADELPHIA: Printed and sold by Benjamin Johnson, No. 147, North side of
Market-Street.

M DCC XCIII.

A List of the Burials in the City and Liberties from August 1, to November 9,
1793.
August September October November Days Burials Days Burials Days Burials Days
Burials 1 9 1 13 1 77 1 15 2 8 2 18 2 64 2 21 3 9 3 11 3 78 3 13 4 10 4 27 4 58
4 15 5 10 5 20 5 71 5 15 6 3 6 24 6 72 6 11 7 11 7 18 7 86 7 14 8 5 8 42 8 90 8
8 9 12 9 32 9 103 9 6 10 7 10 29 10 92 11 6 11 27 11 118 118 12 5 12 33 12 111
The Jews, Baptists, Methodists, Free-Quakers, German part of St. Mary's
congregation, are not included in the above daily account of burials. 13 11 13
33 13 104 14 6 14 48 14 81 15 7 15 56 15 80 16 6 16 67 16 70 17 7 17 81 17 80
18 5 18 67 18 59 19 8 19 61 19 65 20 8 20 68 20 55 21 8 21 56 21 59 22 13 22 77
22 82 23 10 23 66 23 54 24 17 24 98 24 39 25 12 25 87 25 33 26 17 26 50 26 25
27 12 27 62 27 13 28 24 28 51 28 25 29 22 29 53 29 16 30 20 30 67 30 17 31 17
31 22 325 1442 1999 Protestant Episcopalians, 352 Moravians, 12 Presbyterians
353 Baptists, 60 Roman Catholics, 335 Methodists, 33 Friends, 378
Universalists, 2 Free Quakers, 39 Jews, 2 Lutherans, 641 Kensington 169
Calvinists, 261 Potter's field, 133 Swedes, 75

AN ACCOUNT OF THE MALIGNANT FEVER, Lately prevalent in Philadelphia.
AT the period when the Malignant Fever made its appearance in Philadelphia,
the City, by a series of prosperity in commerce, had grown to a state of
opulence not often recorded in the historic page. Her inhabitants indulged
themselves in all the gratifications of luxury and dissipation, to be procured
in this Western hemisphere. Her streets were crowded by the gay carriages of
pleasure, going and returning in every direction; new and elegant buildings
were seen rising in every quarter; and her port was thronged with shipping from
every trading country in Europe, and both the Indies: like Tire of old her
merchants were princes, and her traffickers were the honorable of the earth.
This uncommon slow of prosperity had its too common effect. The citizens too
generally had forgotten the Fountain from whom all their blessings flowed; and
impiously said or seemed to say by thy great wisdom and by thy traffic, have
thou increased thy riches.

By the unfortunate divisions in St. Domingo, one of the French Islands, many
of its inhabitants, to avoid the fire and sword of their stronger antagonists,
had fled from their homes, and, about the time the contagion took place in
Philadelphia, a large number of them sought refuge among us. Before they had
left their own burning and bloody shores their hearts had been appalled by
scenes of the most atrocious cruelty, and by the sight of numerous bodies of
the slain which had remained unburied for many days: so that the air must have
become too polluted for healthful respiration, had they been permitted to stay.
Many of these unfortunate refugees came in vessels exceedingly crowded; as well
as poorly provided with the means necessary to preserve health: had they even
left their homes in a state of soundness: some of course arrived sickly.

About this time, likewise, the licensed plunderers of the Ocean, belonging to
the same nation, brought in their prizes for condemnation and sale. One of
these freebooters, belonging to Marseilles in France, (the hot bed of
pestilential disease) after a lengthy circuitous cruize, came into our port,
and brought with her the Flora, a prize ship, both in a sickly condition. HERE
the inhabitants have generally agreed to fix the origin of the late dreadful
visitation. And in this opinion they have been confirmed by the report of two
accurate observers, Physicians, who had visited the sick in the earliest, and
every succeeding stage of the disease. From all the evidence we have been able
to collect, say they, "the disorder made it; first appearance in water street,
at Richard Denny's lodging house, who kept an ordinary frequented by a number
of Frenchmen who had lately arrived in some of the suspected vessels."

"Mrs. Parkinson, who lodged at Mr. Denny's, took the disease on the third and
died on the seventh of August, two French lads had taken lodgings at Denny's, a
few days before the death of Mrs, Parkinson, one of whom was soon after taken
ill and died. Immediately after his death, Mr. Denny's daughter says the other
one took lodgings higher up the street, and died soon after. Mr. and Mrs.
Denny, and two of their next door neighbors, also died of the same fever,
about two weeks after the French lads. Among the next succeeding victims were
Mrs. Lamaigre and Mr. Miller in the fame neighborhood, and almost every case
which occurred for the first two weeks could be traced to the same source."

"From a comparative view of all the preceding circumstances -- from the
contagious nature of the disease, and from the resemblance of its leading
symptoms to those of the yellow fever of the West Indies, there can be no doubt
that the contagion, which gave rise to the disease here, was imported. And from
its occurring in that part of water street, in a few days after the Amelia,
Sans Culottes, and Flora arrived, there is the strongest presumption, a
presumption amounting almost to a certainty, that it was introduced and
cummunicated by some of the crew or passengers, belonging to one or other of
the said vessels."

"That the fever originated from the rotten coffee, as has been suggested, is
altogether chimerical."

"That the dry and warm state of our atmosphere had no share in the generation
of the disease is reduced to a certainty, from the disease being at first
confined to a few particular persons, and in that particular part of water
street near to the suspected vessels; from its being communicated from those to
others, and so on, in succession."

Such has been the report of Doctors Currie and Cathrall, men of extensive
skill and observation. But this opinion has been combatted by a physician of
very considerable reputation and practice, who has offered some reasons to the
public for dissenting on this occasion, from the above mentioned gentlemen, as
well as most others of their profession. He supposes that the contagion was
generated from the stench of a Cargo of damaged coffee, which had been landed
near the same place where it made its first appearance; on a supposition that
vegetable putrefaction might produce such a disease. This gentleman has
deservedly gained much credit by his noble and humane attention to unhappy
patients of the contagion, during its most perilous stages; but the majority of
his fellow citizens think that he has carried the spirit of discovery too far
in tracing its origin.

It is certain that neither the same disease, nor any other similar to it, has
ever visited, this city at any preceding time since it was founded, but what
has been undeniably traced to a foreign source. The city police, perhaps, was
never better administered; nor its cleanliness more attended to; and if
vegetable putrefaction alone were sufficient to produce so dire a contagion;
surely in the lapse of one hundred years it might have happened, and been
ascertained beyond a contradiction. The cleanliness of our streets and wharves
has been more neglected in former times than lately; they have, also, been more
incommoded by putrid vegetable substances; and we have had every
diversification of seasons, wet and dry, hot and cold, that could assist in
producing such an effect: and as the learned Doctor has not produced sufficient
reasons to convince a number of his fellow citizens of the justness of his
opinion in this instance, he must indulge them in believing that the
deleterious miasmata was introduced from abroad, and from the sick from on
board one of the three vessels before mentioned.

There are some indeed, who go so far as to say that if particular men had done
their duty; and had not betrayed more indulgence to French cruizers, than
genuine friendship for this city, we should never have had occasion to dispute
on so sorrowful a theme.

From whatever fountain we trace this poisoned stream it has destroyed the
lives of many thousand citizens and some of the most distinguished worth. Many
widows and orphans are left to deplore the loss of husbands and parents: at the
acme of its predominance, the universal complexion of the city was like
Ezekiels roll, inscribed from one end to the other with characters of
lamentation and woe.

A particular account of the various symptoms of the late malignant fever have
been described with great precision and perspicuity by the ingenious Dr.
William Cur^rie, in a piece published in an early stage of the disease. From
which the following brief abstract is taken and inserted, for the information
of our readers.

"THE patient first complains of weariness and weakness, which, in a few hours,
is succeeded by a sense of chillness, and an oppressive dull pain and giddiness
in the head, an oppressive weight and stricture about the breast, particularly
at the region of the heart, as if the space was too narrow for its pulsations.
The breathing is performed with quickness and uneasiness.

These symptoms in most cases, are soon succeeded by a frequent propensity to
puke, and this by a quick, full, but soft and irregular pulse; great heat about
the head, neck, and breast; the skin generally hot and moist about the neck and
forehead, but dry, and but little increase of heat about the feet and legs.

IF, to these symptoms we add an extraordinary prostration of strength or
sudden debility in the animal functions of the body, we have a perfect
description of the fever under consideration, from the first day of its attack
to the third of its progress.

WHEN no amendment takes place by the (...) or 4th day, most of the recited
symptoms become more distressing and alarming, with the pulse low and sunk.
Frequent vomiting of matter resembling coffee grounds in color and
consistence, generally occurs before the disease terminates, when it proves
mortal, together with a cadaverous appearance (...) the countenance, succeeded
by a deep yellow or leaden color of the skin and nails; the eyes become
suffused with blood, and the countenance appears like that of one strangled;
but no signs of jaundice appear, either in the urine or feces. In some cases, a
profuse discharge of blood from the nose, concludes the catastrophe. A hiccup
is a very frequent but not a constant symptom, nor does vomiting always occur.
The tongue is seldom very foul or dry, nor does the patient always crave drink.
His intellects, though always confused, are seldom so much disordered as to
amount to a delirium. Subsultus tendinum are very rare

When the disease terminates favorably, the symptoms generally abate on the
third or fourth day, accompanied by a profuse sweat. When it ends fatally, it
is generally between the fifth and eighth day, though some have survived the
tenth and died afterward.

The characteristic or leading symptoms of the disease, as has already been
observed, are sudden debility in the voluntary powers, oppressive ^ain,
giddiness and sense of fullness and distention in the vessels of the forepart of
the head, and an oppressive weight, or an inexpressible sensation of tightness
about the heart and lungs, accompanied with excruciating anguish and
restlessness."

As soon as the contagion had reached the central streets, it spread itself
with dreadful rapidity on all sides. In the course of August there were more
than three hundred funerals; toward the close of the month there were twenty
buried in a day. During the major part of the time the thermoter stood from 80
to 90 in the afternoons; the sky was mostly fair, and the winds generally
westerly. From the 25th. to the end of the month the weather was cloudy and
some rain fell; during these days the mortallity increased.

In September its malignance increased amazingly: fear impressed the stoutest
hearts; the dread of infection increased with the the infection itself. Many
people declined visiting their nearest relatives that were sick. The most
humane seemed to have forgotten their humanity. The utmost skill in the healing
art was employed in vain. Every family seemed to hug itself in a state of
seclusion from its nearest neighbor. Indeed in some few sorrowful instances,
all the warm "charities of father, son and brother," were palsied by the cold
hand of death.

At this crisis, a crisis of inconceivable consternation, many thousands flew
into the country, as choice or chance directed; and in our own state they
generally met with a sympathetic reception; the farmer opened his hospitable
doors to receive the affrighted fugitives, and condoled in their sufferings. A
few there were who allowed their fears to overpower their fellow-feeling, and
refused their aid unless paid an extraordinary price. In this month fourteen
hundred citizens were added to the list of mortality. The contagion was still
progressive; toward the end of it there were from fifty to ninety buried in a
day. By the glasses the heat of the atmosphere had abated; the mercury seldom
rose above 80. The weather was mostly fair, with a few intervening days of
cloud, which promised rain but discharged none. The winds still continued to be
westerly. From the 19th to the 23d the air was calm; and during these five days
and the day following there were near five hundred persons buried. Throughout
the month the heat was generally moderate, and the weather pretty equable; so
that the increase of the mortality was owing merely to the enlargement of the
circle of infection.

Until the middle of October the mighty destroyer went on with increasing
havoc. From the 1st. to the 17th upwards of fourteen hundred fell as victims to
the tremendous malady: from the latter day to the 31st. the bills of mortality
lessoned pretty gradually. In the whole of this month the dead amounted to near
two thousand; a dreadful number! if we consider that at this time upwards of
one third of its inhabitants had forsaken the city.

People by this time had experienced the inefficacy of smelling bottles,
handkerchiefs dipped in vinegar, camphor bags pieces of tarred rope, etc. as a
prevention; and had very generally laid them aside; trusting rather to the
protection of Providence, and a prudent care to avoid the houses of the sick.
In the earlier period of the disease these precautions were almost universal;
insomuch that the greater part of the people to be seen in the streets, had
either one or the other applied to their nostrils. Many placed an extraordinary
confidence in the virtue of garlic and chewed it constantly, even to such a
degree as to be smelled at seveveral yards distance. Samuel Benge, who had that
dangerous office, the superintendance of the removal of the sick from their
houses to Bush-hill, used to take a few Anderson's pills, and a little
sweet-oil every evening: whether this was the cause of his escaping the
disease, cannot be ascertained.

The thermometer was very variable, mostly below 80, and above 50 until the
27th, from which day to the end of the month it was always below 50, and one
day below 40. The winds generally blew from the N. and N. W. The weather for
the greatest part of the time fair. During the five or six last days of this
month the virulence of the contagion was greatly abated; but few fresh patients
presented themselves -- and the funerals were from 12 to 20 per diem.

From the first of November to the seventh, the mortality continued gradually
to decrease; on the ninth, the burials in all the grave-yards were reduced to
so small a number as six. By this time the fugitive citizens had recovered
their spirits sufficiently to venture back to their homes; the streets and the
various departments of business began to resume life and activity.

Let us now make a pause; a solemn pause! The visitation has passed over our
heads for a time at least. Let us look back on the awful scene; and endeavor
to draw some instruction from it: it is a scene replete with interesting
instruction.

A contagious fever has made dreadful, and in this country unparallelled,
ravages in every quarter of the city; few houses indeed have escaped. Universal
consternation invaded every mind: the feelings of humanity; the suggestions of
duty; the fortitude of man, have all been absorbed by the sense of private
danger, and a wish to escape the infectious calamity: every medical aid has
been exerted; and in most cases exerted in vain! The potent malady has laughed
to scorn our wisdom, and our ingenuity. We have been beholden to the poor; to
the despised blacks, for nurses to attend the sick; as if Providence were
determined to convince us that they are equally the objects of his care, with
ourselves.

The long extended train of funeral attendants, heretofore too common, has been
exchanged for the solitary hearse; and weeping relatives have been left to
mourn in a state of dis^ertion. Let the proud Lord of the creation view this
picture, and it is not the picture of fancy, and ask himself whether he has any
reason to boast of his talents, or his virtues. Certainly he has more cause to
exclaim with humiliating propriety in his address to Almighty God, "Lord! what
is man that thou art mindful of him."

With this humble temper of mind he will be better prepared to receive the
benefits of Heaven with gratitude; he can never fail to feel a glow of
devotion, when he considers that all human skill had been exhausted in most
cases to no good purpose; and the gloom which hung over the city seemed to
threaten to unpeople it, the forgiveness and and mercy of the MOST HIGH, burst
out, like the brightness of the sun through a cloud, with healing virtue. Mercy
reasumed the ascendant on the judgment seat; and the raging mortallity ceased.
Let us then with one accord lift up our hearts with our hands to God in the
Heavens, and pray, that he may animate our minds with a resolution to profit by
the late humiliating display of his judgment and his mercy.

One remarkable circumstance and one that reflects much credit on the
neghbouring country people is that our markets were tolerably well supplied
with every necessary of life, usually to be found in them; and that at no
considerable advance in the price.

Although the predominant feature of the city while the mortality raged at the
extreme, was terror and dismay; and although most people sought their own safety
with too little concern about others; there were found men, who, at the
imminent risque of their own lives, stepped forward, at the most trying pinch, to
assist those who wanted the choice or the means of flying. In this band of
worthies the poor met with friends in the day of distress; and the helpless
orphan with a father.

The country seat of William Hamilton at Bush-hill being an high and airy
situation* and at some distance from the city, was taken and converted into an
hospital for the poor, and such as had not conveniences of being nursed at
their own homes. It soon became crowded with patients; and, from a concurrence
of causes, in a short time it fell into great disorder. Unprincipled nurses,
neglected the sick and consumed in riot the provisions gathered for their
comfort. Cleanliness was neglected to such a degree that the chambers became
too offensive and dangerous for any but an insensible, or an heroic mind to
enter. In this state of disorder and filthiness; it will be naturally supposed,
the sick had little chance of recovering: and indeed so few did recover, that
the minds of the poor, who to this time had escaped the infection, instead of
considering the hospital as a blessing, became terrified with the thoughts of
being sent to it, and many, even of the sick, resisted as long they were able,
the importunities of their friends to have them taken to inevitable death as it
appeared to them to be.

A Committee of citizens (a list of whose names is hereunto annexed) who had
undertaken to assist the ordinary and legal guardians of the poor, heard
repeated complaints of this alarming evil: but the hazard of attending at the
hospital to remove it, as well as prevent the repetition of it when removed,
seemed like an immediate sacrafice of the lives of the undertakers. To search
into the horors of this dismal receptical, where every breath was pestilence
and every sight distress, required the humanity and fortitude of a Howard. Such
men where found! -- They voluntarily offered themselves. -- Stephen Gerard a
native of France, a wealthy merchant of Philadelphia, one of the committee, and
Peter Helm, a native of Philadelphia, another member, generously stepped forth
and undertook the perilous task. If an ancient Roman, who saved the life of one
citizen, at the risque of his own, was crowned with a civic wreath, what
rewards do these men deserve? who where instrumental in saving the lives of
many! They gave up their own to help the helpless -- Thanks be to Heaven! They
were preserved; and their generous labors where blessed with success. The
first worthless nurses were discharged, and new ones introduced; the rooms were
well cleansed, and the sick were properly attended.

The effects of the reformation soon appeared; the poor no longer considered
Bush-hill Lazaretto as the Antichamber of the grave; but as a humane provision
for the necessitous sick. In this dangerous post these two worthy citizens
continued their daily attendance until the disease was extinguished.

Joseph Inskeep, (a name dear to all his acquaintance) another member of the
committee, very early devoted himself to enquire after those that where sick
and to assist them: often did this good man set at their bed sides administering
comfort. Several he was instrumental in restoring to their friends and families.

Daniel Offley, another respectable citizen and member of the charitable
committee, with singular fortitude braved the danger of infection, in discharge
of his christian duty; in visiting the sick and comfortless and affording every
assistance in his power.

Jonathan D. Sergeant Esquire. Jacob Tomkins, jun. James Wilson and Andrew Adgate,
all distinguished themselves by their attention and labors of humanity. These
six valuable men are no more! -- They fell victims to the contagion; They are
gone from works to rewards but their memories will ever be respected by all who
knew them

The truly Reverend Henry Helmuth (Pastor of the Lutheran congregation, in this
city) claims particular applause. This worthy clergyman, not satisfied to wait
for the calls of his people, invited them from the pulpet universally to make
free to send for him at all times by day or night. Indeed he consecrated all
his time, whilst the disease prevailed to assist and comfort his flock: and the
sick among them were so numerous that he had but little time he could call his
own.

Many more names could be mentioned, who, to their lasting honor, stepped
forth at this trying season, to smooth the bed of sickness, and to relieve the
necessities of the poor. But it would swell this short account beyond the
compass intended, to recount the benevolent actions, the unremitted attentions
and the hazardous exertions of many of our fellow citizens besides the
committee, during this dreadful period.

" Ye sons of mercy,"
" Who touched with human woe, redrestive searched
Into the horrors of the deathbed room;
Unpitied, and unheard, where miss'ry moan'd;
Where sickness pined, where thirst and hunger dwelt,
And friendless orphans wept their parents lost."
It is not in the tribute of praise from your fellow citizens, however justly
yours, that you seek your reward: A blessing has been Pronounced on such
exertions as yours by the highest of all authorities; because that you have
visited the sick; fed the hungry; and clothed the naked: your charitable
offices to your poor fellow creatures are appreciated as if you had done those
offices to himself.

So great a mortality among the people consequently left a large number of
orphan children in a very destitute and distressing situation; some of them
without a friend to administer to their wants; several of them indeed, were
found wandering in the streets, not knowing where to apply for relief. Here
again was a large field of labor opened for the benevolent. The children were
to be provided with nurses provisions and other accommodations, which was no
small undertaking. The committee however in addition to their former burdens,
also undertook this; and procured the Loganian Library which they ^^^^ed up,
and appropriated to the purpose of an Orphan house. A suitable woman has been
provided as superintendant, with sufficient assistants under her. Every
necessary care appears to have been taken and the children mostly healthy and
cheerful. Many of these have been delivered to their relatives. About two
hundred have been introduced into this house of whom about sixty were infants.
At present there are nearly fifty in the house and between thirty and forty out
with wet nurses. Nineteen only have died.

The accumulating expense of this institution as well as that at Bush-hill,
with many others, obliged the committee to negociate a loan of 1500 dollars
with the bank of North America, and this being inadiquate to the expense, they
borrowed a farther sum of 5000 dollars of the same bank, for which the
directors refused to recieve any interest. Several liberal contributions have
enabled the committee to continue their parental care and provision for those
unfortunate children, as well as to supply a great number of poor with fire
wood and other necessaries. From the citizens of Philadelphia in and near
German-Town they recieved two thousand dollars; from those in the neighborhood
of Darby, fourteen hundred dollars; from the citizens of New York, five
thousand dollars; from Bucks-county sixteen hundred dollars; from
Delaware-county twelve hundred dollars; from Franklin-county five-hundred
dollars; sundry necessaries from the inhabitants of Boston, to the amount of
twenty five hundred dollars; and a great many other contributions from
different places.

Notwithstanding so generous as were the supplies handed us by our friendly
countrymen, so great was the terror and dismay with which they were affected at
the idea of the fugitive Philadelphians carrying the disorder with them and
spreading it in the country, that the great law of self-preservation superseded
every other consideration; insomuch that in many places resolutions were
entered into, that no person or goods whatever should be suffered to enter
their respective towns, and corporations, unless it could be proved they had
been from the city at least twelve days. The inhabitants of the town of Boston,
New York, Baltimore, Charleston, and most other seaports in the United States,
made resolutions similar to the above and obliged all vessels coming from
Philadelphia, to ride quarantine for the space of time which they respectively
apprehended requisite to assertain whether there was any thing of the contagion
among them. However, to their credit let it be remembered, that they generally
procured suitable hospitals, and made ample provision for those who should come
from the city, and be taken with the disease.

During this melancholy period, the city in addition to the various other
afflictions, lost ten of her most valuable physicians, doctors Hutchinson,
Morris, Lynn, Pennington, Dodds, Johnson, Glentworth, Phile, Graham and Green.
Most of the others were sick at different times, and those who remained alive
and able to go out, were not sufficient in number to answer the many calls for
their assistance, so that many suffered for want of proper advice and many more
for want of suitable and attentive nurses. Great has been the charge devolved
on them; great have been their exertions, and much gratitude is due by the
citizens universally, to those of the faculty who faithfully braved the danger
in performing their duty.

It is remarkable that the French who settled among us, and particularly those
from the West India islands, were in a particular manner preserved from this
sickness: some few, however, took it and died.

The black people, likewise, were exempted in a peculiar manner from the
contagion. Very few of them were taken, and still fewer died.

Had it not been for the exertions and attentions of some of these despised
people, the calamity and distress of the city would have been much aggravated.

Some parts of their conduct may have the appearance of ingratitude to the
citizens of Philadelphia who have been their first and firmest friends, who
have always generously and humanely exerted themselves to defend and release
them from the oppressive hand of slavery; yet much may be said in extenuation
of their fault.

Though the conduct of some of them, in taking three and four dollars a day;
exacting it with the utmost rigor from starving families, and then not doing
their duty, is to be reprobated, and for that of others an excuse is necessary,
yet there are some among them whose conduct merits great applause.

Those who are acquainted with human nature, will readily allow that the
principle of self preservation, must operate upon the blacks as strongly as
upon other people. Now though experience has shown that the former have almost
universally escaped the contagion, yet at that time the fact was not absolutely
established, and they might rationally be supposed to be possessed of the idea
that the circulating report of their being incapable of taking the infection,
was but a finesse or stratagem of the whites, to facilitate the attainment of
their assistance; and as they were ignorant of the physical properties of
bodies, and as even we, with all the advantages of education, have not yet been
able to develope the cause of their wonderful preservation, the idea, which
they may have had of the danger, would very probably prevent many from
undertaking so difficult and hazardous an employment. Is it not human nature?
Would it not have been almost a phenomenon, had they, educated as they are,
acted otherwise.

As the value of labor is generally estimated by the trouble it costs, or the
danger which attends it, and the plenty or scarcity of hands that are willing
to undertake an employment, the blacks would naturally follow the general
principle and take advantage of the time, to get as much for their labor as
they could. I mean not to justify the exaction of exorbitant prices at such a
time, but merely to offer a small extenuation of a fault which the negroes were
unfortunately guilty of. It should be considered that their education has been
such as to keep them in ignorance of the finer feelings of nature, that they
have generally been in the habit of being imposed upon, that they are
universally poor, and must possess with others, an ambition of procuring
something for future contingencies, that the time afforded tempting
opportunities, and that it is too generally the case, that mankind seize with
avidity every occasion of profiting.

"IT appears from authentic documents, that the same kind of fever as the one
which has been described in the preceding pages, has been prevalent in
Philadelphia at two different periods. The first, A. D. 1740; supposed to have
been introduced by means of a quantity of wearing apparel brought in a trunk
from Barbados, belonging to a gentleman who died of it in that Island.

THE second time of its appearance was A. D. 1762, introduced by a mariner, who
arrived sick with it from the Havanna, and communicated it to the family where
he lodged; from whence it spread rapidly from house to house as families had
intercourse with one another.

ACCORDING to the notes of Dr. Redman, the worthy President of the Philadelphia
College of physicians, it made its apearance the latter end of August of the
year last mentioned. About the 20th or 25th of September, its progress seems to
have arrived to its height. From the 27th it gradually declined, so that by the
10th of October, instead of 18 to 20 patients of a day, which Dr. Redman had
before attended in it, he had now only two or three.

THE fever at that period was circumscribed between Pine-street northerly, and
three or four squares from thence southerly, and extended from Water-street, to
Third or Fourth-street westerly. Its first and greatest ravages were about the
New Market, which lay near the source of the contagion. The fever as it
appeared at that time, is thus described by Dr. Redman in a communication just
presented to, and read in the College of Physicians.

"THE patients were generally seized with a sudden and severe pain in the head
and eye balls, which frequently appeared a little inflamed, or had a reddish
cast, great pain in the back and limbs, and much dejection of spirits. A sick
stomach generally attended, but in various degrees of violence, with frequent
vomiting, more or less of green or yellow bile, and was distinguished from the
cholera morbus by not having a purging with it. There was also a kind of
cardialgia, or burning heat about the scrobiculus cordis, with great
oppression; but if I remember right, not much pain like a cholic; nor do I
recollect any chill generally preceding the above symtoms -- however, it might
be with some. The skin was dry with a disagreeable burning heat in it, sensible
to the hand of others. The tongue was not very dry at first, but rather moist,
and covered with whitish mucus. The pulse was not generally either full or
tense, but very quick in the beginning, by which the degree of fever was
chiefly designated. Yet in some persons previously very plethoric from high
living and other circumstances, some fullness without tension was observed in
the pulse in the first stage; after which in many, the pulse became so moderate
in every respect, as to be scarcely distinguishable from that of a person in
health. Though very restless and often tossing about, or changing possition
from oppression at the praecordia, I think they were but seldom very delirious;
but if the disease continued to increase, and resist the power of medicines,
they rather grew comatose, which was a bad symptom, and generally continued
till death, unless the black vomiting came on and occasionally roused them. But
even those who were comatose, when roused appeared quite sensible, though not
capable of preserving a regular connection of ideas on any one subject for any
length of time. They soon became yellow in their eyes and skin universally,
which became extreme in some before, and in almost all after death: and in
those that recovered. it continued during the whole convalescent state, and in
some, a great part of the cuticle peeled off.

"WHEN the disease terminated fatally, it was generally on the 4th, 5th or 6th
day; some few later; but after the 7th day, or even sooner if the pulse became
much calmer and slower without a Coma, and the patient inclined to a natural
easy sleep, ^^ough short, with a moist skin and tongue, etc. we were encouraged
to hope, and promise much and generally succeeded in our prognostications, etc."

Committee for relieving the sick and distressed, appointed by the citizens of
Philadelphia, Sept. 14, 1793.
President. MATTHEW CLARKSON, Mayor. Secretary. CALEB LOWNES. Treasurer. THOMAS
WISTAR. Managers of the Hospital at Bush-hill. STEPHEN GIRARD. PETER HELM.
Orphan Committee. ISRAEL ISRAEL. JOHN LETCHWORTH. JAMES KERR. J. SHARSWOOD.
Committee of distribution. ISRAEL ISRAEL. JOHN HAWORTH. JAMES SWAIN. MATTHEW
CAREY. THOMAS SAVERY. JAMES KERR. J. SHARSWOOD. JACOB WITMAN. J. LETCHWORTH. J.
SHARSWOOD. SAMUEL BENGE.
Superintendant of the burials of the dead, and removals of the Sick. SAMUEL
BENGE. Distributer of supplies. HENRY DEFOREST. Committee of accounts. JAMES
SHARSWOOD. JOHN CONNELLY.
Committee on the publication of letters. CALEB LOWNES. MATTHEW CAREY.
Deceased members. A. ADGATE. J. D. SARGEANT. DANIEL OFFLEY. JOSEPH INSKEEP.

ASSISTANT COMMITTEE, appointed Oct. 14.
Samuel Coats, Chairman. John Oldden, Secretary. Northern Liberties. William
Peter Spragues, William Gregory, Jacob Witman, James Swain, Joseph Burns,
George Forepaugh, Casper Snyder, Peter Smith,
Vine (...) Race. Richard Whitehead, Joseph Kerr, John Ettries.
Race to Arch. Thomas Willis, Daniel Dawson, Peter Thompson, Thomas Allib^n^,
Lambert Wilmer.
Arch to Market. William Sansom, Justinian Fox, Amos Wickersham.
Market to Chestnut. Arthur Howell, Alexander Cochran, Thomas Dobson.
Chestnut to Walnut. Jeremiah Paul, James Cummins, Casper W. Morris, Thomas
Castiere.
Walnut to Spruce. George Rutter, Benjamin W. Morris,
Spruce to Pine. Samuel Pancoast, jun. John Woodside, Levy Hollingsworth,
William Watkins.
Pine to South. John Wood, Adam Brittle, William Eckard, Thomas Dicksey, Fergus
M'Elwaine.
Southwark. William Innis, Richard Mosely, William Robinson, s^n John Grantham,
John Savadge, John Pattison.

A SHORT ACCOUNT OF THE PLAGUE IN LONDON, 1665.
(Written at that time.)
AMONGST the many calamities with which the Almighty is pleased to visit the
children of men, in order to reduce them to a just sense of their own weakness
and entire dependence upon him, there is scarce any that are more productice of
true penitent humiliation and of a sight of what is really good and truly evil,
than those contagious distempers, which an offended God sometimes suffers to
rage amongst the people. In the year 1665 the city of London was sorely visited
by the plague. An account of the progress and effects of that visitation was
kept by a citizen who remained there during the whole time of the sickness, and
appears to have been candid and judicious in his remarks thereon. I trust my
readers may, in a short description of that memorable judgment, meet with such
lessons of best wisdom, which nothing can so effectually produce, as a close
and serious converse with death and the grave. The introduction of this
contagion in London was by some goods imported from Holland, which had been
brought thither from the Levant. It first broke out in the house where those
goods were opened, from whence it spread to other houses. In the first house
that was infected there died four persons: A neighbor who went to visit them
returning home, gave the distemper to her family, and died with all her
household. The parish officers who were employed about the sick persons, being
also infected, the physicians perceived the danger, and, upon narrow
inspection, assured, that it was indeed the plague, with all its terrifying
particulars, and that it threatened a general infection. The people began now
to be alarmed all over the town: the usual number of burials within the bills
of mortality for a week were generally about 240 to 300, but from the 17th to
the 24th of Jan. the printed bill was 474. However this went off again, and the
frost continuing very severe till nearly the end of February, the bills
decreased again, and people began to look upon the danger as good as over; but
in May the bills greatly increased, and the weather becoming hot, the infection
spread again in a dreadful manner.

I lived, says the author, without Aldgate, and as the distemper had not
reached to that side of the city, our neighborhood continued easy; but at the
other end of the town the consternation was very great, and the nobility and
gentry thronged out of the town with their families in an unusual manner;
nothing was to be seen but wagons, carts, and coaches, with goods and people,
and horsemen attending them, hurrying away; then empty wagons and carts
appeared, who were apparently returning to fetch more people, besides
innumerable numbers of people on horse back, fitted out for traveling. This
was a very melancholy prospect; indeed there was nothing else of moment to be
seen; it filled my mind with very serious thoughts of the misery that was
coming upon the city, and the unhappy condition of those that would be left in
it. By the end of July the contagion had spread and increased to a great
degree: Sorrow and sadness sat upon every face; and though some parts were not
yet overwhelmed, all looked deeply concerned. London might well be said to be
all in tears, the mourners did not go about the streets, for nobody made a
formal dress of mourning for their nearest relations, but the voice of mourning
was indeed heard in the streets; the shrieks of women and children at the
windows and doors of their houses where their dearest relations were dying,
were so frequent to be heard as we passed the streets, that it was enough to
pierce the stoutest heart in the world. Tears and lamentations were seen almost
in every house, especially in the first part of the visitation; for toward the
latter end people did not so much concern themselves for the loss of their
friends, expecting that themselves should be summoned the next hour.

It was a time of very unhappy breaches amongst us; in matters of religion,
divisions and separate opinions prevailed; the church of England was lately
restored, and the Presbyterians and other professions had set up their meetings
for worship, apart, in which they were frequently disturbed, the government
endeavoring to suppress their meetings. But this dreadful visitation
reconciled the different parties, and took all manner of prejudice and scruple
from the people. But after the sickness was over, that spirit of charity
subsided, and things returned to their own channel again. Here we may observe,
that a nearer view of death would soon reconcile men of good principles to one
another, and that it is chiefly owing to our easy situations in life, and our
putting these things far from us, that our breaches are fomented, and that
there is so much prejudice and want of Christian charity and union amongst us.
A close view and converse with death, or with diseases that threaten death,
would scum off the gall of our temper, remove our animosities, and bring us to
see with different eyes. On the other side of the grave we shall all be
brethren again.

The inns of court were now all shut up, there was few lawyers to be seen in
the city, indeed there was no need of them, for quarrels and divisions about
interest had ceased; every body was at peace.

It was also worthy of observation, as well as fruitful of instruction, to
observe with what alacrity the people of all persuasions embraced the
opportunities they had of attending upon the public worship, and other
appointed times of devotion, as humiliations, fastings and public confessions
of sins, to implore the mercy of GOD, and avert the judgment which hung over
their heads. The churches were so thronged, that there was often no coming
near, no, not to the very door of the largest churches. There was also daily
prayers appointed morning and evening, at which the people attended with
uncommon devotion.

All plays and interludes which had lately began to increase amongst us, were
forbidden; the gaming tables, public dancing-rooms and musick-houses, which
multiplied and began to debauch the manners of the people, were shut up and
suppressed, finding indeed no trade, for the minds of the people were generally
humbled and agitated with other things, death was before their eyes, and every
body began to think of their grave.

The infection still gradually increased till the middle of August when there
died a thousand a day, by account of the weekly bills, though they never gave a
full account by many thousands; many of the parish officers were taken sick
themselves and died when their account was to be given in. The parish of
Stepney alone had within in the year one hundred and sixteen sextons,
grave-diggers and carriers of the dead, etc. Indeed the work was not of a
nature to allow them leisure to take an exact tale of the dead bodies, which
were all thrown together in the dark in a pit, to which no man could come near
without the utmost peril.

I had says the author, the care of my brother's house which obliged me
sometimes to go abroad. In these walks I had dismal scenes before my eyes, as
particularly of persons falling dead in the streets, terrible shrieks of women,
who in their agonies would throw open their chamber-windows, and cry out in a
dismal surprising manner; it is impossible to describe the variety of postures
in which the passions of the poor people would express themselves. Passing
through Token House yard, of a sudden a casement violently opened just over my
head and a woman gave three frightful shrikes, and then cried: Oh! Death Death
Death, which struck me with horror and chillness in my very blood, there was
nobody to be seen in the whole street, neither did any window open, for people
now had no curiosity in any case. I went on to pass into Bell-Alley, where
there was a greater cry than that; I could hear women and children run
skreaming about the rooms like distracted, when a garret window opened, and
somebody on the other side asked What is the matter? Upon which it was
answered, Oh Lord! my old master has hanged himself. The other asked again, Is
he quite dead? And the first answered, Ay ay quite dead and (...). This Person
was a Deputy-Alderman and very rich, But this is but one instance, it is scarce
credible what dreadful cases happened in particular families every day. People
in the (...) of the distemper or in the torment of the swelling, which was
indeed intolerable, becoming (...), oftentimes laid violent hands upon
themselves throwing themselves out of the windows, or breaking out of the
houses, would dance naked about the streets, not knowing one extacy from
another; others if not prevented, would run directly down the river, and plunge
into the water. Some dying of mere grief as a passion, and some of fright and
surprise, without having recieved the infection. It often pierced my very soul,
to hear the groans and cries of those thus tormented; but this of the swellings
was accounted the most promising particular in the whole infection; for if
these swellings could be brought to break and run, the patient generally
recovered. Whereas those who were struck with death at the beginning of the
distemper, and had spots come upon them, often went about indifferent easy,
till a little before they died, and some till the moment they dropped down; some
would be taken very suddenly sick, and would run to a convenient place, or
their own houses if possible, and there sit down, grow faint, and die. The
method the magistrates fell into of locking up the doors of the people's houses
where they had taken the distemper, setting watchmen there night and day to
prevent any going out to spread the infection, looked hard and cruel, as
perhaps those who were ^ound in the family, might have escaped, if they had
been removed from the sick? but the public good seemed to justify such a
conduct, and there was no obtaining the least mitigation by any application to
the magistrates. This put the people who thought themselves well, upon many
stratigems to get out of their confinements. Going out one morning, I heard a
great outcry, which prompting my curiosity, I inquired the cause of a person
who locked out of a window. A watchman had been employed to watch at the door
of a house, which was infected and shut up, both himself and the day-watchman
attended there a day and two nights, all this while no noise had been heard,
nor lights seen in the house, neither had they called for any thing: it seems
that two or three days before the dead cart had stopped there, and a servant maid
had been brought down to the door, dead, wrapped only in a green rug, which the
buriers had put into the cart, and carried away. The next day the watchman
heard great crying and screaming in the house, which he supposed was occasioned
by some of the family dying just at that time; upon which he knocked at the
door a great while, at last one looked out, and said with an angry quick tone,
and a voice of one that was crying, What do you want that ye make such a
knocking? He answered: I am the watchman: how do you do? what is the matter?
The person answered: What is that to you? Stop the dead cart. This was about
one o'clock; soon after the stopped the dead cart, and then knocked again, but
nobody answered. He continued knocking, and the bellman called several times:
Bring out your dead; but nobody answered, till the man that drove the cart
being called to other houses, would stay no longer, but drove away. In the
morning when the day-watchman came in, they knocked at the door a great while,
but nobody answering, they got a ladder, and one of them went up to the window,
and saw a woman lying dead upon the floor in a dismal manner: but though he
called aloud and knocked hard on the floor with his staff, nobody stirred or
answered.

This they made known to the magistrate, who ordered the house to be broken
open, when nobody was found in the house, but that young woman, who having been
infected, and past recovery, the rest had left her to die by herself, and were
every one gone, having found some way to delude the watchman, and go out. As to
those cries and shrieks which he heard, it was supposed, they were the
passionate cries of the family, at the bitter parting, which, to be sure, it
was to them all; this being the sister to the mistress of the family. Many more
instances might be given, but these may suffice to show the deep distress of
that day. Death did not now hover over every one's head only, but looked into
their houses and chambers, and even stared in their very faces; and though
there was some stupidity and dullness of mind, yet there was a great deal of
just alarm sounded in the inmost soul: many consciences were awakened; many
hard hearts melted into tears; many a penitent confession was made of crimes
long concealed. People might be heard even in the streets as we passed along
calling upon God for mercy, through Jesus Christ, and saying: I have been a
thief; I have been an adulterer; I have been a murderer, and the like, and none
durst stop to make enquiry into such things, or to administer comfort to the
poor creature, who in the anguish both of soul and body thus cried out. Many
were the warnings that were then given by dying penitents to others, not to put
off and delay their repentance to a day of distress, that such a time of
calamity as this, was no time for repentance. I wish, says the author, I could
repeat the very sound of those groans and exclamations that I heard from some
poor dying creatures, when in the height of their agonies and distress, and
that I could make him that reads this hear, as, I imagine, I now hear them, for
the sound seems still to ring in my ears.

In the beginning of September the number of burials increasing, the
churchwardens of Aldgate parish ordered a large pit to be dug, to hold all the
dead which might die in a month, it was about forty feet long and sixteen
broad; some blamed the churchwardens for suffering such a frightful gulf to be
dug: nevertheless in two weeks they had thrown more than eleven hundred bodies
into it^ when they were obliged to fill it up, as the bodies were come within 6
feet of the surface. My curiosity drove me to go and see this pit, when there
had been near four hundred people buried in it. I got admittance into the
churchyard, by ^^^ns of the sexton, who was a sensible, religious (...). He
would have persuaded me not to go saying, That it was indeed t^^^^ duty to
venture, and in it they might hope to be preserved; but that, as I had no
apparent call, he thought, my curiosity could not justify my running that
hazard. I told him, I had been pressed in my mind to go, and that perhaps it
might be an instructing ^ight. Nay says the good man, if you will venture upon
that score in the name of GOD go in; it will be a sermon to you, it may be the
best you ever heard in your life. His discourses had shocked my resolution, and
I stood wavering for a good while; but just then I heard the bell-men and the
cart, loaded with dead bodies, appearing, I went in. There was nobody, as I
could perceive, at first with the cart but the buriers, and the man that led
the cart; but when they came to the pit, I saw a man muffled in a cloak who
appeared in great agony; the buriers immediately gathered about him, supposing
he was one of those poor delirious or desperate creatures, that would sometimes
run to the pit, wrapped in blankets, and throw themselves in, and as they said,
bury themselves. When the buriers came to him, they (...) ^ound he was neither
desperate ^or distempered in mind, but one oppressed with a dreadful weight of
grief, having his wife and several children all in the cart, that was just come
in with him, and he followed in agony and excess of sorrow. He calmly desired
the buriers to let him alone, said he would only see the bodies thrown in, and
go away; so they left importuning him. But no sooner was the cart turned round,
and the bodies shot into the pit promiscuously, which was a surprise to him,
for he at least expected, they would have been decently laid in, though indeed
he was afterward convinced that was impracticable, I say, no sooner did he see
the sight, but he cried out aloud, unable to contain himself, and fell down in
a swoon; the buriers ran to him, and took him up, and when he came to himself,
led him to a place where he was taken care of. He looked into the pit again, as
he went away, but the buriers had covered the bodies so immediately with
throwing earth, that nothing could be seen. The cart had in it sixteen or
seventeen bodies. Some were wrapped up in linen sheets, some in rugs, some little
other than naked, or so loose, that what covering they had, fell from them, in
the shooting out of the cart, and they fell quite naked among the rest; but the
matter was not much to them, or the indecency much to any one else, seeing they
were to be huddled together into the common grave of mankind; for here was no
difference made, but poor and rich went together; there was no other way of
burials, neither was it possible there should.

John Hayward, under-sexton, that is, gravedigger and bearer of the dead, never
had the distemper at all, but lived about twenty years after it. His wife was
employed to nurse the infected people; yet she herself never was infected. The
only preservative he used against the infection, was holding garlic and rue in
his mouth, and smoking tobacco; this I had from his own mouth. His wife's
remedy was washing her head in vinegar, and sprinkling her head-clothes so with
vinegar, as to keep them always moist; and if the smell of any of those she
waited on was more than ordinary offensive, she snuffed vinegar up into her
nose, sprinkled her head-clothes and held her handkerchief wetted with vinegar
to her mouth.

And here I must not omit mentioning the disposition of the people of that day,
with respect to their charity to the poor, which indeed was very large both in
a public and private way. Some pious ladies were so zealous in this good work,
and so confident in the protection of Providence in the discharge of this great
duty, that they went about themselves distributing alms, and visiting the poor
families that were infected, in their very houses, appointing nurses and
apothecaries to supply them with what they wanted, thus giving their blessings
to the poor in substantial relief, as well as hearty prayers for them. I will
not undertake to say, that none of these charitable people were suffered to die
of the plague, but this I may say, that I never knew any of them miscarried,
which I mention for the encouragement of others in case of like distress, and
doubtless, if they that give to the poor, lend to the Lord, and he will repay
it, those that hazard their lives to give to the poor, and to comfort and
assist them in such a misery as this, may hope to be protected therein.

From the middle of August to the middle of September the infection still
increased and spread itself, with an irresistible fury; it was reckoned, that
during that time there died no less than sixteen hundred a day, one day with
another. It was then that the confusion and terror was inexpressible: the
courage of the people appointed to carry away the dead, began to fail them; the
vigilence of the magistrates was now put to the utmost trial. At last the
violence of the distemper came to such a height that the people sat still,
looking at one another, and seemed quite abandoned to despair. In a word,
people began to give themselves up to a fear, that there was nothing to be
expected but universal desolation.

This despair made people bold and venturous, they were no more shy of one
another, as expecting there was now no avoiding the distemper, but that all
must go, this brought them to crowd into the churches, they inquired no more
what condition the people who sat near them, were in, but looking upon
themselves as so many dead corpse, they came to the churches without the least
caution and crowded together, as if their lives were of no consequence,
compared to the work which they were come about: Indeed their zeal in coming,
and the earnestness and affectionate attention they showed to what they heard,
made it manifest what value people would set upon the worship of GOD, if they
thought that every day they attended at the church would be their last. It was
in the height of their despair, that it pleased GOD to stay his hand, and
slacken the fury of the contagion, in a manner as surprising as that of its
beginning, and which demonstrated it to be his own particular hand above the
agency of means; nothing but omnipotent power could have done it; the contagion
despised all medicine; death raged in every corner, and had it gone on as it
did then, a few weeks more would have cleared the town of all its inhabitants.
In that very moment when thirty thousand were dead in three weeks, nay when it
was reported three thousand had died in one night, and an hundred thousand more
were taken sick, they well might say, I am was the ^^^p of man, it pleased God
to cause the fury of it to abate, and by his immediate hand to disarm the
enemy. It was wonderful! The physicians were surprised, wheresoever they
visited, to find their patients better, and in a few days every body was
recovering: Nor was this by any medicine found out or any new method of cure
discovered, but it was evidently from the secret invisible hand of him that
first sent this disease, as a judgment upon us. Let the philosophers search for
reasons in nature to account for it, and labor as much as they will to lessen
the debt they owe to their maker; those physicians who had the least share of
religion in them were obliged to acknowledge, that it was all supernatural.


