THE UNIVERSAL RESTORATION, EXHIBITED IN FOUR DIALOGUES BETWEEN A MINISTER AND
HIS FRIEND; COMPREHENDING The substance of several real conversations which the
author had with various persons, both in America and Europe, ON THAT
INTERESTING SUBJECT, CHIEFLY DESIGNED Fully to state, and fairly to answer the
most common objections that are brought against it from THE SCRIPTURES.

A NEW EDITION.

BY ELHANAN WINCHESTER.

To this Edition is prefixed, A BRIEF ACCOUNT OF THE MEANS AND MANNER OF THE
AUTHOR'S EMBRACING THESE SENTIMENTS, Intermixed with some SKETCHES OF HIS LIFE
DURING FOUR YEARS.

PHILADELPHIA: PRINTED BY T. DOBSON, AT THE STONE-HOUSE, NO. 41, SOUTH
SECOND-STREET. M,DCC,XCII.

FROM THE CRITICAL REVIEW, For September, 1788.
OUR Author, with great candor and extensive knowledge of the subject,
discusses the doctrine of eternal punishments. He thinks that there will be a
period when every sinner will be restored to the Divine favor. This doctrine
is perfectly consistent with the benevolence of the Deity. It is supported by
many wise and good men; nor is there any reason to suppose that it will be
perverted to serve the purposes of vice and immorality. Mr. Winchester, in his
defense of it, shows much charity, much humanity, and no little share of
learning: The fifth Dialogue alone, which relates to the design and tendency of
punishment, might furnish some little foundation for a difference of opinion;
but, in a question so greatly above human attainment, the mind would be lost in
the enquiry, and not greatly benefited by the discussion. The question of the
universal Restoration, must be examined as Mr. Winchester has done, by the word
of God, as revealed at different times, and particularly in the Gospel.

N. B. A considerable part of the fifth Dialogue, being printed in the Lectures
on the Prophecies, is left out of this edition, and the remaining part is
included in (...) fourth Dialogue.

PREFACE.
TO THE READER.
AS I now present my Friends and the Public with a new edition of the Dialogues
on the UNIVERSAL RESTORATION, which by many has been long desired, perhaps it
may be acceptable to some for me to give a brief account how I came first to
the knowledge of this part of the counsel of God, which I have not shunned
freely to declare, both by word and writing, as I have found opportunity and
necessity.

I think it was in the beginning of the year 1778, being in South Carolina,
upon the River Pee Dee, where I was at that time Minister, that I called to see
a friend, who first put into my hands that valuable book written by Paul
Siegvolk, and which is called The Everlasting Gospel, of which I have lately
published a new edition. I was desired to tell what it meant to hold forth, as
my friend could not tell by any means what to make of it on the account of the
singularity and strangeness of the sentiments therein contained; although the
language is very plain and clear, and by no means dark, mystical, or obscure.

I opened the book as I was desired, and dipping into it here and there, for
half an hour perhaps, was very soon able to tell what the Author aimed at, viz.
that there would be a final end of sin and misery, and that all fallen
creatures would be restored, by Jesus Christ, to a state of holiness and
happiness, after such as were rebellious had suffered in proportion to their
crimes. I had never seen any thing of the sort before in all my life; and I
seemed struck with several ideas that I glanced over, such as the inconsistency
and impossibility of both good and evil always existing in the universe; and
especially his observations upon the word eternal or everlasting, showing that
it was used for what never had a beginning, and would never have an end, as the
being and perfections of God; and that it was also applied to things which had
a beginning, but should never have an end, as the being and happiness of the
righteous; and, that it was also frequently used to express things, times, and
seasons which had both beginning and end. which he therefore called periodical
eternities, and gave a great number of instances of this sort, which could not
be denied; and he contended that the everlasting punishment threatened to the
wicked, did not belong to the first, nor to the second, but to the third class
of these durations.

But as I was only desired to tell what the author meant, when I had satisfied
my friend in that respect, I laid the book down, and I believe, we both
concluded it to be a pleasant ingenious hypothesis, but had no serious thoughts
of its being true; and for my part, I determined not to trouble myself about
it, or to think any thing more of the matter. And as the book had been sent a
considerable distance for my friend to read, I suppose it was soon after sent
back; for I saw it no more, nor heard any thing farther about it. The The
following summer I went a journey into Virginia, and happening to mention the
subject to a minister there, he told me that a few years before, it had been a
subject of controversy in the public papers, between a clergyman, who defended,
and a gentleman of the law, who denied the proper endless eternity of
punishment; and he told me that this gentleman who denied it, had advanced,
that the translators of the Bible had rendered the very same Greek word, by
very different English words, sometimes rendering it for ever, and sometimes
world; and that if they had always uniformly rendered it by one English word,
it would have been evident to all readers, that no argument for endless misery,
could have been drawn therefrom. I was told also while I was in Virginia, that
a clergyman of the episcopal church, had a few years before, given out that he
had some wonderful thing to make known to his hearers, which he would preach
upon some Sunday, but did not mention when. This raised the public curiosity,
and great numbers attended his place of worship in hopes of hearing what this
wonderful thing might be; but for a considerable time the matter was
undiscovered. But at last he gave out, that on the next Sunday he would open
this great secret. Vast numbers of people flocked to hear what it could be;
When he came to declare what it was, behold! it was a wonderful piece of news
indeed, such as had never been heard before in any pulpit in Virginia. It was
nothing short of the doctrine of the Restoration. I think, to the best of my
remembrance, they told me, that he opened and enlarged upon it for two Sundays,
and never preached any more, being immediately after seized with sickness,
which terminated in his death. And this was generally esteemed as a judgment
that fell upon him for daring to preach such a wicked, false, and dangerous
opinion; and that God cut him off from the land of the living, to testify his
displeasure against him; and to terrify others from daring to follow his
example, or believe his sentiments. But perhaps this might have been some
worthy, learned, pious man, who had long concealed this grand truth in his
heart, and had derived much satisfaction therefrom, and longed to proclaim it
to others, for their good. And at last, notwithstanding the opposition that he
might expect, resolved so to do; and accordingly was enabled, just before his
time came to depart out of this world, to bear a faithful testimony to this
most grand and important of all God's purposes. And having performed his duty,
his master called him to receive his reward, and gave him the glorious plaudit
of, 'Well done, thou good and faithful servant; -- enter thou into the joy of
thy Lord.'

As for the vain judgments of men they are not to be regarded. 'For they know
not the thoughts of the Lord, neither understand they his counsel.' 'But the
souls of the righteous are in the hand of God, and there shall no torment touch
them. In the sight of the unwise they seemed to die; and their departure is
taken for misery. And their going from us to be utter destruction; but they are
in peace. For though they be punished in the sight of men, yet is their hope
full of immortality. And having been a little chastised, they shall be greatly
rewarded; for God proved them, and found them worthy for himself. As gold in
the furnace has he tried them, and has received them as a burnt-offering. And
in the time of their visitation, they shall shine, and run to and fro, like
sparks among the stubble. They shall judge the nations, and have dominion over
the people, and their Lord shall reign for ever. They that put their trust in
him shall understand the truth; and such as be faithful in love shall abide
with him: for grace and mercy is to his saints, and he has care for his
elect.' 'But though the righteous be prevented with death, yet shall he be in
rest.'

I am apt to think therefore, that this minister was one of uncommon faith and
love, and as he be^^^ed God, so he loved mankind, and wished them to know the
amazing riches of their Redeemer's love toward them: and when he had openly
delivered this testimony, he was called to his rest.

Indeed if the enemies of this doctrine had been true prophets, I should have
died and gone to hell long ago; for no sooner was it known I had embraced it,
but some gave out that I would not live a year; but I have already lived
eleven. One of my old friends desired me to take particular notice of what he
said, which he expressed in these words, 'Mind what I tell you. In six months
from this time, you will turn Deist, and deny all revealed religion: and in
twelve months you will turn Atheist, deny the being of God, and abandon
yourself to all kinds of open wickedness.' Blessed be God, this has also proved
false. And they generally seemed to agree to prophesy certain damnation to me
whenever I should depart out of this world. But I trust this is equally false,
'For I know whom I have believed, (or trusted) and am persuaded that he is able
to keep that which I have committed unto him against that day.'

But to return to my narrative,

Sometime after I returned back to South Carolina, a Physician with whom I had
been acquainted in Virginia, came to live in the parish where I was minister;
and among his books I found the Everlasting Gospel, by Paul Siegvolk; this was
the second copy that had fell in my way, and I read a little more therein, but
as yet had not the least thought that ever I should embrace his sentiments; yet
some of his arguments appeared very conclusive, and I could not wholly shake
them off, but I concluded to let them alone, and not investigate the matter;
and therefore I never gave the book even so much as one cursory reading, till
with great difficulty I procured one in the city of Philadelphia, more than two
years afterward.

In the year 1779, I found myself much stirred up to exhort my fellow creatures
to repent, believe, and obey the Gospel, and began to adopt a more open and
general method of preaching than I had used for some years before; having been
deemed one of the most consistent Calvinists upon the continent, much upon the
plan of Dr. Gill, whom I esteemed almost as an oracle. But now my heart being
opened, and viewing the worth of souls, I felt great compassion toward them,
and invited them with all my might to fly for mercy to the arms of Christ, who
died for them, and who was willing to save them. I was gradually led into this
way of preaching, without considering any thing about its consistency with
strict calvinism, but finding myself very happy and comfortable in my own mind,
and that this method of preaching was highly useful, I continued to go in the
same course.

About this time I began to find uncommon desires for the conversion and
salvation of the poor negroes, who were very numerous in that part of the
country; but whom none of my predecessors, that I could learn, had ever taken
pains to instruct in the principles of Christianity; neither had any single
slave, either man, or woman been baptized until that summer, in the whole
parish (which was very large) that I ever heard of.

The prejudices which the slaves had against Christianity, on account of the
severities practiced upon them by professing Christians, both ministers and
people, might be one principal reason why they could not be brought to attend
to religious instructions. But they had no prejudice against me on that score,
as I never had any thing to do with slavery, but on the contrary condemned it;
and this being pretty generally known, operated so upon the minds of those poor
creatures, that they showed a disposition to attend my ministry, more than they
had ever showed to any other. But still I never had addressed them in
particular, and indeed had hardly any hopes of doing them good. But one evening
seeing a great number of them at the door of the house where I was preaching, I
found myself constrained as it were, to go to the door, and tell them, That
Jesus Christ loved them, and died for them, as well as for us white people, and
that they might come and believe in him, and welcome. And I gave them as warm
and pressing an invitation as I could, to comply with the glorious gospel. This
short discourse addressed immediately to them, took greater effect than can
well be imagined. There were about thirty from one plantation in the
neighborhood present; (besides others) these returned home, and did not even
give sleep to their eyes, as they afterward informed me, until they had
settled every quarrel among themselves, and according to their form of
marriage, had married every man to the woman with whom he lived; had restored
whatever one had unjustly taken from another; and determined from that time to
seek the Lord diligently. From that very evening they began constantly to pray
to the Lord, and so continued; and he was found of them. I continued to
instruct them, and within three months from the first of June, I baptized more
than thirty blacks belonging to that plantation, besides as many others, as in
the whole made up one hundred, of which sixty three were men, and thirty-seven
were women, all which were born in Africa, or immediately descended from such
as were natives of that unhappy country.

My preaching was not only useful to the poor slaves, but also to great numbers
of the white people, of whom I baptized upon profession of repentance and faith
in Christ, about one hundred and thirty-nine persons within the same space.
This was a summer of great success, and I shall remember that happy season with
pleasure while I live. This summer I received some farther dawnings of the day
of the general Restoration in my mind, for upon considering several Scriptures,
such as these, 'He shall see of the travail of his soul, and shall be
satisfied; by his knowledge shall my righteous servant justify many; for he
shall bear their iniquities,' Isai. liii. 11. 'After this I beheld, lo, a great
multitude, which no man could number, of all nations, and kindreds, and
peoples, and tongues, stood before the throne, and before the Lamb, clothed
with white robes, and palms in their hands' Rev. vii. 9. I became fully
persuaded that the number of the finally saved would equal, if not exceed the
number of the lost. And I was so forcibly impressed with this new and very
joyful discovery, that I not only conversed in that strain privately, but
boldly preached it in the congregation, which generally consisted of nearly a
thousand persons upon Sundays. Some of the people to whom I had mentioned
something respecting the sentiment, thought that I was going at once to declare
myself in favor of the general Restoration. But that was as yet far from being
the case; though some of the arguments which I had glanced upon in that book,
the Everlasting Gospel, would frequently present themselves to my mind in such
a forcible manner that I could scarcely withstand their evidence.

In the month of September I left South Carolina, on a visit to my friends in
New England, intending however to return to my people again; but to prevent
their being left destitute, I procured the Rev. Mr. Botsford to come and supply
them, upon this condition, that whenever I should return, he should resign the
congregation to me again, if I required it. But he has remained the constant
Pastor ever since. I then traveled slowly through the continent preaching to
the people, and conversing with my friends, to whom sometimes in private I
proposed some of the arguments in favor of the general Restoration, which I
had read in the Everlasting Gospel, on purpose see what answers they could
give; and this I did especially to able ministers; but to my surprise often
found them quite at a stand, not knowing what to say. And some were almost
overpowered, with even the weak manner in which I was capable of holding forth
the arguments in favor of the Restoration. And oftentimes the answers that
some of the greatest men gave, were such as tended to increase my doubts
respecting endless misery, rather than to remove them. I remember once, that I
asked the Rev. Mr. Manning, President of Rhode Island College, and who was at
that time one of my dearest friends, what was the strongest argument that he
could use in favor of the doctrine of endless misery? He answered, That it was
the nature of God, to lay the greatest possible restraint upon sin, and
therefore he had threatened it with endless punishment, as the highest
restraint he could possibly lay upon it. This argument is answered in the third
Dialogue. Thus after much seeking I could find no satisfaction in the matter;
but still my doubts increased. Notwithstanding, I withstood the doctrine of the
Restoration with all my might, and sometimes preached publicly against it with
all the force I could muster. Yet there was something in its favor that gained
gradually upon my mind, and sometimes brought me to be almost willing to
embrace it. I plainly saw that it would reconcile almost, if not quite, all the
difficulties of other systems; and I thought if I should ever receive it, I
should be able to preach much easier, and more freely than ever, and with far
greater satisfaction, which by experience, I have since found to be true. The
ideas were sometimes so transporting to me, even while I professed to oppose
the sentiment, that I have been constrained to set them forth in the most
sublime manner that I was able; and sometimes so as actually to bring them who
heard me converse upon the subject to believe and rejoice in the Universal
Restoration, while I thought myself an opposer of it, and only proposed the
arguments in its favor to see what effect they would have on such who never
heard them before. And I was often carried away before I was aware, even while
I intended only to let my friends hear what might be said. I remember once,
while I was at my father's table in the year 1780, that I mentioned the
doctrine of the Restoration, and finding that none in company had ever so much
as heard of such a scheme, I began to hold it forth, produced many arguments in
its favor, brought up many objections, answered them in such a manner as
astonished all present, and I was amazed at myself, I spoke with so much ease
and readiness as I had hardly ever experienced before on any occasion. Nay, I
was so much animated with the subject that I said, That I did not doubt but
that in sixty years time, that very doctrine would universally be preached, and
generally embraced in that very country, and would certainly prevail over all
opposition.

This discourse made a greater impression upon the minds of those who heard it,
and upon my own also, than I intended; and though I afterward used the best
arguments I could in favor of the common opinion, yet I found them
insufficient wholly to remove the effects of what I had before said.

After spending about twelve months in the most delightful manner, constantly
journeying and preaching with great success, to vast multitudes of people in my
native country, I set off with intention to return toward South Carolina. On
the way I tarried some time at the house of the Rev. Mr. Samuel Waldo, in
Pawling's Precinct, state of New York, whose kind and friendly behavior
toward me I remember with pleasure, and mention with gratitude. I had a great
deal of very agreeable conversation with him upon the matter, and he did not
seem to oppose the ideas hardly at all; but only gently cautioned me against
receiving any thing erroneous. He is a man of a most excellent spirit, and his
family was upon the whole the most delightful, agreeable, and happy family that
I ever knew. While I was at his house one of his children, then about twenty
years of age, seemed fully convinced of the truth of the doctrine, by listening
to our conversation, and was filled with great joy at the idea. Several
religious men who were on a journey, lodged at the house while I was there, got
a hint of the matter, and wished to hear all that I could say in defense of it;
I accordingly gave them some of the principal arguments in its favor, and
obviated some of the most capital objections that could be brought against it;
and I afterward overheard them wishing that they had not been so curious as to
have enquired so far into the subject, for they could not resist the arguments,
although they seemed resolved to treat the sentiment as an error.

In this state of mind, half a convert to the doctrine of the Restoration, I
arrived in the city of Philadelphia, on the 7th of October, 1780. I intended to
have left the city in a few days, and to have gone on toward South-Cnrolina,
but the Baptist church being destitute of a minister, they invited me to stop
and preach with them, to which I was at length persuaded, and for some time I
was much followed, and there were great additions to the church. The
congregations increased in such a manner, especially on Sunday-evenings, that
our place of worship, though large, would by no means contain them; at length
leave was asked by some of my friends for me to preach in the church of St.
Paul, in that city, which was granted. This was one of the largest houses of
worship in Philadelphia, and equal in bigness to most of the churches in
London. I think I preached there about eighteen sermons, and generally to very
crowded audiences, frequently more than could possibly get into the house; most
of the clergy, of every denomination in the city, heard me there, and many
thousands of different people. I am inclined to think, that I never preached to
so many before nor since as I did sometimes in that house, and with almost
universal approbation. But now the time of my trouble and casting down came on,
and thus it was.

Soon after I arrived in the city I had enquired of some friend for The
Everlasting Gospel, which I could not light on for some time, but they lent me
Mr. Stonehouse's book upon the Reslitution of all Things, which I had never
seen nor heard of before; this very learned work I read with great care, and
his reasoning, arguments, and scripture-proofs seemed to me entirely
satisfactory.

The friends who procured me the works of Mr. Stonehouse, were concerned at my
having an inclination to read any thing upon such a subject; nevertheless,
though there were several of them with whom I conversed pretty freely upon the
matter, and who knew of my reading Mr. Stonehouse's works, yet they behaved in
so friendly a manner toward me, that they never mentioned a word of it to any,
until by other means it come to be known and talked of.

In the house where I lodged, when I first came to the city I had, in the
freedom of conversation, and with some appearance of joy, expressed myself in
general terms upon the subject, but always in the exact words of Scripture, or
in such a manner as this, viz. That I could not help hoping that God would
finally bring every knee to bow, and every tongue to swear: and that at the
name of Jesus every knee should bow, of things in heaven, and things in earth;
and things under the earth; and that every tongue should confess JESUS CHRIST
to be Lord to the glory of God the Father. And that I hoped, that in the
dispensation of the fullness of times, he might gather together in one all
things in CHRIST, both which are in heaven, and which are on earth, etc.

Such passages as these I mentioned in this manner, hoping that they would be
fulfilled. The people of the house seemed surprised, and asked me if I believed
so: I answered, 'That sometimes I could not help hoping that it might be so.' I
could hardly have imagined among friends, that any danger could have arisen
from my expressing a hope that the Scriptures were true.

However these false friends told a minister, whom for a number of years I had
esteemed as my best and most intimate friend, that I was turned heretic, and
believed the doctrine of the Universal Restoration, and desired him to convince
me. Some time after he met with me in the street, and in a very abrupt manner
told me, that he had wanted to see me for some time, that he might give me a
piece of his mind; that he had been informed by such a person, that I was
inclined to the doctrine of the Universal Restoration, and then, instead of
using any argument to convince me, or taking any method for my recovery, added
this laconic speech, 'If you embrace this sentiment, I shall no longer own you
for a brother.' And he has hitherto been as good as his word, having never
written nor spoken to m^ from that day to this; and when I have since offered
to shake hands with him, he has refused; and yet he was one whom I esteemed
above any other on earth, as a hearty, sincere, long-tried, and faithful
friend. If my intimate friend treated me in such a manner, what had I not to
expect from my open and avowed enemies?

I now foresaw the storm, and I determined to prepare for it, not by denying
what I had said, but by examining and determining for myself, whether the
sentiment was according to Scripture or not. If I found that it was not, I was
determined to retract, but if it was, to hold it fast, let the consequences be
what they might. I had now no time to lose, I expected in a short time to be
called to an account, and examined respecting this doctrine, and obliged either
to defend or deny it; I was already too well persuaded that it was true, to do
the latter without hesitation, and yet not sufficiently for the former. For
this purpose, I shut myself up chiefly in my chamber, read the Scriptures, and
prayed to God to lead me into all truth, and not suffer me to embrace any
error; and I think that with an upright mind, I laid myself open to believe
whatever the Lord had revealed. It would be too long to tell all the teachings
I had on this head; let it suffice, in short, to say, That I became so well
persuaded of the truth of the Universal Restoration, that I was determined
never to deny it, let it cost me ever so much, though all my numerous friends
should forsake me, as I expected they would, and though I should be driven from
men, and obliged to dwell in caves or dens of the earth, and feed on wild roots
and vegetables, and suffer the lose of all things, friends, wealth, fame,
health, character, and even life itself. The truth appeared to me more valuable
than all things, and as I had found it, I was determined never to part with it,
let what would be offered in exchange.

I had now formed my resolution, and was determined how to act when the trial
came. Hitherto I had said nothing about the Restoration in public, and but
little in private; but I preached up the death of Christ, and salvation for
mankind through him, without restriction. This free manner of preaching gave
offense to some, who came to hear me no more. On the evening of the 22d of
January 1781, a number of the members of the church, who had heard that I held
the doctrine of the Restoration, met me at a friend's house, to ask me the
question, Whether I did or not? I acknowledged that I did, but did not wish to
trouble any body with my sentiments. They desired me neither to preach them in
public, nor to converse of them in private. I told them, That if they would
prevent people from asking me, I would say nothing upon the matter; but if
people asked me concerning my sentiments, I could not deny them, and if they
wished to know the reasons, I must inform them. And thus the matter was to
rest; but some that were present, wished to know the foundation of my
sentiments, others opposed it, not wishing to hear any thing in its favor. At
length it was agreed that I might read the passages of Scripture upon which I
judged the doctrine of the Restoration to be founded, but must not add a single
word of explanation on my part, and on their parts they were not to ask any
questions, or make the least opposition, for if they did, I insisted upon the
liberty of defending.

Accordingly I took the Bible, and read many passages in the Old and New
Testaments, which I judged to contain the doctrine; and the very reading of
them convinced several of the company of the truth of the Restoration. There
was nothing farther took place at that time: we parted with a mutual agreement;
I was not to preach it in the pulpit, nor to introduce it in conversation, but
I would not be obliged to deny it, when asked, nor to refuse to vindicate it,
if opposed: and on their parts they were not to speak of it to my prejudice,
but to endeavor as much as possible, to keep the the matter close, and so we
parted. But notwithstanding all the pains that could be taken, the matter got
abroad, and several came to discourse with me on my principles, to whom I gave
such reasons as I was able for what I believed. A little after this time, I met
with another copy of the Everlasting Gospel, which I then read through with
attention for the first time, and found much satisfaction; the arguments and
Scripture proofs therein contained, seemed to me sufficient to convince all
that would read with candor and attention.

I still continued to act only on the defensive, not preaching upon the
subject, nor going about to private houses to make interest in my favor; but
if any came to me and wished me to discourse upon it, I would not refuse; and
thus a number were convinced of its truth, while others violently opposed it.
And thus matters continued until the latter end of March. Having heard that the
German Baptists in Germantown, about 8 miles from Philadelphia held the
doctrine of the Restoration, I had appointed to spend the first Sunday in April
with them; and this engagement had been made sometime. Just as I was ready to
go out of the city on Saturday, I found that some of the members of the Church
had privately sent into the country, and collected a number of the ablest
ministers, who were arrived in the city on purpose to debate, I gave them the
liberty of my pulpit as they pleased for the next day, and went out of the city
to go to Germantown; and took that opportunity to go and visit that ancient,
venerable, and excellent man, Dr George De Benneville, who received me in the
most kind, open, and friendly manner; and his conversation was most highly
edifying to me. Afterward I went to Germantown, and lodged there all night,
ready to preach the next day. As soon as my enemies in Philadelphia found that
I was gone out of the city, they spread a report that I had fled to avoid an
interview with these ministers, who had come on purpose to convince me. Nothing
could have been more false, than such a report, for I had been engaged to go to
Germantown, on that day, for several weeks beforehand: I knew nothing of these
Ministers being sent for until they came to town; and I had no fear but I
should be able, by God's assistance, to defend the cause before them; and
besides, I had appointed to return on Monday, and did return accordingly. The
whole Church met, both my friends and my opposers, and these Ministers met with
them. I was called to attend a funeral at the time, and was at the house of
mourning, when a messenger was sent in haste, to desire my immediate attendance
at the meeting without any delay. I found that those who were my enemies in the
assembly, had been greatly vaunting over my friends, because I was not present.
They said I had absconded merely to avoid a debate, in which I was sure to be
confuted, as here was an opportunity that might never present itself again; and
seven wise, able, and learned Ministers had assembled on purpose to dispute
with me, but that I had gone, and left my adherents in the lurch, from a
consciousness that I was not able to defend my cause; with abundance more to
the same purpose. My friends, on the other hand, told them, That I was afraid
of nothing but sin, and that they doubted not of my being able and willing to
dispute with any one of the gentlemen, or all of them, one by one, if they
chose it. O, no; they replied, they knew better than that, I was gone out of
the way on purpose, where I could not be found. My friends told them, That if
there was a vote past in the assembly that I should dispute with any one, they
would engage that I would be among them in a few minutes. It was accordingly
unanimously voted, that I should dispute with the Rev. Mr. Boggs, upon my
sentiments, in the presence of these Ministers, and of the whole assembly. But
when in a few minutes I came in, and took my place, what different countenances
appeared in the congregation? All my friends were highly pleased, and the
others were as much confounded and disappointed, at seeing me come in so
cheerfully and quickly, after they had made themselves so sure, that I would
not come. But surely, I might have been looked upon with pity; alone to answer
for myself, no one to support me; while my antagonists were seven of the ablest
Ministers that could be obtained. I felt, however, that inward composure, from
a consciousness of having acted uprightly and sincerely in the whole affair,
that even caused my countenance to appear easy and cheerful.

The vote was then publicly read, and I stood up, and declared my readiness to
comply with what was required. The worthy gentleman who was chosen to dispute
with me, then rose up, and said these words, 'I am not prepared to dispute with
Mr. Winchester, I have heard that he says, That it would take six weeks to
canvass all the arguments fairly on both sides; and I suppose he has been
studying upon the subject for a week or more, and I have not studied it at all;
and therefore I must beg to be excused.'

When I found that he, and all the rest wholly declined disputing with me, I
begged liberty to speak for two hours upon my sentiments, and lay them fairly
open, and the ground upon which I maintained them. But this was denied me; I
then desired them to give me one hour for this purpose; but this was also
refused. One of the Ministers got up, and said, That their business was not to
debate with me, but to ask me, whether I believed the Restoration of bad men
and angels, finally to a state of holiness and happiness, etc.

But if they did not come to dispute with me, why was the vote passed by their
party, as well as by my friends, that I should dispute with them? This speaks
for itself. The ministers insisted upon putting the question to me, Do you
believe the doctrine of the Universal Restoration? My friends objected to my
answering the question, unless I might be allowed to vindicate my sentiments.
But I said, That I did not fear any use that could be made of my words; that I
had always freely confessed what my thoughts were, when asked; and therefore I
told them, that I did heartily believe the General Restoration, and was willing
to defend it. The gentleman that was chosen to dispute with me, then asked me,
whether I thought it strange, considering my change of sentiments, that there
should be such a noise and uproar made upon the occasion? etc. I told him, That
I did not think it strange at all; and gave him a little history of the affair,
and how the matter came abroad, through the treachery of some whom I had
esteemed as my friends; that when I mentioned it to them I was not fully
persuaded of it myself, and perhaps never might have been, if I had not been
opposed and threatened; that I never had intended to trouble the people with my
sentiments, but was willing to live and die with them, if they could bear with
me; but that I could not use so much deceit, as to deny what I believed, when
asked by any one; that I never had yet done so, and by the grace of God never
would, let the consequences be what they might. What I said was in the presence
of all my accusers, and none of them could contradict me, nor had aught to lay
to my charge, except in this matter of the Gospel of my Savior. My discourse
took such an effect upon him, that he then publicly declared, that my behavior
in the whole affair had been as became a man and a christian, and that no one
could accuse me of any improper conduct. I stood sometime, and as none appeared
to have any thing farther to say to me, I took my leave, and went out. He
accompanied me to the door, and told me that he would write to me upon the
subject; but whatever was the reason, he never did, nor have we spoken together
since.

The Ministers then advised the people to get another Minister; but my friends
being numerous, insisted it should be fairly determined by the subscribers at
large; but this the other party would not agree to. Several very fair offers
were made by my friends to them, but they refused them all; and finally, by
force they kept us out of the house, and deprived us of our part of the
property, which was at last confirmed to them by law, though I think unjustly,
as we were the majority at first; but they took uncommon pains in carrying
about a protest against me, to every member of the church, both in the city and
in the country, and threatening all with excommunication who would not sign it;
by which some were intimidated, and by these and other means they strengthened
their party. But on the other hand, I took no pains, either to proselyte people
to believe my sentiments or to make my party strong. But I believe near an
hundred of the members suffered themselves to be excommunicated rather than to
sign the protest against me, and the doctrine that I preached. When we were
deprived of our house of worship, the trustees of the University gave us the
liberty of their hall, where we quietly worshipped God for about four years,
until we purchased a place for ourselves. But to return. After this meeting of
the Ministers, the whole affair was open, and I found myself obliged to
vindicate the doctrine which they had condemned unheard, not only in private,
but in the pulpit. Accordingly, on the 22d day of April, I preached a sermon on
Genesis iii. 15. in which I openly asserted the doctrine of the Final and
Universal Restoration of all fallen intelligences. This was published by
particular desire, with a list of the plainest Scripture passages in favor of
the doctrine; and a number of the most common and principal objections, fairly
stated, and answered. This was my first appearance in the world as a prose
writer, which was what I never expected to be, and probably should never have
been but for this occasion; still less a writer of controversy, to which I had
naturally a great aversion.

After I had preached this sermon, I had the Chevalier Ramsey's Philosophical
Principles of Natural and Revealed Religion put into my hands; I read the same
with great pleasure and advantage, and I must acknowledge it to be a work of
great merit, and I have reason to bless God that ever I had opportunity of
reading it. I can heartily recommend it, as one of the best works in our
language; and I must say, that in most things I fully agree with that very
intelligent author. On the fourth day of January 1782, I preached the sermon
called, The Outcasts Comforted; from Isaiah lxvi. 5. to my friends who had been
cast out, and excommunicated, for believing this glorious doctrine. This was
soon after printed, and the next year it was republished in London, by the Rev.
Mr. Richard Clark, and was the first of my works ever printed here.

I have thus given a brief, plain, and simple account of the means that have
brought me to think and write in the manner that I have done, and which account
may be considered as an historical sketch of nearly four years of my life.

I have every year since printed and published something, which I judged might
be useful to my fellow creatures; but as my works are in the hands of most of
my friends, it is not necessary to give a particular account of any of them
here, except this book of Dialogues on the Universal Restoration. I have had
many discourses with various persons upon this subject, and many objections
have been proposed to me, which I have endeavored to answer; and I can truly
say, that these discourses, their questions, and my answers, their objections,
and my solutions, form the bulk of these Dialogues. I have endeavored to give
all the possible force to their objections, and if any of them are weak, I can
assure the Public, that I have not made them so (as some have insinuated)
merely that I might be able to answer them, but the weakest of them have been
proposed to me, and I have fairly set down the most powerful that I ever heard,
generally in the very words in which they were addressed to me, whether in
conversation, or by letter; and I am willing if stronger objections can be
made, to put them in the place of those which I have set down, or add them to
the number; and I have in this new edition added a few, which I have heard
since the work was first published, and especially one which was sent me by a
venerable Minister, from America, and which I have largely answered.

I have the satisfaction of knowing not only that these Dialogues have been
well received, but that they have been the means of bringing many persons to
the belief of the truth of the Universal Restoration, and have strengthened and
confirmed others, as will plainly appear from the following extracts of
letters, which I have received from several Ministers in different parts of the
kingdom, since their publication.

Wisbich, October 26, 1788. 'DEAR SIR,
'I AM persuaded your knowledge of the world and its inhabitants, has long
since taught you to be familiar with the addresses of persons unknown to you;
and I have formed that opinion of you, that your candor will admit, and your
generous mind rejoice to hear, that a person, though unknown to you, is
convinced that God has gracious designs toward universal man. I am that
person, Sir. For some time past I have entertained doubts with respect to the
eternity of hell torments. My doubts principally arose from the consideration
of the vast disproportion between momentary crimes, committed in this short
life, and the suffering infinitude of punishment: yet many difficulties lay in
my way that I did not know how to remove, and I continued thus embarrassed,
until a short time since I had the happiness to meet with your Dialogues on the
Universal Restoration, which, I thank God, have helped me much. My ardent
prayer is, that the truth may spread, that the word of the Lord may run and be
glorified.

'My good friend, Mr. F --. showed me your letter to him, by which I see your
readiness to serve the cause of our great Head, Christ Jesus, and your
willingness to visit the country, provided the way is open. Now, Sir, I can
only say, That my house, and my heart, and my pulpit will be all open to
receive you, provided you will visit us in this part of the world.

'I remain, with the utmost respect, Dear Sir, Your sincere friend, HENYR
POOLE.'


'DEAR SIR,
'THOUGH personally unknown, have taken the liberty of addressing you with a
few lines. I was lately in London, and called to see you; but was told you were
out of town. Have for some time had the pleasure of reading your Dialogues,
much to my satisfaction.

'The subject of Universal Restitution has for many years engaged my thoughts
at times, and often appeared in an amiable light to my mind. It is a subject
that redounds to the everlasting honor of God, and the everlasting felicity of
the rational creature, who, when delivered from misery, shall be fully sensible
of the obligations due to the Deliverer, and consequently, shall naturally be
engaged in the great and delightful work of praising and honoring both the
Author and Accomplisher of the great salvation.

'My residence is at Lynhurst, in the New Forest, Hants, where I am pastor over
a little church of General Baptists, of which denomination I am informed you
are; but be that as it may, it is no small pleasure to me to find men, of
whatever denomination, vindicate the goodness of God, in the manner it is done
by the doctrine of Universal Restoration.

'Should inclination or leisure ever favor your coming this way, I know not
who I shall be more happy to see and enjoy. Permit me to subscribe myself,

'Your affectionate brother, In the Gospel of universal love, ADAM ALDRIDGE.'
Lyndhurst, December 4, 1789.

'York, March 6, 1790. 'REV. AND DEAR SIR,
'I HOPE you will excuse the freedom I have taken in writing to you.

'I have for several years embraced your sentiments, and have often stood up in
defense of them.

'I have frequently met with learned and candid men, who have given me much
satisfaction in this important subject. When your Dialogues were published, I
procured and read them with the greatest avidity. I found the subject handled
much to my mind. The strongest objections raised in all their weight and
importance, and answered clearly and heartily. I read the book, over and over,
with fresh pleasure and satisfaction. I studied the arguments, treasured them
up in my memory, and determined to become a defender of this part of truth. My
heart burnt in love to God and mankind. I found exalted views of God, raised
exalted strains of gratitude and praise. It was one of the strongest and most
attracting views that ever I met with since I knew the Savior's love. I soon
entered the field, and was obliged to prove my armor against the strongest
objections, backed with prejudices almost of an invincible nature. When I was
hard put to it, I had recourse to your Magazine, and from thence brought forth
new pieces of artillery. You will easily suppose I had many trials from persons
of different dispositions. By persuading several of my acquaintance, Ministers
of the Gospel, to read over your book, I became an instrument of winning them
over to the truth.

'One of my brethren in the ministry protested much against our notions, and
declared he would never believe them. Knowing him to be a sensible man, and one
who might be wrought upon by the force of truth properly stated, I used several
arguments to persuade him to read the book. At length he consented, and said,
that he would do it to oblige me, but was determined not to believe it. I told
him, it would satisfy me for him to give it a candid reading.

'When we met again, I began to enquire what he thought of the book. He paused
a little, and then freely acknowledged the effect that it had had upon him --
He frankly declared that his resotion was just the same, as though he had
resolved to look up to the Heavens when the sun shone at noon, and not to
believe that it shone. I have secretly engaged several, and find when they are
sensible, candid men, they fall in with your sentiments at once.

'I am acquainted with about half a score Ministers, who firmly believe and
heartily embrace the doctrine; besides many private christians of different
denominations. Most of us Ministers, who fall in with your sentiments, are
a^raid of confessing them publicly, for this reason, our people would thrust us
out of the synagogues, and we and our families might suffer thereby. For my own
part, I am determined to stand by this truth, whether I can continue my place
among the people where I am or not. Rather than give up this (through grace) I
would give up life.

'I have so much zea^ in my heart for the confirmation and establishment of
this truth, that I would, were it in my power, gladly proselyte all men to
embrace and enjoy the benefit of it.

'I hope you will muster up all your resolution, and stand forth boldly again
in vindication of the cause of truth, and the most glorious and most neglected
part of that truth that all men ought to embrace. I fear lest the enemy shall
cause a shout of triumph if you refuse again to engage, and do not come forth
to the help of the Lord against the mighty. Please to inform me if you want any
help where you are; I have some little fortune, and would engage in promoting
the work of God, without being wholly dependent on any people.

'Direct to J. P. at Mr. John Brown's Bookseller, Pocklington, Yorkshire.

'Sincerely praying for the success of your labors, and your welfare of body
and mind,

'I am in truth, your affectionate friend, And servant in CHRIST JESUS.'


'Aylesbury, September 22d, 1790. 'REV. AND DEAR SIR,
'AN anxious desire of a more intimate acquaintance with you induces me to take
this liberty of writing to you, hoping you will excuse my freedom; undoubtedly
it will appear strange, that one you never saw nor heard of, should take such
liberty. But as a foe to flattery, I just give you this short account of my
first knowledge of you; which was only by the hearing of the ear.

'Something more than a year ago, I was told that there was a preacher just
come to London, an American by birth, who had undertaken to preach an Universal
Restoration to lost souls. As it was new to me, I was much surprised at this
strange account, and I thought and said, (though with some degree of candor)
that I looked upon it to be some one that could not dig, and was ashamed to
beg, so to procure a living he had written this book. Here I rested for some
time, thinking that much hurt would be done thereby; till the last time I saw
Mr. Atkins, (who I understand is now in connection with you) he gave me some
further account of you and your doctrine. But I could not understand it from
his account; yet he persisted I should believe it, if I was to read your
Dialogues. I told him I would give them a fair reading, if I could see them.
Still I entertained the same strange idea as before. The next account I had was
from a young man of Berkhampstead, who came to see me, and in our discourse, I
said, 'Some of your people have imbibed a new doctrine, I hear.' He said, 'Yes,
and I verily believe it a truth.' I was now more surprised than before; but he
said, if I was to see it he had no doubt but I should believe it also. 'Well,'
said I 'if I could see the book I would lay prejudice aside, and give it a fair
reading, let it be what it may.' He very kindly told me, that as soon as he
could get it home, (for he had lent it to a friend) he would send it to me. I
thanked him, and promised to read it impartially, knowing that where party
spirit reigns, blindness takes place.

'According to promise, he sent the book: and as I had done before, I now laid
the matter before the Lord, with this petition, that he would not suffer me to
be misled, or wander out of the way, as I knew that he knew my desire and
intention. I was delivered from fear, and with candor and confidence I began
to read my new book, and to my great astonishment, yet to my greater joy, I
found what I had many times wished for secretly in my heart, namely, the
possibility of a release for those poor sufferers, and not only so, but
likewise the certainty of it; for as I read on, I could not but see, that it
was the determination of JEHOVAH to make all men, as his creatures, happy in
himself. O with what eyes did I now view the Deity, and what ideas did I
entertain of him to what I had ever done before! (though I was on the general
plan) O how my soul was filled with love! what gratitude did I feel to that
God, who I now saw so loved all his creatures, as to give his only Son to die,
with a pure design to glorify himself in the salvation of every soul! I now saw
him a God of love indeed, but it is out of my power to tell fully the happy
effect it had, and has now upon my mind; but it is something like what I
experienced, when the Lord first set my soul at liberty; as I was then
swallowed up, as in the vision of God. But the bigness of this sheet is not
sufficient to tell you all I could wish, but I trust I shall see you in person,
as I should esteem it a privilege indeed to hear you preach, and to converse
with you, and I fully intended coming to London about last May, on purpose, but
as I had already a large family which, through the blessing of God, I maintain
with my labor; finding it likely to increase, I could not well spare time to
come, or I had been with you at that season, as I had nothing else in my way to
hinder. Mr. John Holder, of Tring, an acquaintance of mine, has lent me a few
little tracts of yours, which I am now reading with pleasure and profit, and he
has kindly offered himself to accompany me at any time that I shall appoint to
come and see you, but the same difficulty is now in the way as before. If ever
Providence should open a way, I shall gladly embrace the opportunity. Though I
have no doubt of the truth of the doctrine of the Restoration, as to myself, I
have never spoke of it in public as yet, not knowing whether that may be the
best way to make this glorious salvation known; but I have spoke to several of
the people in private, those whom I judged to have the best understanding, and
the most candor; and most of these seem to be glad at the news, and my own
wife in particular embraces it with all thankfulness, and joins with me in love
to you and yours. (Though very ill at this time.) If it will not be attended
with too much trouble, please to send me your Dialogues, bound, by the
Aylesbury stage coach. I have given the coachman an order to pay the expense.
As I stand like yourself (in this respect) unconnected with any party, (though
I was with Mr. Wesley's people twelve years,) I am now free, I trust from
bigotry and prejudice, open to conviction, and willing for instruction. A few
lines from you will be gratefully acknowledged, and thankfully received, by
your affectionate, though most unworthy, may I say, brother in Christ,

'THOMAS HIGGINS.'
P. S. 'I pray God of his mercy to give you all the wisdom that you need, to
make this great salvation more fully known, as I believe he has raised you up
for this purpose, and that a double portion of his Spirit may rest upon you,
and that your labors may be crowned with more abundant success, till the Sun
of Righteousness is seen in his full strength, and with all his ability to save.



'Direct to Thomas Higgins, Aylesbury, Bucks.'

I take the liberty of publishing these Letters, with the names and places of
abode of the writers, as a kind of beginning of that general acquaintance,
which I should wish to see take place among all the friends of this doctrine in
these kingdoms. I know several other Ministers in England, who believe and
preach the Universal Restoration, and I trust their numbers will increase. In
America, where I once stood almost in these views alone, (among those who speak
the English tongue) there are now many who testify this Gospel of the free
universal grace of God, and they have formed a connection of societies on this
plan, who meet by their representatives in convention yearly, at Philadelphia
and I could wish a plan of the same nature might be adopted in this country. If
any thing that I have spoken or written may be of use to my fellow creatures,
and may tend to promote the glory of God, and the interest of the dear Redeemer
in the world, I shall have the satisfaction to reflect, that I have not wholly
lived in vain.

London, April 2, 1792.
Contents of the Dialogues.
DIALOGUE I.
OBJECTION. -- That the words everlasting, eternal, etc. are applied to the
punishment of the wicked 2 Answer. -- These words are but seldom applied to the
misery of the wicked; being connected therewith only twice in the Old
Testament, and but six times in the New; and are full as often connected with
things and times that certainly have had, or will have an end, as they are with
the misery of the wicked; which cannot therefore be certainly inferred from
those w^^ds being applied to it. The word forever, from which the word
everlasting is derived, is frequently used in a limited sense; more than fifty
passages of Scripture referred to where it is evidently used in that manner 4 5
9 Objection. -- But the words for ever and ever, are applied to the misery of
the wicked; three instances of which are produced, which are all that can be
found 10 Answer. -- This is a very strong phrase, and would be judged
unanswerable, but for certain considerations. 10 1 If the phrase forever and
ever intends any period or periods longer than the word forever, then there
must be a proportion, and consequently both must be limited 11 2 This phrase as
applied to future misery cannot intend endless duration, since a time will
come, when death, pain, and sorrow shall be no more Page. 11 3. It is more than
probable that the lake of fire, in which the wicked will be punished with the
second death, will be the earth dissolved by the general conflagration; and
that the new earth will be formed out of the same mass, and consequently the
lake of fire shall at last be no more Page. 12 4. There will come a total
cessation of night Page. 12 5. The same words are used full as often, if not
oftener, for periods that must come to an end, as they are for the ages of
future misery Page. 13 6. Unless we allow this phrase, however strong, to
intend ages and periods, we should set the Scripture at variance with itself,
neither would it be possible to reconcile several passages that are mentioned
Page. 14 Objection. -- Forever when applied to things of this life and world
may end, but being applied to things of another state must mean endless. Page.
15 Answer. -- The word forever applied to spiritual things, and circumstances
of another state must not be always understood to mean endless Page. 15
Objection. -- But does not the phrase forever and ever, in the New Testament
always intend endless? Page. 16 Answer. -- It does not. An undeniable instance
brought in proof, to which several more might have been added Page. 16
Objection. -- But is not the Scripture chargeaable with a design to mislead men
in these words when applied to future misery, unless they intend endless
duration? and does the limiting these words accuse Christ of duplicity and
deceit in his threatenings? Page. 16 This answered, by showing that the Jews
might make the same objection against the whole system of Christianity, which
puts an end to the dispensation which is talled everlasting Page. 17 The Hebrew
word rendered everlasting, properly intends a hidden duration, or period, but
not endless Page. 17 Objection. -- The same word everlasting or eternal is in
the very same verse applied both to the misery of the wicked and to the
happiness of the righteous Page. 19 Answer. -- The very same word is in other
places applied to very different things, and whose natures and durations are
entirely dissimilar Page. 20 The kingdom given by the Father to Christ shall
end, and so also the kingdom given by Christ to his saints shall end; but this
shall not diminish the glory of Christ, nor endanger the happiness of the
saints. If the kingdom of Christ and his saints shall end, then certainly much
more the kingdom of Satan Page. 21 Objection. -- But upon the supposition that
the doctrine of endless damnation was true, in what manner might one expect it
to be expressed in the Bible? Page. 22 Answer. -- If it was true, there could be
no promises, intimations, or even distant hints to the contrary. And it is
therefore shown to be false by a number of positive proofs. If there were not
promises and intimations of the General Restoration in the Scripture, the
doctrine of endless damnation might be then concluded to be true, however dark;
but the endless happiness of the righteous is set forth in much stronger
language, and with more abundant force of expression. As for instance, St.
John, who never applies the word everlasting and eternal once in all his
writings to the misery of the wicked, uses the word far oftener in his Gospel
alone, as connected with the happiness of the righteous, than it is used in the
whole Bible to express the misery of the wicked. And there are many strong and
powerful expressions made use of to express the duration of happiness that are
never applied to misery Page. 23 26 27 28 The endless happiness of the
righteous stands upon such foundations that can never be overthrown or
destroyed; such as their indissoluble union with the original source of life
and happiness their being heirs of God, and joint-heirs with Christ, and the
promise that they shall live because he lives; and his life is truly endless
Page. 30 31 31 Objection. -- That since the wicked have chosen evil and
persevered in it through life, it is become a fixed habit in them, from which
it would seem as impossible to reclaim them, as to draw off the just from their
attachment to God and goodness Page. 32 Answer. -- This reasoning founded upon
the old pagan system of good and evil being two eternal co-existing principles
Page. 33 All men are God's creatures, and therefore he will not contend for
ever, nor be always wroth with the souls that he has made Page. 34 Satan's
kingdom and all evil shall be destroyed, and therefore endless misery cannot
have the same permanent foundation as endless happiness Page. 35 Two things
diametrically opposite to each other cannot both exist together to all eternity
Page. 35 Inferences drawn from the foregoing in favor of the endless
continuance of the life of the righteous, and which prove that the state of sin
and misery shall end Page. 37 Objecion. -- But does not the word all frequently
intend a part only? Page. 38 Answered. -- By giving certain never-failing
rules, whereby it may be known when the word all means strictly all, or the
whole universally without any exception; confirmed by plain instances out of
St. Paul's writings Page. 38 Objection. -- That perhaps by all things being put
under Christ, nothing farther may be meant than their being brought into a
state of forced subjection, or made subject to his control Page. 40 Answer. --
They are now put under him in this respect, but they are not yet put under him
in the sense that they shall be, which implies a state of willing subjection
Page. 40 The word many, frequently means all Page. 42 All things were created
by Christ; all rebellious beings shall be subdued by him, and all without
exception shall be reconciled by him, and through him to God Page. 43
DIALOGUE I.
Objection. -- Of the worm that dies not, and the unquenchable fire, five
times threatened by our Lord Jesus Christ in one passage Page. 46 Answered. --
By reference to the words in the prophecy of Isaiah, to which our Lord probably
alluded Page. 47 Passages from the prophets brought to show a literal
accomplishment of the original words Page. 48 The dreadful threatenings of
future misery to the wicked, implied in those words of our Savior. They shall
be publicly punished and tormented in the lake of fire, which is the earth in
its melted or dissolved state Page. 49 Nevertheless, there shall be a new
creation of the earth, and so the lake of fire shall cease Page. 50 Many
instances of fires mentioned in Scripture, of which it was said, they shall not
be quenched, which yet have ceased long ago Page. 52 And of those fires whose
smoke is said to ascend up for ever Page. 55 Things contrary are often
predicted of the same places and people, and must be understood as occurring at
different times Page. 56 Our Lord's words of every one being salted with fire
considered Page. 56 Objection. -- All the fires abovementioned were on earth,
and in time; but the fire of hell, being in eternity, can never go out, or
cease to burn to all endless duration Page. 57 Answer. -- Those fires on earth
that were never to be quenched did not continue to burn as long as the earth
remained; and, therefore there ^ no necessity of granting that the fire of hell
shall burn to all eternity Punishments belong only to the ages of ages before
Christ shall have delivered up the kingdom to the Father Page. 57 58 Objection.
-- The blasphemy against the Holy Ghost shall never be forgiven, etc. Page. 58
Answered. -- 1. By showing what this sin is, etc. Page. 61 2. All that ^ears
the name of death shall be destroyed, and all sorrow, crying, and pain, shall
cease and be no more Page. 64 3. Where sin abounded grace shall much more
abound Page. 66 Objection. -- The deplorable case of Esau Page. 68 Answer. --
He lost the birthright, and the peculiar privileges that belonged to the
firstborn, but yet he had a blessing from his father of a lower degree Page.
69 The great difference between them was more fulfilled in their posterity than
in their own persons Page. 69 Love and hatred are sometimes only comparative,
and not positive terms, and only imply a preference of one to the other Page.
69 Objection. -- The great gulf between the region of happiness and misery is
impassible Page. 69 Answer. -- Christ has passed it, when he went and preached
to the spirits in prison, who were disobedient in the days of Noah Page. 70
This proves a state of conscious existence after the death of the body Page. 73
The rich man seems to have had compassion toward his brethren Page. 79 The
Scriptures constantly hold out punishment in proportion to the sins committed
in the present life Page. 80 Objection. -- The case of Judas, of whom Jesus
said, 'Good were it for that man that he had never been born' Page. 81 Answer.
-- 1. This was a proverbial saying Page. 81 2. Both Job and Jeremiah cursed the
day of their birth, and wished they had never been born, only on the account of
wordly and temporal calamities, although they had no fear of eternal damnation,
or any future punishment Page. 82 3. Solomon declares an untimely birth to be
far better than the longest and most prosperous life of one whose soul is not
filled with good, and who has no burial Page. 88 4. If Judas had died before
he was born he would have escaped all earthly trouble, and future misery, and
would have been immediately happy Page. 89 5. The nation of the Jews as much
rejected and doomed to woe as Judas, and yet the final intention of God is to
have mercy upon them all. Page. 90
DIALOGUE III.
Objection. -- That the doctrine of the Restoration tends to licentiousness,
and is calculated to encourage the wicked to a continuance in their evil ways,
etc. Page. 93 Answered. -- First, by showing the principles upon which the
doctrine of the Restoration is sounded Page. 95 1. God is the Creator of all
Page. 95 2. His benevolence is universal Page. 96 3. Christ died for all
without exception, Page. 98 Objection. -- That Christ did not die for all,
because he did not pray for all Page. 99 Answer. -- This objection is entirely
groundless; for, though in one place he prays exclusively for his apostles, yet
a little after he prays for all that should believe on him, through their word;
and, finally, that the world might come to believe and know that he was the
true Messiah; which shall be the case when all believers shall be one, as the
Father and Son are one Page. 100 The death of Christ for all men is so far from
encouraging licentiousness, that it is the strongest of all motives to induce
them to love and obey him Page. 102 4. Another of the first principles on which
the doctrine of the universal Restoration is founded, is the unchangeableness
of God Page. 104 5. The immutability of his counsels; confirmed by his oath
Page. 105 6. That God has given all things into the hands of Christ, and that
nothing that is given to him shall be lost Page. 108 7. That the Scriptures
must be fulfilled, and that none of them can be broken Page. 109 Secondly, It
is proved that the doctrine of the Restoration cannot lead to licentiousness,
because it is perfectly consistent with experimental religion Page. 110 Queries
asked upon this subject Page. 110 A little sketch of the author's experience
Page. 112 Queries submitted to the consideration of all experienced Christians
Page. 115 Inference deduced therefrom in favor of the doctrine of the
Restoration Page. 116 Thirdly, It is proved, that the doctrine of the
Restoration does not lead to licentiousness, by its tendency to practical
religion, several instances of which are mentioned, As, Page. 116 1. We are
commanded to love all mankind, even our enemies Page. 116 2. To do good to all
Page. 117 3. To forgive all that trespass against us Page. 118 4. To pray for
all men, that they may be saved and come to the knowledge of the truth Page.
118 The belief of the Restoration so far from preventing us from these things,
enables us to perform them with pleasure and consistency Page. 120 All shall be
restored at last by the blood of Christ Page. 121 Fourthly, It is proved, That
the doctrine of the Restoration is according to godliness, because the belief
of it tends to fill our hearts with all amiable tempers; as humility, meekness,
universal benevolence, etc. and is calculated to destroy selfishness, envy,
pride, malice, rage, etc. Page. 121 Fifthly, The doctrine of the Restoration is
vindicated from the charge of licentiousness, by an appeal to facts, especially
by the amiable conduct of the Tunkers or German Baptists, in America, who
universally hold these sentiments Page. 123 Reply to those who call this the
doctrine which Satan taught Eve in the garden Page. 124 Dr. Whitby's grand
objection, That the unbeliever shall not see life, answered Page. 128
Objection. -- The doctrine of endless punishment said to be the strongest
possible restraint upon sin, Page. 128 Answered. -- 1. By showing that God does
not always lay the greatest possible restraint upon sin Page. 129 2. The idea
of limited punishment by appearing more just and reasonable to the mind, is
more calculated to restrain sin and iniquity than the doctrine of endless
misery Page. 130 3. That, in fact, though the greater part have professed to
believe endless damnanation, yet their belief appears not to have much
restrained them from sin, Page. 131 4. The great number of heathen people that
die without ever hearing the Gospel, infants, idiots, persons born deaf, etc.
render it probable that many are reclaimed in a future state Page. 132 5. That
the intention of God is not so much to restrain sin, as to show its enormity;
and, finally, to destroy it out of the universe Page. 132 6. If the doctrine of
the Restoration should be abused, that can be no argument against it, as the
Gospel itself has been perverted, yet is the greatest blessing to mankind Page.
132 Therefore it is evident that this glorious doctrine cannot justly be
charged with the least tendency toward licentiousness Page. 133 Objection. --
It would not be prudent in God, even if he intended finally to restore the
wicked, to let them know his gracious designs before hand; it is time enough to
let them know his gracious purposes toward them, when his former threatenings
have failed of their effect, but not before Page. 133 Answered. -- God has
thought it the abounding of his wisdom and prudence to make known to his saints
this mystery of his will, even his purpose to rehead all things in Christ. This
discovery is chiefly intended for the comfort and satisfaction of the good, and
not for the encouragement of the bad Page. 134 135 God has frequently mixed
promises of great mercies with threatenings of terrible judgments; yet his
threatenings are not thereby weakened. Page. 136 Objection. The doctrine of the
Restoration seems not very plainly revealed in the Scripture, or it would not
have been so long hidden from so many great and good men Page. 138 Answer. --
Things that have been plainly revealed, have been still hidden from great and
good men; as the death and resurrection of Christ Page. 138 As also the calling
of the Gentiles Page. 141 Question. But how comes this man to know better than
all the world? etc. Page. 142 Answered. The charge denied. Many have known,
believed, preached, and defended it Page. 142 The doctrine of endless misery is
one principal cause of the disagreement among Christians Page. 143
DIALOGUE IV.
Objection. Christ threatens the Jews that they should die in their sins, and
that they could not come whither he went Page. 149 Answer. Our Lord told his
disciples themselves that whither he went they could not come, that is, then,
as afterward explained Page. 150 2. There are blessings promised in Scripture
to all Israel, without exception. Page. 150 3. Those that have been rejected
and cast off shall at last return and be received Page. 151 Objection. -- That
the blessings promised only respect those that shall be found alive on the
earth at a certain time Page. 115 Answer. -- The inhabitants of Sodom, Samaria
and Jerusalem with their daughters, or neighboring cities, shall all be
restored, though destroyed long ago Page. 152 2. That all things are given to
Christ without exception; and that all that are given shall at last come to him
in such a manner as not to be cast out. From which premises, the universal
Restoraration is inferred, and proved to be certainly true Page. 153 154 155
Objection. -- God swear in his wrath that the Israelites should not enter into
his rest Page. 159 Answer. -- The rest was the land of Canaan, being typical of
the time of the Millenium, or Christ's reign on earth, and not of the ultimate
state of happiness Page. 160 Objection. -- There are some of whom we read, That
he that made them will not have mercy upon them, and he that formed them will
show them no favor Page. 161 Answer. -- These words must necessarily be
understood with some limitation, and refer to a particular season, when they
shall have judgment without mercy, but finally mercy shall rejoice against
judgment Page. 161 This proved to be the true intent of the text, by a number
of passages where absolute judgment without the least favor is threatened; but
which threatenings are immediately succeeded by promis^s of the richest
blessings Page. 164 Objection -- That the wicked shall never see light Page.
164 Answer. -- Not until subdued or overcome, as the words ought to be tendered
Page. 164 Objection. A great ransom cannot deliver those who are taken away by
the stroke of God Page. 165 Answer. The great ransom cannot intend the blood of
Christ, the power of which is unlimited, but gold and all the forces of
strength, riches, wisdom, etc. none of these can deliver their possessors from
death Page. 165 Objection. -- Solomon says, That there is no work, nor device,
nor knowledge, nor wisdom in the grave; and that in the place where the tree
falls, there it shall be Page. 167 Answer. -- The first part of this
objection respects only the state of the body in the grave, but cannot be
brought to disprove the consciousness of the soul in the separate state, the
resurrection of the body, a future state of existence, or the final Restoration
Page. 168 The second part of this objection has not the least relation to the
subject; but belongs to quite another matter. But if it related to the death of
the body, (as it does not) it would be no real objection to the Restoration
Page. 169 171 Objection. -- The living have hope, but the dead have none, their
love, hatred, envy, etc. are perished Page. 172 Answer. This belongs to the
present life, and to the state of the body in the grave; but forms no objection
against the Restoration Page. 172 Objection. Our Savior has said, The night
comes when no man can work Page. 173 Answer. Our Lord was diligent in his
work, and we ought to be so in our labors on earth, to which death will put an
end. But this can form no objection to the final Restoration, as that is an
event, which will be subsequent not only to death, but to the resurrection, and
to a future state of punishment according to the deeds done in the body Page.
173 174 Objection. Many terrible passages of Scripture brought to prove the
destruction and future misery of the wicked Page. 174 Answer. The Scriptures
are an unanswerable objection to those who deny a future state of retribution,
but not so to the scriptural doctrine of the general Restoration Page. 177
Observations made upon those awful and striking passages Page. 177 The most
terrible threatenings close with gracious promises Page. 178 This particularly
instanced in the prophecy of Ezekiel, where the threatenings denounced are
numerous and very severe, but commonly close with the gracious declaration, And
they shall know JEHOVAH; or some similar expression Page. 179 Question. But
does not punishment harden and inflame, instead of softening and subduing the
criminals? Page. 180 Answer. Punishment to a certain degree produces the former
effects, but in greater degrees and longer continued produces the latter Page.
180 This illustrated by a true story Page. 182 Different degrees of the same
things produce quite contrary effects Page. 184 Objection. The deplorable
estate of wicked men, their aversion to good, their love of vice, their
hardness of heart, and opposition to every method taken to reclaim them, seems
to render their Restoration an event hardly to be hoped for Page. 184 Answer.
However difficult it may be for our reason to admit the possibility of such
monsters of iniquity being changed and restored, yet nothing is too hard for
God, and therefore faith may lay hold on his promises, which he has graciously
given us for our encouragement Page. 185 Examples are given us in Scripture of
some of the most atrocious sinners being reclaimed; we ourselves have been
reconciled; and therefore we should not despair of the final recovery of all
Page. 187 Objection. There will come a time when the characters of all men will
be so fixed and confirmed, that no change can afterward take place upon them.
He that is unjust, let him be unjust still, and he that is filthy let him be
filthy still, etc. Page. 187 Answered. -- 1. By considering the words as
belonging to a certain period, and by the consideration of many other
scriptural passages of a like import Page. 188 2. By comparison; as even the
most holy creatures are unclean, compared with God: so those who remain filthy
and unclean, during the present life, may be so esteemed hereafter, in
comparison of those holy souls who having purged themselves from all
uncleanness here, shall be reckoned as vessels of the highest honor in the
house of God Page. 190 Objection. Those who add or diminish shall have the
plagues added to them, or their part taken out of the book of life, etc. Page.
192 Answer. This no objection to the general Restoration, but is a solemn
warning for us to take heed that we do not fall under those dreadful
punishments which await unbelievers and profane persons, nor lose those
inestimable blessings which Christ has promised to the faithful, obedient,
overcomers, etc. Page. 193 A sad instance of presumption mentioned Page. 196
The highest and greatest not secure, if they indulge themselves in sin Page.
196 The reflections cast upon the doctrine of the Restoration by its opponents
shown to be highly absu^d Page. 198 The doctrine of annihilation considered
Page. 199 There can be but three things possible, endless misery; total
annihilation; or the Restoration Page. 199 The doctrine of annihilation, or a
final state of nonexistence, proved unscriptural Page. 200 1. By the wicked
being actually tormented for a long season, ages of ages Page. 200 2. Because
they are destroyed, not that they might cease to exist any more, but that they
might come to know the Lord Page. 200 3. By the unexceptionable instance of
Sodom and Gomorrah, etc. who were so long ago destroyed, and yet shall have
their captivity returned Page. 201 The promises made respecting Sodom, and
Gomorrah, etc. prove the doctrines of annihilation and endless misery, both to
be erroneous, and the Restoration alone to be true Page. 203 An objection taken
from Mr. B -- 's sermon, That sinners in Hell will be always under the
necessity of committing fresh sin, therefore God will be obliged to continue
their punishment to all eternity Page. 204 Answered. The objection
unscriptural, merely a rash conjecture, totally unfounded Page. 205 The
Scripture represents future punishment as the reward of sins committed in this
world Page. 206 Their intention is to destroy sin, and consequently will cause
it to cease from being committed Page. 206 Whatever rage punishments may at
first seem to provoke, they must continue until the most rebellious are
entirely subdued Page. 206 The last objection. That sin is infinite, being
against an infinite object, containing infinite hatefulness, and justly
deserves infinite punishment; and which cannot be fully executed, and therefore
endless misery must be their portion Page. 207 This unscriptural, unreasonable,
trite objection largely answered Page. 208 1. By showing the absurdity of
ascribing infinite actions to creatures Page. 208 2. Acts of the highest
goodness, do not extend to God, cannot be infinite, much less can evil actions
be infinite Page. 208 3. Though iniquities are once in Scripture styled
infinite, yet it is evident from the whole passage compared with other parts of
Scripture, that infinite is only used for a great multitude. Page. 209 4. The
idea of every sin being absolutely infinite, and deserving infinite punishment,
or endless misery, entirely confounds and destroys all the different kinds and
degrees of sin, and all those distinctions which God has made, and revealed to
us in the Scriptures Page. 210 5. God threatens to punish sinners for all their
sins; and to render their sin and iniquity double upon them; and yet promises
to be gracious to them after all: which would be impossible if every sin was
infinite, and could not be fully punished with any punishment short of endless
misery Page. 211 6. Even allowing that sin is naturally infinite, and deserves
infinite punishment, that will not prove that any of the human race must be
miserable without end; since Christ has made a full and sufficient
reconciliation and propitiation for the sins of the whole world, and the grace
of God must finally superabound and triumph over all sin, and consequently put
an end to misery Page. 212 Eight reasons given why the Author sometimes treats
in public upon the doctrine of the universal Restoration Page. 214 Eleven
reasons mentioned why the Author does not speak of it more frequently and fully
in his public discourses Page. 216 Conclusion Page. 219
FAMILIAR DIALOGUES BETWEEN A MINISTER AND HIS FRIEND, CONCERNING THE DOCTRINE
OF THE RESTORATON OF ALL THINGS.
DIALOGUE I.
Friend. I HAVE taken the freedom to call upon you, to have a little discourse
with you concerning the doctrine of the Restoration of all Things, which it is
said you believe; and to propose some objections.


Minister. I am happy to see you, and am willing to discourse, as well as I am
able, upon any subject that may be agreeable; but I have always made it a rule
never to press the belief of my sentiments upon my friends; and I can safely
say, that, though such great pains have been taken by my adversaries to
prejudice people against me, I have never gone about from house to house to
propagate my opinions; and I make it an universal rule not to introduce the
subject in conversation, unless desired; but yet I never have refused to own my
sentiments, when asked, respecting the matter; and am ready, in the fear of
God, to answer any objections that can be made, to a doctrine which I believe
is plainly revealed in the Scriptures of truth, and appears to me worthy of God.


Friend. I shall first of all bring to view that grand objection, which is
formed from the word eternal or everlasting, being applied to a future state of
punishment; as in the following passages: Isaiah xxxiii. 14. 'The sinners in
Zion are afraid, fearfulness has surprised the hypocrites. Who among us shall
dwell with the devouring fire? who among us shall dwell with everlasting
burnings?

Dan. xii. 2. 'And many of them that sleep in the dust of the earth shall
awake, some to everlasting life, and some to shame and everlasting contempt.'

St. Matt. xviii. 8. 'Wherefore, if thine hand or thy foot offend thee (or
cause thee to offend) cut them off, and cast them from thee; it is better for
thee to enter into life halt or maimed, rather than having two hands, or two
feet, to be cast into everlasting fire.'

St. Matt. xxv. 41. 'Then shall he say also unto them on the left hand, Depart
from me, ye cursed, into everlasting fire, prepared for the devil and his
angels.' Verse 46, 'These shall go away into everlasting punishment: but the
righteous into life eternal, or everlasting,' -- The same word in the original
being used for both, though varied by the translators.

St. Mark, iii. 29. 'But he that shall blaspheme against the Holy Ghost, has
never forgiveness; but is in danger of eternal damnation.'

2 These. i. 7, 8, 9. 'The Lord Jesus shall be revealed from heaven with his
mighty angels, in flaming fire, taking vengeance on them that know not God, and
that obey not the gospel of our Lord Jesus Christ: who shall be punished with
everlasting destruction, from the presence of the Lord, and from the glory of
his power.'

Jude, 6, 7. 'And the Angels which kept not their first estate, but left their
own habitation, he has reserved in everlasting chains under darkness, unto the
judgment of the great day: Even as Sodom and Gomorrah, and the cities about
them in like manner, giving themselves over unto fornication, and going after
strange flesh, are set forth for an example, suffering the vengeance of eternal
fire.'

These texts, together, form such an objection to the doctrine of the
Restoration, that I can by no means believe it, unless this can be fairly
answered, and proofs brought from the Scriptures to show, that the words
everlasting and eternal, (which are translations of the same word and
synonimous) being connected with the punishment of the wicked, and their future
misery, do not necessarily imply the continuance of the same while God exists.


Minister. I am glad that you have so fairly and fully stated the matter; and I
highly commend your resolution, not to believe the universal doctrine, unless
this can be answered fully, without any torturing or twisting the Scriptures;
and if I am not able, with God's assistance, to remove this difficulty, I will
publicly recant my sentiments.

But, before I come to give a direct answer, I would beg leave to remark how
very seldom this word is used to express the duration of punishment. We should
think, by some sermons we hear, that everlasting is applied to misery in every
book of the New Testament, if not in every chapter. A friend of mine told me,
that he was once preaching in Maryland, and after sermon a man came and asked
him, of what denomination he was? To which he answered, A Baptist. I think,
says the man, that you do not preach up so much everlasting damnation, as the
Baptists and Methodists, among us, do. To which my friend replied, Everlasting
damnation is found in the Scripture. True, answered the man; but some preachers
give us more of it in one sermon than is to be found in the whole Bible. The
truth of this remark will appear, if we consider that St. Luke, never uses the
word aionion, or everlasting, as connected with the misery of the wicked, in
his gospel; nor St. Mark but once, and then in a particular case only: In the
gospel of St. John, it is not to be found at all, in that connection, nor in
any of his epistles: In the account of the preaching of the apostles through
the world, in the first age of Christianity, we do not find it mentioned, in
that light, so much as once: No, not in all the sermons, and parts of sermons,
which St. Luke has preserved in the Book of the Acts: though the doctrine of
everlasting damnation is the substance of many modern discourses. St. Paul
never mentions everlasting destraction but once, though his writings form such
a considerable part of the New Testament. Neither are such words found in the
epistle of St. James, or in those of St. Peter; and but three times in the
gospel of St. Matthew: And only twice in all the Old Testament. But was the
word aionion applied to misery but once, in the whole Bible, it would deserve a
serious consideration; and unless the force of it can be removed by the
authority of Scripture, it must remain an unanswerable objection. But I shall
proceed to answer it, by bringing an equal number of passages where the word
everlasting is applied to things and times, that have had, or must have, an
end. As in the following passages: Genesis xvii. 7, 8. 'And I will establish my
covenant between me and thee, and thy seed after thee, in their generations,
for an everlasting covenant; to be a God unto thee, and to thy seed after thee.
And I will give unto thee, and to thy seed after thee, the land wherein thou
art a stranger, all the land of Canaan, for an everlasting possession; and I
will be their God.' Verse ^3. 'He that is born in thy house, and bought with
thy money, must needs be circumcised: and my covenant shall be in your flesh
for an everlasting covenant.'

Here note, that the land of Canaan is called an everlasting possession; and
the covenant of circumcision in their flesh, an everlasting covenant, though it
is certain that the land of Canaan, as well as the other parts of the earth
must be dissolved or melted, in the general confl^gration; and circumcision is
now declared null and void by the Holy Ghost; and the ceremony cannot endure to
endless ages.

Of the same kind are the following passages: Genesis xlviii. 3, 4. 'And Jacob
said unto Joseph, God Almighty appeared to me at Luz, in the land of Canaan,
and blessed me; and said unto me, Behold, I will make thee fruitful, and
multiply thee, and I will make of thee a multitude of people: and will give
this land to thy seed after thee, for an everlasting possession.' And in the
blessing of Joseph, he says, 'The blessings of thy father have prevailed above
the blessings of my progenitors, up to the utmost bound of the everlasting
hills.' By which, I suppose, the hills of the land of Canaan were meant.

God says to Moses, Exodus xl. 15. 'And thou shall anoint them (Aaron's sons)
as thou did anoint their father, that they may minister unto me in the
priest's office: for their anointing shall surely be an everlasting priesthood,
throughout their generations.' Lev. xvi. 34. 'And this shall be an everlasting
statute unto you, to make an atonement for the Children of Israel, for all
their sins, once a year; and he did as JEHOVAH commanded Moses.'

The apostle declares, that these everlasting ordinances were only till the
time of reformation, Heb. ix. 10. And this everlasting priesthood of Aaron's
sons has ceased long ago: 'For the priesthood being changed, (by Christ) there
is, of necessity a change also of the law: For he of whom these things are
spoken, pertains to another tribe, of which no man gave attendance at the
altar: For it is evident, that our Lord sprang out of Judah; of which tribe
Moses spoke nothing concerning priesthood. And it is yet far more evident: For
that, after the similitude of Melchisedec, there arises another priest, who is
made not after the law of a carnal commandment, but after the power of an
endless life: For he testifies, Thou art a priest for ever, after the order of
Melchisedec: For there is verily a disannulling of the commandment going before
for the weakness and unprofitableness thereof.' Heb. vii. 12 -- 18. The whole
sum of the apostle's argument, in this epistle, tends to prove, that the
everlasting ordinance is now no more; and the everlasting priesthood of Aaron
and his sons, is now abolished.

Another passage where the word everlasting is evidently used in a limited
sense, is, Numb xxv. 11, 12, 13. where we read thus: 'Phinehas, the son of
Eleazar, the son of Aaron the priest, has turned my wrath away from the
Children of Israel while he was zealous for my sake among them, that I consumed
not the Children of Israel in my jealousy. Wherefore say, Behold, I give unto
him my covenant of peace: And he shall have it, and his seed after him, even
the covenant of an everlasting priesthood; because he was zealous for his God,
and made an atonement for the Children of Israel.'

If the word everlasting intends endless duration, how should we be able to
reconcile this promise with the total cessation of the Levitical priesthood? As
for the family of Phinehas, with whom this covenant of an everlasting
priesthood was made, it was entirely deprived of the benefit of the same,
within the space of four hundred years: For when the sons of Eli transgressed
the covenant, by profaning it, God sent him word, that as they had broken it on
their parts, it was entirely, and to all intents and purposes dissolved. Read 1 Samuel ii. from the beginning of the 12th verse to the end of the 17th, and from
the 27th verse to the end of chapter: And also, chap. iii. 11, 12, 13, 14.

I will transcribe verse 30, of the second chapter, in proof of my point.
'Wherefore, JEHOVAH, God of Israel, says, I said, indeed, that thy house, and
the house of thy father, should walk before me for ever: But now JEHOVAH says,
Be it far from me, for them that honor me, I will honor; and they that
despise me, shall be lightly esteemed.' Hophni, and Phinehas, were soon after
slain in one day; and Saul, the king of Israel, sent Doeg, the Edomite, who
fell upon the priests, and slew fourscore and five persons, who wore a linen
ephod, in one day. 'And Nob, the city of the priests, smote he with the edge of
the sword; both men, and women, and children, and sucklings, and oxen, and
asses, and sheep, with the edge of the sword.' 1 Samuel xxii. 19. The whole house
of Phinehas seems to have been destroyed at this time, except Abiathar; and
when Solomon came to the throne, he thrust him out from being priest, 'that he
might fulfill the word of JEHOVAH, which he spoke concerning the house of Eli,
in Shiloh,' 1 Kings, ii. 27. From this time, the house of Ithamar had the
priesthood.

It is so evident that the word which is translated everlasting, cannot in the
nature of things, absolutely signify, without end, that I should not think it
worth while to quote any more passages in proof of its intending age, or ages,
only, were it not constantly used as a great objection against the universal
Restora^ion: I shall, therefore, instance two or three more in particular, in
this place, and refer to a great number of others, of the same kind; all
tending to prove the same thing. Hab. iii. 6. 'The everlasting mountains were
scattered, the perpetual hills did bow.' The gospel is called, the everlasting
gospel,' Rev. xiv. 6. yet it must cease to be preached, when it shall be needed
no longer. Jonah says, 'The earth with her bars was about me, for ever: yet
have thou brought up my life from corruption, O JEHOVAH, my God.' Jonah, ii. 6.
But it would be the highest absurdity upon the supposition that the word
Legnolam, here rendered, for ever, properly signifies without end, for him to
say, that his life was brought up from corruption; and, therefore, we know that
he could not use it in that sense, because, on the third day, he was delivered
from his dreadful prison. There is no doubt but the time that he was there,
seemed an age, and, while he was thus shut up, there was no intermission to the
darkness, and distress, that overwhelmed him; and, therefore he might say, with
propriety, that the earth, with her bars, was about him, for ever,' (i. e.
perpetually without cessation) during the period he remained in the fish's
belly; which appeared to him, as a long age indeed. But, as it would be a work
of much time and labor to mention all the passages where the word translated
for ever, evidently intends only an age, or period, I shall just direct you to
the following; which you may look over at your leisure.

Genesis xiii. 15. xliii. 9. xliv. 32. -- Exodus xii. 14, 17, 24. xxi. 6. xxvii.
21. xxviii. 43. xxix. 9, 28. xxx. 21. xxxi. 16, 17. xxxii. 13. -- Lev. iii. 17.
vi. 13, 18, 20, 22. vii. 34, 36. x. 9, 15. xvi. 29, 31, xxiii. 14, 21, 31, 41.
xxiv. 3. xxv. 30, 46. -- Numb. x. 8. xv. 15. xviii. 8, 19. xix. 10. -- Deuteronomy.
iv. 40. xv. 17. xviii. 5. xxviii. 46. -- Joshua iv. 7. xiv. 9. -- 1 Samuel ii.
30. iii. 13. xxvii. 12. xxviii. 2. -- 1 Kings, xii. 7. -- 2 Kings, v. 27. -- 2 Chronicles. x. 7.

Here are more than fifty passages, where the word rendered for ever intends
only age, or ages; to which many more might be added.

Now, the rule for understanding words is this: What must be the meaning of the
word, in many places, and what may be the meaning in all; is the true sense of
the same.


Friend. Although the single word forever, in these passages, seems evidently
to intend certain unknown, limited periods; yet, what can you do with those
texts that say, the misery of the wicked shall endure for ever and ever?


Minister. Indeed, they are terrible threatenings; and, no doubt, will be fully
executed.


Friend. But, do you imagine that such passages as the following can intend
less than endless misery? Rev. xiv. 11. 'And the smoke of their torment
ascends up, for ever and ever: and they have no rest day nor night, who
worship the beast and his image, and whosoever receives the mark of his name.'
Rev. xix. 3. 'And her smoke rose up for ever and ever.' Rev. xx. 10. 'And the
devil, that deceived them, was cast into the lake of fire and brimstone, where
the beast and the false prophet are, and shall be tormented, day and night, for
ever and ever.'


Minister. I confess, you have proposed a difficulty that I should judge to be
unanswerable, were it not for the following considerations: 1st, If for ever
and ever is a longer time than for ever, which must be granted; then is there
some proportion between them: Thus, if for ever intends an age, period, or
sometimes ages; for ever and ever, may intend ages, an age of ages, or ages of
ages: But any proportion at all between two periods, supposes both to have an
end, or there could be no proportion.

2dly, I find a time promised, when, 'there shall be no more death; neither
sorrow nor crying; neither shall there be any more pain; for the former things
are (or shall then be) passed away. And he that sat upon the throne said,
Behold, I make all things, new. And he said unto me, (John) Write; for these
words are true and faithful.' Rev. xxi. 4, 5.

3dly, I think there is sufficient reason, from the words of St Peter, in his
second epistle, third chapter, 5, 6, 7, 10, 11, 12 verses, to conclude, that as
the earth was once overflowed with water, and became truly a lake of water,
wherein the world of ungodly men perished; so, by the general conflagration,
the same shall become literally the lake of fire and brimstone, in which the
wicked shall be punished after the day of judgment: But I also think, that the
13th verse of the same chapter, compared with Rev. xxi. 1. Isaiah lxv. 17.
lxvi. 22. more than intimates, that the new heaven and earth shall be created
out of the substance of the old, dissolved by the fire; that the new earth
shall no more have a sea therein, seems to imply, that in its former state, it
had a sea, or why this expression, 'And there was no more sea.' -- Now, if this
hypothesis is right, the following will be the true state of the case; viz.

The lake of fire is expressly declared to be 'the second death,' Rev. xx. 14.
The earth, in its burnt, melted, and dissolved state, will be the general lake
of fire and brimstone; according to the verses above cited from St. Peter.
There will be a new heaven and a new earth, created out of the substance of the
old, in which there will be no more sea, either of water, or of liquid fire;
consequently, the lake of fire, or second death, (which are declared to be
synonimous) must end; and, of course, the punishment of the second death must
then cease.

4thly, The smoke of their torment is to ascend up for ever and ever, and they
are to be tormented day and night: But, as the smoke of the burning earth must
cease, when its substance is entirely dissolved or melted, and all combustible
bodies are consumed; and as it is intimated in Job xxvi. 10. that day and night
shall come to an end: and in Rev. xxi. 25. it is said of the New Jerusalem,
'And the gates of it shall not be shut at all by day, for there shall be no
night there.' For all these reasons, I cannot be altogether persuaded, that
their being tormented day and night, for ever and ever, during which time the
smoke of their torment shall constantly ascend, is quite equal to endless
misery, especially as there shall come a time when death shall be no more, pain
shall be no more, sorrow shall be no more, smoke shall probably ascend no more,
and, peradventure, night shall be no more.

5thly, But the great reason of all, why I do not conceive that for ever and
ever, does certainly intend endless duration, is, because I find the words as
often used for times and periods, that must have an end, as you find them used
for the misery of the wicked. You bring three passages, which are all that are
to be found in the whole Bible, where they are used in that sense; I shall now
invalidate those evidences for endless damnation, by bringing an equal number
of texts, where you will allow the words are used in a limited sense.


Friend. Is it possible that you can find any such passages in the Bible? Pray
show them to me.


Minister. Isa. xxx. 8. 'Now go, write it before them in a table, and note it
in a book, that it may be for the time to come, for ever and ever.'

See Jer. vii. 1 -- 7. The 7th verse is, 'Then will I cause you to dwell in
this place, in the land that I gave to your fathers, for ever and ever.'

Jer. xxv. 5. 'Turn ye again, now, every one from his evil way, and every one
from the evil of your doings, and dwell in the land that JEHOVAH has given
unto you, and to your fathers, for ever and ever.'

These passages are as many, and as strongly expressed, as those which you
brought to prove endless misery; and yet nothing can be more evident than that
they cannot intend endless duration. -- Here, these periods must be limited by
the great conflagration; and thus (for ought that appears as yet) the misery of
the wicked may be limited, notwithstanding the use of those expressions, to set
forth its dreadful continuance to unknown ages; at least, those words do not
necessarily imply, that they shall never, as long as God lives, be delivered
from their sins and consequent sufferings.

If we were always to read for ever and ever, ENDLESS, we should set the
Scriptures at variance; and no criticism could ever reconcile them. Try, for
instance, to reconcile Psalm cii. 25, 26, with Psalm cxlviii. 6. 'Of old have
thou laid the foundation of the earth, and the heavens are the work of thy
hands. They shall perish, but thou shall endure; yea, all of them shall wax old
like a garment; as a vesture shall thou change them, and they shall be changed.
-- He has also established them for ever and ever: he has made a decree which
shall not pass.'

Now, if the words for ever and ever, signify without end, then there is a
contradiction that cannot be reconciled; but only understand them ages of ages,
(as, indeed, they ought to be rendered) and the whole difficulty vanishes at
once.

Suppose a person should read Rev. xx. 11. and xxi. 1. 'And I saw a great white
throne, and him that sat upon it, from whose face the earth and the heaven fled
away; and there was found no place for them. And I saw a new heaven, and a new
earth; for the first heaven and the first earth were passed away; and there was
no more sea;' And should then say, These visions cannot be true, because
Solomon has said, 'One generation passes away, and another comes, but the
earth abides for ever,' Eccles. i. 4. And God 'laid the foundations of the
earth, that it should not be removed, for ever, Psalm. civ. 4. The world also is
established that it cannot be moved,' Psalm. xciii. 1. See also Psalm. lxxviii.
69. and xcvi. 10. What would you think of such reasoning? Just so weak, must
all the reasoning against the universal Restoration be, from the words for
ever, and for ever and ever, being applied to states of future misery, if God
has promised to put an end to them all, by reconciling all things to himself,
destroying in, and introducing a new creation, and a state of universal and
permanent happiness: For, if such promises really exist, and their existence
can be demonstrated, all reasoning against them must be vain and futile.


Friend. It is certain, that when the word for ever is applied to things of
this life and world, it intends a period; but when applied to spiritual
matters, and things of another world, it must be endless, according to my
judgment; and I am apt to think, you will find it so too.


Minister. I am certain that you will soon be convinced to the contrary. The
apostle, speaking of Christ, says, 'But this man, after he had offered one
sacrifice for sins, for ever sat down on the right hand of God; from
henceforth, expecting till his enemies be made his footstool," Heb. x. 12, 13.
You will please to notice, that Christ's sitting down in the heavens, on the
right hand of God, is not a circumstance belonging to this world, or the things
of time; and he is is to sit there for ever; and yet that period, which,
according to your hypothesis, must be endless, is expressly limited by the
sacred writings: The heavens have received him, 'until the times (seasons, or
ages) of restitution of all things,' (that is, till the beginning, and not the
ending of those times) which God has spoken of by the mouth of all his holy
prophets since world began,' Acts, iii. 21. And the whole New Testament
teaches us, to wait for the coming of Jesus, from heaven; (1 These. i. 10.)
which would be highly absurd, upon the supposition, that he is always to abide
there: Which yet he must, if the word for ever, as applied to things of another
state, intends endless duration.


Friend. I confess, I never observed this before: But, do you know of any
passage in the New Testament, where the words, for ever and ever, certainly
intend limited duration? For I observed, that all the instances you brought
were from the Old Testament.


Minister. Yes: Heb. i. 8. But unto the Son he says, 'Thy throne, (in
distinction from the throne of the Father) O God, is for ever and ever;' yet we
read, (1 Cor. xv. 24, 28.) of the end, when he shall have 'delivered up the
kingdom to God, even the Father; when he shall have put down all rule, and all
authority and power: then shall the Son also himself, be subject unto him that
put all things under him, that God may be all in all.'


Friend. But when Christ threatened sinners, with everlasting fire, everlasting
punishment, and eternal damnation; did not his expressions naturally convey the
idea of endless misery? And may not the Son of God be accused of duplicity and
deceit, if he did not mean to denounce punishment without end? And, therefore,
if we believe his words to be true, as most certainly they are, we must reject
the doctrine of the Restoration, which puts an end to a state, which is called
everlasting, by the mouth of truth itself. -- Are you able to answer this
fairly?


Minister. If I am not able to answer this objection, which you have stated in
the strongest manner, I assure you, I will confess myself in an error; and
shall thank you, (as an instrument) for bringing me to know it. The same
objection that you make against the Restoration, the Jews make against Christ
and his religion; for they argue thus: God is an unchangeable Being, and he
declared, in the most solemn manner, that the ordinances of the Levitical
dispensation should be everlasting, and the anointing of Aaron's sons should be
an everlasting priesthood, throughout their generations; (See Exodus xl. 15. and
Lev. xvi. 34.) and, therefore, we must reject the Messiah of the Christians, as
an impostor; inasmuch, as he pretends to abolish those statutes, which God has
called everlasting, and to set himself up as a Priest, contrary to the express
promise of the LORD, who cannot lie, nor repent, that Aaron and his sons should
have an everlasting priesthood; and, therefore, if this is the true Messiah,
God meant to deceive us, when he promised these everlasting blessings, and
privileges, which, we must suppose were only for a time, if Christianity be
true; therefore, we reject it, as being inconsistent with the promises of God.

It is evident, from this view of the matter, that the Jews reject Christ and
his religion, upon as good ground, as you reject the universal Restoration, and
perhaps better; for you have nothing to plead against the Restoration, but some
threatenings of punishments, which are called everlasting, or eternal, in our
translation; but they plead express promises of the everlasting continuance of
their church state and worship, in opposition to Christianity. But, if it be
true, that both the Hebrew and Greek words, which our translators have rendered
by the English word everlasting, do not intend endless duration, but, a hidden
period, or periods; then the ground is changed at once, and the Jews have no
right to object against Christianity, because God, promised a continuance of
their temple worship, for a certain age, ^, hidden period; nor the Christians
to reject the universal Restoration, because God has threatened the rebellious
with such dreadful punishments, which shall endure through periods, expressed
in the same terms. It is indeed confessed by some of the most learned Jews,
that they have no word in their language, which absolutely signifies endless
duration; and therefore, they can only argue the endless continuance of any
thing from its nature, and not merely from the words rendered for ever, or
everlasting. And, if this is the truth of the case, (as who can deny it?) then,
neither did JEHOVAH speak to deceive the Children of Israel, when he promised
them blessings of such long continuance, which have ended long ago, and which
are never to be restored by virtue of that covenant which he made with their
fathers, when he brought them out of Egypt: but by the new covenant, which he
will make with them, when he shall return them to their own land; nor did the
Son of God speak to deceive, when he threatened the wicked with those
punishments, which shall not end till they have answered the purposes for which
it seems reasonable to believe they shall be inflicted; viz. to bring them
down, and humble their proud and stubborn hearts; which shall be done, during
the periods of his kingdom, before he shall have delivered it up to the Father,
that God may be ALL IN ALL.


Friend. But if I should grant that the word aionion does not even in the New
Testament always signify endless duration, yet what would you gain by it, since
it is plain that Christ has set the happiness of the righteous, and the misery
of the wicked, one against the other; and has expressed the continuance of
both, by the same word, aionion, in St. Matthew. xxv. 46? Here, the punishment of
the wicked, and the life of the righteous, are both declared to be aionion, or
eternal, without distinction: Now, can you show me any passage of Scripture,
where the same word is applied to two different things, whose existence is not
the same, or the time of their continuance not alike?


Minister. Fairly stated! And, if it be not as fairly answered, it shall be
looked upon as an insuperable difficulty. But, happily, there is a passage, in
Hab. iii. 6. where the same word is used for very different things; 'He stood,
and measured the earth: he beheld, and drove asunder the nations; and the
everlasting mountains were scattered, the perpetual hills did bow: his ways are
everlasting.' In our translation, the mountains, and the ways of God, are
called everlasting, and the hills perpetual; but, in the original, the word
gnad is applied to the mountains, and the word gnolam to the hills, and the
ways of God. But whether we argue from the original, or from the translation,
it makes no difference: The question is, Are the mountains, or the hills,
eternal in the same sense in which the ways of God are? If so, the earth must
have existed coeval with the ways of JEHOVAH, and the hills, and mountains,
must never be removed, while his ways endure; and, as his ways can never be
destroyed, the absolute eternity, not of the earth only, but of its present
form, its mountains and hills, must be inferred: contrary to Isaiah xl. 4.
xliv. 10 -- Ezekiel. xxxviii. 20. -- 2 Pet. iii. 7, 10, 11, 12. -- Rev. xvi. 2c.
xx. 11. -- Nay, even in this very text, the ways of God are spoken of as being
of a 'different nature from the mountains, which were scattered, and the hills,
which did bow.

Thus, no solid argument can be drawn from the application of the same word to
different things, to prove that they shall be equal in their continuance,
unless their nature be the same.

Thus, in the Greek New Testament, in Romans xvi. 25. we read of the mystery
which has been kept secret, from Chronois aioniois, and, in the 26th verse, we
find, that it is now made known by the commandment Tou aionion Theou. But must
it be argued that because aioniois is applied to times, and aionion to God;
therefore, times are as ancient as JEHOVAH, and must continue while he exists?
The absurdity of this is too glaring. Our translators have rendered Chronois
aioniois, 'since the word began,' instead 'of eternal times;' and have thereby
shown their judgment to be, that words cannot change the subjects to which
they are applied, but the meaning of the words must be determined by the nature
of the subjects.

In Jer. xxviii. 8. the word hegnolam is used in the Hebrew; but the
translators did not think themselves obliged to render it 'from everlasting,'
or, from eternity;' as it would have been highly absurd to have read, eternal
prophets, or prophets which were from eternity; and have therefore rendered it
'of old,' though it is a stronger word than gnad, which they have translated
'eternity,' in Isa. lvii. 15.

Many other instances of the like nature, might be brought; but these are fully
sufficient to convince any unprejudiced mind, that nothing can be concluded in
favor of endless punishment, from the word aionion being used to set forth the
duration of it, as well as the duration of that life which our Savior promises
to the righteous.

But upon the supposition that our Savior intends no more by the 'life
eternal,' in the 46th verse of the xxvth of St. Matthew's gospel, than he does
in the 34th verse, by 'the kingdom prepared from the foundation of the world.'
(which it would be hard to prove) then an answer might be given, without all
this labor, in this manner; viz. that as the Father has appointed Christ a
kingdom, so he has also appointed his saints a kingdom; (See St. Luke, xxii.
29, 30. Rev. ii. 26, 27. iii. 21.) but as the kingdom which the Father has
given to Christ, as Mediator, and as Judge, shall end, when he shall have
subdued all things, and put down all rule, and authority, and power; (See 1.
Cor. xv. 24, 25, 26, 27, 28.) so, of consequence, that kingdom which is given
to the saints or overcomers, to subdue the nations, shall also end, when they
shall be all subdued, and brought to submit. But as the glory of Christ shall
not be lessened, but increased, when God shall be ALL in ALL; so the happiness
of the saints shall be so far from ending, or being diminished, at that period,
that it shall then arrive at the summit of perfection; but shall never close,
nor decrease, while JEHOVAH endures.

Some time ago, a woman came to hear me, and I happened to mention in my
sermon, that Christ's mediatorial kingdom was called everlasting, or aionion;
but that it must come to an end, when the kingdom should be delivered up to the
Father, when he should have put down all rule, and all authority and power.
After sermon, she was asked, how she liked? She answered, 'Not at all: he says,
The everlasting kingdom of Christ shall end; and I never heard of such a thing
before in all my life; and I am sure it must be contrary to Scripture.' The
person who asked her, told her, that there was such a text somewhere, she could
not tell exactly where to find it. But the woman persisted in it, that there
was no such text; and went away, full of prejudice. Now, had this passage of
Scripture been in the Book of the Revelations, it would not have been so much
to be wondered at, that she had never heard of it; but when we consider, that
this is expressed in that part of the 15th chapter of St. Paul's first epistle
to the Corinthians, which is in the burial service -- what shall we say?

Thus, if Christ's kingdom shall end, much more Satan's! If rewards, as such,
shall cease; how much more punishments! If the everlasting kingdom of the
saints, which they shall possess for ever and ever, (See Dan. vii 18, 27.)
shall end, or be swallowed up in that kingdom of boundless love, where God
shall be ALL IN ALL; how much much more, shall all sin, pain, sorrow, and
death, cease, and have no more a name in God's creation!


Friend. But supposing the doctrine of endless misery to be a truth, how would
you expect to find it expressed in the Bible?


Minister. I should have a right to expect, in the first place, that there
would be no promises in the Scripture to the contrary; no such passages as
these: 'For I have sworn by myself, the word is gone out of my mouth in
righteousness, and shall not return* that unto me every knee shall bow, and
every tongue shall swear;' Isaiah xlv. 23. Mind well, EVERY TONGUE SHALL SWEAR.
Swearing allegiance, as every civilian will tell you, implies pardon,
reception, and protection, on the part of the king; and a hearty renouncing of
rebellion, true subjection, and willing obedience, on the part of the rebels.
Kings of the earth may be deceived, but God cannot ^ he will never accept of
any feigned subjection; and therefore, all that swear, shall swear in truth and
righteousness; so shall rebellion cease, and disobedience be no more.

The apostle St. Paul, seems to quote this passage of Scripture with some
variation, in his epistle to the Philippians, chap. ii. 9, 10, 11; where,
speaking of the sufferings of Christ, and the consequences of the same, he
says, 'Wherefore God also has highly exalted him, and given him a a name,
which is above every name; that at ( or in) the name of Jesus every knee shall
bow, of things in heaven, and things in earth, and things under the earth; and
that every tongue should confess that Jesus Christ is Lord, to the glory of God
the Father.' Now, this confession appears to me to imply a willing subjection
to the authority of the Savior, brought about by the operation of the blessed
Spirit; for the same apostle says, Wherefore, I give you to understand, that
no man, speaking by the Spirit of God, calls Jesus accursed; and no man can
say that Jesus is the Lord, but by the Holy Ghost,' 1 Cor. xii. 3.

Then the argument, thrown into a syllogistical form, will run thus:

If every knee shall bow, of things in heaven, and thing in earth, and things
under the earth; then shall all rebellion cease.

But the first is ture; therefore, also the last. If every tongue shall confess
that Jesus Christ is Lord, to the glory of God the Father; and no man can say
that Jesus is the Lord, but by the Holy Ghost; then shall the Holy Ghost work
effectually in every man. As the major is proved, by Phil. ii. 11. and the
minor, by 1 Cor. xii. 3, the conclusion must be evident to a demonstration.


Friend. I acknowledge, that in the present state, no man can say that Jesus is
the Lord, but by the Holy Ghost; but when they shall stand before his bar, they
shall confess him Lord, to the glory of God the Father, by force.


Minister. But St. Paul speaks generally, 'that no man can say that Jesus is
the Lord, but by the Holy Ghost:' He does not mention time or place, but
represents the matter impossible; besides every expression here used, implies a
willing, and not a forced subjection; as bowing in the name of Jesus, and
confessing him to be Lord of all, to the ^lory of God the Father.


Friend. But we are sometimes told, that God is as much glorified by the
eternal damnation of some, as by the eternal salvation of others.


Minister. I have, indeed, heard some assert the same: But as the glory of God
is the ultimate end of all that he does, we may properly ask, why he should
take any pains to save mankind?

But, above all, there is one objection that may be brought against this idea,
which is hard to answer; and that is, God has said, 'For I have no pleasure in
the death of him that dies, says the Lord GOD. Say unto them, As I live,
says the Lord GOD, I have no pleasure in the death of the wicked; but that the
wicked turn from his way, and live: turn ye, turn ye, from your evil ways; for
why will ye die, O House of Israel? Ezekiel. xviii. 23. xxxiii. 11. It is evident
to me, that God must take pleasure in what glorifies his name; and as he has
sworn, that he takes no pleasure at all in the death of the wicked, it must be
set down for a truth, that punishment, without having the reformation and
subjection of rebels for its end, is unworthy of the Being we adore; and even
now, it is called, 'his strange work,'and 'his strange act.' But to proceed: If
endless misery were a truth, I should not expect that the mystery of the will
of God, which he has made known unto his chosen, according to his good
pleasure, which he has purposed in himself, would be, 'That, in the
dispensation of the fullness of times, he might gather together in one, ( or
rehead) all things in Christ, both which are in heaven, and which are in
earth,' Ephesians. i. 9, 10. Far less should I expect to find, that 'It pleased the
Father that in him should all fullness dwell; and having made peace by the blood
of his cross, by him, to reconcile all things to himself; by him, I say,
whether they be things in earth, or things in heaven.' Col. i. 19, 20. And I am
not able to imagine, how St. John's vision (Rev. v. 13.) could be just, if
endless damnation is true, where he says, 'And every creature who is in heaven,
and on the earth, and under the earth, and such as are in the sea, and all that
are in them, heard I, saying, Blessing, and honor, and glory, and power, be
unto him that sits upon the throne, and unto the Lamb, for ever and ever.'
In the nature of things, it appears impossible to me to believe these passages
to be strictly and literally true, if endless misery be a truth: Therefore I
say, that I should not expect any intimations, far less absolute promises, that
God would destroy death, the works of the devil, and make all things new, with
many others of the like nature.

We find it promised, that every knee shall bow: and lest some might say, that
every knee, meant only some knees, it is explained by the inspired apostle, to
mean all things in heaven, and in earth, and under the earth: and not only so,
but every tongue shall swear, and confess that Jesus Christ is Lord, to the
glory of God the Father; which could not be, except all were reconciled to him,
whether things in heaven, or things in earth: Wherefore, this is also promised;
and, in consequence of their being subdued, humbled, made obedient, and
reconciled, they shall be reheaded in Christ; never more to go astray, nor
break that band of eternal union, which shall bind all together in one body,
joined to one head; and all shall give never-ceasing praise to God and the
Lamb, world without end.

As endless damnation appears to me to be against the promises, I cannot hold
it as an article of my faith; but were there no promises or intimations to the
contrary in Scripture, I should not require it to be threatened in any stronger
terms than it is; I should believe it as a truth, though I might not be able,
at present, to see the propriety and equity thereof; I should never suffer my
weak reason to gainsay Divine Revelation: But my difficulty arises from these
express promises of God, which compose so great a part of that book which is
given us as a rule of faith and practice; and which promises expressly assert a
future state of things beyond sin, sorrow, pain, and death of every kind; when
all things shall be made new; and death, the last enemy of God, Christ, and
man, shall be destroyed, swallowed up in victory; and sin, which is its sting,
shall be no more in existence; and tears shall be all wiped away, from all
faces.

But though I have acknowledged that I should not dare to dispute the doctrine
of endless damnation, unless God had given intimations, and even promises, to
the contrary; since I find several dreadful threatenings in Scripture, in which
the word aionion, or everlasting, is joined with the punishment of the wicked;
yet, a very little attention will show us, that the felicity of the righteous
is promised in much stronger language, than the misery of the wicked is
threatened, in the Scriptures.

I remark, in the first place, that the word aionion, rendered everlasting, or
eternal is used much oftener in St. John's gospel alone, to express the
continuance of the life, or well-being, of the righteous, than it is used in
the whole Bible, to express the misery of the wicked; and this remark is
strengthened by observing, that he never once uses the word in his whole
gospel, nor in his epistles, to set froth the duration of punishment. See St.
John, iii. 15, 16, 36. iv. 14. v. 24. vi. 27, 40, 47, 54, 68. x. 28. xii. 25,
50. xvii. ver. 2, 3. in all which passages, the word aionion is used to express
the continuance of the well-being of the righteous.

But, not to insist on this: I observe, that there are many stronger
expressions (even in our translation) to set forth the well-being of the
righteous, than any that are used as connected with the misery of the wicked. I
saiah, xlv. 17. we read, 'Israel shall be saved in JEHOVAH, with an everlasting
salvation; ye shall not be ashamed, not confounded, world without end.' But
where do we read, that the misery of the wicked shall have no end? The word
endless, or world without end, is never once used by our translators, to
express the eternity of punishment, in the whole Bible.

We read, in 1 Pet. i. 4. of 'an inheritance, incorruptible, and undefiled; and
that fades not away, reserved in heaven:' and in chap. v. 4. of 'a crown of
glory, that fades not away:' and, Heb. xii. 28. of a 'kingdom, which cannot be
moved:' And our blessed Savior's words are remarkably strong upon this
subject, in many places; as in St. Luke's gospel, chap. xx. 35, 36, where he
says, 'But they who shall be accounted worthy to obtain that world, and the
(first) resurrection from the dead, neither marry, nor are given in marriage:
neither can they die any more: for they are equal unto the angels; and are the
children of God, being the children of the resurrection:' And in St. John, x.
27, 28, 29. we read thus: 'My sheep hear my voice, and I know them, and they
follow me: and I give unto them eternal life: and they shall never perish,
neither shall any pluck them out of my hand. My Father, who gave them ^^e, is
greater than all; and none in able to pluck them out of My Father's hand.' In
chap. xi. 25, 26. Christ says, 'I am the resurrection and the life: he that
believes in me, though he were dead, yet shall he live; And whosoever lives
and believes in me, shall never die.' And, in chap. vi. 50. he says, 'This is
the bread that comes down from heaven, that a man may eat thereof, and not
die.' And he expresses the perpetuity of heavenly bliss, and of our enjoyment
of the same, by advising us, saying, 'Lay up for yourselves treasures in
heaven; where neither moth nor rust does corrupt, and where thieves do not
break through nor steal. Fear not, little flock; for it is your Father's good
pleasure to give you the kingdom. Sell that ye have, and give alms: provide
yourselves bags which wax not old, a treasure in the heavens that fails not;
where no thief approaches, neither moth corrupts,' St. Matthew. vi. 20. and
St. Luke, xii. 32, 33. This is that which St. Paul calls 'a better and an
enduring substance,' Heb. x. 34. But what shall I say of the apostle's words, 2
Cor. iv. 7? 'For our light affliction, which is but for a moment, works for
us, ^ath hyperbolen eis hyperbolen aionion baros doxes katergazetai emin: a
glory, exceeding aionion, or eternal, to an excess.' Here is an hyperbole upon
an hyperbole; beyond eternal; a far more exceeding eternal weight of glory.

But it is not so much by the different words made use of to denote the
permanency of the felicity of the righteous, from those which are used to
express the duration of the misery of the wicked, that I judge of the
continuance of the one beyond the other; so much as from the different sources
from whence they flow, and of their different natures.

The happiness of those who are reconciled to God, arises from their union to
Christ; in which if they continue grounded and settled during this present
life, wherein they pass through so many sore trials, the union will become so
permanent, as that it will be impossible to dissolve it; and the very nature of
things shows, that if we abide firm to the end, through all difficulties, and
overcome all those things that would seek to separate us from Christ, when we
come into that state where we shall meet with no more temptations, nor any
thing that has the least tendency to draw our minds from God, we must, of
consequence, remain attached, or united, to him, while we have an existence.
This doctrine was known to David; and, therefore, he said, 'While I live, will
I praise JEHOVAH; I will sing praises unto my God, while I have any being,'
Psal^ cxlvi. 2. civ. 33. It may be proved, that the union shall continue
between Christ and his faithful ones after this life, and shall become
indissoluble; and that neither 'tribulation, nor distress, nor persecution, nor
famine, nor nakedness, nor peril, nor sword; neither death, nor life, nor
angels, nor principalities, nor powers, nor things present, nor things to come,
nor height, nor depth, nor any other creature, shall be able to separate us
(who abide in him) from the love of God which is in Christ Jesus our Lord?' See
Romans viii. 35 -- 39. See also St. John, xv. 4, 5, 7, 9, 10. 1 John, ii, 24 --
28.

The never-ending continuance of the life, or state of well-being of the
righteous, may be certainly inferred, with the greatest ease, from the
continuance of the life of Christ; who is made an high priest, 'not after the
law of a carnal commandment, but after the power of an endless life,' Heb. vii.
16. And he has expressly declared, 'Because I live, ye shall live also,' St.
John xiv. 19. Thus, as long as the cause remains, the effect must continue; but
the cause, even the life of Christ, must undoubtedly continue to endless
periods; therefore also, the effect, or the life of those who are joined to him
in an indissoluble union, shall continue. The apostle Paul understood logic as
well as any in our days: and he thus reasons upon this glorious truth; 'The
spirit itself bears witness with our spirits, that we (who are led by the
Spirit of God, and have received the spirit of adoption, whereby we cry, Abba,
Father) 'are the children of God: And if children, then heirs; heirs of God,
and joint-heirs with Christ: if so be that we suffer with him, that we may be
also glorified together,' Rom, viii. 16, 17.

Now, as Christ, the principal heir, cannot be disinherited; so, neither can
those who are joint heirs with him. The Holy Spirit is given us as the earnest
of our inheritance, and to seal us to the day of redemption, 2 Cor. v. 5.
Ephesians. i. 13, 14, and iv. 30. Christ is the head, and the overcomers through
the blood of the Lamb, are the members of his body, and shall inherit all
things; he will be their God, and they shall be his children: he is their life,
and he 'will make them pillars in the temple of God, and they shall go no more
out,' Rev. iii. 12. St. Paul says, 'When Christ, who is our life, shall appear,
then shall ye also appear with him in glory,' Col. iii. 4. And St. John says,
'Behold what manner of love the Father has bestowed upon us, that we should be
called the sons of God: therefore the world knows us not, because it knew him
not. Beloved, now are we the sons of God, and it does not yet appear what we
shall be: but we know, that when he shall appeap, we shall be like him; for we
shall see him as he is,' 1 John iii. 1, 2. Thus, we are sure, from the
Scriptures, and from the nature of things, that those who are drawn by the
Father, united to the Son, sealed by the Holy Ghost, willingly choose the Lord
for their portion, and constantly adhere to him to the end, shall never be
separated from him in the future ages; for he himself says, 'As the living
Father has sent me, and I live by the Father; so he that eats me, even he
shall live by me,' St. John, vi. 57. And as Christ is the great attracting
loadstone, that shall finally draw all things to him; it is evident, that he
will preserve for ever, those whom he has thoroughly drawn to himself, and who
have adhered to him through the time of trial. Thus is the life eternal of the
righteous, or their endless state of well-being, expressed in much stronger
language than the misery of the wicked; and, moreover, has its foundation in
the union between Christ and his church, and in the nature of things.


Friend. But if the Spirit of God dwelling in us, and thereby causing us to
adhere to Christ, and to follow him through all trials, makes our union to him
so perfect, that nothing shall be able to separate us from him to all eternity;
since we are confirmed in habits of goodness by free choice, and by often
repeated exercises; why, by the same rule, shall not the misery of the wicked
be endless, seeing that they have chosen and adhered to evil through life, and
by constant practice are confirmed therein? Evil is grown up to a body in them;
and it appears to me as difficult to reform and bring them off from their
vicious habits, as it would be to draw the saints in light from their adherence
to virtue and goodness.


Minister. Your reasoning would be conclusive, upon the supposition that there
are two eternal principles, viz. good and evil; if it can be proved, that evil
is coexistent with goodness, that it has always been: then, the absolute
eternity of sin and misery may be easily inferred. This is the true foundation
of endless misery, and it came from the Pagan theology: The Heathens believed
in two eternal principles, ever warring against each other, and neither fully
prevailing; that men had the liberty of enlisting under which they pleased; and
that those who in life chose virtue, should enjoy endless felicity; while those
who chose, and adhered to vice, should eternally remain under its dominion, and
of consequence be always miserable. Thus, the infernal deities being judged by
the poor Pagans to be as eternal as the good gods, and more powerful; they
sacrificed more to the evil principle than to the good, out of fear, and to
appease the anger of those abhorred, malevolent agents; hence, the frequency of
human sacrifices.

Now, when the Christian religion triumphed over Paganism in the Roman empire,
many of the philosophers embraced and professed it, but withal, retained many
of their Pagan notions; among which was the eternity of these two opposite
principles: hence arose the ancient sect of the Manichees, who believed not
only the eternal existence of two contrary eternal Gods, one good and the other
evil; but also, that all visible things were created by the devil; and upon
this principle, they might argue the universality of damnation, with as much
ease and certainty, as we, upon the contrary, may argue the certainty of the
universal Restoration, according to that glorious promise of God, Isaiah, lvii.
16, 17, 18, 19, 'For I will not contend for ever, neither will I always be
wroth: for the Spirit should fail before me, and the souls which I have made.
For the iniquity of his covetousness was I wroth, and smote him: I hid me, and
was wroth; and he went on frowardly, in the way of his heart. I have seen his
ways, and will heal him: I will lead him also, and restore comforts unto him,
and to his mourners. I create the fruit of the lips; Peace, peace, to him that
is far off, and to him that is near, says JEHOVAH; and I will heal him.'

Those who venture to contradict their Maker, and say, that he will contend for
ever, and be always wroth; ought to give as good a reason, at least, why he
will, as he has given why he will not; and, consequently, must prove him not
to be the Father of all spirits, and the Creator of all souls: If, therefore,
it can be demonstrated, that Satan is an eternal, self-existent, immutable,
evil being, and that he has created all, or a part of mankind, (as some
asserted formerly, and as I myself have heard lately) or that he has drawn
some of God's creatures into such an union with himself, that they cannot be
separated from him; and that he will maintain his crown, throne, and kingdom,
in opposition to God, to all endless duration; then, and not till then, may the
eternity of sin and misery be concluded, from the nature of things, with equal
ease and certainty, as the perfection and happiness of the saints.

But, if the kingdom of evil, and all the works of sin, Satan, and darkness,
shall be totally destroyed by Christ, and all things shall be reheaded in him,
who is the head of all principality and power, as well as of every man: See
Ephesians, i. 10. Col. ii. 10. 1 Cor. xi. 3. If every kn^^e shall bow, and
tongue shall swear, and all things, whether in heaven or in earth, or under the
earth, shall confess that he is Lord; and all things, whether in heaven or in
earth, shall be reconciled to him: See Isaiah, xlv. 23. Phil. ii. 10. Col. i.
20. And all kingdoms (not excepting that of the prince of the power of the air)
shall be broken and destroyed by the kingdom of Christ, which shall itself be
yielded up into the kingdom of boundless love, where judgment shall be no more:
What shall we say of that doctrine, that teaches us the endless duration of
evil? So far is the endless sin and misery of the wicked from being inferred
from the endless holiness and felicity of the righteous, in the kingdom of the
Father, that every proof and demonstration of the latter, concludes equally
against the former.

One of the first arguments that ever began to take hold of my mind, and to
bring me to think seriously of the system of the Restoration, was, what I read
in a little book upon the subject called, The Everlasting Gospel, etc. and is
there thus expressed.

'It is as impossible that there should be two endless contrary things, as that
there should be two real contrary deities, a good God and a bad one, or two
sorts of contrary creatures, both of truly divine original, some being made
good by God, and others bad. For an absolute and merely infinite duration,
which has ne^t^^^ beginning nor end, is according to the confession of all
divines, yea or every reasonable man, a property peculiar to the uncreated
Being only. But such an infinite duration, which, although it has a beginning,
yet shall have no end, can only be the property of those creatures, that are of
divine original. For as these, according to the language of the scripture, are
of divine origin, and therefore are rooted in God, or in his almighty creating
power, which has no beginning, they can also be everlasting, their existence o^
duration can also be without end in God. But whatsoever has not its eternal
root in God, or in his eternal creating power, but is sprung up in the creature
in this world, by its voluntary turning away from God, and against his holy
will, and consequently is an abomination and displeasure to the Most High, and
is only suffered by him, such as sin, and the punishment depending thereon,
these things cannot possibly be of an absolute endless existence and duration,
or remain so long as GOD shall exist; but must of necessity once cease and be
annihilated. For as God is a Being to those creatures which he created good,
and which exist through his will, wherein they may subsist and be preserved
without end; so he is on the contrary, to iniquity and sin, (which against his
will, is sprung up in and sticks to the creatures) a consuming ^ire, whereby
all sin and perverseness in the creatures must be at last consumed,
annihilated, and separated from them in the highest degree, in order to restore
them to their primitive purity; in the same manner as the fire does not consume
and destroy the gold, but only the dross, and that which is impure.'

We will now state some of the arguments in favor of the endless continuance
of the happiness of the saints, in the kingdom of their Father; and those which
prove that the state of misery shall come to an end

Christ has promised, that the happiness of the saints shall have no end;
because his life shall have no end, and he is their life.

The misery of the wicked shall end, because the kingdom of evil shall end.

The power of God stands engaged to preserve and keep those who commit
themselves to him; and thus their union with him shall always continue.

The same is engaged to destroy that covenant with death, and that agreement
with hell, whereby sinners are held in subjection to Satan, and thus to take
the prey from the mighty, and the captives from the terrible.

The subjects of Christ are his natural subjects; he is their rightful
sovereign: but Satan's subjects are slaves, led captive by him at his will; he
is an usurper, and all that are in bondage to him belong to Christ, who will
finally draw them all to himself.

Those that are in bliss shall be eternally attracted by him, and shall always
choose that which is good; but when evil is broken, its influence shall no more
prevail over those that are captivated by it; and they shall feel the
consequences of sin in such a manner as to loathe it; and they shall heartily
return, and swear allegiance to their rightful King.

There shall be no influence to draw the saints in bliss from Christ, and
thereby dissolve his kingdom; but all the influence of God and goodness, shall
tend to dissolve the kingdom of darkness, and to put an end to the thraldom and
misery of its unhappy slaves.

Thus, I might go on with a long train of arguments upon this subject; but
these may suffice.


Friend. Your arguments would seem very conclusive, for the entire subjection
of all things, if you could prove that the word ALL, intends literally and
mathematically, the whole, without exception; but this, I doubt, will be
difficult for you to do, as you must know, that it is very frequently used in
common language for a part, and sometimes for only a small part of mankind.


Minister. I acknowledge, this is the case in common conversation, and in such
parts of the sacred history where we are in no danger of being misled by it,
being well informed by the context, or some other passages, or from the nature,
or from the circumstances of the facts, that we must take it in a limited
sense; but I do not recollect any passage, where any point of doctrine is
spoken of, in which the word ALL is used in that uncertain and undeterminate
manner: and it is necessary that it should not be used in that way, in matters
of importance; because we might be led into confusion and great uncertainty
thereby; not knowing whether to understand it universally, or partially.
Wherefore, I lay down this plain rule; viz. When the word ALL is used in any
passage of Scripture, and we are not necessarily obliged, either by the context
or some other text, or the nature and circumstances of the case, to understand
it partially; and especially, where any important point of doctrine is spoken
of we are always to understand it universally, without exception.


Friend. But can you prove from the writings of the apostles, that they used
the word ALL in this large and universal sense?


Minister. Yes, my friend, very easily, and in the most unexceptionable manner,
Hear what the author of the Epistle to the Hebrews says upon this matter: 'Thou
have put ALL things in subjection under his feet: for in that he put ALL in
subjection under him; he left nothing that is not put under him,' Heb. ii. 8.

It is evident, that the apostle's reasoning would be very inaccurate, if not
entirely false, upon the supposition that ALL things did not intend ALL, in the
largest sense: for how would this conclusion naturally and necessarily follow,
'For in that he put ALL in subjection under him, he left nothing not put under
him;' unless it be premised, that ALL is used in the universal sense of the
word?


Friend. But has not the same apostle made an exception, when he uses the word
ALL, in some other of his writings?


Minister Yes, truly; but it is such an exception as justifies this sense of
the word, more than a thousand arguments: 'For he has put ALL things under his
feet; but when he says, ALL things are put under him, it is manifest, that he
is excepted which did put ALL things under him.' 1 Cor. xv. 27. Here God the
Father being alone excepted, proves all other beings to be included in the
words ALL things; and that in so convincing a manner, that I am astonished that
I did not perceive it long before I did.


Friend. It is true, that nothing can be plainer, than that ALL things, in
these places, must mean ALL beings, except God; but then, perhaps, St. Paul
only meant, that they should be subject to his control, and not brought
willingly to obey: If you can prove this point as clearly as you have the
other, and from the same authority, it will seem to put the matter with me
beyond dispute.


Minister. This is very easily done; for it is universally acknowledged by all
Christians, that all things are now, and have ever been subject to his
control; for when he was upon earth, in his lowest state of humiliation, even
the unclean spirits, the most rebellious of beings, obeyed his word; which made
those who saw his miracles cry, with amazement, 'What thing is this? what new
doctrine is this? for with authority commands he even the unclean spirits,
and they obey him,' St. Mark, i. 27. The devils obeyed him universally, in
whatever he commanded them; and could not enter into the swine without his
permission; and how disagreeable soever his words were to them, they were
forced to comply, without daring to complain; yea, they frequently seemed like
humble suppliants; and once we read, they went so far as to adjure our blessed
Lord not to torment them: See St. Mark, v. 7. The winds, waves, fishes, all
obey him; all diseases, and even death itself, heard his voice, and departed at
his bidding; and to his disciples he said, All power is given unto me, in
heaven and in earth,' Matthew. xxviii. 18. and certainly now, he is at 'the right
hand of God, angels, and authorities, and powers, are made subject unto him,' 1
Pet. iii. 22. God has exalted him far above all principality, and power, and
might, and dominion, and every name that is named; not only in this age, (for
so I render the word aio^^) but also in that which is to come; and put all
things under his feet, and gave him to be the head over all things to the
church," Ephesians. i. 21, 22. But, as though the apostle had known that the sense
would be disputed, he has said, 'But now we see not yet all things put under
him,' Heb. ii. 8. All things were subject to his control, even on earth; and
they cannot be less so, now he is exalted to heaven, to the glory which he had
with the Father before the world was; and yet, many years after his ascension,
the apostle says, 'But now we see not yet all things put under him;' by which
he must certainly mean their being willingly subject unto him; for, in all
other senses, all things are now put under him, in the most unlimited manner,
as we have seen already. But the apostle goes on to tell how far the important
work is accomplished, and that a sure foundation is laid for its entire
completion; saying, 'But we see Jesus, who was made a little lower than the
angels, for the suffering of death, crowned with glory and honor, that he, by
the grace of God, should taste death for ALL;' (for so the word pantos ought to
be rendered.) There was anciently a manuscript in use, in which the words were
choris Theou instead of chariti Theou, that is, for all, EXCEPT GOD. And there
is little doubt of its being the true sense; because St. Paul makes the same
exception, with respect to those who are put under Christ, as we have before
noted, 1 Cor. xv. 27.

Then the apostle adds, 'For it became him, for whom are all things, and by
whom are all things, in bringing many sons unto glory, to make the Captain of
their salvation perfect through sufferings,' Heb. ii. 9, 10.

Instead of the word all intending only a part, we find, in several places,
that the word many intends all, as in Romans v. 15, 16, 19. 'For if through the
offense of one, many be dead; much more the grace of God, and the gift by
grace, which is by one man, Jesus Christ, has abounded unto many. The free
gift is of many offenses unto justification. For, as by one man's disobedience
many were made sinners; so, by the obedience of one, shall many be made
righteous.' Isaiah liii. 1^, 12. 'By his knowledge shall my righteous servant
justify many (or the many) for he shall bear their iniquities. And he bare the
sins of many and made intercession for the transgressors.' These many are
called all, in the 6th verse: All we, like sheep have gone astray; we have
turned every one to his own way: and JEHOVAH has laid on him he iniquity of us
all.'

But, to return to our subject: St. Paul assures us, that though all things,
without exception, are put under him, in one sense; yet in another, he says,'
But now we see not yet all things put under him.' But he leaves us not in the
dark about the matter; but speaks of that effectual 'working, whereby he is
able even to subdue all things unto himself,' Phil. iii. 21. And when all
things shall be subdued unto himself, then shall the Son also himself be
subject unto him that put all things under him, that God may be ALL IN ALL,' 1
Cor. xv. 28. Here we plainly find, a very necessary distinction between all
things being put under him; and all things being subdued unto him, the former
is already done, in the fullest manner; and the latter shall be as perfectly
and as fully accomplished, in due time: 'Because the creation itself shall be
delivered from the bondage of corruption, into the glorious liberty of the
children of God. For we know, that the whole creation groaneth and travaileth
in pain together, until now,' Romans vi^i. 21, 22.

Though what has already been spoken, may seem more than enough to prove the
point respecting the word all; yet there is one passage more, full to the
purpose, that I would not omit; it being, of itself, fully sufficient to settle
the dispute for ever: -- The apostle, speaking of Christ, says, 'Who is the
image of the invisible God, the firstborn of every creature: for by him were
all things created that are in heaven, and that are in earth, visible and
invisible, whether they be thrones, or dominions, or principalities, or powers;
all things were created by him, and for him: and he is before all things, and
by him all things consist. And he is the head of the body, the church; who is
the beginning, the firstborn from the dead: that in all things he might have
the pre-eminence. For it pleased the Father, that in him should all fullness
dwell; and having made peace through the blood of his cross, by him, to
reconcile all things unto himself; by him, I say, whether they be things in
earth, or things in heaven,' Col. i. 15 -- 20.

As the word all is generally acknowledged to be used i^ its most extensive
sense, in every place in this paragraph, except the last, there is no reason to
be given why the apostle should change the sense of the word, without giving us
the least notice of it; and, indeed, it would be very unkind, if not unfair,
for him thus to do; as it would tend to mislead us, in a matter of very great
importance.


Friend^ I hope that I am not so attached to my own opinions as to be unwilling
to hear and consider what may be advanced against them; but the doctrine of
endless damnation has been so generally considered as a most important article
of faith by all denominations, that I can by no means think of giving it up,
unless you are able to establish the contrary system upon the most solid
ground, and answer all the scriptural objections fairly, that have been, or
that can be brought against it; for I must have all my doubts solved, before I
can think of believing such a strange doctrine as this appears to me.


Minister. I most heartily commend your prudence and sincerity: I took the same
resolution; and would never receive this view, till I could answer all
objections to my own satisfaction: and if you are disposed to enquire farther
at another opportunity, I shall be happy in giving you all the assistance in my
power.


END OF THE FIRST DIALOGUE.
DIALOGUE II.
Friend. GOOD day to you, sir, I was just passing by, and if you have a little
time to spare, I should be happy to have some farther discourse with you,
respecting your sentiments; for although I cannot fall in with your views, yet
I am convinced, that your mind is upright in the matter, and that you do not
disagree with your brethren for the sake of differing, but for what you believe
to be truth.


Minister. I have this to say, (and I can with truth declare it) that I never
should have dissented from my brethren, had they only given me the liberty of
enjoying that natural right of freely thinking for myself in matters of
religion. I sincerely wish to live and die in unity with all that love God and
keep his commandments; and I should never have troubled the world with my
sentiments, had not great pains been taken to represent me as a heretic, and my
sentiments dangerous to mankind: This was done to prevent people from hearing
what I had to say in other matters. I was therefore, in a sort, compelled to
sit down and answer all the objections that were brought against the truth I
believed; which answers, drawn (as I trust) fairly from the Scriptures, have
satisfied many who have read what I then wrote upon the subject.


Friend. I never saw your answers to objections in print: but in our last
conversation, you gave such answers to many questions, as seemed to convince me
that much more might be said in favor of the general Restoration than I
formerly imagined: But I have a number of objections remaining, which appear to
me unanswerable; and which I beg leave to state you in the plainest manner.


Minister. Do, my dear friend; you will give me pleasure by being free and open
upon this subject; propose all your objections, in the strongest manner
possible, and I will give you such answers as have satisfied me in the matter;
and I beg leave to assure you, that no light, trifling, or forced answer, far
less a manifest evasion, would satisfy my mind upon this awful and interesting
subject; and if what I believe is not capable of a scriptural defense, I shall
endeavor to quit the ground as speedily as possible.


Friend. The words of our Savior, recorded by St. Mark, chap. ix. 43 -- 49,
form a very serious, and to me an unanswerable objection against the universal
Restoration.

'And if thy hand offend thee ( or cause thee to offend) cut it off: it is
better for thee to enter into life maimed, than having two hands, to go into
hell; into the fire that never shall be quenched ( or that is unquenchable):
where their worm dies not, and the fire is not quenched. And if thy foot
offend thee, ( or cause thee to offend) cut it off: it is better for thee to
enter halt into life, than having two feet, to be cast into hell, into the fire
that never shall be quenched ( or that is unquenchable): where their worm dies
not, and the fire is not quenched. And if thine eye offend thee, ( or cause
thee to offend) pluck it out: it is better for thee to enter into kingdom of
God with one eye, than having two eyes to be cast into hell fire: where their
worm dies not, and the fire is not quenched. For every one shall be salted
with fire, and every sacrifice shall be salted with salt.'

Here our Lord repeats five times, that 'the fire is not, or never shall be
quenched, or is unquenchable;' words of nearly similar meaning: Three times he
speaks of hell, as a place where 'their worm dies not:' and, to show the
perpetuity of the sufferings of the miserable, he says, 'For every one shall be
salted with fire;' i. e. preserved by the fire, as salt preserves meat. These
are the objections from this passage, briefly stated: Are you able to answer
them fairly, without any evasion, from the authority of Scripture?


Minister. This is certainly a most terrible passage, and deserves to be
considered particularly.

There is no doubt but Jesus Christ had his eye upon that passage in Isaiah,
lxvi. 24. -- 'And they shall go forth, and look upon the car^ases of the men
that have transgressed against me: for their worm shall not die, neither shall
their fire be quenched; and they shall be an abhorring unto all flesh.'

It will be of use to us to understand when this prophecy shall be fulfilled:
It shall be when the Children of Israel shall return, and be settled in their
own land; and their enemies shall come against them, and shall be destroyed,
and their carcases shall fall upon the mountains of Israel, and shall be a prey
to the fowls of heaven, and their flesh shall be devoured by worms, which shall
not die, till they have eaten and entirely destroyed their bodies.

'Thou shall fall upon the mountains of Israel, thou and all thy bands, and the
people that is with thee; I will give thee to the ravenous birds of every sort,
and to the beasts of the field, to be devoured. Thou shall fall upon the open
field: for I have spoken it, says Adona^ JEHOVAH. And it shall come to pass in
that day, that I will give unto Gog a place there of graves in Israel, the
valley of the passengers on the east of the sea: and it shall stop the noses of
the passengers; and there shall they bury Gog, and all his multitude: and they
shall call it, The Valley of Hammon-Gog. And seven months shall the House of
Israel be burying of them, that they may cleanse the land.' (See Ezekiel. xxxix.
4, 5, 11, 12.) 'And it shall come to pass, that every one that is left of all
the nations which came against Jerusalem, shall even go up, from year to year,
to worship the King, JEHOVAH, of Hosts, and to keep the feast of tabernacles.'
Zech. xiv. 16. 'And it shall come to pass, that from one new moon to another,
and from one sabbath to another, shall all flesh come to worship before me,
says JEHOVAH.' Isaiah, lxvi. 21. And they that shall come up to Jerusalem, to
worship the Lord, during the time that these bodies shall lie in the open
field, shall go forth, and behold them in a state of putrefaction, a prey to
worms; and all the nations of the earth shall see God's judgments executed upon
those who dare to rebel against: him, by making war against the Lamb, and
against his army. Rev. xvii. 14. xix. 19.

It is also intimated by Ezekiel, that a fire shall be kindled, to burn their
weapons of war, etc. which shall last for some time. Hear his words: 'And they
that dwell in the cities of Israel shall go forth, and shall set on fire and
burn the weapons, both the shields and the bucklers, the bows and the arrows,
and the hand-staves and the spears; and they shall burn them with fire seven
years: so that they shall take no wood out of the field, neither cut down any
out of the forests; for they shall burn the weapons with fire.' See Ezekiel.
xxxix. 9, 10.

Thus have I endeavored to give the plain sense of the text to which our Lord
alluded; and I have not the smallest doubt of its being hereafter literally
fulfilled.

I will now endeavor to give what appears to me the meaning of the text before
us: -- Christ threatened that those who would not deny themselves, and cut off
those things that led them into sin, should hereafter suffer infinitely greater
inconveniences, by being cast into hell fire. And, Oh! who can conceive how
dreadful a portion is threatened to some transgressors! that they 'shall drink
of the wine of the wrath of God, which is poured out without mixture, into the
cup of his indignation; and shall be tormented with fire and brimstone, in the
presence of the holy angels, and in the presence of the Lamb: And the smoke of
their torment ascends up ages of ages; and they have no rest, day nor night.'
Rev. xiv. 10, 11.

Thus, as the enemies of God, who shall be destroyed near Jerusalem, shall have
their carcases exposed, full of worms, and be an abhorring unto all that behold
them; so those who are cast into the burning lake, shall be publicly exposed to
shame, and shall suffer openly for their crimes; and the smoke of their torment
shall ascend up continually, during those ages that the lake of fire, or the
second death, shall continue.

But when I consider that this terraqueous globe itself is probably to become
the lake of fire, when the elements shall melt with fervent heat; and yet after
that dreadful scene is past, the earth itself shall be renewed, and become the
habitation of righteousness; I can hardly have any doubts, but all the rational
part of the creation, 'shall be delivered from the bondage of corruption, into
the glorious liberty of the children of God.' See Romans viii. 19, 20, 21, 22.

Thus, if the lake of fire, or second death itself, shall be destroyed, shall
cease, and be no more; there is an end to tormenting pain; though, perhaps,
such inward reflections, shall continue for some time longer, (if not to
eternity) which, though they shall tend exceedingly to increase the love of God
in the souls thus delivered, shall fill them with shame, similar, or perhaps
more pungent than we feel here on earth, when we are melted under a deep sense
of our manifold transgressions, and of the pardoning love of God at the same
time. -- This seems to me to be the meaning of such passages as these:

'O my God, make them like a wheel; as the stubble before the wind. As the fire
burns the wood, and as the flame sets the mountains on fire; so persecute
them with thy tempest, and make them afraid with thy storm. Fill their faces
with shame, that they may seek thy name, O JEHOVAH. Let them be confounded and
troubled for ever; yea, let them be put to shame, and perish: That -- (our
translators have added the word men, but the sense determines that the addition
should be) -- ' they may know that thou whose name alone is JEHOVAH, art the
Most High over all the earth,' Psalm. lxxxiii. 13 -- 18.

'The wise shall inherit glory, but shame shall be the promotion of fools,'
Prove. iii. 35.

'They shall be great^^, ashamed, for they shall not prosper; their everlasting
confusion shall never be forgotten,' Jer. xx. 11. xxxiii. 40.

'They shall be ashamed, and also confounded, all of them: they shall go to
confusion together, that are makers of idols, ' Isa. xlv. 16. 'And all are
incensed against him, (JEHOVAH) shall be ashamed, ' verse 24.

'For thus says Adonai JEHOVAH; I will even deal with thee as thou have done,
which have despised the oath in breaking the covenant. Nevertheless, I will
remember my covenant with thee in the days of thy youth, and I will establish
unto thee an everlasting covenant. Then thou shall remember thy ways, and be
ashamed, when thou shall receive thy sisters, thine elder and thy younger (
viz. Samaria and Sodom); and I will give them unto thee for daughters, but not
by thy covenant. And I will establish my covenant with thee, and thou shall
know that I am JEHOVAH: That thou may remember, and be confounded, and never
open thy mouth any more, because of thy shame, when I am pacified toward thee,
for all that thou have done, says Adonai JEHOVAH,' Ezekiel. xvi. 59 -- 63.

'Then shall ye remember your own evil ways, and your doings that were not
good, and shall loathe yourselves in your own sight, for your iniquities, and
for your abominations. Not for your sakes do I this, says Adonai JEHOVAH, be
it known unto you; be ashamed and confounded, O house of Israel," Ezekiel. xxxvi.
31, 32.

But the lake of fire shall go out, when all the purposes for which it shall be
kindled are accomplished; and if so, then it follows of course, that
intelligences shall be no longer tormented therein.


Friend. But when God says, that a fire shall not be quenched, does it not
necessarily imply, that it shall never cease burning?


Minister. By no means: for we read in several places of Scripture of fires
that have ceased, ages ago, that were spoken of in as strong terms as are used
by Christ, respecting the fire of hell.

As for instance: In Lev. vi. 13. we read, 'The fire shall ever be burning upon
the altar: it shall never go out.' This is a much stronger expression than if
it had been said, 'It shall not be quenched;' for it is said, 'It shall never
go out:' But surely, it must be used with some limitation; for for we know that
it has ceased, ages ago: And we read, that Daniel prophesied of the Messiah,
that he should 'cause the sacrifice and oblation to cease,' Dan. ix. 27; but it
would certainly have been a weak argument against Daniel's prophecy, that as
Moses had said, The fire should never go out upon the altar, therefore the
Messiah could never cause the sacrifice and oblation to cease; but it would be
just as good an argument against Daniel's prophecy, as the words of Christ are
against Isaiah's: 'For I will not contend for ever, neither will I be always
wroth; for the spirit should fail before me, and the souls which I have made. I
have sworn by myself, the word is gone out of my mouth in righteousness, and
shall not return, That unto me every knee shall bow, every tongue shall swear.
Surely shall say, In JEHOVAH have I righteousness and strength; to him shall
come; and all that are incensed against him shall be ashamed,' Isa. lvii. 16.
xlv. 23, 24.

In Jer. xvii. 27. we read: 'But if you will not hearken unto me, etc. then
will I kindle a fire in the gates thereof, and it shall devour the palaces of
Jerusalem, and it shall not be quenched.' See also chap. iv. 4, xxi. 12. Amos
v. 6. 2 Kings xxii. 17.

Similar threatenings we find positively pronounced by Ezekiel, at the command
of God: 'Moreover the word of JEHOVAH came unto me saying, Son of man, set thy
face toward the south, and drop thy words toward the south, and prophesy
against the forest of the south field, and say to the forest of the south, Hear
the word of JEHOVAH; Thus says Adonai JEHOVAH, Behold I will kindle a fire in
thee, and it shall devour every green tree in thee, and every dry tree: the
flaming flame shall not be quenched, and all faces from the south to the north,
shall be burnt therein; and all flesh shall see that I JEHOVAH have kindled it;
it shall not be quenched.' Ezekiel. xx. 45, 46, 47, 48. See also Jer. vii. 20.

Now these threatenings were surely executed; for the people did not hearken to
God: he did certainly kindle a fire, and it burnt, and was not quenched, but
consumed Jerusalem and all her palaces; and the beautiful forests that were so
much esteemed, shared the same fate: But what person will argue, that the whole
city and country must be now in flames; and must have been consuming, from the
days of Jeremiah and Ezekiel, because of these expressions, 'The flaming flame
shall not be quenched,' etc. since we know that Jerusalem, and the country
round about, have been since inhabited, and will be again, in a more glorious
manner than ever?

Neither will it help the matter to say, that we must understand the fire
figuratively, for the anger of God, etc. for he declares by Zechariah, after
the seventy years captivity, that he was 'returned to Jerusalem with mercies.'
See Zech. i. 16. And though the present desolation of that land is compared to
the overthrow of Sodom and Gomorrah, Admah and Zeboim, Deuteronomy. xxix. 23 -- 28.
And Ezekiel not only speaks of it as desolate and waste, but as having been
always so; though we know it was formerly filled with inhabitants: (See Ezekiel.
xxxvi. 34, 35, xxxviii. 8.) Yet all the prophets speak of a time to come, when
it shall be much more flourishing than ever it has been; and Isaiah says,
'Whereas thou have been forsaken and hated, so that no man went through thee; I
will make thee an eternal excellency, a joy of many generations. Thou shall no
more be termed Forsaken; neither shall thy land be termed Desolate; but thou
shall be called Hephzibah (my delight is in her) and thy land Beulah (married);
for JEHOVAH delights in thee, and thy land shall be married,' Isaiah lx. 15.
lxii 4.

Thus we may see, by these and many other passages, that predictions apparently
directly contrary one to the other, may be all fulfilled upon the same land,
people and persons; only allowing a proper time to each, without which we can
never make sense of many prophecies.

Isaiah, speaking of the land of Bozrah, says, 'And the streams thereof shall
be turned into pitch, and the dust thereof into brimstone: and the land thereof
shall become burning pitch. It shall not be quenched, night nor day; the smoke
thereof shall go up for ever: from generation to generation it shall lie waste;
none shall pass through it, for ever and ever. But the cormorant and the
bittern shall possess it; the owl also, and the raven, shall dwell in it:'
(birds that cannot live in fire, pitch, and brimstone, any better than men.)
'And thorns shall come up in her palaces, nettles and brambles in the
fortresses thereof: and it shall be an habitation for dragons, and a court for
owls. The wild beasts of the desert shall also meet with the wild beasts of the
island, and the satyr shall cry to his fellow: the screech-owl also shall rest
there, and find for herself a place of rest. There shall the great owl make her
nest, and lay and hatch, and gather under her shadow: there shall the vultures
also be gathered, every one with his mate. Seek ye out of the book of JEHOVAH,
and read: no one of these shall fail, none shall want her mate: for my mouth it
has commanded, and his Spirit it has gathered them. And he has cast the lot
for them, and his hand has divided it unto them by line: they shall possess it
for ever, from generation to generation shall they dwell therein,' Isaiah
xxxiv. 9, 10, 11, 13, 14, 15, 16, 17.

Now, in this passage, there are such things spoken of as are impossible to be
fulfilled at once, without as great a miracle as was wrought for the three
children in the furnace; and which there is no reason to expect will be wrought
in favor of cormorants, bitterns, owls, ravens, dragons, satyrs, wild beasts,
thorns, nettles, and brambles. In the 10th verse we read of a period, called
for ever, wherein this land is to be on fire and is not to be quenched, night
nor day: and the smoke of it is to ascend up for ever; but in the 17th verse,
it is said, that the beforementioned birds and beasts shall possess it for
ever, even from generation to generation shall they dwell therein. But one of
these periods must end, before the other can begin; the fire must cease to
burn, and the smoke to ascend, before beasts can take up their constant
dwelling there, and birds can lay and hatch, and gather their young ones under
their shadow, and enjoy the society of their mates. And thus the whole prophecy
may be fulfilled; not in the same, but in different periods: And thus also, may
all the threatenings, and all the promises, in the sacred book, be
accomplished; not at once, but each in their season.

It appears evident, that our Lord, by alluding to a fi^e that shall burn on
earth, and to worms that shall devour the flesh of the slain, could not mean to
prove the torments of men to be absolutely endless; at least, the expressions
of the worm that dies not, and the fire that is not quenched, do not
necessarily imply it; which has been sufficiently proved, by the passages where
the same or similar expressions are used, where yet the subject cannot intend
endless duration; and this is all that can be necessary to prove at present.

As to the expression of being salted with fire, as every sacrifice was salted
with salt; I am not so clear, what might have been our Savior's intent in this
expression; but I think, in the first place, he intended to teach us, that they
should not be annihilated by the fire, but preserved therein, to be tormented
day and night, in the presence of the holy angels, and in the presence of the
Lamb, during the ages of ages. I would also propose, whether our Lord did not
mean to intimate, that even the fire itself shall be of use under his
direction, to humble, subdue, and penetrate the stubborn and disobedient
rebels, that shall be cast into it. Fire, as well as salt, is a great purifier;
and preserves and cleanses those things which are able to endure it; and is the
great agent by which all metals are separated from their dross, and prepared
for the use for which they were designed. Under the law, all unclean things,
that could endure the fire, were ordered to be cast into it, in order to their
cleansing.


Friend. What you have said concerning the fires that are represented as
unquenchable, in several passages of Scripture, is worthy of attention; but you
should consider, that these fires were all on earth, and in time, and therefore
must have an end, or cease to burn; but the fire of hell is in eternity, and
therefore must last as long as eternity shall endure. Pray, what can yon say to
this?


Minister. Had those unquenchable fires never gone out while earth endured, or
while time lasted, there might have been some force in this argument; but since
the continuance of the fire does not depend upon the season in which it is
kindled, but upon the combustibles that feed and support it, this can be no
objection: Therefore, since those unquenchable fires that have been mentioned,
were kindled on earth, and yet not burn while earth lasted, but have gone out
long ago; there is no necessity of granting, (even though we should admit your
premises of the fire of hell being kindled in eternity) that the unquenchable
fire of the burning lake must unavoidably burn to all eternity, merely because
it is supposed to belong to that state: But if punishments only belong to those
ages of ages before Christ shall resign the kingdom to the Father, and the lake
of fire shall be this terraqueous globe, dissolved, or melted, with fervent
heat; then the ground is changed, and the whole objection vanishes of course.


Friend. As you have come over this objection better than I expected you could,
I shall leave it for the present, and consider more fully, when I am by myself,
what you have said upon this subject; and shall now propose the greatest
objection that can be brought against the Restoration of all men, from the
Scriptures; and which, if you can fairly answer, I shall be almost persuaded to
believe with you: but I am persuaded that you will be hard put to it.


Minister. Produce your cause, and bring forth your strong reasons, that we may
hear them; and if I am silenced, I will not be ashamed to acknowledge it with
all my heart.


Friend. I shall bring my objection from the Scriptures, and state it with the
utmost precision that I am able: -- It is the sin against the holy Ghost, of
which our Savior speaks in the most awful manner; saying, 'Wherefore I say
unto you, all manner of sin and blasphemy shall be forgiven unto men: but the
blasphemy against the Holy Ghost shall not be forgiven unto men. And whosoever
speaks a word against the Son of man, it shall ( or may) be forgiven him; but
whosoever speaks against the Holy Ghost, it shall not be forgiven him,
neither in this world ( or age) neither in the world ( or age) to come. Verily,
I say unto you, all sins shall ( or may) be forgiven unto the sons of men, and
blasphemies wherewith soever they shall blaspheme: but he that shall blaspheme
against the Holy Ghost, has never forgiveness, ( or has not forgiveness to
the age) but is in danger of eternal damnation,' St. Matthew. xii. 31, 32. St.
Mark, iii. 28, 29. This is such a matter of importance, that three of the
evangelists notice it. St. Luke has it thus: 'And whosoever shall speak a word
against the Son of man, it shall ( or may) be forgiven him; but unto him that
blasphemeth against the Holy Ghost, it shall not be forgiven,' St. Luke, xii.
10. St. Matthew says, this sin shall not be forgiven in this world, nor in
that to come; St. Mark, that such an one has never forgiveness, but is in
danger of eternal damnation; and St. Luke positively says, it shall not be
forgiven: And, to confirm the matter still more, if possible, St. Paul says,
'For it is impossible for those who were once enlightened, and have tasted the
heavenly gift, and were made partakers of the Holy Ghost, and have tasted the
good word of God, and the powers of the world to come; if they shall fall away,
( or, and have fallen away) to renew them again to repentance; seeing they
crucify to themselves the Son of God afresh, and put him to an open shame. For
if we sin wilfully, after that we have received the knowledge of the truth,
there remains no more sacrifice for sins, but a certain fearful looking for
of judgment, and fiery indignation, which shall devour the adversaries. He that
despised Moses's law, died without mercy, by the mouth of two or three
witnesses: Of how much sorer punishment, suppose ye, shall he be thought
worthy, who has trodden under foot the Son of God, and has counted the blood
of the covenant, wherewith he was sanctified, an unholy thing, and has done
despite unto the Spirit of grace?' Heb. vi. 4, 5, 6, x. 26, 27, 28, 29. And the
same Apostle directs us, saying; 'Looking diligently, lest any man fail of the
grace of God; lest any root of bitterness springing up trouble you, and thereby
many be defiled: Lest there be any fornicator, or profane person, as Esau, who
for one morsel of meat sold his birthright. For ye know how that afterward,
when he would have inherited the blessing, he was rejected; for he found no
place of repentance, though he sought it with tears.' Heb. xii. 15, 16, 17.

And St. John, the beloved disciple, says; 'If any man see his brother sin a
sin which is not unto death, he shall ask, and he shall give him life for them
that sin not unto death. There is a sin unto death: I do not say that he shall
pray for it,' 1 John v. 16.

Now here is a sin for which there is no forgiveness, neither in this world (
or age) or in that to come; which shall not be forgiven at all; he that
commits it has never forgiveness, is in danger of eternal damnation; he
cannot be renewed again to repentance, because he has crucified Christ to
himself afresh, and has put him to an open shame: having sinned wilfully and
maliciously, after receiving the knowledge of the truth, to such no more
sacrifice for sins remains; judgment and fiery indignation are his certain
portion, he is an adversary, and must be devoured: a sorer punishment than
death without mercy awaits him, of which he is worthy, for that he has trodden
under foot the Son of God, the only Savior, and has counted the precious
blood of the covenant, wherewith he was sanctified, and which alone is able to
cleanse from sin, an unholy thing; and has done despite to the Spirit of
grace, which is only able to renew the heart, and therefore the case of such
must be desperate; for if such an one, like Esau, should wish to repent and
gain what he had lost, it could not be, for he would find no place for
repentance, though he might seek it carefully with tears; for having committed
the sin unto death, for which no prayer is to be made, no intercession offered
up, he is bound over to the second death, the lake of fire and brimstone, and
must bear the punishment of his sins for ever and ever!!! -- What say you to
this?


Minister. As when Nebuchadnezzar told Daniel his dream, he was astonished for
one hour at the greatness of the punishment which he saw would inevitably come
upon the King; much more must all those be, who read and consider these
dreadful threatenings, which must surely come upon all those who have sinned in
the manner described! I shall make a few observations upon these most terrible
passages of Scripture; partly to prevent feeble minds from falling into
despair, that may see them collected in one striking view; partly to cure proud
minds of presumption; and partly to show that the doctrine of the Restoration
may be defended, notwithstanding. 1. We are sure that the Scribes and Pharisees
of our Savior's time, who blasphemously ascribed his miracles to the power of
the devil, did, in the most direct and undeniable manner, commit that sin; and
some are doubtful whether it can be committed by any in these days. 2. It is
generally acknowledged, that the Hebrews were in danger of committing that sin,
by openly and wilfully apostatizing from Christianity, and publicly renouncing
Christ and his salvation, and blaspheming against the Holy Ghost, after having
been partakers of its extraordinary gifts. 3. It cannot be committed by
ignorant persons, nor without a considerable degree of malice prepense; light
in the understanding, and malice in the heart, are necessary ingredients of
this dreadful crime; and it appears to me, it must be committed openly, and
that it cannot be committed in thought only. 4. Under the Levitical
dispensation there were many unpardonable sins -- crimes that could not be
forgiven or overlooked, and for which no atonement could be made, and which
were punished with death, without mercy; other crimes, unless sacrifices were
offered, and repentance took place, subjected the parties to death also; but,
under the gospel, there is but one crime that is properly unpardonable, and
that absolutely subjects the person guilty of it to the second death; yet many
other sins are threatened with the same punishment conditionally, but they may
be forgiven, and not punished at all; but this one must as certainly be
punished with the second death, as murder or any other crime, was by the law of
Moses punished with the death of the body without mercy or forgiveness. Forgery
is the unpardonable sin of England: people frequently suffer death for other
crimes, as well as this; but other offenses are sometimes forgiven, but this
never; it is always punished with death. This circumstance may illustrate my
meaning. The sin against the Holy Ghost is an offense of that kind, that,
either owing to its uncommon malignity (as is most likely,) or some other
cause, exposes the guilty person to the age of judgment, from which he cannot
escape by repentance, pardon, and sprinkling of the blood of Christ, as other
sinners may; neither can he be at present born of the Spirit, to which he has
done despite; nor can he be reclaimed by any possible means, in this age, or in
the age that is to succeed this, but is inevitably bound over to suffer the
inconceivable torments of the second death, or lake of fire and brimstone,
after the day of judgment. 5. There is no kind of dispute between us,
respecting the certainty of the punishment of such; in this we both agree: he
that sins against the Holy Ghost, is in danger of eternal damnation, or
judgment, or the second death: -- The question is, Shall there ever come a
time, when the second death, or lake of fire, shall no more exist? If this can
be proved, the conclusion will be evident, viz. that not one shall remain under
the power thereof to all eternity: Upon this, and this alone, depends the
solution of this awful, interesting, and most important question: and I
consider all other answers as mere quibbles, compared with this. And if it
cannot be proved that a time will come, when all that bears the name of death
shall be destroyed, those who commit the sin unto death, must, at least, be
allowed to stand as exceptions to the general rule; and, I am apt to think, the
rule itself will be overthrown. I shall therefore labor this point a little;
and if I should be so happy as to prove to your satisfaction the total
destruction of death, it will answer many other objections as well as this. My
only refuge is Scripture; if that fails me, I shall not presume to pursue the
subject farther.


Isa. xxv. 8. 'He will swallow up Death in victory; and Adonai JEHOVAH will
wipe away tears from off all faces.' Hos. xiii. 14. 'I will ransom them from
the power of the grave; I will redeem them from death, O death, I will be thy
plagues; O grave, ( or hell) I will be thy destruction: Repentance shall be hid
from mine eyes.' 1 Cor. xv. 26. 'The last enemy that shall be destroyed is
Death ' -- or rather, as the words may more properly be arranged, 'Death,' the
last enemy, shall be destroyed.' The second death is infinitely more the enemy
of man than the first, and may therefore be considered as an enemy which God
will destroy. -- Now,

If the last enemy shall be destroyed, there will not be one left.

But the first is true; therefore also the last. As,

Would it not be highly absurd to say, that, Although the very last enemy shall
be destroyed, yet, many millions shall remain to all eternity?

Verse 56. 'The sting of Death is sin.' While sin remains in existence, death
will be able to show its sting; but the time will come when death shall have no
sting to boast of; therefore sin, and consequently death of every kind, shall
be destroyed. 1 John iii. 8. 'For this purpose the Son of God was manifested,
that he might destroy the works of the devil.' Unless Christ finally destroys
the works of the devil, even all sin out of the universe, his purpose must be
eternally frustrated:

But the last can never be; therefore the first is true.

Heb. ii. 14. 'Forasmuch, then, as the children are partakers of flesh and
blood, he also himself likewise took part of the same; that through death he
might destroy him that had the power of death, that is the devil.' -- Now what
death has the devil power over? the death of the body? or that of the soul,
which consists in enmity against God, and separation from him? 'To be carnally
minded is death; but to be spiritually minded is life and peace. Because the
carnal mind is enmity against God; for it is not subject to the law of God,
neither indeed can be,' Romans viii. 6, 7. If this death, with the consequence of
it, is that which the devil has the power of, then must this death be
destroyed.

But, I think, the first is true; therefore also the last.

Rev. xxi. 4. we read, 'And God shall wipe away all tears from their eyes; and
there shall be no more Death, neither sorrow, nor crying, neither shall there
be any more pain: for the former things are passed away.' Here is a state
spoken of beyond all death; a state wherein, sorrow, crying, and pain shall be
no more. This state is cotemporary with the new heaven and earth, after the
lake of fire has ceased.


Friend. We have always understood this passage to relate to the death of the
body, and even to the death of the righteous only; but making this state
cotemporary with the new heavens and earth, seems to throw a new light upon the
subject.


Minister. Most certainly the word Death here implies the second death; for we
are informed, in the foregoing chapter, of the first resurrection, even that of
the martyrs, who were beheaded for the witness of Jesus, and for the word of
God; and such as had not worshipped the beast and his image, neither had
received his mark in their foreheads, or in their hands; then we read of a
thousand years between this resurrectien, and the rest of the dead living
again: after this, we find, that the dead, small and great, stood before God,
and were judged; and such as were not found written in the book of life, were
cast into the lake of fire, which is expressly called 'the second death;' which
as before observed, is probably the earth in its melted state. In this chapter
we find, that all things are to be made new; and Death is to be no more,
neither sorrow, nor crying, neither any more pain. But this must be the second
death, or lake of fire; for the resurrection of all the bodies, both of the
just and unjust, had been spoken of before.

Thus, as all sin, and all that bears the name of death, shall be entirely
destroyed at last; the doctrine of endless misery seems to fall to the ground,
or, at least, cannot be certainly proved from Scripture, but rather the
contrary.

The time must come when all things shall be subject to Christ, when he shall
destroy death, the last enemy, by destroying sin, which is the sting of death;
so this dreadful sin, as well as others, shall be no more. For if this was not
to be the case, it never could be true, that 'where sin abounded, grace did
much more abound:' for it never would abound quite so much; neither would death
and hell be silent when God shall ask the great questions, 'O death where is
thy sting? O grave, ( or hell) where is thy victory?' for death could say, Here
is my sting, that sin against the Holy Ghost, which must endure to all
eternity, and which even divine grace shall never destroy; I have, therefore,
the victory and dominion over these sinners who have committed it, and will
hold it while God himself exists. Then death could never be destroyed, nor
swallowed up in victory; neither would sorrow, crying, and pain cease; neither
could God ever be ALL IN ALL, in any other sense, with respect to them, than he
is now; nor would every tongue swear; neither would all things wholly be made
new, nor all the former things ever pass away! neither could the universal
chorus of praise ever be sung by every creature, in heaven, on earth, and under
the earth, and throughout God's wide domain; and, finally, many Scriptures
would never seem to be fulfilled, in the fullest sense. Romans v. 20, 21. 'But
where sin abounded, grace did much more abound; that as sin has reigned unto
death; even so might grace reign, through righteousness, unto eternal life, by
Jesus Christ our Lord.' Now, if grace shall abound more than sin, it shall be
as universal, and more powerful: But the first is true; therefore also the
last. If grace shall be as extensive as sin, and more powerful, all who have
sinned shall be restored: But the first is true; therefore also the last.

What consequences must follow from the supposition, that some of God's
creatures shall always remain his enemies! Either God created some to be
miserable to endless ages, or must be frustrated eternally in his designs, or
all must be restored at last, and made happy by love and free love.

The first is blasphemous, the second is dishonorable to God: therefore, the
third must be true: For I cannot think of a fourth conclusion.


Friend. What do you think of the deplorable case of Esau, 'who, for one morsel
of meat, sold his birthright; and afterward, when he would have inherited the
blessing, he was rejected; for he found no place of repentance, though he
sought it carefully, with tears?'


Minister. He certainly lost, or rather sold, his birthright; in consequence
of which, he lost the blessing belonging to the firstborn: But lest any should
be led to conclude from this, that poor Esau had no blessings at all, the same
apostle informs us, that, 'By faith, Isaac blessed Jacob and Esau, concerning
things to come," Heb. xi. 20. By this we find, he was blessed, as well as
Jacob; but in a less degree.


Friend. Do we not read, 'Jacob have I loved; but Esau have I hated?' Rom ix.
13. Mal. i. 2, 3.


Minister. Yes, most certainly: But then this love and hatred, so called, was
manifested to their posterity, and not to their persons, in the manner
described by the prophet: 'I have loved you, says JEHOVAH: yet ye say, Wherein
have thou loved us? Was not Esau Jacob's brother? says JEHOVAH: yet I loved
Jacob, and I hated Esau, and laid his mountains and his heritage waste, for the
dragons of the wilderness.' This manifestation of hatred did not affect the
eternal state of their souls, but their condition in this world: God declared,
that Jacob's seed should exist: as a distinct people to the end of time, but
that Esau's should not: and this difference is evident; for the remains of
Esau's seed were, in the days of the Maccabees, incorporated with the seed of
Jacob, and existed no more for ever, as a nation by themselves. From Jacob's
race the Messiah was to come, and all nations were to be blessed in the seed of
Israel. In all these instances, and in many others, there was a manifest
preference of Jacob to Esau; but nothing like positive hatred can be intended.

Christ says, (St. Luke, xiv. 26.) 'If any man come to me, and hate not his
father and mother, and wife, and children, and brethren, and sisters, yea, and
his own life also, he cannot be my disciple.' But we cannot suppose our Lord
intended positive, but comparative hatred; according to St. Matthew. x. 37. He
that loves father or mother more than me, is not worthy of me: and he that
loves son or daughter more than me, is not worthy of me.'


Friend. What you have said upon this subject appears to have some weight, and
I will consider it more fully hereafter: but I must beg leave to ask you, how
you get over that great gulf which is placed between the regions of Paradise
and Gehenna of which Abraham speaks to the rich man; saying, 'And besides all
this, between us and you there is a great gulf fixed; so that they which would
pass from hence to you, cannot; neither can they pass to us, that would come
from thence.' Does not this imply the absolute impossibility of the rich man's
being ever restored?


Minister. You have asked me many questions; give me leave to ask you one. --
Do you believe, that Jesus of Nazareth was able to pass that impassable gulf?


Friend. Indeed, that is a question I never heard proposed before; and which I
am not prepared to answer, without farther consideration. Pray, be so kind as
to give an answer yourself, and tell me what you think of it.


Minister. I believe, that with man it is impossible; but with God all things
are possible: And I believe, that Jesus Christ was not only able to pass, but
that he actually did past that gulf, which was impassable to all men, but not
to him: And he assures St. John, that he had passed it, and not only so, but
that he had the keys of the same in his possession; for he says, 'Fear not, I
am the first and the last; I am he that lives, and was dead; and behold, I am
alive for evermore, Amen; and have the keys of hell and death.' And St. Peter
informs us; that 'Christ once suffered for sins, the just for the unjust, (that
he might bring us unto God); being put to death in the flesh, but quickened by
the Spirit; by which also he went and preached to the spirits in prison; who
sometime were disobedient, when once the long suffering of God waited, in the
days of Noah, while the ark was a preparing,' And he also tells us, that we
'shall give account to him that is ready to judge the quick and the dead. For,
for this cause was the gospel preached also to them that are dead,' (in
distinction from them that are quick) 'that they might be judged according to
men in the flesh, but live according to God in the spirit.' See Rev. i. 18. 1
Pet. iii. 18, 19, 20. iv. 5, 6.


Friend. You know, the common opinion is, that the Spirit of God, in Noah,
preached unto the inhabitants of the old world; who, in St. Peter's time, were
shut up in the prison of hell: But I must confess, it appears to me a very dark
text.


Minister. If you only observe how particular the expressions are in these
texts, I think it will soon appear, that not the Spirit of God in Noah, but the
spirit, or soul, of Christ, in its disembodied state, is here intended. His
body was doubtless quickened, by his soul, or spirit coming into it again: Was
it not?


Friend. It seems most reasonable to believe it was.


Minister. Then observe the next words, he went; here the idea of a journey to
a distant place is intimated, the original word being expressive of an actual
passage from one place to another, and is the same that is used in ver. 22, for
the ascension of Christ into heaven, so that he appears to have gone into the
prison in the same proper sense, as he afterward went into heaven. He actually
journeyed to the place of confinement, and p^eached to the spirits, etc. He
preached the gospel no doubt, not to men in the body, but to the spirits, to
those in a disembodied state; not only so, but to the spirits in prison: Had
they not been in the prison, Christ would not have gone into the prison to
preach to them. But, who were these spirits? St. Peter informs us, that they
are those who were sometime disobedient; but this expression intimates, that
the time is perfectly past; as, 'Ye were the servants of sin: for when ye were
the servants of sin, ye were free from righteousness,' Romans vi. 17, 20. St.
Peter tells us when they were disobedient; when once the long-suffering of God
waited in the days of Noah, while the ark was a preparing: Here he evidently
distinguishes the two periods of their visitation; one is called the preaching
of Christ, by his spirit, after he was put to death in the flesh; and the other
is called the long-suffering of God, which waited in the days of Noah, while
the ark was a preparing. The long-suffering of God waited upon them, before
they were drowned, while the ark was building; but Christ preached to them when
they were spirits in prison. They were disobedient to God's long-suffering; but
it is not certain that they were so when Christ preached to them; but the
contrary is intimated in these words: 'For, this cause was the gospel preached
also to them that are dead,' etc. This cannot intend those that are spiritually
dead only, but those whose bodies are dead; because we here find the dead set
in opposition to the quick, or those whose bodies are alive, and not those that
are spiritually alive; for we may observe, that whenever the words quick and
dead occur, by quick, we always understand those whose bodies are alive; and by
dead, those who have ceased to exist here.

Acts, x. 40, etc. St. Peter, in his sermon to Cornelius and his family,
informed them of Jesus, who was slain, whom 'God raised from the dead, and
showed him openly: not to all the people, but unto witnesses, chosen before of
God; even to us, who did eat and drink with him, after he rose from the dead.
And he commanded us to preach unto the people, and to testify, that it is he,
who was ordained of God to be the judge of quick and dead.' And St. Paul says
to Timothy, I charge thee, therefore, before God, and the Lord Jesus Christ,
who shall judge the quick and the dead at his appearing, and his kingdom;
preach the word,' etc. See 2 Timothy iv. 1. So, in 1 Pet. iv. 5. the words quick
and dead are used in the same manner; and then immediately, while the idea is
warm in our minds, the apostle gives us the reasons why the gospel was preached
to the dead, ( or the spirits in prison) of which he had before informed us,
and now repeats again, and assures us, that it was, that they might be judged
according to men, in the flesh; or, as though they had heard it while they were
alive in the flesh: but also, that they might live according to God, in the
spirit. The gospel not only was, but is, preached to them that are dead, in a
moral or spiritual sense. It need not have been said; For, for this cause was
the gospel preached ALSO to them that are dead, if only the spiritually dead
are intended; for it is rarely preached to any other but such. Why should it be
said, that they might be judged according to men in the flesh, if they were men
in the flesh at the time when it was preached to them?

This passage proves the existence of the soul after the death of the body: for
unless the souls of the antedeluvians existed after the drowning of their
bodies, Christ could not have preached to them in prison: But the dead being
opposed to the quick in this passage, sufficiently, and even incontestibly,
determines the sense.

With a little attention, we may easily be convinced, that Christ was not only
designed to be a Covenant of the people, (meaning the Jews) and a Light to the
Gentiles; which two descriptions comprehend all the living: but also, to bring
out the prisoners from the prison, and them that sit in darkness out of the
prisonhouse; which (if it be not a repetition) must intend the dead, as all
the living were mentioned before.

'And he said, It is a light thing that thou should be my servant, to raise
up the tribes of Jacob, and to restore the preserved of Israel: I will also
give thee for a light to the Gentiles, that thou may be my salvation unto
the ends of the earth. Thus says JEHOVAH, In an acceptable time have I heard
thee and in a day of salvation have I helped thee: and I will preserve thee,
and give thee for a covenant to the people, to establish the earth, to cause to
inherit the desolate heritages.' Thus far the Redeemer's work seems limited to
the earth, and respects the living: But the prophet goes much farther, and
says, 'That thou may say to the prisoners, Go forth: to them that are in
darkness, Show yourselves: they shall feed in the ways, and their pastures
shall be in all high places. They shall not hunger, nor thirst neither shall
the heat nor sun smite them; for he that has mercy upon them shall lead them,
even by the springs of water shall he guide them.' See Isaiah, xlii. 6, 7,
xlix. 6, 8, 9, 10. Compared with Rev. vii. 14, 15, 16, 17. The work of the
Savior, as described by the elegant pen of Isaiah, (chap. lxi. 1, 2, 3.) seems
to comprehend a great variety of particulars; all which he has performed
already, or shall execute in due time.

'The Spirit of Adonai JEHOVAH is upon me; because JEHOVAH has anointed me,
(1) to preach good tidings to the meek: (2) He has sent me to bind up the
brokenhearted; (3) to proclaim liberty to the captives, (4) and the opening of
the prison to them that are bound: (5) To proclaim the acceptable year of
JEHOVAH, (6) and the day of vengeance of our God: (7) To comfort all that
mourn: (8) To appoint unto them that mourn in Zion, to give unto them, First,
beauty for ashes; Secondly, the oil of joy for mourning; Thirdly, the garment
of praise for the spirit of heaviness: that they might be called, First, Trees
of righteousness; Secondly, The planting of JEHOVAH; ( and ALL for this great
end) -- that he might be glorified.'

Our Lord Jesus Christ, by his process, has laid a foundation for the recovery
of all men; 'For to this end Christ both died, rose, and revived, that he might
be Lord, both of the dead and living,' Romans xiv. 9. He passed through all our
states, that he might redeem us. He came down from Heaven -- he was conceived
in the womb of Mary -- he was born of her -- he lived in the world unknown --
he sympathized with us in our sorrows -- he bare our sins in his own body, on
the tree -- he was buried -- he descended into Hades -- He arose -- ascended --
sits at the right hand of God -- and makes continual intercession for us.

It seemed necessary, that our Savior should visit men in all situations, that
he might redeem them. The apostle informs us, saying, 'Forasmuch as the
children are partakers of flesh and blood, he also himself likewise took part
of the same: that through death, he might destroy him that had the power of
death, that is, the devil; and deliver them, who, through fear of death, were
all their lifetime subject to bondage,' Heb. ii. 14, 15. It was not only
necessary that he should die, to vanquish death, and to redeem us from its
power; but it was equally needful for him to go into those places, where
spirits were confined in the regions of darkness, that he might gain universal
dominion, spoil principalities, and redeem the captives whom he had bought with
his blood, in order that he might ascend up to Heaven, and open to his
followers the gates of eternal life.

'Wherefore he says, When he ascended up on high, he led captivity captive,
and gave gifts unto men. Now that he ascended, what is it but that he also
descended first into the lower parts of the earth? He that descended, is the
same also that ascended up far above all heavens, that he might fill all
things,' Ephesians. iv. 8, 9, 10. 'And having spoiled principalities and powers, he
made a show of them openly, triumphing over them in it,' Col. ii. 15.

Thus our Savior by his divine process, has obtained a right to open the
prison doors, and let the captives go free: and though the rich man was in
torments, where he could not get a drop of water to cool his tongue, and had
judgment without mercy, because he had showed no mercy; yet it is possible,
that, by the blood of the covenant, he may be sent forth out of the pit wherein
is no water. See Zech. ix. 11. The Lord Jesus is able to take the prey from the
mighty, and to deliver the lawful captive, Isa. xlix. 24.

'Such as sit in darkness, and in the shadow of death, being bound in
affliction, and iron; because they rebelled against the words of God, and
contemned the counsel of the Most High; therefore he brought down their heart
with labor; they fell down, and there was none to help.' -- This evidently
points out the deplorable, miserable state of sinners, cut off in their sins;
having rebelled against God's words, and contemned his counsels; for which
reason he has shut them up in darkness, and in the shadow of death; in such a
situation, that no power but his own, can give them the least help, much less
release. Such circumstances seldom occur in this life; but these words are a
lively and affecting description of the miseries of the future state.

'Then they cried unto JEHOVAH in their trouble, and he saved them out of their
distresses. He brought them out of darkness, and the shadow of death, and brake
their bands in sunder. O that men would praise JEHOVAH for his goodness, and
for his wonderful works to the children of men! For he has broken the gates of
brass, and cut the bars of iron in sunder,' Psalm. cvii. 10 -- 16.

This amazing deliverance seems to be described in such language, as
corresponds much better with the deliverance of the spirits from their dreadful
prison, than with any temporal mercies that are bestowed on mankind here on
earth. 'The righteous shall see it, and rejoice; and all iniquity shall stop
her mouth: Whosoever is wise, and will observe these things, even they shall
understand the loving kindness of JEHOVAH,' ver. 42, 43.

Those who are acquainted with the Divine character, and see his designs of
mercy toward his creatures, shall rejoice in the same: They that are wise,
shall observe these things, and shall understand his loving kindness; and that
'JEHOVAH is good to all: and his tender mercies are over all his works,' Psalm.
cxlv. 9.

Thus, how impossible soever it might appear to us, that the rich man should
ever be delivered, we must remember, that 'with God nothing shall be
impossible,' St. Luke i. 37. 'Is there any thing too hard for JEHOVAH?' Genesis
xviii. 14. 'Behold (says he) I am JEHOVAH, the God of all flesh: Is there any
thing too hard for me?' Jer. xxxii. 27.

Our Savior says, (St. Matt. xix. 24, St. Mark x. 25. St. Luke xviii. 25.) 'It
is easier for a camel to go through the eye of a needle, than for a rich man to
enter into the kingdom of God.' Whether the word here used, intends a camel or
a cable, it certainly implied the greatest difficulty imaginable, even
amounting in the view of his disciples, to a natural impossibility, or they
would not have been as the evangelist expresses it, exceedingly amazed, and
astonished out of measure at his words, ' saying among themselves, Who then can
be saved?' But, though Jesus meant to represent the matter as in itself a kind
of natural impossibility, and absolutely impossible to men; yet he could not
intend thereby, that it never should be accomplished, because he immediately
adds, 'With men, this is impossible; but not with God: For with God all things
are possible,' St. Mark x. 27. Therefore, though it was impossible for men to
pass the gulf between Paradise and Gehenna; yet, as we have seen, Christ was
able, and therefore as we know not the ne plus ultra of his power to save, we
cannot positively conclude against the Restoration, from this instance of the
rich man, unless we could find some passages of Scripture, where God has
promised never to restore, or to reconcile such to himself, whom he has once
cast off: the contrary to which, I think, may be proved: but I am at present
considering, that, in the nature of things, it is not impossible for God to
restore the rich man, if he so pleases; and, consequently, others that are in
the same situation.

Behold the rich man in another world! -- He seems now to have much more true
benevolence in him, than in his lifetime; for when he could not obtain a drop
of water for his tongue, he pleads much more earnestly for Lazarus to be sent
to his five brethren, to testify to them, lest they also should come into the
same place of torment with himself. Here he urges the matter most earnestly,
and does not seem willing to be denied. This shows him not to have been so lost
to virtue as Satan; since he and his angels, though miserable themselves, seek
to make all men so too, though their torments are increased thereby.

Add to all this, that Abraham called the rich man, 'Son,' and bade him
remember, that in his lifetime he had his good things: and likewise Lazarus,
evil things; and that therefore it was but reasonable that the scene should be
changed: that Lazarus should be comforted, and he tormented. And I think,
nothing can be fairly argued from his case, in favor of endless damnation: For
in case he was doomed to suffer while God exists, there could be no proportion
between the sufferings, torments, and evil things of Lazarus on earth, and
those which he endured in hell; whereas it is intimated in the Scriptures, that
all things are determined by number, weight, and measure. Let us hear what our
Lord has said upon the subject. St. Luke xii. 47, 48. 'And that servant who
knew his Lord's will, and prepared not himself, neither did according to his
will, shall be beaten with MANY stripes. But he that knew not, and did commit
things worthy of stripes, shall be beaten with FEW stripes: for unto whomsoever
much is given, of him shall be much required; and to whom men have committed
much, of him they will ask the more.' But what difference, so much to be
noticed, could there be, if both were to be beaten to all eternity? or how
could either be said to have FEW, if there never was to be an end? Impossible ^
Rev. xviii. 7. 'How much she (Babylon) has glorified herself, and lived
deliciously; so much torment and sorrow give her.' All this appears just and
reasonable: But to suppose a poor ignorant Heathen, or a child of ten years
old, will remain in misery as long as the most persecuting Tyrant, or apostate
Christian, seems to contradict all the ideas we have of justice and equity, as
well as of goodness; for in this case, who can suppose that each one is exactly
rewarded according to his works? And especially, can any think, that mercy has
any hand in a reward, where there is seemingly no proportion? Whereas we read,
(Psalm lxii. 12.) 'Also unto thee, O Lord, belongs mercy: for thou renderest
to every man according to his work.'


Friend. Indeed, I could not have thought that so much could have been said
upon that side of the case; and though I am not yet wholly satisfied, I must
confess, some of my great difficulties seem to be removed, from what you have
said; and yet there appears something very dreadful in the account. Pray, do
you understand it as a parable?


Minister. I am most inclined to think it is a piece of real history, known to
our Savior, who was well acquainted with what passed in the spiritual, as well
as the natural world; and who intended thereby to give an awful warning to the
Pharisees, (who were covetous) of the dreadful condition of wicked rich men in
the next state: and especially, of those who neglect or despise the poor.


Friend. I am inclined to think with you in this matter: and therefore, without
any farther delay, I shall pass to mention another strong objection to the
doctrine of the Restoration of all men; viz. the instance of J^das: of whom our
Savior says, 'The Son of man goes, as it is written of him; but woe to that
man by whom the Son of man is betrayed; it had been good for that man, if he
had not been born, St. Matt. xxvi. 24. St. Mark, xiv. 21. If Judas should ever
be restored, how could the Savior say, 'Good were it for that man, if he had
never been born?' I think you will find it difficult to remove this objection;
for, if he is ever to be happy, (though after many ages) it will be good for
him that he was born.


Minister. I cannot think that this is so strong an argument against the
general Restitution, as most that use it imagine. It was a common proverb among
the Jews, when any great misfortune happened to a man, or his family, to say,
'Good were it for that man, if he had never been born.' And thus our Savior
used it with great propriety respecting Judas: for who, that thinks with any
reason at all, would not have wished that he had never been born, rather than
to have betrayed the dear Redeemer?


Friend. But can any thing less than endless damnation be sufficient to justify
the expression of 'Good were it for that man, that he had never been born?'


Minister. I am of opinion that even worldly troubles (short as they are) may
sufficiently justify the expression. There are a thousand circumstances into
which the children of Adam fall, that make their case infinitely worse than
though they had never been born, even without supposing a state of future
punishment at all. I had rather, a thousand times, never have been born, than
to have betrayed Christ, even upon the supposition that I had never been doomed
to suffer for it beyond this life. Job, when he had lost his substance, his
children, and his ease, opened his mouth, and, through excess of grief cursed
the day of his birth: though it does not appear that he had any fear of future
damnation, but the reverse.

'And Job spoke, and said, 'Let the day perish wherein I was born; and the
night in which it was said, There is a man-child conceived. Let that day be
darkness; let not God regard it from above; neither let the light shine upon
it. Let darkness and the shadow of death stain it; let a cloud dwell upon it:
let the blackness of day terrify it. As for that night, let darkness seize upon
it: let it not be joined unto the days of the year; let it not come into the
number of the months. Lo! let that night be solitary; let no joyful voice come
therein. Let them curse it that curse the day, who are ready to raise up their
mourning. Let the stars of the twilight thereof be dark; let it look for light,
but have none; neither let it see the dawning of the day; because it shut not
up the doors of my mother's womb, nor hid sorrow from mine eyes. Why died I not
from the womb? Why did not I give up the ghost, when I came out of the belly?
Why did the knees prevent me? or, why the breasts that I should suck? For now
should I have been still, and been quiet; I should have slept; then had I been
at rest, with kings and counselors of the earth, who built desolate places for
themselves; or with princes, that had gold, who filled their houses with
silver: Or, as an hidden, untimely birth, I had not been; as infants, who never
saw light. There the wicked cease from troubling; and there the weary be at
rest. There the prisoners rest together: they hear not the voice of the
oppresser. The small and great are there; and the servant is free from his
master,' See Job, iii. 2 -- 19.

From this discourse, it seems, that Job thought it would have been better for
him never to have been born, than to have fallen into such fore troubles in
this present life, without taking the other into his account; but if he had
known that he had been doomed to suffer the amazing torments of the second
death, in the lake of fire and brimstone, what would he have said? Even upon
the supposition that it was only to last for ages, he would have thought that
his being born into this world, to be fitted for such a punishment, would have
been the greatest curse that could have befallen him.

If Job, who could say, 'I know that my Redeemer lives, and that he shall
stand at the latter day upon the earth: And, though after my skin worms destroy
this body, yet in my flesh shall see God: whom I shall see for myself, and mine
eyes shall behold, and not another; though my reins be consumed within me. He
knows the way that I take; and when he has tried me, I shall come forth as
gold. My foot has held his steps; his way have I kept, and not declined;
neither have I gone back from the commandment of his lips: I have esteemed the
words of his mouth more than my necessary food. Though he slay me, yet will I
trust in him: but I will maintain mine own ways before him. He also shall be my
salvation. My righteousness I hold fast, and will not let it go: my heart shall
not reproach me so long as I live.' (See Job, xix. 25, 26, 27. xxiii. 10, 11,
12. xiii. 15, 16. xxvii. 6.) And who could make such a solemn protestation of
his innocence and uprightness, before God and man, as we find in the xxix. xxx.
xxxi. chapters of that book. If such a man had reason to say, 'Wherefore, then,
have thou brought me forth out of the womb? Oh! that I had given up the ghost,
and no eye had seen me! I should have been as though I had not been; I should
have been carried from the womb to the grave,' (See Job x. 18, 19.) with what
amazing propriety might Christ say of Judas, the traitor, who sinned in such a
dreadful manner, and had such horrible guilt on his conscience: who died in
black despair, perished in such an awful situation, in his sins, and, probably,
by his own hands: who suffered the most violent agitations of mind, died under
the power of the horrid suggestions of the great enemy of men, without one
smile, or look of forgiveness, from Jesus, or even daring to seek it; whose
sorrow in this life far exceeded Job's, (for Job had no sense of guilt,
treason, and ingratitude; nor was he filled with rage, blasphemy, and despair)
-- and who must probably have his portion in the second death; -- 'Good were it
for that man, if he had never been born! even upon on the supposition that his
torments are not designed to continue while God exists.

Jeremiah is another instance much to my purpose; who wished that he had never
been born, even at the very time when he knew the Lord was his helper; only
because he had been put in the stocks by Pashur, and had suffered a little pain
and shame in a good cause. He was not afraid of endless damnation, nor yet of
any future punishment: for he thus expressed himself, in all the language of
full assurance; 'But JEHOVAH is with me, as a mighty terrible One: therefore,
my persecutors shall stumble, and they shall not prevail; they shall be greatly
ashamed, for they shall not prosper; their everlasting confusion shall never be
forgotten. But, O JEHOVAH of Hosts, that triest the righteous, and see the
reins and the heart, let me see thy vengeance on them ( or, thou will let me
see, etc.) for unto thee have I opened my cause. Sing unto JEHOVAH, praise ye
JEHOVAH: for he has delivered the soul of the poor from the hand of evil
doers. How strong his faith! how full his assurance! Yet it is evident, that he
thought it would have been much better for him, personally, never to have been
born; for he immediately adds, 'Cursed be the day wherein I was born; let not
the day wherein my mother bare me, be blessed. Cursed be the man who brought
tidings to my father, saying, A man child is born unto thee, making him very
glad. And let that man be as the cities which JEHOVAH overthrew, and repented
not: And let him hear the cry in the morning, and the shouting at noontide;
because he slew me not from the womb: or that my mother might have been my
grave: and her womb to be always great with me. Wherefore came I out of the
womb, to see labor and sorrow, that my days should be consumed with shame?'
See Jer. xx. 11-18.

Here is not a word about a state of future punishment, much less endless
damnation, and yet the good prophet Jeremiah thought, that if he had never been
born, it would have been far better for him.


Friend. I must confess, I never before considered it possible to answer this
objection; you have done much toward solving it: but you must consider, that
both Job and Jeremiah passionately exclaimed, and, through sorrow, uttered such
rash words, as, in their cooler moments, they repented of; and therefore, what
they spoke of themselves cannot wholly set aside the objection. Had they
delivered those expressions as general truths, and declared, that men had much
better never have been born, than to have suffered such degrees of worldly
sorrow, it would have more than answered the objection; but, when men under
grief exclaim in such a manner, we cannot ground a matter of such importance
upon what they say respecting themselves; as their minds, being overwhelmed
with trouble, and the immediate sensations of pain, are biassed, and cannot
utter the calm dictates of sober reason. But Christ, though under great sorrows
himself, saw the case of Judas so deplorable, that he expressed himself thus
respecting him; which was the sober truth, without exaggeration; and could this
be said of him, or of any other of the human race, upon the supposition that
misery is not absolutely endless?


Minister. We do not find that Job or Jeremiah ever recanted, in their cooler
moments, what they uttered in their sorrows; and our Lord, speaking of the
destruction of Jerusalem, says, 'And woe unto them that are with child, and to
them that give suck in those days,' See St. Matthew. xxiv. 19. St. Mark, xiii.
17. Not because of their future, endless damnation, in distinction from others;
but on account of their present trouble and sorrow; as is explained, Luke xxi.
23. 'But, woe to them that are with child, and to them that give such, in those
days: for there shall be great distress in the land, and wrath upon this
people.' And when the Savior was led to death, we read, 'And there followed
him a great company of people, and of women, who also bewailed and lamented
him. But Jesus, turning unto them, said, Daughters of Jerusalem, weep not for
me, but for yourselves, and for your children. For behold the days are coming,
in the which they shall say, Blessed are the barren, and the wombs that never
bare, and the paps which never gave suck. Then shall they say to the mountains,
Fall on us; and to the hills, Cover us. For if they do these things in a green
tree, what shall be done in the dry?' St. Luke, xxiii. 27 -- 31.

And who would not, a thousand times, choose rather never to have been born,
than even to see, far less experience, the miseries which came upon Jerusalem
and its inhabitants? Would it not have been better for mothers never to have
been born, than to have killed and eaten their own children in the siege? And
would it not have been better for the children never to have been born, than to
have been food for their mothers?

But Solomon not only represents a state of great misery and affliction in this
life, as worse than not to have been born, but also, a state of the greatest
prosperity, if it ends in disgrace; for he says, 'If a man beget an hundred
children, and live many years, so that the days of his years be many, and his
soul be not filled with good; and also, that he have no burial; I say, that an
untimely birth is better than he. For he (the untimely birth) comes in with
vanity, and departs in darkness; and his name shall be covered with darkness.
Moreover, he has not seen the sun, nor known any thing: this has more rest
than the other. Yea, though he live a thousand years twice told, yet has he
seen no good:' ( i. e. no equivalent good, to balance his disgrace). 'Do not
all go to one place?' All came from dust, and turn to dust again. See Eccles.
vi. 3, 4, 5, 6.

The state here described by Solomon, is not only infinitely better than the
damnation of hell, though limited by certain periods; but far preferable to
many, if not to most situations of men in this life: and yet he prefers an
untimely birth to a man who lives more than twice the age of Methuselah, and
has an hundred children of his own, if he has not his soul filled or satisfied
with good; and that he has no burial, or has not honor, (credit, or
reputation) at his death.

Long life and many children, were formerly esteemed as the greatest of
blessings: but as the things of this life cannot fill the soul with good; so a
man had better never have been born, than to have enjoyed the good things of
this world in the greatest profusion, if he dies in disgrace, and has no
burial, or is not honored at his death. Yet, this is not worthy to be named in
the same day with the damnation of hell; yet, is frequently threatened as a
great and terrible judgment; which, if it falls upon a man, however he may have
enjoyed long life, health, wealth, and all kinds of prosperity; it makes it
worse for him than if he had never been born, according to the decision of God
himself; and, therefore, no wonder that Christ said of wicked Judas; 'Good were
it for that man, if he had never been born.'

Though I have answered you so largely, yet one word might have sufficed to
have answered the whole objection at first; viz. Had Judas died before he had
been born, and perished from his mother's womb, he would never have sinned, far
less betrayed Christ; he would have entered into peace immediately, 'where the
wicked cease from troubling, and where the weary are at rest:' In that case, he
would have escaped the judgment that came upon him, and would have had more
rest than those who should live in all the affluence of life two thousand
years, and beget each an hundred children, and yet should not be honored at
their death.

Some would have answered the objection shorter, by saying, Christ promised
twelve thrones to his twelve apostles, among whom Judas was one; and therefore,
he must be restored, or the promise cannot be fulfilled: See St. Matthew. xix.
28. But this I do not insist upon; nevertheless, those who answer the objection
this way, make an observation that may be worth attention; viz. that Peter,
speaking of Judas, says, 'Let his habitation be desolate, and let no man dwell
therein;' that is, Let his mansion be reserved for him, let no man take
possession of it; but 'His bishopric, or office, let another take.' See Acts,
i. 20. compared with Psalm. lxix. 25. cix. 8. But I am rather of opinion that
the desolation of the habitation of the wicked, and the want of inhabitants in
their tents, respects this state, and is part of the curse pronounced upon all
traitors; and may therefore in an eminent sense, be applied to Judas, and also
to the rebellious nation of the Jews at large; and therefore, as these words do
not intend their Restoration, so neither are they any objection to it; for St.
Paul applies part of the lxixth Psalm to the Jews, as truly as St. Peter
applies it to Judas: See Romans x. 9, 10. And yet he says, 'I say then, Have they
stumbled, that they should fall? God forbid: But rather, through their fall,
salvation is come unto the Gentiles, to provoke them to jealousy. Now, if the
fall of them be the riches of the world, and the diminishing of them the riches
of the Gentiles; how much more their fullness?' And thus, form the 11th verse to
the end of the chapter, goes on to speak of their being again received,
reconciled, and grafted again into their own olive tree; and that their
blindness is only for a time: 'And so all Israel shall be saved: There shall
come out of Sion a deliverer, and shall turn away ungodliness form Jacob:' That
God's covenant, or promise, is to take their sins away; that they are beloved
for the fathers sakes; that the gifts and calling of God are without
repentance; that, therefore, they shall obtain mercy at last; and that, for
this very purpose, God has concluded them all ( or shut them up) in unbelief,
that he might not only punish them thereby for their transgressions, and also,
through their unbelief, cause the the Gentiles to obtain mercy and salvation;
but also, that he might have mercy upon all those whom he had thus shut up in
unbelief, without exception. See the whole chapter.

Here, then, are three designs, worthy of a God of infinite wisdom, power and
goodness, in this one dark dispensation, the rejection of the Jewish church and
nation: -- 1. That he might punish them for their iniquity: -- 2. That others
might come in their room, stand in their office, and be made partakers of their
privileges: and 3. That they might be reserved to mercy and forgiveness at
last. And what happened to a whole nation of traitors, might happen to an
individual of that nation; and vice versa.


Friend. This is subject of great importance, and if you can maintain the
system you have espoused, and answer the remaining objections that may be
brought against it, it will most certainly give me pleasure, and relieve my
mind from great anxiety. I am a father of many children, and God knows the
tears I have shed on their account, but could I receive your views with what
pleasure should I look upon them!!! But I have many remaining difficulties and
objections still to propose; may God preserve me from error and false doctrine,
I wish to know what is really the truth in this matter, for above all things I
dread deception.


Minister. I assure you my friend that I should be as loath to deceive you, as
you are to be deceived, and had I not the surest confidence through the Lord of
the truth and reality of this most glorious system, and did I not find the
highest satisfaction in it myself, I should never presume to hold it forth to
others. But as I have an engagement that calls me elsewhere just now, I must
beg you to excuse me, hoping that in a little time I shall have another
opportunity of hearing the remainder of your objections; and in the mean time I
advise you to search the scriptures, and pray God to lead you into all truth.


END OF THE SECOND DIALOGUE.
DIALOGUE III.
Friend. I AM glad to meet with you, to have some farther conversation upon the
very important the interesting subject of the final Restoration. Since I saw
you last I have had opportunity of hearing some very capital objections made
against this system, which I beg leave to state in the plainest and strongest
manner.


Minister. Your frankness is well pleasing to me, and I am ready to hear
whatever can be urged against my sentiments, and will do my endeavor to answer
all reasonable objections; therefore propose them as soon as you think proper.


Friend. One grand objection that is very generally made against the doctrine
of the Restoration^ is, that it tends to licentiousness; that it is the
doctrine that the serpent preached to Eve; for we read, (Genesis iii. 4.) 'And the
serpent said unto the woman, Ye shall not surely die:' and that it is a
doctrine calculated to give encouragement to the wicked to continue in their
evil ways; that it is 'saying, Peace, peace, when there is no peace;' and that
this doctrine is as dangerous as that of the wicked prophetesses of Ezekiel's
time, of whom GOD says, 'With lies ye have made the heart of the righteous sad,
whom I have not made sad; and strengthened the hands of the wicked, that he
should not return from his wicked way, by promising him life. They say unto
them that despise me, JEHOVAH has said, Ye shall have peace; and they say unto
every one that walks after the imagination of his own heart, No evil shall
come upon you,' Jer. viii. 11. Ezekiel. xiii. 2^. Jer. xxiii. 17.

It is said, that it is the nature of God to lay the highest possible restraint
upon sin, and, therefore, he has threatened it with eternal, or endless
punishment: and this is even found too weak to prevent the prevailing of
iniquity. What a flood of impiety, therefore, would overflow the world, if it
should be generally believed, that after some ages of suffering, mankind should
be restored to some degree of happiness? Would not the restraints be wholly
taken off from the lusts and passions of the wicked, if once this doctrine
should become prevalent? Will you be so kind as to give a fair and candid reply
to this objection?


Minister. This objection is stated with all possible force, I shall, therefore
endeavor to answer it as well as I can; putting in this caveat, that if I
should not answer it to your satisfaction, do not imagine that no solid answer
can be given; but impute it to my not being sufficiently master of my subject,
or not being able to express my mind so clearly as I could wish. As this
objection is frequently made, and often used, by people who mean well, but have
not considered the subject thoroughly, I shall be as explicit as possibly I can
upon it.

I would first observe, that the great truths, or first principles, upon which
the Restoration is founded, and form which it is derived by natural and easy
consequences, are far from tending to licentiousness: But, in order to make
this evident, it will be proper here to set them down in their order.

First Principles, upon which the Doctrine of the final and universal
Restitution is founded.

1. GOD is the universal and only creator of all: contrary to the opinion of
the Manichees of old, who believed the devil to be the creator of most, if not
all visible beings: The Mugglet^nians, of the last century, and the Buchanit^s
lately, assert nearly the same sentiments; contrary to Rev. iv. 11. Col. i. 16.
Psalm. c. 3. Numb. xvi. 22. Isai. lxiv. 8. Ezekiel. xviii. 4. Zech. xii. 1. and a
vast number of other Scriptures.

Now, who can say, that this noble thought, which St. Paul enlarges upon so
beautifully, (Acts, xvii. 24 -- 30.) tends, in the least, to make men wicked?
Does it not tend to dignify and ennoble human nature, to be told, that GOD is
our Father, Creator and First Cause; and that we were made by his power,
according to his will, and for his pleasure; and that the chief end for which
he made us, was, to glorify his name, and to enjoy him for ever? -- as the
Assembly's Catechism beautifully declares. This is one of the principles from
which GOD himself deduces the certainty of the final end of wrath, as I have
observed before: -- 'For I will not contend for ever, neither will I be always
wroth: for the spirit should fail before me, and the souls which I have made,'
Isai. lvii. 16. -- Those who venture to contradict their Maker, and say, that
he will contend for ever, and be always wroth; ought to be able, at least, to
give as good a reason why he will, as he has assigned why he will not; and
consequently prove, that he has not made all souls; which is the true
foundation upon which endless misery must be founded, and the only doctrine
which is perfectly consistent with it.

The poor untutored Indians in America, argued (with a missionary that was sent
from Sweden to convert them) from the universal providence of GOD, that he, who
was so kind a Father as to provide for their bodies all things needful, had not
wholly neglected their souls: But this I do not insist upon, though, I think,
the argument has weight in it; and, certainly, the providential goodness of
GOD, and his long-suffering, tends to lead men to repentance: Romans ii. 4. 2
Pet. iii. 9.

2. The universal benevolence of the Deity, or the love of GOD to his
creatures, is one of the first principles from which the general Restoration is
deduced: and who can say, that this leads to licentiousness? If those who
believe that GOD loves them, in particular, find that consideration the
strongest obligation on them to love him again, and to obey his will; by the
same rule, if all the individuals of the whole human race, were to believe that
GOD loved each one of them, would not the same cause produce the same effect?
And if so, can this be charged as a licentious doctrine, which is expressly
grounded upon a cause which powerfully operates to produce holiness? Is there
any thing like argument in this reasoning: I know that GOD loves me, and seeks
to do me good; therefore, I must hate him. What should we think of a woman who
should leave her husband, and do all in her power against him, and should be
able to give no better reason for it than the following: My husband loves me,
and I know it, and he has always loved me, and always will; and, therefore, I
am determined to hate, ridicule, despise, and contemn him, and have left him
for this very cause, and am determined never to love or obey him more? Bad as
human nature is, I question whether such instances often occur. We commonly
say, that love begets love: 'We love him, because he first loved as;' says the
Apostle, 1 John, iv. 19. Therefore, the doctrine of GOD'S universal
benevolence, cannot lead to licentiousness, in any light in which it can be
viewed; for, if he really loves us, he will do all in his power to bring us to
love him again, and to be like him; and I am sure, the consideration of his
love to us, goes as far as moral suasion can go, to induce us to love him
again, nay, the belief of it is acknowledged to be one of the strongest motives
to obedience; and the love of GOD, shed abroad in the heart, produces the best
effects, and is the most powerful principle, and spring, of good and virtuous
actions, that we are acquainted with. This being a first principle, from which
the universal Restoration is concluded, we are happy to find, that 'GOD is
love:' and that he 'so loved the world, as to give his only begotten Son, that
whosoever believes in him, should not perish, but have everlasting life: For,
GOD sent not his Son into the world to condemn the world: but that the world,
through him, might be saved,' See 1 John, iv. 16. St. John, iii. 16, 17. But it
is not so much my business now to show, that the sentiment is scriptural, as to
show that it is not of a dangerous tendency. The following words, however, are
so beautiful, that I take the liberty to mention them: -- 'But thou have mercy
upon all; for thou can do all things, and winkest at the sins of men, because
they should amend. For thou love all the things that are, and abhorrest
nothing which thou have made: for never would thou have made any thing, if
thou had hated it, And how could any thing have endured, if it had not been
thy will: or been preserved, if not called by thee? But thou sparest all; for
they are thine, O Lord, thou lover of souls. For thine incorruptible Spirit is
in all things: Therefore chastenest thou them, by little and little, that
offend, and warnest them, by putting them in remembrance wherein they have
offended, that leaving their wickedness, they may believe on thee, O LORD. For
thy power is the beginning of righteousness; and because thou art the LORD of
all, it makes thee to be gracious unto all. But thou, O GOD, art gracious and
true: long-suffering, and in mercy ordering all things. For if we sin, we are
thine, knowing thy power; but we will not sin, knowing that we are counted
thine:' Wisdom of Solomon, xi. 23 -- 26. xii. 1, 2, 16. xv. 1, 2. 'JEHOVAH is
gracious and full of compassion, slow to anger, and of great mercy. JEHOVAH is
good to all: and his tender mercies are over all his works. All thy works shall
praise thee, O JEHOVAH; and thy saints shall bless thee,' Psalm. cxlv. 8, 9, 10.

3. Another great principle, upon which the Restoration depends, is, that
CHRIST died for all; 'We see Jesus, who was made a little lower than the
angels, for the suffering of death, crowned with glory and honor; that he, by
the grace of GOD, should taste death for every man^( or ALL) Heb. ii. 9. 'If
any man sin, we have an Advocate with the Father, Jesus Christ, the righteous:
And he is the propitiation for our sins; and not for ours only, but also for
the sins of the whole world,' 1 John, ii. 1, 2. 'For there is one GOD, and one
Mediator between GOD and men, the Man CHRIST JESUS: who gave himself a ransom
for all to be testified in due time,' 1 Timothy ii. 5, 6.

I need not multiply passages to prove that Christ died for all; for though the
universality of his death is not expressly asserted, in every text where it is
mentioned that he died, it must always be understood; because it is never
denied in any place, and is plainly, and pointedly declared in those which I
have quoted: And, besides, it is evident that in the apostles time, the
universality of the death of Christ was a first principle, universally
acknowledged, and, therefore, St. Paul reasons from it as such; which it would
have been highly preposterous for him to do, if that had not been the case: As,
for example, 'For the love of Christ constrains us; because we thus judge,
that if one died for all,' (which is not disputed by any, and which we know to
be a truth) 'then were all dead: And that he died for all; that they who live,
should not henceforth live unto themselves, but unto him that died for them,
and rose again,' 2 Cor. v. 14, 15.


Friend. But have you never heard it argued that Christ did not die for all,
because he did not pray for all?


Minister. I remember, when a lad, I was seat to a neighbor's house, and
overheard the good man, the master of the family, read in a book, after this
manner: 'Christ did not die for all, because he did not pray for all: I pray
for them; I pray not for the world, but for them which thou have given me, for
they are thine,' St. John, xvii. 9. And I then thought the argument conclusive:
But I am now at a loss whether the author of that book meant to deceive his
readers; or, whether he had never read the chapter through critically: for, had
he read the 20th verse, he would have found these words, which would have
overthrown his hypothesis: -- 'Neither pray I for these alone; but for them
also, who shall believe on me through their word.' If Christ had prayed for
all, in the 9th verse, for whom he died, he could not have enlarged his prayer
so much in the 20th verse, as to take in not them only, but all that should
believe on him through the^ word: Neither does he stop here, but goes on to
pray for those that believe, in these words: 'That they all may be one; as
thou, Father, art in me, and I in thee; that they also may be one in us:' And,
why is all this unity prayed for among believers? Surely, it has never been
accomplished; but it shall be, for this great and admirable purpose viz. 'That
the world may believe that thou have sent me. And the glory which thou gave
me, I have given them; that they may be one, even as we are one: I in them, and
thou in me; that they may be made perfect in one, and that the world may know
that thou have sent me, and have loved them, as thou have loved me,' verses 21,
22, 23.


Friend. But when shall the world believe, and know that Christ is the Sent of
God?


Minister. When all that believe shall be one, as the Father and the Son are
one: When the great marriage of the Lamb shall be celebrated, and his Bride
shall be one, in the bond of universal love and fellowship, as the Father and
Son now are: When the Church shall be perfected in one; shall dwell in love,
and dwell in God, as the Father dwells in the Son, and the Son in the Father:
When Zion's watchmen shall see eye to eye: When all believers shall speak the
same thing; when there shall be no more divisions among them; when they shall
be perfectly joined together in the same mind, and in the same judgment.

This was the state that St. Paul besought the Corinthians to press after, and
wished them to attain; but he had the mortification to see them fall short of
it, as all the Christian churches have, from that day to this. But when Christ
shall give that glory and honor to his Bride, which the Father gave to him,
and shall thus unite her to himself, in an indissoluble union, and the several
members of his body, the Church, shall be as much united one to another, as the
members of the natural body are; or, to express it in his own words, 'As thou,
Father, art in me, and I in thee;' When thus the Church shall be one, in
spirit, love, design, judgment, etc. as the Father and Son are; then shall the
world believe, and believing, have life; then shall the world know him, whom to
know is life eternal: See verses 2 and 3, But as this great cause has never yet
existed, the effect has not yet followed; but when the first shall be, the last
shall take place in consequence.

The petitions in that most excellent prayer, that may, with great propriety,
be called the LORD'S Prayer, may be divided into four classes: 1. For himself,
verses 1st and 5th: 2. For his apostles, 9 -- 19: 3. For them that should
believe, through their word, verses 20, 21, 22, 23: And, 4. for the world,
verses 21, 23; as I have just observed, and need not add any more upon so plain
a matter.


Friend. Proceed, if you please, to show, that the doctrine of the universality
of the death of Christ does not lead to licentiousness.


Minister. It is evident that it does not; but, on the contrary, it is the
strongest motive to all who believe it, to love and live to him who died for
them, and rose again: We are not our own, but are bought with a price;
therefore, we are exhorted not to be the servants of sin, slaves to our
passions, and servants to men: but to glorify GOD in our bodies and sprits,
which are his: and the apostle beseeches us, by the mercies of GOD, to present
our bodies a living sacrifice, holy, acceptable unto GOD; which is our
reasonable service. Forasmuch, as we know that we were not redeemed with
corruptible things, as silver and gold; but with the precious blood of Christ,
as of a Lamb without blemish, and without spot; See 2 Cor. v. 15, Romans vi. 12,
13. 1 Cor. vii. 23. vi. 19, 20. Romans xii. 1. 1 Peter, i. 18, 19.

What a horrid thought would it be, that Christ should be the minister of sin,
and that his bloodshedding should cause wickedness to abound? The love of GOD,
in giving his Son to die, is enough to move an heart of stone; 'For when we
were yet without strength, in due time, Christ died for the ungodly: for,
scarcely for a righteous man will one die; yet, peradventure, for a good (kind,
benevolent, generous) man, some would even dare to die. But GOD commends his
love toward us, in that, while we were yet sinners, Christ died for us. Much
more, being now justified through his blood, we shall be saved from wrath
through him. For if when we were enemies, we were reconciled to GOD by the
death of his Son; much more, being reconciled, we shall be saved by his life,'
Romans v. 6 -- 10.

Here the death of the Lord Jesus is laid as the ground, and the salvation of
men inferred from it, with the greatest possible certainty; yet, will any one
say, that because Christ has died for him, therefore he will indulge himself
in sin? God forbid. Some say that if they believed this doctrine, they would
live in sin, and indulge themselves in their lusts and passions: but then it
may be observed, that those who say so are its enemies, and those who oppose
the view, and not those who receive it.

There is something so brutish and unaccountable in such dispositions, as would
lead men to hate their best friends, merely because they are so; that would
lead them to hate GOD, because he loved them; and despise Christ, merely
because he died for them; that, for the honor of human nature, I would hope,
these instances are rare. But to the point. I have conversed with many who
believed that Christ died for them in particular; and yet I never heard them
say, that they hated him for it; but, on the contrary, that they loved him
exceedingly. Now, is not the same cause likely to produce the same effect? If a
thousand persons, for instance, all believing that Christ died for them, find
their hearts constrained to love him for it, would it not have the same effect
upon ten thousand, ten millions, or ten millions of millions? And if it would
cause licentiousness to abound in the world, to preach that Christ died for
all, if it was universally believed; by the same rule it must cause it to
prevail, in a lesser degree, to preach that he died for a small part, at least,
among those who believe themselves to be of the the number; and, therefore, it
must not be preached at all, that he died for any? Who can deny the
consequence? It seems to be evident, that Christ has done and suffered too much
for those that he died for, to lose them finally: and thus the universal
Restoration stands connected necessarily with the universality of the death of
Christ, and is deduced therefrom, in the easiest manner; therefore, the
doctrine of the former cannot tend to licentiousness, as it stands upon the
ground of the latter, which has been demonstrated to have no such tendency.

4. Another principle upon which the universal doctrine depends, is, the
unchangeableness of God: Whom he loves once, he always loves; he loved his
creatures when he made them, as none can well deny; their sins he never loved,
nor ever will; he has declared, that he loved us when sinners, but never as
sinners. His eternal and constant hatred of all sin, and his unchangeable love
of all his creatures, are of the nature of primary truths; from which the
doctrine of the general Restoration may be easily and plainly inferred. In this
view we may understand those many dreadful threatenings and gracious promises,
made to the same people and persons: Both shall be fulfilled; the first, while
they continue as rebels, which are designed to humble and subdue them; the
last, when they shall have accepted of the punishment of their iniquity; when
their uncircumcised hearts are humbled, when their stubborn knees shall bow to
JEHOVAH, and their former rebellious tongues shall swear allegiance to him.

Does this idea lead to licentiousness, that GOD hates sin, and determines to
pursue it to entire destruction, and never to put up his sword, so long as
there is a rebel in the universe; yet, at the same time, has no positive hatred
to the souls which he has made, but only wishes them to return to order? --
This idea appears to me, equally to check presumption and despair; and tends to
put an end to licentiousness, rather than to encourage it: For, if rebels are
assured that their rightful sovereign hates them, and will never suffer them to
be reconciled to him, it naturally causes them to fight with tenfold rage, as
all warriors will testify; as, on the other hand, if they believe he is too
weak, or undetermined, to conquer them, they will be presumptuous, and continue
the war. It cannot, therefore, be affirmed, by any persons of reason, that the
declaration that GOD will destroy sin, tends to promote it; or, that his love
of order, and hatred of evil, being compatible with his love to the creatures
he has made, is a doctrine that encourages men to rebel; the contrary is
evident: and yet these are the very grounds of the universal Restoration; which
cannot, therefore, be licentious.

5. Another of the first principles of the Restoration, is, the immutability of
GOD'S counsels; which he has confirmed by an oath, 'That by two immutable
things, ( viz. his word and oath) in which it was impossible for GOD to lie, we
might have a strong consolation, who have fled for refuge, to lay hold upon the
hope set before us,' Heb. vi. 17, 18. 'God has abounded toward us in all
wisdom and prudence, having made known unto us the mystery of his will,
according to his good pleasure, which he has purposed in himself. That in the
dispensation of the fullness of times, he might gather together ( or rehead) in
one, all things in Christ, both which are in heaven, and which are on earth:
even in him: in whom we have obtained an inheritance, being predestined
according to the purpose of him who works all things according to the counsel
of his own WILL,' Ephesians. i. 8, 9, 10, 11. GOD is our Savior, ( or Soteros,
Restorer) who will have all men to be saved, ( sothenai, restored) and to come
unto the knowledge of the truth,' 1 Timothy ii. 3, 4. This is the will and counsel
of that GOD, who 'doeth according to his will in the armies of heaven, and and
among the inhabitants of the earth; and none can stay his hand, or say unto
him, What do thou?' Dan. iv. 35. He has sworn by himself, the word is gone
out of his mouth in righteousness, and shall not return, that unto him 'every
knee shall bow, every tongue shall swear,' Isai. xlv. 23. The counsel of GOD
shall stand; he will perform his pleasure, notwithstanding all the opposition
that men can make: 'GOD is not a man, that he should lie, neither the son of
man, that he should repent: Has he said, and shall he not do it? or, has he
spoken, and shall he not make it good?' Numb, xxiii. 19. If GOD will have all
men to be saved, or restored, and to come to the knowledge of the truth, if it
is his good pleasure, which he has purposed in himself, in the dispensation of
the fullness of times, to rehead all things in Christ, both in heaven and on
earth; if he has sworn, that unto him every knee shall bow, and every tongue
shall swear; and if he works all things after the counsel of his own will,
and is determined to perform all his pleasure, which he is able to do; and with
him nothing that he pleases is impossible: I say, if all these things are true,
(as who, that believes the Scriptures, can deny?) then, is not the doctrine of
the Restoration true? And who will venture to charge that with licentiousness,
which GOD, in the counsel of his will, has purposed, and is determined to
perform? We know, the will of GOD is a will to all goodness, and that he cannot
do any thing unjust, or contrary to his holy nature, or inconsistent with his
plan of moral government, or that shall tend to promote rebellion; therefore,
if GOD had seen that this great work had been, in any respect, injurious to his
perfections, character, government, etc. he would not have proposed it; and if
he had foreseen that the knowledge of it would have been hurtful to mankind, he
would not have revealed it: But since he has done both, we may certainly
argue, that it is not a licentious doctrine to declare, that GOD will finally
make all his intelligent creatures happy; by making them all his subjects, by
destroying their sins, and making them holy, in a way perfectly consistent with
all his perfections and attributes; without doing the least injury to his
character, or rendering his moral government weak, or making any of his words
void, whether threatenings or promises, or in the least setting aside the
sanctions of his law or gospel, or a future state of rewards and punishments;
without derogating at all from the glory of the Mediator, but rather exalting
it to the highest possible pitch; without saddening the hearts of the
righteous, or diminishing, in the least, from the happiness of Heaven, but
rather causing it to increase; for if there is joy in Heaven over one sinner
that repents, there must be more over many, in exact proportion; and as God
will certainly give the greatest possible joy to his chosen, and there is no
doubt but it will receive addition from every one that is restored, or brought
home to himself; therefore, it can only be brought to its highest possible
pitch by the universal Restoration; which doctrine cannot, therefore, be
licentious, as God has appointed and revealed it, and all holy beings (except
some weak good men on earth) rejoice therein exceedingly.

6. Another of the principles on which the general Restoration is founded, is,
that God has given all things into the hand of Christ, who has declared, that
it is the Father's will, that of all that he gave him, he should lose nothing:
and that power was given him over all, that he should give the knowledge of
God, even eternal life, to all that the Father had given him; and that all,
without exception, whom the Father has given, shall come in such a manner, as
not to be cast out: But as all these Scriptures have been recited, and reasoned
upon before, I shall only now observe, that as GOD the FATHER has given all
things to CHRIST, and as he has engaged to bring all back, without exception,
and has both will and power to perform this work, and came into the world on
purpose to accomplish it, it must, of consequence, be finally performed; yet,
it cannot tend to licentiousness, or the God of Heaven, and the Lord Jesus
Christ, would never have planned it approved of it, or sought to execute it.

Many more first principles, on which the doctrine of the Restoration is
founded, might be mentioned, and shown to be far from tending to
licentiousness: but I shall mention but one more; and that is -- The Scriptures
must be fulfilled; the Scriptures cannot be broken: None or the words of God
can fail of being accomplished; and he has not only denounced dreadful
threatenings, but made many gracious promises to the same people: These cannot
be fulfilled together; and, if there is no truth in the Restoration, I cannot
see how the latter will ever be fulfilled at all; and if sins are not punished
in the persons who commit them, I am equally at a loss what sense or truth
there can be in the former. It would be a great task to collect all the texts
which justify the remark, that threatenings and promises belong to the same
people in different periods, some specimens of which have been given in the
course of these dialogues. Now, it cannot lead to licentiousness, to suppose
that the Scriptures shall all be fulfilled; but it must lead to infidelity, and
all kinds of evil, to suppose the contrary.

These are the first principles upon which the doctrine of the Restoration
stands, and by which it is supported; and as these have all been considered,
and proved to have no tendency to encourage sin, separately, much less can they
have any such tendency, jointly; and then it evidently follows, that a doctrine
which seems necessarily deduced, or inferred by undeniable consequences, from
all these considerations united, cannot be false, or have any evil tendency.

But I shall next proceed to show, that all true, experimental, and practical
religion, seems so consistent with the universal Restoration, that it may be
reckoned a wonder, that all who have tasted that the Lord is gracious, and have
diligently practiced his commands, have not, in all ages, been fully convinced
of the truth of it.


Friend. Is it possible that you can do this? If so, I hope your reasoning will
be attended to; and I must confess, that you have cleared your way so well, by
considering the first principles of the doctrine, and showing that they are
very far from tending to licentiousness, that I am half inclined to think you
will be able to answer this objection, formidable as it has been considered
hitherto.


Minister. As I trust you have been made acquainted with experimental religion,
I need only to appeal to your own experience, for the truth of what I advance;
and I am apt to think, if you will answer me heartily, to a few questions, you
must acknowledge either that the Restoration is true, or that your experience
is false.


Friend. I am willing to give you as plain and candid answers as I can; for it
will be of no use to deny what the Lord has done for my soul.


Minister. Let me then ask you, in the first place, Did you not see yourself
lost and undone; and that you were vile before God, unworthy of his mercy, and
totally unable to deliver yourself from your sin and misery?


Friend. I certainly did; and I was sometimes ready to think there was hardly
such a sinner on earth as myself, all circumstances considered; for I had
sinned against such light and love, that I thought all the world might be
forgiven sooner than myself.


Minister. And were you not brought by the power of God, to resign yourself
into his hands, without reserve, to do with you, and dispose of you, according
to his will and pleasure; being convinced, that he neither would nor could do
you any injustice?


Friend. O yes; and then I found peace; my rebellion against God ceased; I
looked upon him quite different from what I did before; I saw that he was
wholly right and just, and that I was entirely to blame: my murmurings against
him ceased; I viewed him as such a holy, good, merciful, and yet righteous God,
that I could trust my soul in his hands, with the most entire satisfaction.


Minister. And when Christ was revealed to you as a Savior, how did he appear?


Friend. As one able and mighty to save, even to the uttermost; and I thought
there was not only a sufficiency in him for me, the vilest of all, but for the
whole world, yea, for a thousand worlds, had there been so many. His blood
seemed to me so precious, his obedience and sufferings so meritorious, his
power so great, his love so rich, boundless, and free, that I was overcome with
the transporting view: and as I saw in him a fullness for all, so I found in him
(...) infinite willingness to save all; for how could I think otherwise? I knew
myself to be most unworthy, and that he had graciously pitied me: I beheld his
love, like a river, flowing down to me as free as water: and I was amazed that
I had not beheld it before, in the same light. I saw, that the love of God to
me, did not now begin, but was now manifested to my soul. I saw that there was
no change in God, but all in myself. Those words were precious to my heart at
that time: 'Yea, I have loved thee with an everlasting love; therefore with
loving kindness have I drawn thee,' Jer. xxxi. 3. As also these: 'Son be of
good cheer: thy sins be forgiven thee,' St. Matthew. ix. 2.


Minister. You have brought my own experience to my mind: -- It pleased GOD, by
an incident too trifling to mention, to bring me to seek earnestly for an
unfading treasure; and, by a train of circumstances, fixed the concern deeply
upon my mind; and I labored night and day, but could obtain no rest, till one
morning -- a time never to be forgotten! -- as I was walking on a journey,
under great distress, and when deliverance seemed farther from me than ever,
all at once, I was brought to resign my soul into the hands of GOD, and thus I
expressed myself: 'Lord, here I am: a poor helpless sinner: I resign myself
into thine hands; take me, and deal with me, just as thou please: I know thou
can do me no injustice.' Immediately these words came into my mind, with
great power and sweetness: 'In an acceptable time have I heard thee; and in a
day of salvation have I helped thee,' Isai. xlix. 8. and I had then such a view
of CHRIST, as made me to cry out 'Glory to God in the highest! This is
salvation; I know this is salvation!' Then those passages which you have
mentioned, came into my mind with great energy; and I saw the fullness,
sufficiency, and willingness of CHRIST to save me, and all men, in such a
manner as constrained me to venture my soul into his arms; and if I had had ten
thousand souls, I could have trusted them all in his hands. And, O how did I
long, that every soul of Adam's race might come to know the love of God in
CHRIST JESUS! And I thought, I could not be willing to live any longer on
earth, unless it might please God to make me useful to my fellow creatures.
'What peaceful hours I then enjoyed!
'How sweet their memory still!
'But they have left an aching void
'The world can never fill.'


This is a little abstract of what God did then graciously teach me by his
Spirit; but I had been brought up in the particular system, and in the course
of a few years came to be so firmly attached to it, as to refuse in my
preaching, to make general invitations to mankind at large; rightly reasoning
with myself, that if provision was only made for a small part, I had no warrant
to call or invite the whole to come and partake; and therefore only pressed the
duty on such and such characters, as hungry, thirsty, weary, heavy-laden, such
as were without money, sensible sinners, etc. all of which I concluded to be of
the elect, because I judged the Spirit had begun to operate savingly upon their
hearts; and that to these, and these only, the Scriptures directed invitations
to be made; never considering that text -- 'Hearken unto me, ye stout-hearted,
that are far from righteousness. I bring near my righteousness; and it shall
not be far off, and my salvation shall not tarry,' Isa. xlvi. 12, 13. During
the time that I remained in this close-hearted system, laboring with all my
might to maintain it, I chanced to come to a house, where, as far as I can
judge, was a very sensible and pious young woman, whom I never saw before or
since: She gave a very judicious account of the work of grace upon her heart:
but when she came to that part, where she said she beheld an infinite fullness
in CHRIST for ALL the world, I interrupted her, and told her, That could not
be; for there was no provision made for all, and therefore it was impossible
that she could have any such discoveries made to her by the Spirit of God. This
I insisted upon, according to my system, contrary to my experimental knowledge;
(O the mischiefs of bigotry, prejudice, and vain attachment to system!) she, on
the contrary, maintained, that she clearly viewed matters in that light; and
that she certainly was taught to believe, that in Christ there was a fullness
and freeness for all: This I denied; and she was thereby prevented from
finishing what she had begun. I can never forgive myself, for the opposition I
made to what I knew to be truth by experience; and as I did not enquire the
name of the person, I have had no opportunity of making a recantation by
letter, as I ought to have done; and having never been in the place since, and
it being highly improbable that ever I shall again, I feel myself extremely
hurt, whenever I think of it.


Friend. I can but admire the agreement between us in matters of experience;
for I found the same dispositions of mind that you mentioned, when it pleased
God to reveal his Son in me.


Minister. I never found an experienced Christian in my life, but would give
much the same account, provided that his system was not in sight; and I have
found some, that though they were violently attached to the contrary system,
and knew my intention in asking the questions; yet answered the following
affirmatively.

Did you not see and feel yourselves the vilest of sinners?

Did you not view the love of GOD infinitely full, free and unmerited?

Did you not behold in Christ an infinite fullness, sufficiency, and
willingness, to save all, without exception?

Did you not love all, and wish that all might come and partake of his grace?

Did you not earnestly desire the salvation of all, not only of your family,
friends, neighbors, and nation; but also of your enemies, and of all mankind?
Could you not embrace the whole human race in the arms of benevolence?

Did you not find it in your heart to pray for the salvation of all mankind, as
for your own?

If you had as much power as good will, would you not bring all to bow to the
scepter of grace, and to be reconciled to God through Jesus Christ?


Friend. I do not see how an experienced person can refuse to say Yes, to all
these questions; they are so agreeable to the very tempers of the newborn soul;
and, I am sure, I found them in my heart, at the very time when I first tasted
of the love of God.


Minister. Well then, my friend, let me ask you, From whence did these tempers
and dispositions proceed?


Friend. To be candid, I think they were given me from above, and came down
from the Father of lights, from whence every good and perfect gift comes; and
I am the more apt to think so, because I found contrary dispositions in my
heart before; and the more I am sensible of the forgiving love of God, the more
I find these affections which you have described, and these desires for the
good of others.


Minister. Then let me ask you, Can a small drop be larger than the unfathomed
abyss and ocean of Love? Have you more compassion toward your fellow creatures
than the God that made them? Can any effect be greater than its cause? Would
you bring all to submit to God, and be happy, if you could? and will not he, to
whom nothing that he pleases to do is impossible, bring all his creatures to be
reconciled to himself at last? He has infinitely more love to his creatures,
than all the saints and angels in glory have; he is possessed of infinite power
and wisdom, as well as love; all means to accomplish the work are known to him:
he can do it in a way that shall cause his praise to abound exceedingly, in a
way perfectly consistent with all his perfections, and the whole of his
glorious character; it is his will and purpose so to do, as has been proved at
large; What, then, can hinder him from fulfilling it?


Friend. I am not able to gainsay this reasoning; it seems almost undeniable:
But can you show that the doctrine of the Restoration stands connected with
practical religion, or the keeping of the commandments of God?


Minister. I can very easily do that, in every instance; but shall only attend
to the following, as a specimen.

1. Our Lord has commanded us to love all mankind; not our brethren and friends
only, but even our greatest enemies; and all for this purpose, that we may be
the children of our Father, who is in Heaven, whose love is universal, and
whose tender mercies are over all his works: See St. Matthew. v. 44 -- 48. St.
Luke, vi. 27 -- 36. But if God does not love all himself, Christ has commanded
us to be more perfect, in that respect, than our Father, who is in Heaven;
which, to suppose, is highly absurd. What shall we say to that doctrine that
teaches us, that God hates, with a perfect hatred, many of those whom he has
commanded us to love as ourselves?

Therefore, there is nothing in the doctrine of the Restoration, contrary to
the love of our neighbor; which on the contrary is promoted thereby.

2. We are commanded to do good to all men, as we have opportunity. This is
recommended to us by the example of our heavenly Father, who makes his sun to
rise on the evil and on the good, and sends rain on the just, and on the
unjust;' and no person can say, that the belief of this doctrine tends, in the
least, to hinder us from doing good to all our fellow creatures; but rather
encourages us so to do, from the consideration that God loves them all, and
does good to all, and is determined to make them all the subjects of his
kingdom at last.

3. We are commanded to forgive all men their trespasses, and to pray; saying,
'Forgive us our (debts, or) trespasses, as we forgive (our debtors, or) them
that trespass against us;' St. Matthew. vi. 12. St. Luke, xi. 4. And our Lord
says, 'For, if ye forgive men their trespasses, your heavenly Father will also
forgive you: But if ye forgive not men their trespasses, neither will your
Father forgive your trespasses;' St. Matthew. vi. 14, 15. See also, chap. xviii
21 -- 35. St. Mark, xi. 25, 26. St. Luke, vi. 37.

Now, is it possible to suppose, with any degree of reason, that our Lord would
command us, upon pain of his highest displeasure, to forgive those whom he
hated, and determined to punish while he should exist, without having the least
desire or design to do them good? Has he promised us the greatest blessings, if
we will forgive all men; and will he never forgive them? He that can believe
this, let him believe it. However, since forgiving all men is a plain command,
which none can deny; I trust, no one will venture to say, that believing the
final Restoration of all men, at last, will have any tendency to make us break
this precept of our Savior's, upon which he lays so much stress; but, I think,
the contrary is evident.

4. We are commanded to pray for all men: St. Paul says, 'I exhort, therefore,
that, first of all, supplications, prayers, intercessions, and giving of
thanks, be made for all men: For this is good and acceptable in the sight of
God, our Savior, ( or Restorer) who will have all men to be saved, ( or
restored) and to come unto the knowledge of the truth. For there is one God,
and one Mediator between God and men, the man Christ Jesus: who gave himself a
ransom for all, to be testified in due time.' This is the great doctrine of the
Gospel, the very foundation of Christianity: -- 'Whereunto I am ordained a
preacher, and an apostle; (I speak the truth in Christ, and lie not) a teacher
of the Gentiles in faith and verity.' The apostle not only believed, but
taught; not only taught, but commanded others to teach and preach this great
doctrine, of God's being the Savior, or Restorer, of all men: In this he
gloried, saying, 'This is a faithful saying, and worthy of all acceptance. For
therefore we both labor and suffer reproach, because we trust in the living
God, who is the Savior ( or Restorer) of all men, specially of those that
believe. These things command and teach.'

Upon this grand foundation, St. Paul recommends prayer to all men; saying, 'I
will therefore, that men pray every where, lifting up holy hands, without wrath
and doubting,' 1 Timothy ii. 1 -- 8. iv. 9, 10, 11.

Observe, the apostle recommends prayer for all men: and wills, that men should
pray every where, at all times, and in all places, lifting up holy hands,
without wrath and doubting. How nearly forgiving all men, and praying for all
men, stand connected! and both are plainly and peremptorily recommended by our
Lord; who says, 'Love your enemies, bless them that curse you, do good to them
that hate you, and pray for them which despitefully use you, and persecute you.'

We are commanded to pray for all men, because it is the will of God that all
men should be saved; ( or restored) and because Christ has given himself a
ranson for all: And we are bid to pray without doubting: O, what a word is
this! May we, ought we, to pray for the salvation of all men, without doubting?
Surely, God would never have commanded us to do this, unless it was his purpose
to restore all men, in his own time; and no man can say, that the belief of the
Restoration will prevent our praying for all men.

I was once on a journey, and called in at the house of one of my former good
friends: Several religious persons were there; and, after some time, my
sentiments came to be spoken of, and they seemed to wonder how I could embrace
the opinion, that all men, finally, would be saved! I told them, however many
might preach against it, that no person, under the influence of the Divine
Spirit, could pray against it; but, on the contrary, we could pray for it in
faith, nothing wavering, as God had commanded, and as his Spirit naturally
inspired: that no person could pray God not to save or restore all mankind,
without being shocked at the blasphemy and impiety of such a prayer; but that
our Lord had said, that all things whatsoever we asked in prayer, believing
that we should receive, should be granted, let them be things seemingly ever so
impossible; that if we asked any thing according to his will, it should be
done; and that it was his positive and declared will, that all men should be
saved, ( or restored) and come to the knowledge of the truth: that we were
ordered to pray for it in faith, without doubting; and, therefore, it was as
evident as the nature of things required, that it would be done; since God had
never ordered us to pray for any thing that he was not able and willing to do.
This, and much more, I said, and they seemed exceedingly well satisfied;
especially, when I informed them, that it was through the blood of Christ, the
blood of the covenant, that the prisoners should be sent forth out of the pit
wherein is no water, and that all should be restored through his mediation.


Friend. Then you hold that even the damned shall be finally restored and
delivered by the power of Jesus, and through his bloodshedding. I have heard
it objected against your scheme, that it tended to set at naught the whole
mediatorial plan, and to depreciate the blood of Jesus, which he shed to purge
our sins away; though I never observed any thing like this in your discourses,
either in public or in private.


Minister. No: God forbid that I should ever set aside the blood that cleanses
from all sin; nor can I be charged with it, unless having a much higher idea of
its merit than my opposers, may be looked upon as tending to depreciate it.
They hold that it shall cleanse a small number from their sins; I believe that
it shall cleanse, heal, and restore the whole human race. They believe that its
virtue endures for a little season; I maintain that it shall continue to all
ages, until all evil shall be destroyed out of the universe.


Friend. I am satisfied that you do not mean to set at naught the powerful
blood of the dear Redeemer, but on the contrary, you suppose that your views
tend more to exalt it. Pray proceed in your discourse.


Minister. I need not say much more upon this matter; Our Savior has said, 'If
any man will do his (the Father's) will, he shall know of the doctrine, whether
it be of God, or whether I speak of myself,' St. John vii. 17. This is the
surest rule: practice religion; love, revere, and serve God; love all men, even
your enemies; do good to all, forgive all, and pray for all; and then ask, Is
the doctrine of the final Restoration contrary to this manner of life? If it
be, reject it; for these commands are plain: and if these principles are
inconsistent with the observation of these precepts, then avoid them, as you
would death and hell. But, I trust, it has been shown, that they have no such
tendency; but the contrary. For instance, Does this doctrine tend to make us
hate God, and his character? Does it naturally fill our minds with selfishness,
and prevent benevolence from ruling within us? Does it fill us with pride, and
cause us to look down with contempt upon those that are beneath us in life; and
banish humility from our hearts? Does the belief of this, cause our breasts to
swell with pale envy, and rancorous malice, at the happiness of others? Does it
cause us to burn with hellish rage, fury, and madness, against mankind? Does it
tend to destroy meekness, and increase wrath? If these questions require
(either from the nature of things, or from known facts) the answers to be in
the affirmative; then I would abhor such a system, and wish it to be
universally detested: But if, on the contrary, the candid enquirer must answer
in the negative, and say, That the doctrine of the final Restoration does not
tend to produce selfishness, envy, pride, or wrath; but, on the contrary,
'Glory to God in the highest, and on earth peace, good will toward men;' that
it causes benevolence, meekness, humility, forbearance, forgiveness, charity,
and all goodness, to abound and increase; then it cannot be a licentious
doctrine, and is not to be discarded on that account; for it is a maxim with
St. John, that 'He that loves his brother, abides in the light, and there is
none occasion of stumbling in him,' 1 John, ii. 10. That is, he cannot receive,
hold, maintain, or do, any thing essentially or materially wrong; and,
therefore, can give no just occasion of offense: 'For, all the law is fulfilled
in one word, even in this; Thou shall love thy neighbor as thyself. For he
that loves another, has fulfilled the law. For this, Thou shall not commit
adultery, Thou shall not kill, Thou shall not steal, Thou shall not bear false
witness, Thou shall not covet; and if there be any other commandment, it is
briefly comprehended in this saying: Thou shall love thy neighbor as thyself.
Love works no ill to his neighbor: therefore, love is the fulfilling of the
law,' Gal. v. 14. Romans xiii. 8, 9, 10.

But it is not only from reasoning, but from facts, that I am able to prove
that the belief of the doctrine of the universal Restoration, does not lead men
to sin. The Tunkers, or German Baptists, in Pennsylvania, and the states
adjacent, who take the Scriptures as their only guide, in matters both of faith
and practie, have always (as far as I know) received, and universally, at
present, hold these sentiments: But such Christians I have never seen as they
are; so averse are they to all sin, and to many things that other Christians
esteem lawful, that they not only refuse to swear, go to war, etc. but are so
afraid of doing any thing contrary to the commands of Christ, that no
temptation would prevail upon them even to sue any person at law, for either
name, character, estate, or any debt, be it ever so just: They are industrious,
sober, temperate, kind, charitable people; envying not the great, nor despising
the mean: They read much, they sing and pray much, they are constant attendants
upon the worship of God; their dwelling-houses are all houses of prayer: They
walk in the commandments and ordinances of the Lord blameless both in public
and private: They bring up their children in the nurture and admonition of the
Lord; no noise of rudeness, shameless mirth, loud, vain laughter, is heard
within their doors: The law of kindness is in their mouths: no sourness, or
moroseness, disgraces their religion; and whatsoever they believe their Savior
commands, they practice, without enquiring or regarding what others do.

I remember the Rev. Morgan Edwards, formerly minister of the Baptist Church in
Philadelphia, once said to me, 'GOD always will have a visible people on earth;
and these are his people at present, above any other in the world.' And in his
History of the Baptists in Pennsylvania, speaking of these people, he says:
'General redemption they certainly held, and, withal, general salvation; which
tenets (though wrong) are consistent. In a word, they are meek and pious
Christians; and have justly acquired the character of The harmless Tunkers.'

Thus have I proved that this doctrine is not licentious; both from the first
principles on which it is founded, from the nature of experimental and
practical religion, and from fats. As to that part of the objection, which
supposes this doctrine to be the same that the serpent preached to Eye, saying,
'Ye shall not surely die;' it seems almost unworthy of notice: But as it has
been gloried in by some writers, as unanswerable, merely because it was passed
over unnoticed, as being nothing to the purpose; I shall make a few remarks
upon it. 1. I say, that Satan was a liar, and GOD was true* For man and woman
did die, in a moral sense, on the very day that they sinned; they became dead
in trespasses and sins; they lost the divine life, and became earthly, sensual,
devilish; darkness in their understandings, stubbornness in their wills, and
disorder in their affections, rendered them unfit, unable, and unworthy, to
have fellowship with their God. But do they contradict JEHOVAH, and join with
the serpent, who assert, that JESUS, the second Adam, has quickened, and is
able to quicken, those who were dead in trespasses and sins? If so, St. Paul
joined with the serpent, in Ephesians. ii. 1. 2. The sentence of death was
pronounced upon man, even the death of the body, in those words: 'In the sweat
of thy face shall thou eat bread, till thou return unto the ground; for out of
it wast thou taken: for dust thou art, and unto dust thou shall return,' Genesis
iii. 19. But, would it be just and right for any one to say, that those who
believed the resurrection of the body, contradicted God, and, joining with the
serpent, declared, that men should not die; merely, because they asserted,
according to the promises, that they should rise again? Would not those who
preach Jesus, and the resurrection, have a right to look upon it as a vile and
wilful slander, if any one should so misrepresent the matter? What! must I be
accused of saying, that no man ever died, because I believe and teach, that
some have risen, and that all shall be raised, at last: when even the very idea
of a resurrection, presupposes a state of death? 3. I confess, that God has
threatened sinners with the second death: but do I say, that they shall never
taste of the second death, because I declare, that the time will come when it
shall exist no more? This is curious reasoning, indeed.


As well may I say, that no man ever lived on earth, because so many have died;
that no one sleeps in the night, who wakes in the morning; or, that no fish was
ever in the water, that was caught and taken out.

Did St. Paul join with the serpent, when he said, 'For as in Adam all die,
even so in CHRIST shall all be made alive?' 1 Cor. xv. 22. Will any suppose
that we affirm, that the dreadful threatenings denounced by God, never were,
nor ever will be executed, because we declare, that his promises shall also be
fulfilled? Can any reasonable man suppose, because Christ is the Savior of
men, that, therefore, they were not in a lost condition? How absurd! when he
declares, that he came to seek and to save the lost!

Thus, though mankind died a moral death, in the day wherein they sinned; yet,
CHRIST is able to quicken and raise them up from the same: and though their
bodies die, in consequence of the fall; yet shall he cause all that are in the
graves, to hear his voice, and come forth: and, by the same rule of arguing,
though many shall fall under the power of the second death, which is threatened
to sinners; yet as he has promised to destroy all that bears the name of death,
their Restoration may be fairly concluded, without either contradicting God, or
joining with the serpent. Had the Scriptures, indeed, contained nothing but
threatenings of death, without any promises of salvation, resurrection, or
restoration; it would have been presumptuous for us to have entertained any
hopes for the human race, or their deliverance, either from sin, death, or
hell: but, since promises are found, as well as threatenings, we must not,
under pretense or color of believing the latter, reject the former, lest we
are found contradictors and opposers of God; for it is as possible that we may
make him a liar, in refusing to believe the record he has given of his Son, and
his intentions of grace and mercy toward mankind, as in disregarding his
threatenings, denounced against them because of their sins.

As for this doctrine making the hearts of the righteous sad whom GOD would not
have made sad, nothing can be more contrary to fact; for if it be the will of
God to reward and punish, and finally to restore mankind, none of the righteous
will be sorry, but, on the contrary, will greatly rejoice. It is not God's
truth, but men's lies, of which the prophet speaks; which made the hearts of
the righteous sad, and strengthened the hands of the wicked, that he should not
return from his wicked way, by promising him life: But we are so far from
strengthening the hands of the wicked, and saying, that no evil shall come upon
them; that we declare from the Scripture, that 'the wrath of God is revealed
from Heaven, against all ungodliness and unrighteousness of men, who hold the
truth in unrighteousness; unto them that are contentious, and do not obey the
truth, but obey unrighteousness, indignation and wrath, tribulation and
anguish, upon every soul of man that does evil; of the Jew first, and also of
the Gentile,' Romans i. 18. ii. 8, 9. And that 'there is no peace to the wicked,'
Isai. xlviii. 22. lvii. 20, 21. Therefore, they are called to repent, and turn
to God; for in sin they never can be happy: no unholy, or unclean thing can
enter into the kingdom of Heaven. And so far are we from promising them life in
their wicked ways, that we testify, from the Scripture, that 'He that believes
not the Son, shall not see life,' while he continues in that state; 'but the
wrath of God abides on him,' St. John, iii. 36.


Friend. I had intended to propose that text as an objection to your system; it
is, indeed, one that Dr. WHITBY insists much upon: But I see how you will
answer it -- that the unbeliever, as such, and while he so continues, cannot
see life; but the wrath of God abides on him, while he remains in unbelief;
but that God can take away the cause, in his own time, and then the effect
shall cease.


Minister. Certainly, this must be the meaning: for St. John only meant to
describe the difference between believers and unbelievers, as such; but could
not mean to intimate, that those who were unbelievers, in his time, should
always continue so.

But I now pass to consider the latter part of this objection, upon which I
have dwelt so long; viz. that it is the nature God to lay the highest possible
restraint upon sin, and, therefore he has threatened it with everlasting
damnation, which must intend endless misery; and as this restraint is found too
weak, wholly to prevent evil, what an amazing increase would there be, if this
restraint should be taken off, in any degree; as it must be, if it should come
to be known that punishments were only for certain ages or periods, and
designed for the amendment of the sufferers?

I once asked a Reverend Divine, what was his strongest argument in favor of
endless punishment? and he told me, this which is mentioned above; and,
therefore as it is of considerable importance, I shall give it a brief
consideration. 1. It is not quite clear to me, that it is the nature of God to
lay the highest possible restraint upon sin; and that he always does so, in all
his dispensations. He sometimes has higher designs in view, than barely to
restrain sin: he sometimes, perhaps, suffers it to prevail for a time, that his
power might be more manifest in destroying it: hence we read, 'Moreover, the
law entered' -- not merely to restrain sin, but -- 'that the offense might
abound: but where sin abounded, grace did much more abound; that as sin has
reigned unto death, even so might grace reign, through righteousness, unto
eternal llfe, by Jesus Christ our Lord. Wherefore, then, serves the law? It
was added because of transgressions, till the seed should come, to whom the
promise was made,' Romans v. 20, 21, Gal. iii. 19. St. Paul says; 'Sin, taking
occasion by the commandment, wrought in me all manner of concupiscence; for,
without the law, sin was dead. Was, then, that which was good, made death unto
me? God forbid: But sin, that it might appear sin, working death in me, by that
which is good; that sin, by the commandment, might become exceeding sinful,'
Romans vii. 8, 13. Perhaps, if the punishment of sins immediately followed the
commission of them, it would be a stronger and more effectual restraint than
any threatenings of future misery; yet God does not think it necessary to
restrain sin by that mean, though it is expressly asserted that, 'Because
sentence against an evil work is not executed speedily, therefore is the heart
of the sons of men fully set in them to do evil.' Eccles. viii. 11. There is no
doubt but if the awful punishments of the future state were made visible to our
senses, by any means, they would prove a powerful restraint to sin; yet God has
not thought fit to restrain it by those, and perhaps many other possible ways;
Wherefore, I have a right to doubt the premises; for, if the strongest possible
restraints were laid upon sin, it might not be so consistent with a state of
probation, as those reasonable restraints which God has thought fit to lay
upon it. 2. But it may be questioned, whether there is not something in the
idea of limited, yet certain punishment, so just, equitable, reasonable, and
evident; that is much more calculated to produce belief, and consequently more
effectual to destroy false hopes of escaping it, and also to check that daring
presumption, which rises out of the idea of endless misery, than can be found
in the contrary doctrine. Endless punishment seems to shock tender minds, at
least. I heard of a little boy, to whom his mother constantly kept preaching
damnation without end, for every sin; one day, after she had been discoursing
with him in that manner, he went to work, but soon returned back, suddenly
opened the door, and with an air of surprise, cried out; 'Why, mother, the law
says, 'An eye for an eye, a tooth for a tooth, a hand for a hand, a foot for a
foot; but you say, ten thousand for one, and that punishment shall never end.'
I have heard of numbers that had no better excuse for sinning greedily, than
this, viz. that there was no hopes of their being saved; that, therefore, they
were determined to sin as much as possible, since it could make no difference.
I have reason to say, from what I know of mankind, that more persons refuse to
believe in Divine Revelation, because it is commonly thought to contain the
doctrine of endless misery, than from any other cause: And numbers have
embraced it immediately, upon being fairly convinced that it was not necessary
to understand it in that light. And a very sensible Deist once said to an
acquaintance of mine, who believed and preached the universal doctrine; 'Had I
been acquainted with your system, thirty years ago, I should have been a
zealous Christian; and as great a friend to Revelation, as I have been an
enemy.' 'And, pray, why not now Doctor?' -- 'Because I am ashamed, having so
long been fighting against, to receive it now.' 3. Though damnation has been
commonly understood to be endless, for many ages; yet it has not (as far as we
can judge) prevented evil at all, or very little: but I have mentioned before,
how very strict those people live, who receive and hold the system of limited
punishments: whether it is, that endless damnation is too unnatural to be
believed, and that limited punishments, being more reasonable, seem more
certain; or whether it be, that by considering they shall be punished, either
without end, or not at all; and every one thinking that endless punishment is
more than they deserve, but is only reserved for some greater sinners, and
therefore they have nothing to fear from it, I shall not pretend to determine;
but certain it is, that where the idea of endless misery prevails, it has not
prevented iniquity, in the measure that might have been expected, on the
supposition of its being the truth of GOD. 4. The great number of Heathens,
that die without ever being favored with the light of the gospel, and
certainly without ever hearing of endless misery; the many that die in a state
of infancy and childhood; together with the instances of idiots, and persons
born deaf; all convince me, more than any logical arguments, that God has many
ways of instructing and reclaiming his creatures, in another state, that we are
at present unacquainted with. 5. It is not so much the intention of God, merely
to restrain sin, as to show it in all its dreadful deformity, punish it
according to its deserts, and, finally, to show the super-abounding of his
grace, in overcoming and totally destroying it out of his creation; which shall
be accomplished when He that sits upon the throne shall make all things new;
'And there shall be no more death, neither sorrow, nor crying; neither shall
there be any more pain; for the former things are passed away,' Rev. xxi. 4. 6.
As the doctrine of the final Restoration, has been shown in itself not to have
the least tendency to licentiousness, but directly the reverse; and, as far as
I can learn, by history, or my own observation, those who have believed it, in
the manner here laid down, as perfectly consistent with a future state of
rewards and punishments, have been particularly careful to depart from iniquity
of every kind: yet if any should be so lost to all that is good, as to pervert
this truth (revealed for contrary purposes) to their own destruction, they
alone must bear the blame, the loss, and the punishment. The Scriptures, of
truth have been perverted; yet, that is no argument against Divine Revelation:
The Gospel of the Grace of GOD, has been abused; but should it never be
preached on that account? Some, in the apostles days, turned the Grace of GOD
itself into wantonness or lasciviousness, (See Jude 4); and others pretended
that those holy men encouraged sin, by proclaiming salvation to sinners,
through grace, or faith in Christ; of which St. Paul complains, (Romans iii. 8.)
'We be slanderously reported, and some affirm that we say, Let us do evil, that
good may come: whose damnation is just' -- The holy apostle abhorred, and
constantly denied this horrid consequence, which some perverse minds pretended
to draw from his doctrine; he declared that the damnation of such was just, who
did sin that grace might abound, or who affirmed that the doctrine led thereto,
or that the apostles taught or practiced any such things; nevertheless, (not as
fools, but as wise) they did not think fit to lay the gospel aside, and refuse
to preach salvation through CHRIST any more on that account: The self-same
reasoning applies to the present case.



Friend. I must confess that you have so far prevailed as to silence this great
objection; for certainly the belief of the Restoration feems by your account of
it consistent with a state of grace, and the knowledge and practice of
religion. But though you have obviated several objections, there is one you
have not yet touched, which is very considerable, and I am doubtful that it
will be difficult if not impossible for you to answer fairly, it may be thus
expressed, God has abounded toward us in all wisdom: one instance is his
hanging out the threatenings of the severest punishments to prevent his
creatures from sinning while in this world; but to tell them at the same time,
that if they should sin he means to save them, is not prudent; because that
lessens, if not destroys the force of his threatening. He told Adam that if he
did eat, he should surely die; but did not tell him (at the same time) that if
he should eat, his case would not be remediless; this were to take down with
one hand what he had set up with the other. After the threatening failed of the
effect, he told him so, and not before, this was prudently done; so after his
threatenings fail of effect in this state, is the time to reveal his design of
saving daring sinners. We may therefore be sure that he has not done it yet,
and that we misconstrue those texts which seem to contain such a revelation.
The next state is the only state to preach the doctrine, and reveal the
doctrine. If you preach it here, it will be unnecessary to preach it in hell;
for obstinate sinners will carry it in their heads thither.


Minister. As specious and plausible as this objection seems, I doubt not of
being able to answer it fairly, without evading the natural force of it in the
least. The first thing that I shall notice in this objection, is the very
different and contrary manner in which you apply those words of the apostle
from his first evident intention. He has abounded toward us in all wisdom and
prudence, having made known unto us the mystery of his will according to his
good pleasure, which he has purposed in himself, that in the dispensation of
the fullness of times, he might gather together in one all things in Christ,
both which are in Heaven, and which are on earth, even in him. Ephesians. i. 8, 9,
10. God has judged it be the height of heavenly wisdom and prudence to make
known to his saints, his glorious purpose, finally to rehead all things in
Christ; and we ought not to presume to be more wise and prudent than he.

There is no doubt but God has revealed this great truth more immediately to
his saints and faithful ones for their consolation, than for the benefit of the
finally impenitent.

It is of amazing, I had almost said of infinite use to the people of God, to
have this divine counsel declared to them in the present time. The knowledge of
this truth entirely removes all hard thoughts of God from the minds of those
who receive it, as I can testify by experience; for since I have believed in
the doctrine of the universal Restoration, I have never had one hard thought of
God abiding for one minute in my mind, that I remember, and never expect to
have any more while I continue to believe it firmly.

The belief of the Restoration is of great use in supporting good people under
their sorrows and trials here; the idea that evil shall be destroyed, and all
things restored to their primitive glory is the most consolatory of all other
ideas. As this doctrine tends to remove the greatest difficulties from the plan
of Providence, and also from divine Revelation, it is evident that the
knowledge of it must be of the greatest use to all that love their great
Creator. And therefore if the revelation of it answered no other purpose in
this life, but for the happiness, joy, and satisfaction of such as love God, we
might be sure that he has made it known, and that we rightly understand those
passages that hold it forth; for since 'the secret of the Lord is with them
that fear him, and he will show them his covenant,' Psalm. xxv. 14. and 'The
Lord God will do nothing, but he reveals his secret unto his servants the
prophets,' Amos iii. 7. there is all the reason to conclude, that if God ever
intended to restore mankind hereafter, he would not fail to reveal it to his
chosen and faithful servants. And this he has done, if I can understand the
meaning of words.

It is true that God did not inform our first parents before they sinned that
he had provided a remedy; but not long did he delay after the fall to reveal to
them, that the seed of the woman should bruise the serpent's head, Genesis iii.
15. and this one text contains in miniature all that I believe respecting the
Restoration of mankind; for if the Serpent's head is finally to be bruised, his
power and influence over mankind, must be entirely destroyed; and then what
shall prevent their return to God?

Besides, it is impossible to read the Scriptures attentively, and not perceive
that God very frequently mixes promises of mercies among his severest
threatenings of judgment; and yet he does not throw down with one hand, what he
builds up with the other.

Your object seems to suppose that the doctrine of the Restoration supersedes
and sets aside those punishments which God has threatened to inflict upon the
impenitent; or else how does the preaching of this doctrine weaken the force of
the threatenings? But this is a very false idea; for we acknowledge that the
threatenings shall be fulfilled, and not that the disobedient shall escape
unpunshed. There is a great deal of difference between these two ideas, though
you would intimate them to be the same, and that we contradict God by assuring
the wicked that they shall escape the just judgment of God. But we only declare
that an end shall finally come to their punishment, and that when they shall be
sufficiently humbled a dispensation of mercy shall succeed that of judgment.
Let me ask you, Has not God threatened mankind with death on the account of
sin? 'Dust thou art, and unto dust thou shall return.' Genesis iii. 19. Well, tell
me, is this threatening either weakened or destroyed by the knowledge of the
great doctrine of the resurrection of the dead? Did not God threaten the
children of Israel with dreadful judgments to prevent their sinning, and that
they should be dispersed among all nations? but will you say that he either
weakened or distroyed the force of his threatenings, because he promised them
at the same time that at last he would return their captivity, and restore them
as at the first, and do better unto them, than at their beginning.

The laws of this country condemn criminals to death: would it be thought that
I should weaken or destroy the force of the penal statutes, by saying, that the
execution of the law could only be felt for a certain time, beyond which it
could not endure? Is not every malefactor under the sentence of death supposed
to know this? and yet will any presume to say, that these laws are entirely
weakened, and their force destroyed because they do not condemn transgressors
to endless punishments? But, if it be allowed that torments, which are but
momentary, have a considerable influence in restraining many vices, there
cannot be the smallest reason to fear that the doctrine of just retribution
according to the deeds done in the body, will open the door to vice and
immorality, but on the contrary. But this objection is so near a kin to the
last which you proposed, that it hardly deserves a distinct consideration; for
if the doctrine of the Restoration does not lead men to commit sin, (as I am
sure it has no such tendency) then no harm can be apprehended from its being
known in this state. And whereas you argue, that as it would not be proper for
the present state, we may be sure that God has not revealed it; and therefore
is highly proper for men to know in the present state. You will please
therefore to notice that the universal doctrine, so far from tending to render
the divine threatenings useless or vain, weakening their force, or setting them
aside, operates in the direct contrary manner. I as much believe as you or any
other man can do, that all the threatenings will be fulfilled upon the finally
impenitent; but dare not carry the matter so far as to set aside the gracious
promises of God, with which the Scriptures appear to me to abound, in favor of
the final recovery of all at last.


Friend. It must I think be confessed that if the doctrine of the Restoration
be true, it would be matter of great joy and comfort for good men to know it,
for they have often great trouble and anxiety of mind on the account of their
families, friends, neighbors, acquaintance, and mankind in general; which
sorrow would be greatly relieved, could they have an idea of the Restoration of
all things in the manner you hold it. But however true this may be, it seems
not to be plainly revealed in the Scripture, otherwise it would not be hidden
from the eyes of so many great and good men.


Minister. It is possible, that a subject may be revealed in the plainest
manner, and yet the best of men may remain ignorant of it. For instance, were
not the sufferings, death, and resurrection of our Lord plainly revealed in the
Scriptures of the old Testament? And yet we know that the apostles of our
Savior did not understand one of those prophecies. Nay, when Jesus told them
openly and expressly that he must be delivered into the hands of men, and that
they should mock, scourge, and crucify him, and that the third day he should
rise again, they did not comprehend his meaning; although he spoke to them
frequently and very plainly upon the subject, and said, 'Let these sayings sink
down into your ears: for the Son of man shall be delivered into the hands of
men. But they understood not this saying, and it was hid from them, that they
perceived it not; and they feared to ask him of that saying.' St. Luke ix. 44,
45. And in another place we read, 'For he taught his disciples, and said unto
them, The Son of man is delivered into the hands of men, and they shall kill
him: and after that he is killed, he shall rise the third day.' It is
impossible that words should be more express, or less liable to be
misunderstood. 'But (as the evangelist immediately informs us) 'they understood
not that saying, and were afraid to ask him.' St. Mark ix. 31, 32. And in the
same chapter we find, that after our Lord Jesus was transfigured upon the
mount, in the presence of Peter, James, and John, 'As they came down from the
mountain, he charged them that they should tell no man what things they had
seen, till the Son of man were risen from the dead. And they kept that saying
with themselves, questioning one with another what the rising from the dead
should mean.' Ver. 9, 10. This was what Christ taught them not only plainly,
but also frequently. See St. Matt. xvi. 21. xvii. 9, 22, 23. xx. 17, 18, 19.
xxvi. 31, 32. St. Mark viii. 31. ix. 9, 10, 31, 32. X. 32, 33, 34. xiv. 27, 28.
St. Luke ix. 21, 22, 44, 45. xviii. 31, 32, 33, 34.

Yet notwithstanding the plainness and frequency of these predictions, and the
pains which Christ took to instill these ideas into them, they never understood
them at all until sometime after they were fulfilled. For when they saw him
taken and delivered into the hands of men, and treated exactly according to his
own words often repeated, they were entirely disappointed, and all their hopes
seemed to die within them. And when he was risen from the dead, they would not
believe the testimony of those who had seen him, and would hardly trust their
own senses, so ignorant were they of what he had told them.

St. John was the first of the disciples who believed that he was risen, for
thus he writes 'Then went in also that other disciple, who came first to the
sepulcher, and he saw and believed. For as yet they knew not the Scripture that
he must rise again from the dead.' Sr. John xx. 8, 9. This instance is so much
to my purpose, and proves so evidently that a thing may be plainly revealed,
and expressed in the clearest manner, and yet not be understood; that I hardly
need mention any more. But I will mention another, and that is, the calling of
the Gentiles. This was spoken of by the prophets, in the clearest language; and
Jesus after his resurrection gave a full commission to his apostles, which one
would think it was impossible for them to misunderstand.

'All power is given unto me in heaven and in earth, Go ye therefore and teach
all nations,' etc. St. Matt. xxviii. 18, 19. 'Go ye unto all the world, and
preach the gospel to every creature.' St. Mark xvi. 15.

'Thus it is written, and thus it behoved Christ to suffer, and to rise from
the dead on the third day: and that repentance and remission of sins should be
preached among all nations, beginning at Jerusalem. And ye are witnesses of
these things.' St. Luke xxiv. 46, 47, 48. 'Ye shall receive power after that
the Holy Ghost is come upon you: and ye shall be witnesses unto me both in
Judea and in Samaria, and unto the uttermost part of the earth.' Acts i. 8. But
the apostles themselves, even after the miraculous descent of the Holy Ghost
upon them, were without understanding, respecting the calling of the Gentiles,
until St. Peter was taught it by a vision from heaven. See Acts x.

And St. Paul speaks of this subject as a mystery that was hid from ages and
generations, and particularly revealed to him, and to the saints in that day.
See Ephesians. iii. 1 -- 11. Col. i. 25, 26, 27.

Wherefore, when I consider that the apostles themselves could not for a time
see those things to be revealed, which yet were most plainly, fully, and
frequently told them, I cannot wonder that many great and good men now should
not see the general Redemption and final Restoration of all things plainly
revealed in the Scriptures, though to me scarce any subject appears more
evident. It gives me now but little concern to hear many say, that they cannot
see the matter plainly declared in the Bible, since I know that things have
been there that wise and good men could not see; and what has happened in times
past may take place now: and if I can see for myself, this great truth made
known, it is enough for me. I am not to enquire, What does this man believe?
Or, What shall the other do? I must believe what the Scripture appears to me to
teach, and do what I am there commanded, let others believe or do as they may.


Friend. But I have heard some say of you, 'How comes this man to know more
than all the world? Have there not been many great, wise, and good men in all
ages, that have never thought of these things? If this doctrine of the final
Restoration of all things had been true, surely our wise, good, and learned
ministers would have discovered it, and proclaimed it long ago. But the
doctrine of endless misery is a point in which they seem generally to agree,
however they differ in other matters, and therefore it must be true, and this
doctrine of the general Restoration, which this man holds up, almost alone,
must be false.'


Minister. I am very far from pretending to be wiser than any that have gone
before me; and as for this doctrine of the Restoration it was not only believed
and preached by the apostles, but many of the ancient fathers who lives in the
first ages of Christianity, were bold witnesses for this glorious truth. It is
true that when the Church of Rome rose to supreme power, the Popes and Councils
endeavored to extirpate the merciful doctors (as those who believed the
general Restoration, were called in derision) and their adherents, but it was
not until near the close of the seventh century, that they were able to silence
the witnesses for this truth. This, (as well as many other precious truths)
then lay hid until the reformation, when it began a little to revive, and has
gradually increased ever since. Several great authors have written upon it;
many hundreds, and even thousands have believed it, and found comfort and joy
therein. Nay, there are many ministers who believe it now as firmly as I do,
but do not choose to confess or preach it, for various reasons; and great
numbers of private christians enjoy the comfort and happiness of believing it
secretly. But put the case that I stood alone in this testimony, yet if upon a
fair examination, the Scriptures hold forth this idea, and if all objections
against it may be fully answered; why should my testimony be refused on the
account of its singularity? God has an absolute right to use what means or
instruments he pleases, to manifest his truth, and to fulfill his purposes; and
though I am nothing, and in his sight am less than nothing, yet he is able by
the things that are not, to confound and bring to naught the things that are,
that no flesh should glory in his presence. 1 Cor. i. 28, 29.

I acknowledge that the generality of ministers in the present day profess to
believe endless misery, though they disagree in other points; and indeed one
reason why they fall out so much about other doctrines, is, because they
receive this as a first principle, as is very obvious; for were those who
believe that Christ died only for a part of mankind, once to give up the idea
of endless misery, they would acknowledge the universality of the love of God,
and confess that Jesus died for all in the fullest sense. And on the other
hand, if those who believe in general redemption, were not so exceedingly
tenacious of the doctrine of endless misery, they would not oppose the doctrine
of election, nor hold that the will of God might be finally frustrated, and
that the death of Christ shall be in vain, with respect to many, and that many
objects of the divine love shall finally perish to all eternity. These
inconsistencies in their sentiments, and the contests between them and those
who hold partial redemption and salvation, are therefore chiefly, if not wholly
owing to both parties being agreed in this most dreadful doctrine of endless
misery.

It is beautiful to observe the progression of the glorious gospel, from its
opening to our first parents in the garden down to the present day. I have
sometimes mentioned, in public, that the more the gospel is known and revealed,
the larger and richer it appears.

It first seemed confined to one family or nation, but later discoveries showed
that all nations had a part therein, and all sorts of people were designed to
share in its blessings: now the glorious news begins to be published abroad,
not only that all nations, and all sorts of people, but all persons and
individuals, without exception, not only may partake of its benefits, but shall
in due time enjoy great advantages thereby.

God always adapts his remedies to the evils that prevail in the world; and
therefore he has opened his counsels to men according to their different
capacities, needs, and circumstances. Christianity might, formerly, have been
received and sincerely practiced, without being investigated at all; but when
infidelity rises up and attacks it, as it does in this our age, it becomes the
duty of its friends to defend it, by enquiring into its meaning; and laying all
prejudices aside, to receive as truth those things which God has revealed, and
the same to vindicate before the world.

It might not formerly have been necessary to understand all the prophecies;
and yet now, as the time of their fulfillment draws nigh, they may become more
important, be more studied, and better understood; and for this purpose, God
may actually illuminate the minds of some, to set them forth in a more
national, scriptural, consistent manner than they have appeared in hitherto.
And if it should please God to make any use of my tongue or pen for this great
purpose, the glory shall be all ascribed to his name, to whom alone it is due;
I shall have nothing to glory or boast of, forasmuch as I can only communicate
what I receive; and I hope none will refuse to receive the truth, however weak
or unworthy the instrument by which God may please to send it.


Friend. If this is the truth which you hold forth, however contrary to the
commonly received opinions of the age, I see no reason why men should refuse to
hear what you have to say; but I have heard many exclaim against you in the
severest manner: and declare that they would not hear you, nor read your
writings on any account: and others have said, that they could confute and
overthrow your whole system in ten minutes, but whether they would be able to
make their words good if they should enter the lists with you is another
matter, and cannot be determined till a fair trial.


Minister. I can assure yon my friend that I should not have the least
objection to their making the attempt; for though I am conscious that neither
my natural nor acquired abilities, are worthy to be compared to those of many
excellent characters who hold the contrary sentiments: yet the goodness of the
cause in which I am engaged, inspires me with courage to attempt its
vindication, let who will enter the lists with me. For when the evidence of
this most glorious truth first began to appear to my mind, I was determined
never to believe or profess it, until I could answer every objection that could
be brought from the Scriptures against it, fairly, and without any torturing or
twisting the words of truth; and it pleased God so to open matters to my view,
as to take every objection out of my mind, and to clear up every doubt, in such
a manner, that I have full satisfaction: And I can safely say, in the fear of
God, that I am so far from being offended with those who question me upon the
matter, and thereby give me an opportunity of answering for myself, that I take
it as an act of kindness; and as I stand ready to be reproved wherein I am out
of the way, so I shall thank the person who, in the spirit of love, convinces
me of error: 'Let the righteous smite me; it shall be a kindness: and let them
reprove me; it shall be an excellent oil, which shall not break my head.' But
let not the man who would write, dip his pen in gall; nor he that would
converse, make his tongue as a sharp sword: but 'Let all bitterness, and wrath,
and anger, and clamor, and evil-speaking, be put away from you, with all
malice; and be ye kind one to another, tenderhearted, forgiving one another,
even as God, for Christ's sake, has forgiven you. Put on, therefore, as the
elect of God, holy and beloved, bowels of mercies, kindness, humbleness of
mind, meekness, long-suffering; forbearing one another, and forgiving one
another, if any man have a quarrel against any; even as Christ forgave you, so
also do ye. And, above all things, put on charity, which is the bond of
perfectness, And let the peace of God rule in your hearts.' These are the
tempers of mind we ought always to possess; and especially, when we discourse
upon the great things of the kingdom of God.


Friend. I have the same desires that you express; and I think it is to the
shame of human nature, and a reproach to the innocent cause of Christianity,
that religious disputes have been carried on with such amazing bitterness and
acrimony. Men seem frequently to forget that they are brethren; and that they
must all stand before the judgment seat of Christ. If they remembered these
things, as they ought, they would not revile, censure, judge, and condemn each
other, as they do: From which evil practices may the good Lord preserve us,
while we debate this very important subject; for though I am determined to urge
every thing that I can with propriety, in the strongest manner that I am able,
yet I am willing to stipulate on my part, that if I should use any reproachful
or censorious language in the remainder of the debate, I will give you leave to
consider it as totally giving up the cause in which I am engaged.


Minister. And I hereby promise the same: for I am determined never to write a
page of controversy, unless it can be written in the very spirit of love and
true benevolence, with a sincere desire to find and embrace the truth.

The want of this in most controversial writers, has made serious people so
weary of controversy, that they will neither read nor hear it on any account:
nor can I wonder at it, for such bitterness tends entirely to root out the
spirit of true religion.


Friend. I hope we shall show an example to mankind, how disputes ought to be
carried on: in love, and in the fear of God, and for the purpose of mutual
edification. But as our present discourse has been long and very important, I
will take my leave of you for this time, hoping at a future opportunity to have
more conversation with you on this so interesting a subject.


END OF THE THIRD DIALOGUE.
DIALOGUE IV.
Friend. I AM happy to have another opportunity of discoursing with you,
concerning that point in which you differ from your brethren, the final
Restoration of all things. I have thought much of the subject since I saw you;
and though I must acknowledge, that you have answered, as far as I can see,
some of the greatest objections that I have found in the Scriptures; yet a
considerable number remain to be answered, before I can venture to receive as a
truth, what I have hitherto looked upon as a dangerous heresy; and as I have
many questions to propose, I wish to make the best use of my time.


Minister. Propose your objections, as freely as you please; and I will
endeavor to answer them as briefly, and at the same time as plainly as
possible.


Friend. CHRIST threatens the Jews with an eternal exclusion from his presence:
'Ye shall seek me, and shall not find me; and where I am, thither ye cannot
come,' St. John vii. 34. Then said JESUS again unto them, I go my way, and ye
shall seek me, and shall die in your sins: whither I go, ye cannot come. Ye are
from beneath, I am from above: ye are of this world, I am not of this world. I
said therefore unto you, That ye shall die in your sins: for if ye believe not
that I am he, ye shall die in your sins,' St. John viii. 21, 23, 24.


Minister. Do you recollect that our LORD uses words nearly similar to some of
these, to his own disciples?


Friend. No, indeed; I do not remember any such like expressions used to them:
Can you show them to me?


Minister. If I do, will you acknowledge the force of the objection to be
removed?


Friend. Certainly, I must.


Minister. Then read St. John xiii. 33. 'Little children, yet a little while I
am with you. Ye shall seek me, and, as I said unto the Jews, Whither I go, ye
cannot come; so now I say unto you.'


Friend. I am surprised that I should never have observed this before -- Let me
read the passage -- Oh! but stop -- it is explained in the 36th verse: 'Simon
Peter said unto him, LORD, whither go thou? JESUS answered him, Whither I
go, thou can not follow me now; but thou shall follow me afterward.' But
nothing of the kind is intimated respecting the Jews.


Minister. Not in that text, I confess; but in many others it is more than
intimated, that they shall come to know and love him, yea, and to behold him as
their friend. I think, it is intimated in those words which our Savior used,
in the close of his threatenings to Jerusalem: -- 'Behold, your house is left
unto you desolate: and verily I say unto you, Ye shall not see me henceforth,
until the time come when ye shall say, Blessed is he that comes in the name of
the LORD,' St. Matthew. xxiii. 38, 39. St. Luke xiii. 35. It is more than
intimated in these words -- 'And so all Israel shall be saved. For GOD has
concluded them all in unbelief, that he might have mercy upon all,' Romans xi.
26, 32. 'In JEHOVAH shall all the seed of Israel be justified, and shall
glory,' Isai. xlv. 25. 'I will call them My people, who were not my people; and
her Beloved, that was not beloved. And it shall come to pass, that in the place
where it was said unto them, Ye are not my people, there shall they be called,
The children of the living God,' Romans ix. 25, 26. 'Now will I bring again the
captivity of Jacob, and have mercy upon the whole house of Israel: I have
gathered them unto their own land, and have left none of them,' Ezekiel. xxxix.
25, 28. 'And I will multiply men upon you, (the mountains of Israel) all the
House of Israel even all of it,' xxxvi. 10. 'Behold, O my people, I will open
your graves, and cause you to come up out of your graves, and bring you into
the land of Israel. And ye shall know that I am JEHOVAH, when I have opened
your graves, O my people, and brought you up out of your graves, and shall put
my Spirit in you, and ye shall live, and I shall place you in your own land:
then shall ye know that I, JEHOVAH, have spoken it, and performed it, says
JEHOVAH,' chap. xxxvii. 12, 13, 14.


Friend. But this returning from captivity, can only respect such as are alive
at that period, when the LORD shall set his hand the second time to recover the
remnant of his people from Assyria, etc.


Minister. That is more than any one can prove: as the expression is sometimes
used evidently for the Restoration of such whose bodies are destroyed, beyond
dispute; as, in the case of Sodom and her daughters, who were taken away, by
fire and brimstone from heaven, whose captivity GOD promises to return,
together with the captivity of Samaria, and her daughters, at the same time
that he will bring again the captivity of Jerusalem, and her daughters, in the
midst of them. See Ezekiel. xvi. 44 -- 63; especially, verses 53, 55, 61.


Friend. But Mr. POOLE'S Continuators, as well as many other eminent divines,
tell us, that these which you take to be promises, are only dreadful
threatenings; and their meaning is this: -- I never will bring again the
captivity of Samaria, and her daughters; nor the captivity of Sodom, and her
daughters; neither will I ever bring again the captivity of thy captives, in
the midst of them: when Sodom and her daughters shall return to their former
estate, (which is impossible) and Samaria and her daughters shall return to
their former estate, (which shall never be) then thou and thy daughters shall
return to your former estate: but that time shall never come.


Minister. I know, such is their interpretation, which proves nothing more than
the weakness of their cause; for in all this, they expressly contradict GOD,
who, from the 60th verse to the end of the chapter, promises blessings to
Jerusalem in the most absolute manner; That he will remember the covenant made
with her in the days of her youth, and will establish unto her an everlasting
covenant; that she shall receive her sisters, Samaria and Sodom, (called her
elder and her younger sisters); and he promises to give them to her, for
daughters; not by the first covenant, indeed, but by the new and everlasting
covenant, which he will make in those days; then shall the covenant be firmly
established with her; she shall know JEHOVAH; shall remember, and be
confounded; and never shall open her mouth in pride any more, because of her
former sin and shame, when GOD shall be pacified toward her, for all that she
has done.

How many promises has GOD made to Jerusalem, in the prophecies, of not only
bringing her captivity, and returning her to her former estate; but even
causing greater blessings than ever to come to her, and of doing better to her
than in her beginning, making her an eternal excellency, a joy of many
generations, etc.

It is therefore very surprising, that men professing to believe the Bible,
should dare be so bold as to deny these promises, and declare, that GOD will
never bring Jerusalem to her former estate! They might, indeed, safely say,
that the promises have not yet been fulfilled; but it is too bold to assert,
That therefore they will never be accomplished. Were there no other text to
prove the Restoration of the Jews who died in their sins, and indeed of the
whole fallen race of Adam, I should judge this sufficient; -- ' All that the
Father gives me, shall come to me; and him that comes unto me, I will in no
wise cast out. For I came down from heaven, not to do my own will, but the will
of him that sent me. And this is the Father's will, which has sent me, that of
all which he has given me, I should lose nothing; but should raise it up again
at the last day,' St. John vi. 37, 38, 30. Here we find that Christ, our Lord,
declares, not only that all that the Father gives him shall come to him; but
also, that they shall come in such a manner, as in no wise to be cost out; and
that such is the Father's will, that nothing of all which he has given to the
Son, should be lost, or missing, at that great day when he shall deliver up the
kingdom to the Father, who did put all things under him; and as this is the
will of that God who works all things after the counsel of his own will; and
as Christ has undertaken the accomplishment of this will of the Father, it
concludes absolutely and forcibly against the doctrine of endless misery, and
annihilation.


Friend. It certainly does, with respect to all those whom the Father gives,
or has given, to the Son; but to none else.


Minister. That is all that I contend for: I ground the universal Restoration
of all things, upon these two premises, which I call the major and the minor,
1. That all things are given to the Son, without exception: 2. That all that
are given him, shall come to him, in such a manner as not to be cast out; and
that none shall be missing, lost, or wholly destroyed, but shall be
forthcoming, in that great day when Christ shall give up the kingdom to the
Father.


Friend. But can you prove your major? I am sensible that the minor has been
the great foundation upon which particular redemption, etc. has been supported;
but if the major can be proved, it will set the strongest weapons of those who
hold partial decrees, etc. directly against them, and will give another turn,
to the argument.


Minister. I can prove the major by the same positive expressions as the minor,
and by more passages of Scripture; and you shall judge for yourself, whether I
quote them fairly, and whether they can be invalidated by any arguments which
will not, at the same time, invalidate the minor. I will set down the several
texts at large, as they are of great importance.

St. Matthew. x^. 27. ' All things are delivered unto me of my Father: and no man
knows the Son but the Father: neither knows any man the Father, save the
Son, and he to whomsoever the Son will reveal him.' The very same words are
mentioned by St. Luke: See chap. x. 22.

But the most striking passages of this kind, are found in the gospel of St.
John, chap. iii. 35. and xiii. 3. 'The Father loves the Son, and has given
all things into his hands. Jesus knowing that the Father had given all things
into his hands, and that he was come from God, and went to God, etc.'

God has moreover said to his Son, 'Ask of me, and I shall give thee the
heathen for thine inheritance, and the uttermost parts of the earth for thy
possession,' Psalm. ii. 8.

Thus, all things are given to Christ, without exception. The major and minor
being both proved from Scripture, we may venture to draw this conclusion:

If all things are given into the hands of Christ, by the Father; and all that
the Father gives, or has given, shall come to Christ, in such a manner as not
to be cast out; then shall all men be restored.

Here the whole Christian world may unite, without either party being obliged
to give up their favorite tenets: and while some strongly contend, and prove
from Scripture, that all things are delivered into the hands of Jesus* let the
others go on to prove, that all that the Father gives, shall come in such a
manner as no^ to be cast out: Thus shall the truth be promoted mutually and
equally, by those who seem to contradict each other; but neither shall, in that
case, contradict what our Lord has said.

But as all things or all men, without exception, are given to Jesus, that he
might restore, or bring them back to God, in his own way and time; so is he
invested with all power, that he might be able to accomplish so great a work.
Jesus spoke, saying, ' All power is given unto me, in Heaven and in earth,' St.
Matthew. xxviii. 18, 'For as the Father has life in himself, so has he given to
the Son to have life in himself; and has given him authority to execute
judgment also, because he is the Son of man,' St. John v. 26, 27. Jesus, or
Lord, has power to quicken souls who are dead in trespasses and sins; See
Ephesians. ii. 1. He himself says; 'Verily, verily, I say unto you, The hour is
coming, and now is, when the dead shall hear the voice of the Son of God; and
they that hear, shall live, St. John v. 25. He has power to raise all the dead
that are in their graves; for he says, 'Marvel not at this: for the hour is
coming, in which all that are in the graves shall hear his voice, and shall
come forth: they that have done good, to the resurrection of life; and they
that have done evil, to the resurrection of damnation,' verse 29. But he has
not only power to raise the ^ead, and quicken whom he will; to give rewards to
them that love him, and to pass sentence of judgment and condemnation upon his
foes, and they (...) have done evil; but has also power to subdue (...) things
unto himself, to reconcile all things, and (...) rehead all things in himself:
And whatever me^^ods he may use toward mankind, and whatever ^^series he may
suffer them to feel for their sins, ^^d how long soever the dreadful age of
judge^ent and fiery indignation may last, Christ has gi^en us to understand, in
his prayer to the Father, that the power which he has, was given with a ^esign
far superior to this, (though judgment is included) -- he says, (in that
address which, for its grandeur, beauty, simplicity, and majesty, never was
equalled); 'As thou have given him power over all flesh, that he should give
eternal life to as many ( pan, ALL) as thou have given him. And this is life
eternal, that they might know thee, the only true God, and Jesus Christ whom
thou have sent,' St. John xvii. 2, 3. Here we see that his power over all flesh
was given him for this grand purpose, that ultimately he might give eternal
life; not only endless existence, but the knowledge of God and his Christ, to
all that the Father has given him; which are all without exception. -- This is
the will of God, that of all which he has given the Son, he should lose
nothing; but should give eternal life, even the knowledge of God, which he
alone can give, to all, without reserve, whom the Father has given him; this
is the will which Christ came to do, and this he has power to perform. -- Now,
if he came purposely to do the will of God; and if it is the will of God, that
of all that the Father has given to the Son, he should lose nothing; but
should bring all to himself, in such a manner as that they should not be cast
out, and give them all eternal life; and if all, without reserve, are given to
him, and universal power and dominion are his, for this very purpose; if all
these premises are true -- as who can deny? -- then nothing can be more evident
than this conclusion, viz. that All shall be at last restored.

'It is written in the prophets, (says Jesus) -- And they shall all be taught
of God. Every man therefore, that has heard, and has learned of the Father,
comes unto me,' St. John vi. 45. -- If all shall be taught of God; and all
that are taught, shall come to Christ; and none that come to him shall be cast
out or rejected; if all these premises are true (and, I think, they are fully
proved); how very naturally the conclusion follows, viz. that all shall be
finally brought home to God, before Christ shall resign the kingdom to the
Father.

Our blessed Lord is invested with power sufficient to perform this work: It is
the will of God that it should be done; Christ came into the world on purpose
to begin, and lay a foundation for the same; he has laid a sufficient
foundation, by tasting death for all; one died for all; he gave himself a
ransom for all, to be testified in due time; and he seemed confident that he
should be able to accomplish this will of the Father, when he said, 'And I, if
I be lifted up from the earth, will draw all unto me,' St. John xii. 32. He was
lifted up from the earth, and therefore the IF is now no more; he will
certainly draw all unto himself, and give eternal life, or the knowledge of God
to all. He shall see of the travail of his soul, and be satisfied: And who can
conceive how much it will take to satisfy the capacious soul of the Son of God,
and especially after having borne such deadly pains for all? These passages, my
friend, establish my mind in the belief of the final universal Restitution,
beyond all hesitation; neverthelese, I would not wish to force your assent,
were it in my power, but only to lay before you that evidence which has wrought
upon me, and has brought me over, notwithstanding my education, prejudices,
former sentiments, custom, the multitude, my interest, my honor, and
connections, were all against it.


Friend. I suppose you know the expositions that are given by the generality of
expositors upon all these texts: and it is a fact that thousands and millions
of great and good men have read them, many have preached from them, and yet
never saw any thing like the universal Restoration contained in them; but if
the doctrine be true, and be at all intended to be set forth in the Scriptures,
I must suppose that the passages you have mentioned, may allude to it; but I
have many objections yet to propose, which must be fairly answered before I can
receive it.


Minister. I would choose you should propose every objection that you can,
especially those that may be brought from the sacred page; not only for your
own satisfaction, but lest any should be led to suppose that objections of the
greatest force are purposely kept back, because no solid answers could be
found; whereas I am desirous of hearing whatever can be fairly urged from the
Scriptures against this view, and make no doubt of being able to show, that all
may be fully answered.


Friend. What do you think of those passages, where GOD is represented as
swearing in his wrath that unbelievers shall not enter into his rest, which are
found in Psalm. xcv. 11. Heb. iii. 11, 18, 19. Chap. iv. 3, 6, compared with
Numb. xiv. Do they not seem to cut off all hopes of the restoration of those
who die in their sins?


Minister. By the rest that was promised to the children of Isreal, which they
forfeited by their unbelief, we must understand the land of Canaan, and not the
final state of happiness. For who can suppose, that out of more than six
hundred thousand men, besides women, only two will be saved? -- and that even
Moses and Aaron, those ^aints of the Lord, will be lost among the rest? For
they, as well as others, entered not in; because they believed not God, to
sanctify him before the congregation: (See Numb. xx. 12.) Only C^l^b and Joshua
entered into that rest, for they followed the Lord fully: and they are typical
of those who shall follow the Lamb in all ages, so as to obtain a part in the
first resurrection, over whom the second death shall have no power: they who
are called, and chosen, and faithful, and are overcomers, shall reign with
Christ on earth during the Millenium, which is the rest that was pointed out by
the land of Canaan.


Friend. Is it, indeed? We have commonly understood that rest which the
children of Israel had in the promised land, as typical of Heaven and eternal
felicity.


Minister. This cannot be; since it is evident that mighty wars were waged, and
dreadful battles fought, thirty-one kings and kingdoms were conquered and
subdued by Joshua and the Israelites, after they passed over Jordan; it was not
a perfect rest, but only a type of that keeping of the sabbath which remains
for the people of GOD, into which we are exhorted to enter; which is the time
when our Lord, after having conquered the nations of the earth, shall reign for
a thousand years, before the second resurrection; but as many of the Israelites
may be saved in the day of the Lord, whose carcases fell in the wilderness; so,
likewise, shall the names of many be found in the book of life, at the general
judgment, when the dead, small and great, shall stand before GOD, who were not
worthy to have a part in the first resurrection. These passages, therefore,
conclude strongly against those having a a part in the first resurrection; but
nothing against the final Restoration, which is a state far beyond, and belongs
to another dispensation.


Friend. This is quite a different comment from what I have ever heard before;
but allowing this objection to be answered, I have another in my mind, that
appears very difficult, and I should be glad to know what you can say upon it;
it is drawn from Isaiah xxvii. 11. 'For it is a people of no understanding;
therefore he that made them will not have mercy on them, and he that formed
them will show them no favor.' How can they ever be restored, if GOD will not
have mercy upon them, nor show them any favor?


Minister. If we did not understand these words with some limitation, it would
be as difficult to reconcile them with other passages of Scripture, as with the
doctrine of the Restoration; but if we only limit the time, all is easy; 'He
shall have judgment without mercy, that has showed no mercy;' nevertheless it
is added, 'but mercy rejoiceth against judgment,' James ii. 13. The way I
answer all these threatenings, and show them to be consistent with that
boundless mercy of GOD, that is over all his works, is, to show, that both
wrath and mercy have their season; that anger endures but a moment, but that
mercy endures for ever; which glorious declaration is expressed more than
forty times in the Scripture; and that God frequently threatens the greatest
judgments, and promises the greatest mercies, to the same people and persons.
'Thus says JEHOVAH, Thy bruise is incurable, and thy wound is grievous. There
is none to plead thy cause, that thou may be bound up: thou have no healing
medicines. All thy lovers have forgotten thee: they seek thee not; for I have
wounded thee with the wound of an enemy, with the chastisement of a cruel one,
for the multitude of thine iniquity; because thy sins were increased. Why
criest thou for thine affliction? Thy sorrow is incurable, for the multitude of
thine iniquity: because thy sins were increased, I have done these things unto
thee.' Now, who would not think, from reading these words, that these people
were in a most hopeless state, beyond the reach of mercy; and that it was in
vain for them even to seek it? -- And yet the very next words speak a language
directly contrary. 'Therefore all they that devour thee, shall be devoured,
etc. For I will restore health unto thee, and I will heal thee of thy wounds,
says JEHOVAH; because they called thee an Outcast, saying, This is Zion, whom
no man seeks after.' See Jer. xxx. 12 -- 17. I could justify this observation
by hundreds of passages wherein GOD threatens his people with judgments the
most severe, and declares -- that his eye shall not pity, nor his arm save;
that he will visit their transgressions upon them, will utterly cast them off,
and will not have compassion on them at all; and then such promises of mercy
break out as are sufficient to astonish every one with their greatness. But
time would fail to quote them at large. GOD, by Hosea, says, 'I will no more
have mercy upon the house of Israel; but I will utterly take them away. For ye
are not my people, and I will not be your God.' And then immediately says,
speaking of a time to come, 'And it shall come to pass, that in the place where
it was said unto them, Ye are not my people, there it shall be said unto them,
'Ye are the sons of the living GOD.' See Hosea, i. 6, 9, 10.

The whole prophecy, indeed, seems of a piece with this specimen. In the second
chapter it is said, 'Plead with your mother, plead: for she is not my wife,
neither am I her husband; and I will not have mercy upon her children; for they
be the children of whoredoms.' Then he goes on to pronounce many dreadful
threatenings; but the chapter closes with the most amazing promises of mercies
to the same people, under the similitude of a wife that had been rejected, and
after a long time received again. 'And I will betroth thee unto me for ever;
yea, I will betroth thee unto me in righteousness, and in judgment, and in
loving kindness, and in mercies. I will even betroth thee unto me in
faithfulness, and thou shall know the Lord. And I will sow her unto me in the
earth, and I will have mercy upon her that had not obtained mercy; and I will
say to them who were not my people, Thou art my people; and they shall say,
Thou art my GOD;' See Hos. ii. 2, 4, 19, 20, 23. Thus the objection admits of a
fair and rational answer; and I have been the larger upon it, because I judged
it of great importance to clear it up thoroughly: but more passages upon this
subject are needless, or I could easily produce great numbers, that speak to
the same purpose.


Friend. You have seemed to come over this objection rather better than I could
have expected, but I must beg leave to ask you, What you do with that passage:
(Psalms x^^x. 19.) 'He shall go to the generation of his fathers; they shall
never see light?'


Minister. I render the words gnad natzah, 'until subdued and overcome, they
shall not see the light; or, 'until the age, or a certain period, they shall
not see the light.' The same words are used in Job xxxiv. 36, where they are
rendered 'unto the end.' 'My desire is, that Job may be tried unto the end. How
would it seem to render the words thus -- 'My desire is, that Job may be tried
never; or, may never be tried?' This would be quite inconsistent with the
nature of things, as well as a contradiction in the words themselves; For first
to say, 'My desire is, that Job may be tried,' and then to add words that mean
never, is quite ridiculous even to suppose; but render the words, unto a time
or period,' or as they will bear, ' until he be subdued or overcome,' and the
meaning is both plain and benevolent: but to wish him tried for ever, world
without end, would be a most malevolent wish, -- and to wish him tried never,
would be nonsense.


Friend. This translation is very different from that which we commonly read,
in which this text appears a very formidable objection indeed: for if they
shall never see the light, they cannot be restored.


Minister. The word never is sometimes used in our translation, in such a
manner as to oblige us to understand (...) in a limited sense, as has been
proved before; Lev. vi. 13. 'The fire shall ever be burning upon the altar, it
shall never go out; and in several other place.


Friend. I must allow that the words you mention seem very strong and absolute,
but the very reason of things obliges us to limit their meaning to a period or
age; but where no such necessity appears we must understand such words in the
most absolute and unlimited sense.


Minister. I think there is as abundant reason from Scripture to limit the time
of punishment as any thing whatever; as I trust will appear in the course of
our conversation, for which purpose I shall be glad to hear all that you are
able to urge against the doctrine of the Restoration.


Friend. The next objection I shall bring is from Job xxxvi. 18. 'Because there
is wrath, beware left he take thee away with his stroke; then a great ransom
cannot deliver thee.' By which we understand, that after death there is no
deliverance, no, not even by that great ransom the blood of Christ.


Minister. This would be one of the strongest objections that you have yet
advanced, if the words a great ransom, had any allusion to the blood of the
dear Redeemer, and if it could be fairly demonstrated, that it can have no
power over the dead; but I apprehend, when you read and consider the text,
context, and similar passages, you will see that no such thing is intended.

Job had frequently wished for death in his trouble and anguish, (as many
persons foolishly and wickedly do, that have never felt the tenth part of his
afflictions) for which Elihu justly reproves him, in these words; 'Because
there is wrath, beware lest he take thee away with his stroke; then a great
ransom cannot deliver thee,' from death and the grave; from being cut off by
the hand of Heaven, justly provoked by thy rashness: 'Will he esteem thy
riches?' Will he account thy great riches a ransom for thy life? 'No not gold,
nor all the forces of strength:' Would thou give ever so much of the
precious ore to ransom thy life, it would be unavailable; or, should thou
trust in thy strength of body or mind; should thou plead the readiness of
thy wit, the strength and greatness of thy judgment, memory, and other
faculties; thy benevolence of disposition; thy usefulness in life, thy numerous
connections, the great honors that await thee; were thou a monarch, and
could thou command armies and valiant hosts, strong and mighty; all these
things would be totally disregarded by God, if he, provoked by thy rashness,
should give thee thy wish, and issue the death warrant against thy life:
therefore, considering these things, 'Desire not the night (of death and
especially sudden death) when people are cut off in their place,' and there is
no remedy, no ransom, no discharge in that war; from which neither power,
wisdom, might, riches, honors, wickedness, nor even virtue, can deliver. 'Take
heed, regard not iniquity;' do not sin in any wise, and especially do not
rashly wish for death; which is very presumptuous and heaven daring; 'for this
thou have chosen, rather than affliction:' See Job xxxvi. 18, 19, 20, 21. This
is evidently the plain meaning of the text, and is confirmed by Psalm. xlix. 6,
7, 8, 9. 'They that trust in their wealth, and boast themselves in the
multitude of their riches; none of them can by any means redeem his brother,
nor give to God a ransom for him: (For the redemption of their soul is
precious, and it cease for ever.) That he should still live for ever, and not
see corruption.' But, though the power of wealth, wisdom, and strength, are not
sufficient to buy a short reprieve from death; yet the power of GOD is able to
ransom therefrom, and to redeem from the grave, or hell, as I have noticed
before; and which is expressed in the last-mentioned Psalm, in the following
terms; 'But GOD will redeem my soul from the power of the grave; for he shall
receive me,' ver. 15. And by the same parity of reasoning, that the power of
the HIGHEST is able also to redeem or ransom, the bodies of men from the grave,
after they have perished there: he is able also to redeem souls from sin and
misery, if it be his pleasure; and, by the blood of the MESSIAH'S, covenant, to
send sorth his prisoners out of the pit wherein is no water, not even a drop to
cool the tongues of those who are tormented there. I have therefore no doubt,
but, the blood of Christ is able to redeem to the uttermost, and is sufficient
to destroy the power of sin, death, and hell. Nothing in the text on which your
objection is founded, can depreciate the merit of that cleansing, all-powerful
blood, by proving that it cannot be effectual to lost souls.


Friend. But have you forgot that the Scripture says, 'Whatsoever thy hand
finds to do, do it with thy might. for there is no work, nor device, nor
knowledge, nor wisdom, in the grave, whither thou go. And if the tree fall
toward the south, or toward the north; in the place where the tree fall^th,
there it shall be?' Eccles. ix. 10. xi. 3.


Minister. No; I have not forgot that such passages are found in the Bible; and
I believe they were written with a design to make us diligent, and wisely to
improve our time and talents; and that we should be liberal in giving alms,
which seems especially to be the meaning of the last, if we may judge by the
connection in which it is found, and without which I am not able to say what it
intends: But, in this case, they do not appear to me to be any thing to the
purpose, one way or the other; and yet no Scriptures are more frequently
brought than these against the doctrine of the Restoration of all things; but
commonly accompanied with some additions; such as -- 'There is no repentance in
the grave; Nor pardon offered to the dead.' -- 'And as death leaves us, so
judgment finds us.' -- Words that I have never found in the Bible; but were
they repeated ever so often, could not affect this argument; since the general
Restoration cannot happen till long after the last Judgment, and will not be
wholly comple^ted till the time of the creation of the new heavens and earth,
wherein righteousness alone shall dwell.

We all know, that the grave is a place of inactivity, where there is no work,
devi^e, knowledge, nor wisdom; and it is a state to which we shall soon be
brought; and, therefore, we ought to be diligent and industrious now: But those
who believe in the immortality of the soul, will not undertake to prove from
these words, that it has no knowledge, or wisdom, after it leaves the body;
since many of them say, that the soul knows much more in one hour after that
event takes place, than in the whole period of its existence before. And as for
those who believe that man dies wholly, and sleeps in the grave until the
resurrection, they can never bring this text with any consistency against the
final Restoration of all men; because, let what will be the state of things in
the grave, nothing can prevent our Savior from raising all at last, and
changing them finally for the better, if such be his pleasure. I might,
therefore, just as well attempt, from the vii. and xiv. chapters of Job, to
prove, that there shall be no resurrection of the dead from their graves,
notwithstanding the numerous promises of that grand event; as any person to
prove, from these and similar passages, that all men shall not be finally
restored; since what is said in those chapters seems ten times more against the
former, than any thing that can be urged from these is against the latter. The
doctrine of the general resurrection of the just and unjust; and a state of
rewards for the former, and punishments for the latter, according to their
works; and also the subjection, final reconciliation, and reunion of ALL
things in CHRIST, are all expressly revealed, and are made the subject of
prophecies, threatenings, and promises; and are all truths, that cannot be
overthrown by any reasonings, as they are plainly declared by GOD himself.

The Scripture, in abundance of places, highly recommends liberality; and, in
the most positive manner, assures the bounteous, that they shall be blessed: I
need not recite passages to prove, what is so universally known and confessed.
Solomon, therefore, having given many excellent precepts to direct us in other
matters, comes to exhort us to be bountiful and liberal, in distributing to the
necessities of others what GOD has blessed us withal; saying, 'Cast thy bread
upon the waters; for thou shall find it after many days. Give a portion to
seven, and also to eight; for thou know not what evil shall be upon the
earth. If the clouds be full of rain, they empty themselves upon the earth: and
if the tree fall toward the south, or toward the north; in the place where the
tree falls, there it shall be.' Thereby intimating to us, that as certainly
as these plain common observations are true, (than which nothing can be more
so) shall they who bestow liberally upon the poor and needy, be rewarded; since
GOD has promised, and he will perform: See, upon this subject, Deuteronomy. xv. 10,
11. -- Psalm. xli. 1, 2, 3, cxii. -- Prove. xi. 24, 25, 26. xiv. 31. xix. 17.
xxii. 9. -- St. Matthew. vi. 3, 4, x. 42. -- St. Luke vi. 38. xii. 33. xiv. 12,
13, 14. -- 2 Cor. viii. 9. -- 1 Timothy vi. 17, 18, 19 -- and many other places.

Solomon then goes on upon the same subject, and intimates to us, by two
striking metaphors, that if we wait till no difficulties appear in our way to
hinder us from performing our duty, we shall never reap the blessing; and after
giving us to understand that GOD has many secret ways of working, far above our
comprehension, and can therefore bless and reward us in many ways out of our
own sight, or the view of others, and yet no less certainly than children are
conceived, nourished, and receive life in the womb, though we know not how; he
comes to give us a warm and pressing exhortation, to be constant in doing good
to all, according to our power; and to be so far from concluding that to be
lost that we thus bestow, that we ought to consider alms as seed sown in a
fruitful soil, and should, with patience, wait for the glorious harvest, when,
through the divine blessing, we may expect to reap an hundred fold.

All this is plain and easy: But how any text in this beautiful chain, should
ever have been thought to have any allusion to the state of souls departed, or
brought as a proof that no alteration can take place after death, I cannot
conceive. But, allowing it to have any relation at all to a future state, it
cannot then in the least disprove, that very material changes may happen to
souls in the spiritual world; since a tree cut down by its owner, lies not long
in the same position in which it falls, but is applied to various uses,
according to its fitness and his pleasure. But as this is nothing to the
purpose, I think I have taken too much pains here already; and I should have
said little or nothing upon this part of the objection, were it not continually
urged, as though the whole controversy turned and terminated upon this
allusion, than which, nothing seems farther from the meaning of the text;
which, in its true sense, appears to be this -- That as certainly as full
clouds must empty themselves upon the terraqueous globe, and that every thing
is what it is, and where it is, and no where else; and as a tree falling to the
south, does not fall and lie to the north; and, vice versa, so, with the same
certainty, shall liberality be blessed and rewarded.


Friend. I have nothing to object to what you have said upon the text; it
appears natural. I formerly thought it intended, that as persons were laid in
the grave, so they should rise, and that there could be no change after death;
but I am fully convinced, that this belongs not to the subject. But there is
another passage, in the book of Ecclesiastes, (chap, ix. 4, 5, 6.) that I
should be glad to hear your opinion of: -- 'For to him that is joined to all
the living, there is hope; for a living dog is better than a dead lion. For the
living know, that they must die: but the dead know not any thing, neither have
they any more a reward; for the memory of them is forgotten. Also, their love,
and their hatred, and their envy, is now perished: neither have they any more a
portion for ever, in any thing that is done under the sun.'


Minister. It is evident that the wise man, in this and many other of his
observations, only considered things with respect to the present life, without
any regard to a future state. In this view, his declarations are consistent
with truth; but in no other. Let the following serve as a specimen: -- 'No man
knows either love or hatred, by all that is before them. All things come
alike to all; there is one event to the righteous and to the wicked; to the
good, and to the clean, and to the unclean; to him that sacrifices, and to him
that sacrifices not; as is the good, so is the sinner; and he that swears,
as he that fears an oath,' ver. 1, 2. -- Nothing could possibly be more false
than these observations, applied to a future state, though they are generally
true in this life; for if there are no future rewards and punishments, no state
of retribution hereafter, there is an end to all religion. But he does not
finally leave the matter so; but makes a most excellent conclusion to this
book; saying --

'Let us hear the conclusion of the whole matter: Fear ( or revere) GOD, and
keep his commandments: for this is the whole duty of man. For GOD shall bring
every work into judgment, with every secret thing; whether it be good, or
whether it be evil, chap. xii. 13, 14.

Thus, it is plain, that a living dog is better (more useful in this world)
than a dead lion; which is no longer capable of doing good or evil; that a man,
when he dies, loses all hopes of enjoyment in this life, and is rendered
incapable of exercising the functions of it any longer; has no more a portion
in any thing belonging thereto. Thus, in fine, all the observations that can be
fairly made, upon this and similar passages, belong entirely to the present
state of things; and, therefore do not at all affect the argument, either one
way or the other.


Friend. This is so plain, that nothing can be more so; but our Savior's words
(St. John ix, 4.) deserve a particular consideration: -- 'I must work the works
of him that sent me, while it is day: the night comes, when no man can work:'
-- which is explained commonly of the night of death, when no more works can he
wrought.


Minister. Our Lord was diligent in his labor; he constantly went about doing
good; he was never idle; he was in haste, till he had finished the work which
his father had given him to do. In this he was -- as in every thing else -- a
glorious pattern and example for us! And, O that we might follow him! -- Now we
may feed the hungry, give drink to the thirsty, clothe the naked, be eyes to
the blind, feet to the lame; may take in the stranger, ^elieve the distressed,
visit the sick, the fatherless, widows, and prisoners in their affliction; may
bury the dead, -- and constantly perform works of benevolence and mercy, while
we remain in this state of our existence; which if we here neglect, we never
can perform at all, and of consequence, never obtain the rewards which are
promised to the obedient: but as it is not the state of rewards and punishments
that we are now discoursing about, but a state beyond -- even the Restoration
of all things; neither is the dispute about what men can do after this life,
but what GOD can do, or what he has purposed to do with and for them, in the
ages to come, after the dreadful sentence is past; whether they shall be left
under the same, while God exists; or whether they shall ever be restored; or
whether they shall be annihilated: this, you know, is the state of the
question: some hold the first, and others the last: but I am apt to think both
these opinions are extremes, and therefore judge it safest to maintain the
second, which I take to be the medium here.


Friend. Indeed I am convinced, that no circumstance preceding the general
judgment, can affect the argument; because we are informed, that the
condemnation of the wicked shall be at that day; then GOD will render to them
according to their deeds, and will say to them, Depart from me, etc. -- But the
following texts of Scripture form a strong objection to the universal
Restoration, which I would wish you well to consider.

'The expectation of the wicked shall perish; and the hypocrite's hope shall
perish: Whose hope shall be cut off, and whose trust shall be a spider's web.
He shall lean upon his house, but it shall not stand; he shall hold it fast,
but it shall not endure. The heaven shall reveal his iniquity, and the earth
shall rise up against him. The eyes of the wicked shall fail, and they shall
not escape; and their hope shall be as the giving up of the ghost. His
confidence, shall be rooted out of his tabernacle, and it shall bring him to
the king of ter^ors. For what is the hope of the wicked, though he has gained,
when GOD takes away his soul? Will GOD hear his cry, when trouble comes upon
him? He that being often reproved, hardens his neck, shall suddenly be
destroyed, and that without remedy. When a wicked man dies, his expectation
shall perish; and the hope of unjust men perishes. Because I have called, and
ye have refused; I have stretched out my hand, and no man regarded: But ye have
set at naught all my counsel, and would none of my reproof: I also will laugh
at your calamity, I will mock when your fear comes; When your fear comes as
desolation, and your destruction comes as a whirlwind; when distress and
anguish come upon you: Then shall they call upon me, but I will not answer;
they shall seek me early, but they shall not find me: For that they hated
knowledge, and did not choose the fear of JEHOVAH. They would none of my
counsel: they despised all my reproof. Therefore shall they eat of the fruit of
their own way, and be filled with their own devices.' Prove. x. 28. Job viii.
13, 14, 15 xx. 27. xi. 20. xviii. 14. xxvii. 8, 9. Prove. xxix. 1. xi. 7. i. 24
-- 31.

These, and abundance of other similar passages, declare the future state of
the wicked to be desperate, without hope; they and their hopes perish together,
as the spider's web; they have no hopes or prospect of being redeemed; they can
look for nothing but judgment and fiery indignation, which shall devour them as
stubble fully dry, and as thorns cut up shall they be burned in the fire.
Solomon says, 'The expectation of the wicked is wrath,' Prove, xi. 23. 'As he
loved cursing, so shall it come unto him: as he delighted not in blessing, so
shall it be far from him. As he clothed himself with cursing, like as with his
garment; so shall it come into his bowels like water, and like oil into his
bones,' Psalm. cix. 17, 18. Indeed he can have no hopes, when he considers that
he has neglected so great a salvation all his life; that he has set at naught
GOD'S counsels, despised his reproofs: that when his CREATOR called to him to
turn, he had no ears to hear his voice; and therefore, when sorrow shall
overtake, though he may cry, he shall not be regarded of God; and though he may
seek, he shall not find: the Master of the house having risen up, and shut to
the door, all knocking for entrance is in vain, even though such were to plead
for admittance in the most earnest manner, saying, 'Lord, Lord, open to us;' he
shall answer, 'I know you not whence you are;' and though they may reiterate,
and expostulate, saying, 'We have eaten and drank in thy presence, and thou
have taught in our streets;' he shall not be moved, but shall say to them, 'I
tell you, I know you not whence you are; depart from me, all ye workers of
iniquity. There shall be weeping, and gnashing of teeth, when they shall see
Abraham, and Isaac, and Jacob, and all the prophets, in the kingdom of God, and
they themselves thrust out.' St. Luke xiii. 25, 26, 27, 28. See also, St.
Matthew. vii. 21, 22, 23, xxv. 11, 12.


Minister. These are awful warnings, indeed; and were they attended to as they
ought to be, would be sufficient, one would think, to deter men from their evil
ways: I am glad that you have stated them in this most striking point of light;
for though they form no real objection to my views of GOD'S dealing with men,
as I understand the Scriptures, they are an insuperable bar to the opinions of
those who deny a future state of retribution, which I think impossible for them
to answer fairly. I shall, however, notice briefly, some things in this
collection of Scriptures, in order that my sentiments may appear in their true
light.

1. All the hopes of the wicked, ungodly, and hypocrites, shall perish at their
death.

Perhaps they hoped to have lived long, to have enjoyed health, wealth,
pleasure, and all worldly good, for many years; to have seen their children for
many generations, flourishing for a long time on earth; but death destroys
these hopes.

The hypocrites might have hoped that they should have been accepted with GOD,
on the account of their birth, parentage, profession, rank among the people of
GOD, observation of the externals of religion, etc. etc. all of which vain
hopes do certainly perish at death.

The profane and wicked infidel, and practical atheist, might have hoped,
either to have ceased to exist, or to have found some way of escaping the
threatened punishment; but death destroys these hopes also.

2. Whatever may be the final intention of GOD toward these miserable
creatures, it is evident they are shut up in a state of keen tormenting
despair, or dreadful suspense, and may be fully persuaded that they shall never
be released, of which it is likely they may not have even the most distant
hope, or the least degree of knowledge -- but, on the contrary, be in fearful
expectation of more terrible punishment hereafter.

3. As they have lived and died in sin, their destruction, or misery, is
certain -- and there is no remedy, that can prevent their experiencing the
consequences of their crimes, and suffering the just punishment which shall be
inflicted on them, according to their different deserts.

4. They who live and die in rebellion against GOD, will be eternally deprived
of the glories and honors of the kingdom of Christ, which otherwise they might
have possessed; will be excluded from a share in the first resurrection, and
will be exposed to suffer the torments of the second death; which all must
inevitably suffer, who remain incorrigible till the great day of judgment.

5. As God has called, and they have refused, it is but reasonable to suppose,
that they, in their turn, shall cry in vain: yet nevertheless, though he may
long delay, he may hear their cries, and deliver them at last. See Psalm. cvii.
13, 14, 15, 16.

David, in Psalm xxxivth says, 'The face of JEHOVAH is against them that do
evil, to cut off the remembrance of them from the earth.' Our translators not
understanding, or not entertaining an idea of the future Restoration, add, '
The righteous cry, and JEHOVAH hears, and delivers them out of all their
troubles.' Whereas the Holy Ghost has put no such words as the righteous into
the text there; but after saying, that the face of JEHOVAH is against them that
do evil, to destroy them out of the world, and to make them forgotten, and
their names to cease upon the earth, it adds a word that signifies crying, and
then says, 'And JEHOVAH hears, and delivers them out of all their
troubles:' See ver. 16, 17. This seems, indeed, like the doctrine of the Bible,
which elsewhere says, speaking of the notoriously wicked; 'O my God, make them
like a wheel: as the stubble before the wind. As the fire burns the wood, and
as the flame sets the mountains on fire; so persecute them with thy tempest,
and make them afraid with thy storm. Fill their faces with shame, that they may
seek thy name, O JEHOVAH. Let them be confounded, and troubled for ever; yea,
let them be put to shame, and perish. And they shall know (as the Hebrew word
signifies, and as it is rendered in the old translation) 'that thou, whose name
alone is JEHOVAH, art the Most High over all the earth,' Psalm. lxxxiii. 13 --
18. -- Here we see, in a beautiful and clear manner, that one grand design of
God in bringing judgments, and even what is called utter destruction, upon men,
is that they may know that he is JEHOVAH, the true God: and there are but few
intelligent Christians, but must, in some measure, be able to conceive hopes
concerning all those to whom the knowledge of God is promised.

Though the threatenings in the prophecy of Ezekiel, both against the Jews and
other nations, are uncommonly severe; yet they frequently close with this
gracious promise -- 'And they shall know that I am JEHOVAH' -- or something
similar; as will evidently appear to those who will be at the pains of
examining the following passages in that book.

EZEKIEL, vi. 7, 10, 13, 14. vii. 4, 9, 27. xi. 10, 12. xii. 15, 16, 20. xiii.
9, 14, 21, 23. xiv. 8. xv. 7. xvi. 62. xx. 12, 20, 26, 38, 42, 44. xxii. 16.
xxiii. 49. xxiv. 24, 27. xxv. 5, 7, 11, 17. xxvi. 6. xxviii. 22, 23, 24, 26.
xxix. 6, 9, 16, 21. xxx. 8, 19, 25, 26. xxxii. 15. xxxiii. 29. xxxiv. 27. xxxv.
4, 9, 12, 15. xxxvi. 11, 23, 38. xxxvii. 6, 13. xxxviii. 23. xxxix. 6, 7, 22,
28.


Friend. But does not punishment harden and inflame offenders, instead of
softening and humbling them? As we read, Isa. viii. 21. 'They shall curse their
King and their GOD, and look upward:' and, in Rev. xvi. 9, 10, 11. 'And men
were scorched with great heat, and blasphemed the name of GOD, which has power
over these plagues: and they repented not to give him glory. And they gnawed
their tongues for pain, and blasphemed the GOD of Heaven, because of their
pains and their sores; and repented not of their deeds.'


Minister. Punishment, to a certain degree, inflames and enrages, in a most
amasing manner; but continued longer, and heavier, produces a contrary effect
-- softens, humbles, and subdues. When Ephraim, of old, bemoaned himself, he
said thus: -- 'Thou have chastised me, and I was chastised, as a bullock
unaccustomed to the yoke; turn thou me, and I shall be turned; for thou art
JEHOVAH, my GOD,' Jer. xxxi. 18. The metaphor here used, expresses, in a most
lively manner, the different effects of the same discipline, in its beginning,
progress, and end. When a bullock first has the yoke laid on his neck, he
frets, tosses, and rages exceedingly; but, by a continuance of the discipline,
he is subdued, brought down, humbled, and tamed, so as to become the most
useful and gentle of animals. The sons of Zion are represented as lying 'at the
head of all the streets, as a wild bull in a net; full of the fury of JEHOVAH,
the rebuke of GOD,' Isai. li. 20. A wild bull, in a net, must be a furious
creature; so are men, when first they are brought under the Divine correction.
But GOD knows how to correct men, in such a manner as to bring them to submit
to him, in due time; and though some are so sunk in sin as not to be reformed,
by any means, in this life; yet that is no argument, that GOD is not able to
subdue and bring down the proud and most rebellious, in another state, by means
that may be used effectually there, though they could not be used here. GOD
says, by the prophet to Israel. 'Because I have purged thee, and thou wast not
purged, thou shall not be purged from thy filthiness any more till I have
caused my fury to rest upon thee. So will I make my fury toward thee to rest,
and my jealousy shall depart from thee; and I will be quiet, and will be no
more angry,' Ezekiel. xxiv. 13. xvi. 42. Some sins are so daring and presumptuous,
as to provoke GOD to threaten, that they shall not be purged away in this life;
and, perhaps, their malignancy may be so great, that nothing that can be used
here, is able to subdue them: Thus, when GOD threatened his people, of old,
with destruction, they turned his threatenings into ridicule: instead of
weeping, mourning, baldness, and girding with sackcloth, to which God called
them; there was nothing but 'joy and gladness, slaying oxen, and killing sheep,
eating flesh, and drinking wine: Let us eat and drink, for tomorrow we die.
And it was revealed in mine ears, by JEHOVAH of Hosts, Surely, this iniquity
shall not be purged from you till ye die, says JEHOVAH, God of Israel,' Isai.
xxii. 12, 13, 14.

Thus, punishments are designed for the humbling of the proud: but if they fail
of answering that purpose, as administered in the present state, they will be
continued and increased in future periods, to such a degree, as shall bring all
down in due time. Those pains which produced that rage and blasphemy which you
mentioned, were all poured out on hardened sinners in the present life; and
were so terrible and severe as to produce those fearful effects, but not
sufficiently so as to produce the contrary.

That punishment, to a certain degree, produces rage, but to a certain degree
beyond, produces submission; may be illustrated by the following fact, as well
as many others, of the same nature.

In the former war between England and France, there was one Mr. --, of
Virginia, who was waggon-master-general in the army of the Provincials. He was
guilty of abusing his power, by frequently striking the soldiers with his
waggon-whip. Complaint being made, a court martial was held, and he was
sentenced to receive five hundred lashes; which sentence was executed upon him.
When first he began to feel the lash, he was exceedingly enraged, and cursed
those who had thus sentenced him; swearing, that if he lived to be released, he
would kill them all, if possible; for that he valued not his life, in the
least, but would revenge this disgrace, by killing them, wherever he found
them; and much more, to the same purpose. But, before he had received half his
punishment, he declared, that he had not the least disposition to lift his hand
against them; he saw clearly that they had acted right; that he had been
entirely to blame; and that his punishment was just. After his correction was
over, he was led quietly away, entirely cured of all his rage; from which he
was as much freed by his punishment, as ever an effect was produced by a cause.
He was healed of his wounds, and, I think, restored to his post. -- Some time
after the war was over, he was passing one day over those mountains in
Virginia, commonly called The Blue Ridge; and there he met alone one of the men
who had condemned him, in the court martial, to such a punishment. He put him
in mind of it; and told him, that it was now in his power to retaliate upon
him. The other acknowledged that he was in his power; but added, 'M --, you
know you did wrong, and deserved the punishment you received; and if you kill
me, I declare, that we did right in sentencing you to be whipped; I should do
the same, were it to do again; and so would you have done, had you been in my
place.' Mr. M -- acknowledged the truth of it; and was so far from fulfilling
his threatenings, that he suffered him to go in peace, highly commending him
for his conduct. Mr. M -- may be still living: he was a general in the American
army during the late war, and acquired great honor, for his valor and good
conduct.

This I think is an argument ad hominem. I have often observed instances of the
same nature, in a less degree; and I think it must be admitted, that although a
certain degree of punishment will en flame, harden, and enrage; yet, farther
degrees produce quite contrary effects. Nor is punishment the only thing in
nature that produces contrary effects, according to the quantity used; almost
all things do the same. Thus, water, with a little salt in it, will cause
pu^refaction, much sooner than perfectly fresh water; but let it be saturated
with salt, and it will preserve bodies that are cast therein. A little salt
cast on the earth is good manure, and causes fruitfulness; but a greater
quantity produces the contrary effect, by causing barrenness. A little wine
refreshes, cheers, invigorates; but, taken to excess, stupifies and intoxic^es.
And, to mention no more instances, a little smattering of knowledge puffs up
the mind; but a greater degree, humbles and brings it down: From whence, 'Drink
^eep, or never taste the spring.'


Friend. But let me ask you: When you view the miserable state of fallen men,
the inveterate obstinacy of their wills, the total aversion that many have to
God and goodness, their confirmed habits of evil, their amazing love of vice,
their opposition to every method taken to reclaim them, and a thousand other
dreadful circumstances, which you must have observed; are you not ready to
despair of their recovery? not for any want of goodness in God, but through
their total incapacity of ever being made better.


Minister. I must confess, this objection has great weight; and I have often
been ready to give up my own salvation, on account of the evils of my own
heart, which sometimes rise, and prevail in such a manner, as almost drives me
to despair: and I can find no relief, but by flying to Jesus, as my only
refuge, and trusting in his promises: And the case is the same with respect to
the Restoration of all men. My weak reason tells me, that it cannot be; that it
is absolutely impossible, that such hardened rebels can be so changed to
eternity, as to become willing and obedient subjects: but when faith prevails,
it informs me, that the things which are impossible with men, are possible with
GOD; that nothing is too hard for JEHOVAH; and that he has said -- 'Behold, I
am JEHOVAH, the the GOD of all flesh: is there any thing too hard for me?' Jer.
xxxii. 27. And the example of Abraham has often proved a great support to me in
this case; 'who, against hope, believed in hope, that he might become the
father of many nations; according to that which was spoken, So shall thy seed
be: and being not weak in faith, he considered not" the impediments, which, to
the eye of reason, rendered the accomplishment of the promises improbable, if
not impossible. 'He staggered not at the promise of GOD, through unbelief; but
was strong in faith, giving glory to GOD: And being fully persuaded that what
he had promised, he was able also to perform,' Romans iv. 18, 19, 20, 21.

This is the only way I answer this objection to my own satisfaction -- GOD
has sworn, that to him every knee shall bow, every tongue shall swear, Isai.
xlv. 23. -- That in the name of Jesus, every knee shall bow, of things in
heaven, things on earth, and things under the earth; and that every tongue
shall confess, that Jesus Christ is Lord, to the glory of God the Father, Phil.
ii. 10, 11. That it is the mystery of his will, according to his good pleasure,
which he has purposed in himself, in the dispensation of the fullness of the
times, to gather together, or rehead, in one, all things in Christ; both which
are in heaven, and which are on earth; even in him, Ephesians. i. 9, 10, -- And
having made peace through the blood of his cross, he is determined to reconcile
all things unto himself; whether things in heaven, or things on earth, Col. i.
20. -- That he works all things after the counsel of his own will, Ephesians. i.
11. -- That he will have all men to be saved, or restored, and to come unto the
knowledge of the truth, 1 Timothy ii. 6. -- That the Father loves the Son, and
has given all things into his hands, St. John iii. 35. -- And that Christ has
said, 'All that the Father gives me, shall come unto me; and him that comes
unto me, I will in no wise cast out,' St. John vi. 37. -- When I consider
these, and many such like promises, which I find in the Scriptures; and that he
that has promised, is able to perform; has wisdom, power, and goodness,
sufficient to accomplish all his words, how difficult or impossible soever the
matter may seem, to our carnal, vain, and weak reasoning; I cast the whole of
my concern upon him; judging, that he is faithful who has promised, and that,
in his own time, he will fulfill all his purposes, and all his promises. But I
confess to you, that it requires a faith, if possible, more strong than that of
Abraham, to believe the doctrine of the Restoration steadfastly, in the midst of
so much evil as prevails in the world, and which seems to render it impossible:
But my only hope is in GOD.

But, to encourage us the more, there are not only promises of what GOD will
do, but examples of what he has done, recorded in Scripture, as the cases of
Manasseh, Nebuchadnezzar, Mary Magdalen, Saul, and many of the murderers of our
Lord, priests, and even Pharisees, are left on record, as patterns of GOD'S
long-suffering, power, mercy, and love. -- And I would advise those Christians
that doubt of the universal Reconciliation of all things, to remember St.
Paul's words to the Colossians, on this subject, chap. i. 21. 'And you that
were some time alienated, and enemies in your mind, by wicked works, yet now
has he reconciled;' as a proof and example of his power to reconcile all
things. Let all remember their own stubbornness; and then, instead of reviling
and deriding a truth which GOD has revealed, they will adore him, of whom,
through whom, and to whom, are all things; who 'doeth according to his will in
the army of heaven, and among the inhabitants of the earth; and none can stay
his hand, or say unto him, What do thou?' Romans xi. 36. Dan. iv. 35.


Friend. But allowing that God has power to change the hearts of the vilest of
men, is not the exercise of that power evidently limited? for I find it written
in Rev. xxii. 11. -- 'He that is unjust, let him be unjust still; and he that
is filthy, let him be filthy still; and he that is righteous, let him be
righteous still; and he that is holy, let him be holy still.' By these words it
seems to be intimated, that the characters of both the wicked and the
righteous, shall at some period be so confirmed and fixed, as to admit of no
change or alteration.


Minister. This appears to be a considerable difficulty, but can by no means
overthrow the system of the Restoration, which seems established upon many
gracious promises. The words seem to refer to a particular period, even when
the Lord shall come, and show that his coming will not, (as some suppose)
change the characters of men; but that all shall continue, for a certain time,
in the same character as before. But, though 'he that is unjust, shall be
unjust still; and he that is filthy, shall be filthy still' -- during the age
of judgment; and shall have the dreadful curse pronounced upon him; for, 'If
any man love not the Lord Jesus Christ, let him be anathema, Maranatha: that
is, Accursed, the Lord comes: 1 Cor. xvi. 22. Yet I trust that I have proved,
that the vilest shall be finally changed; and consequently, that these words
must be understood with some limitation. And thus though this text is plainly
contrary to the opinion of those who suppose that all the human race shall be
admitted into the kingdom of heaven at the day of judgment, yet it may be well
reconciled to the system laid down in these Dialogues; especially if it can be
proved that similar expressions are used, where a limitation is supposed, or
necessarily implied.


Friend. Yes; if you can find similar expressions used for limited times, it
will be satisfactory.


Minister. St. Paul says, 1 Cor. xiv. 38. 'But if any man be ignorant, let him
him be ignorant:' But we can hardly suppose that he meant without limitation.
So we read of the Jews, that 'GOD has given them the spirit of slumber; eyes
that they should not see, and ears that they should not hear, unto this day.'
And David says; -- 'Let their table be made a snare, and a trap, and a
stumbling block, and a recompense unto them. Let their eyes be darkened that
they should not see, and bow down their back ALWAYS,' Romans xi, 8, 9, 10. These
expressions of their remaining in a blinded, hardened, and reprobate state, are
stronger than those -- 'He that is unjust let him be unjust still, etc. for,
instead of still, the word always is used; and yet we are informed, that this
'blindness in part has (only) happened to Israel, until the fullness of the
Gentiles be come in: And so all Israel shall be saved.' And that 'GOD has
concluded them all ( or, shut them up together) in unbelief, that he might have
mercy upon all,' even all whom he had shut up, or concluded in unbelief. And,
as I observed before, David says; 'Fill their faces with shame, that they may
seek thy name, O JEHOVAH. Let them be confounded and troubled for ever: yea,
let them be put shame, and perish; That they may know that thou whose name
alone is JEHOVAH, art the Most High over all the earth,' Psalm. lxxxiii. 16, 17,
18. Many other similar passages might be mentioned; but these may suffice, to
show, that often where the words Let it, or Let them be, in such-and-such a
state, they only intend a certain period, until another dispensation takes
place. As for righteousness, holiness, and happiness, they have quite a
different foundation from sin and impurity, as I have shown before; and
therefore, no arguments used in favor of the total destruction of evil, can,
in the least, prove, that goodness, which is the Divine essence, shall cease;
but the contrary: and those who are firmly joined to the LORD, and have
continued with him through the state of temptation, shall never cease to be
righteous, nor be separated from their Head, from whom they shall derive
eternal life: for CHRIST has said, 'Because I live, ye shall live also.' St.
John xiv. 19.

CHRIST, at his coming, will bring every hidden thing to light, and shall take
off all disguises; so that he that is unjust, shall appear unjust; and he that
is filthy, shall be discovered: hypocrisy shall be no more. 'The vile person
shall be no more called liberal, nor the churl said to be bountiful,' Isai
xxxii. 5. 'Then shall ye return, and discern between the righteous and the
wicked; and between him that serves God, and him that serves him not,' Mal.
iii. 18. The judgment of God is according to truth, and is designed to make an
entire discovery of all persons, and all secret things, 'that every mouth may
be stopped, and all the world may become guilty before God,' Romans iii. 19. But
though judgment has its great use in discovering, laying open, convincing, and
condemning; and punishment, in destroying, subduing, and humbling; yet the
powerful, saving grace of GOD, and the operation of the divine Spirit, must
have the glory of restoring, or creating men anew; and the blood of JESUS must
cleanse their souls from the guilt and pollution of sin. Evil must be destroyed
out of them: this is done by afflictions; and goodness must be restored; this
is done by God's renewing power and grace.

But the objection may be answered another way, without any of this reasoning,
by considering the subject comparatively. Thus: As God only is holy; as none
are good but he, in an absolute sense; as he puts no trust in his holy ones,
and the heavens are not clean in his sight, and his angels he charged with
folly; (See Job xv. 15. iv. 18.) and as all intelligences, compared with him,
are unjust and unclean; so, those who have lived and died in rebellion against
God, and in the pollution of sin, may remain unjust and filthy, compared with
the saints, those vessels of honor and glory, who have purged themselves. 'But
in a great house there are not only vessels of gold and silver, but also of
wood, and of earth; and some to honor and some to dishonor. If a man,
therefore, purge himself from these (sins), he shall be a vessel of honor,
sanctified and meet for the master's use, and prepared unto every good work,' 2 Timothy ii. 20, 21. Here we may observe, that in our Lord's great house there
shall be diverse vessels of various kinds, yet all useful, but some more highly
so than others; that honor and dishonor are comparative terms; and that the
way to become vessels of the highest honor at last, is to purge ourselves from
iniquity while on earth, by obeying the truth. For it must appear evident, from
the nature of things, that there will always be an immense difference between
those who shall be kings and priests to God, and those who shall be subdued in
the ages to come, so as to be subjects, but who shall not attain to that honor
and glory, which they shall have who suffer with Christ here, and shall be
glorified with him hereafter.


Friend. Since I have conversed with you I must acknowledge that many things
have appeared in a different light from what they did before; and if I do not
wholly embrace the doctrine of the Restoration, I must allow that there is much
more to be said for it than I could have imagined. But I have still some
difficulties that I wish to propose. There is a terrible threatening, which is
indeed the last in the Bible, that I should be glad to hear your thoughts upon,
which is thus expressed, (Rev. xxii. 18. 19.) 'For testify unto every man, that
hears the words of the prophecy of this book; If any man shall add unto these
things, GOD shall add unto him the plagues that are written in this book: And
if any man shall take away from the words of the book of this prophecy, GOD
shall take away his part out of the book of life, and out of the holy city, and
from the things which are written in this book:' But I can almost foresee how
you will answer this; that though the plagues that are written in this book,
shall be added, yet mercy shall finally rejoice against judgment; and though a
man's part may be taken out of the book of life, and he, in consequence, suffer
the torments of the second death: yet, as the time will come, when there shall
be no more death of any kind, neither sorrow, nor crying, nor any more pain;
his Restoration may be certainly inferred; and though his part in the heavenly
city may be forfeited, so that he may never become one of those who shall reign
therein, nor yet have a constant dwelling there; he may, nevertheless, enter as
a worshipper, and a subject of the great King; and may drink of the water of
life; feed on the fruits of the tree of life, and be healed by its leaves; and
be one of the happy inhabitants of the new earth, which God will create.


Minister. Yes, my friend: But though this Scripture may be easily reconciled
to the plan laid down in these dialogues; it contains such threatenings as are
very terrible indeed; and should m^^e us exceeding careful not to contradict
what God has here revealed, by adding vain interpretations of our own,
contrary to the sense of the text; nor in any wise to explain away, or weaken,
the force of either the threatenings or promises, set forth in this wondrous
book. The amazing torments which they shall feel that have these plagues added
to them, and the dreadful loss which they shall sustain that have their part
taken out of the book of life, and out of the holy city, cannot be even
conceived: And it being possible to forfeit this glorious portion entirely, and
for ever, made St. Paul warn the Hebrews in such a solemn manner as he does
throughout the whole epistle -- Oh, what affecting advice is the following! --
'Looking diligently, lest any man fail of the grace of God; lest any root of
bitterness, springing up trouble you, and thereby many be defiled: Lest there
be any fornicator, or profane person, as Esau; who, for one morsel of meat,
sold his birthwright. For ye know, how that afterward, when he would have
inherited the blessing, he was rejected: for he found no place of repentance,
though he sought it carefully, with tears,' Heb. xii. 15, 16, 17.

'Poor Esau repented too late,
'That once he his birthright despised;
'And sold for a morsel of meat,
'What could not too highly be prized.
'How great was his anguish, when told,
'The blessing he sought to obtain
'Was gone, with the birthright he sold;
'And none could recall it again!
Thus, though Esau, as well as Jacob, was blessed concerning things to come;
(See Heb. xi. ^o) yet the birthright, and the particular blessings connected
therewith, he lost for ever: And so it is possible that we may lose our parts
in the holy city, or ^o such threatenings would ever have been made. For it is
a maxim with me -- That God never warns, where there is no danger to fear; and
never encourages us to hope, where there is no possibility of obtaining.

As the glorious and universal deliverance of all men from the bondage of sin,
and their obtaining an inheritance in the new earth, was clearly pointed out by
the great year of Jubilee, under the law; in which every servant went out free,
and every man returned to his possession, and to his family; (See Lev. xxv.
10.) So, the possibility of being ^ut off from the holy city, for ever, was
pointed out by that notable exception, ver. 29, 30. -- 'And if a man sell a
dwelling house in a walled city, then he may redeem it within a whole year
after it is sold; within a full year, may he redeem it. And if it be not
redeemed within the space of a full year, then the house that is in the walled
city shall be established for ever to him that bought it, throughout his
generations: it shall not go out in the Jubilee.'

Something similar to this may be found in Rev. iii. 11. -- 'Behold, I come
quickly; hold that fast which thou have, that no man take thy crown:' And the
5th verse is also worthy of consideration -- 'He that overcomes, the same
shall be clothed in white raiment; and I will not blot out his name out of the
book of life; but I will confess his name before my Father, and before his
angels.' -- O, what promises are made to overcomers! That they shall eat of the
tree of life, which is in the midst of the Paradise of GOD; shall have a crown
of life; and shall not be hurt of the second death; shall eat of the hidden
manna; shall have a white stone, and a new name, which no man knows, saving
he that receives it; shall have power over the nations, etc. even as Christ
received of the Father: shall walk with him in white; shall be esteemed worthy
to be companions and friends of God; shall be clothed in white; shall have
their names enrolled among the followers of the Lamb, as called, chosen, and
faithful; shall be confessed by the Son of God, before his Father, and the holy
angels; shall be made pillars in the temple of God, and shall go no more out;
shall have the name of GOD written upon their foreheads, and the name of the
holy city, New Jerusalem, and Christ's new, heavenly name; shall sit with him
upon his throne, even as he overcame, and is set down with the Father, upon his
throne; shall inherit all things; shall be called the sons of God: See Rev. ii.
7, 10, 11, 17, 26, 27. iii. 4, 5, 12, 21. xvii. 14. xxi. 7.

The apostle assures us, that 'If (we are) children, then (are we) heirs; heirs
of God, and joint heirs with Christ; if so be that we suffer with him, that we
may be also glorified together.' And then adds -- 'For I reckon that the
sufferings of the present time, are not worthy to be compared with the glory
which shall be revealed in us,' Romans viii. 17, 18. 'When Christ, who is our
life, shall appear; then shall ye (his saints) also appear with him in glory,'
Col. iii. 4, 'We know, that when he shall appear, we shall be like him; for we
shall see him as he is,' 1 John iii. 2. But let none of those who believe
themselves the heirs of this kingdom, etc. dare to indulge themselves in sin,
under a notion that God can never cast them off; as some do.

A Preacher whom I once knew, encouraged this wickedly presumptuous disposition
so far, as, openly, to say: 'God cannot damn me: He can as soon cease to be
God, as he can cast me off: even though I should sin ever so much. If I should
kill a man, he could not damn me; nay, if I should kill all the men in the
world, he cannot damn me.' -- This man was rigid in trifles, religiously
scrupulous in frivolous things, such as dress, etc. yet he made traffic of the
human kind, engaged in war, and performed acts of cruelty and outrage with as
little tenderness as may be imagined* He long bloated himself with the notion
of God's peculiar favor -- but, near the close of his life, the displeasure of
the Almighty coming visibly upon him, the rhapsodist changed his tone, and
exclaimed, that God had forsaken him!

I would advise all men, of that bold, presuming, self-confident spirit, to
read and consider well those words, in Jer. xxii. 24. 'As I live, says
JEHOVAH, though Coniah, the son of Jehoiakim, king of Judah, were the signet
upon my right hand; yet would I pluck thee thence.'

Consider, first, who speaks, JEHOVAH: He not only speaks, but he confirms his
threatening with an oath; and, because he could swear by no greater, he swear
by himself, by his own life; 'As I live, says JEHOVAH, though Coniah, the son
of Jehoiakim, king of Judah;' though he is of the family of David, with whom I
have made an evarlasting covenant, ordered in all things, and sure; and though
he is anointed king over my people; I will not spare him: yea, though he 'were
the signet upon my right hand; yet would I pluck thee thence.' Signets, upon
the hands of ancient Persian monarchs, were those seals with which their
decrees were sealed and confirmed: so that no man could reverse them. Now, God
declares, that if this man was ever so dear, and as necessary, to him, as the
signet on the right hand of a king is to its owner; that though he was not able
to govern his kingdom without his assistance; though he had been the dearest
and most useful thing: he would entirely cast him off, for his transgressions.
And how much more so, if it be considered, that no man is necessary to God;
that man cannot be profitable to him; that neither our wickedness can hurt him,
nor our righteousness benefit him: (See Job xxii. 2, 3. xxxv. 6, 7, 8. Psalm.
xvi. 2, 3.) And that he threatens to punish the only family that he had known
on earth, for all their iniquities; Amos iii. 2. What have not those to fear,
who have been placed in high stations, entrusted with precious treasures, great
abilities, opportunities, etc. and have abused them! -- Let such read, and
seriously consider, St. Luke xii. 42 -- 48. St. Matthew. xxiv. 45 -- 51. 2 Pet.
ii. 20, 21, 22.


Friend. These considerations are, on one hand, glorious and sublime, beyond
conception; and, on the other, terrible, beyond description. But some say, That
if they are only admitted into the kingdom of God, and are not cast into the
lake of fire, it is the highest of their ambition: that they never aspire to be
kings and priests; nor to obtain a crown, throne, scepter, etc. And others say,
That if they are ever, to all eternity, to be delivered from their misery, that
it is a matter of little consequence to them whether they are followers of
Christ here, or not.


Minister. These kind of reflections are frequently thrown out by the enemies
of the Restoration, to cast an odium upon the doctrine: But if they were to
hear a man say; 'If I am just suffered to enter into this kingdom, and am not
condemned as a rebel, it is all I wish; I desire neither the riches, honors,
pleasures, conveniences, nor even the necessaries, that many of the
inhabitants enjoy: all I ask is to be exempted from the pain and shame of
public punishment:' And another was to add -- 'I can see little or no
difference between being made heir apparent to the crown, possessing all the
privileges, honors, dignities, etc. of a prince of the blood; and being
hanged, drawn, and quartered, for high treason; since even that punishment,
painful and shameful as it is, must come to an end:' I ask, Would they not
esteem both these men in a state of insanity, or worse; entirely devoid of all
sense and reason? Yet, this unreasonable language, is not worthy to be named in
the same day with that which you mentioned. The difference is so great, I
cannot find language to express it. I therefore consider all such persons as
madmen, with whom it is not worth while to reason; who understand not what they
say, nor whereof they affirm.


Friend. So they appear to me. But the system you have laid down, appears
equally calculated to check presumption and despair, and to cure all such
spiritual madness; provided that they will attend to it. -- But, what will you
say to the doctrine of annihilation? that may not be liable to the same
objections as endless damnation; and so the wicked may be punished with
everlasting destruction, and destroyed, soul and body, in hell; and yet, at
last, all beings that are in existence may be made happy. The Scripture seems,
in many places, to favor this idea; and the works of nature seem to confirm
it. For instance; many fruits and animals perish, before they arrive at
perfection; and why may it not be so with the souls and bodies of men? they are
no where said to be raised to incorruption, or immortality; but to be
destroyed, to be cast into the lake of fire, to be burnt up, root and branch:
to be consumed, devoured, burnt up as chaff, thorns, etc. I need not mention
particular texts; because the general part of the threatenings in the
Scriptures run in that style. And I have sometimes of late reasoned with
myself, that the second death must end either in the restoration or
annihilation of those who were cast therein; for there seemed something in
endless misery, that surpassed my belief, at times. But I could not satisfy
myself, whether the wicked would be finally restored to some degree of
happiness, or totally destroyed; and was apt to think the latter, as it seemed
a strange figure of speech to call destruction, Restoration. -- Pray, have you
ever thought upon this matter?


Minister. There are but three possible things that can befall those who are
cast into the second death; either endless misery, total annihilation, or
Restoration: a fourth cannot be thought upon; and but one of these can be true.
Now, where there are only three possibilities, of which only one can be true,
and one must be true; there are these two ways of discovering the truth: First,
if two of the propositions are proved to be absurd, the third must stand: 2dly,
if one be proved true, the others must fall to the ground of consequence. I
have taken the second method; and having showed that the doctrine of the
Restoration is not absurd, and therefore that it is true; consequently, the
others are false. -- But, besides this way of arguing, there are three
circumstances which prove to my satisfaction,^ at annihilation is not a truth.
1. That at the very time that the wicked are destroyed, they are said to be
tormented with fire and brimstone: and that they have no rest, day nor night;
and the continuance of this is for no short time, (as would probably be the
case, if the intention of God was only to destroy them out of being) but for
the age of ages. Rev. xiv. 10. 11. 2. They are put to shame, and perish, that
they may know the Lord; as I have noticed before: See Psalm. xxxiv. 16, 17.
lxxxiii. 16, 17, 18. -- and the observations I have made upon these passages in
the dialogues. 3. But that on which I dare venture the whole cause, is, that
God has absolutely promised to restore and bring again those whom he has
utterly destroyed.



Friend. Can you prove that? For if you can, it will settle the whole
controversy.


Minister. I trust I can, in many instances: But I will fix upon one that is
full to the purpose, and unexceptionable; and that is, the case of Sodom, and
her daughters, Gomorrah, Admah, and Zeboim, who, 'giving themselves over to
fornication, and going after strange flesh, are set forth for an example,
suffering the vengeance of eternal fire,' Jude 7.

As they are set forth for an example in their punishment, so also in their
restoration: For we may certainly argue, that if any of the human race shall be
annihilated, the inhabitants of Sodom, Gomorrah, etc. will be; as they were
condemned with an overthrow, and made an example to those who should after live
ungodly, 2 Pet. ii. 6. But these wicked nations shall have their captivity
returned; shall return to their former estate; and shall be received by
Jerusalem, as daughters, in the everlasting covenant: Jerusalem and her
daughters, more wicked themselves, than Sodom and her daughters, shall be
restored at the same time; shall remember their ways, and be ashamed; shall
never open mouth any more to glory over the meanest of mankind; when the great
JEHOVAH shall be pacified toward Jerusalem, for all that she has done, and
toward Sodom and Samaria, for all that they have done also, inasmuch as they
shall return from their long captivity, and be given to Jerusalem for
daughters; See Ezekiel. xvi. 53, 55, 61, 63.

Now, by Sodom and her daughters being returned from their long and dreadful
captivity, we must understand one of three things: either, first, the return of
their descendants; or, secondly, the restoration of the land whereon the cities
stood; or, lastly, the restoration of those very persons who were destroyed.

It cannot be the first; for there are none of their descendants remaining on
earth: all were destroyed by fire and brimstone: none of the inhabitants
escaped, Lot and his daughters excepted: who were only sojourners, and were
descendants of Terah, and relations to Abraham.

As it cannot be the first, let us try the second. A very ingenious gentleman
supposes, that in the time of the Millenium, the Dead Sea shall be turned into
land, and shall again become a beautiful, well-watered plain, and be given to
the posterity of Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob: For he argues, and seemingly very
justly, that as God promised Abraham all the land which he could see from the
place where he then stood; (See Genesis xiii. 14, 15, 16, 17.) and as the plain of
Sodom was in sight, it was included in the grant: and, though the Dead Sea now
occupies the place where those cities stood; yet God's promise cannot fail:
and, therefore, in the Millenium, the Dead Sea shall be swallowed up, and the
place shall become a fruitful plain. But whoever will read Ezekiel. xlvii. 8, 9,
10, 11. may plainly see, that the waters that shall issue out from under the
threshold of the holy house, shall be brought into the Dead Sea; and shall so
heal those deadly waters, that they shall become fruitful, and bring forth fish
in great abundance; exceeding many, like the great sea, which is now called the
Mediterranean; which fish shall be more useful for food, to the innumerable
inhabitants that shall then be in that happy country, than all the vegetables
that would grow there, even though the whole place was turned into a fruitful
garden.


Friend. But are you certain, that by the sea, is meant the Dead Sea, or Lake
of Sodom?


Minister. Yes. 1. Because all the other waters in those parts, produce great
plenty of excellent fish; and, therefore, need not healing. 2. Because fishers
shall stand upon the banks of the sea, from En-gedi even unto En-eglaim, places
that are well known to be contiguous to the Dead Sea; one of which is nearly at
the north-east corner, the other at the west end of the same. 3. The marshes,
and the miry places thereof, shall not be healed; but shall be given to salt,
as specimens of what the whole is at this time; which barren and deadly spots
shall remain, as standing evidences of the truth of Scripture, and the exact
fulfillment of prophecy.

Thus, as Sodom cannot be restored in her posterity; there being none remaining
on earth; neither shall the Dead Sea be turned into land, in the Millenium; it
follows, as the only remaining sense of the return of Sodom's captivity, that
those very inhabitants, who were destroyed by fire and brimstone from heaven,
shall be restored to a state of felicity: And thus, both the doctrine of
annihilation and endless damnation fall to the ground at once.


Friend. But as it is the second death, after the day of judgment, that is to
destroy the bodies and souls of the wicked in hell; perhaps, the inhabitants of
Sodom, Samaria, and Jerusalem, may be restored before that period, and may not
be cast into the lake of fire.


Minister. It is evident by our Savior's words, (for we must not contradict
any part of the Scriptures) that this will not be the case: for he says, That
it shall be more tolerable for the land ( that is, the inhabitants) of Sodom,
in the day of judgment, than for the cities where his gospel was preached, and
his miracles wrought, and yet the inhabitants remained impenitent: See St.
Matthew. xi. 24. x. 15. St. Mark, vi. 11. St. Luke, x. 12. From all which
passages it is evident, that the inhabitants of Sodom will be condemned in the
day of judgment, and punished in the lake of fire; and though their misery will
not be so great as that of the inhabitants of the cities where our Savior
preached, and performed his mighty works; yet they will be miserable in that
day: and, consequently, the return of their captivity is not to be expected,
till after the creation of the new earth. Therefore, it is plain, that the lake
of fire is not designed to annihilate those who are cast therein; since all
that are not found written in the book of life, at the day of judgment, will be
cast into the lake of fire. They whose names are in the book of life, will be
happy. The inhabitants of Sodom will be miserable, in some degree; therefore,
will not be found written in the book of life; consequently, will be cast into
the lake of fire. They will be restored; their captivity shall be returned:
therefore the lake of fire shall not annihilate them. They are set forth for an
example in their punishment; and consequently, in their Restoration. -- I need
not pursue this argument farther: It appears evident to me; and, till it be
fairly answered, I shall add nothing more.


Friend. I lately read a sermon written by one Mr. B --, in which the writer
brings many strong reasons for the eternity of Hell torments, most of which
have already been mentioned and answered in these Dialogues; but he makes use
of one which has not yet been brought under our consideration, which is, That
the damned are under the necessity of constantly committing fresh sin, and
therefore as they will always continue to sin against God, so of necessity
their punishment can never cease. Have you ever thought of this?


Minister. Yes, I have frequently heard it mentioned, but as it appears totally
void of all foundation in the Scripture, it hardly deserves any notice. The
objections that I feel myself concerned to treat with seriousness and respect,
and heartily to answer, are those which appear to be drawn from the book of
divine Revelation; but if I must attend to all those which the ingenuity of men
might raise against the doctrine of the Restoration, I should not only have a
very hard task, but should never know when I had done, and besides the
discourse would dwindle into trifling and conjectures, very unsuitable to the
nature and importance of such an awful serious subject. I must observe, that
this objection is nothing but a rash ungrounded assertion, or bold conjecture,
without the least foundation either in Scripture or reason, and if I was to
assert just the contrary, I cannot see why my assertion would not be a
sufficient answer. Nevertheless, lest it should be thought that any objection
can be raised, that cannot be fairly answered, and that I knowing the strength
of this, would willingly evade it, I will say a few words upon it. The
Scriptures universally hold forth the idea, that men will be judged, condemned,
and punished according to the deeds done in the body. God will render to every
man according to his deeds,' Romans ii. 6. 'For we must all appear before the
judgment seat of Christ, that every one may receive the things done in his
body, according to that he has done, whether it be good or bad,' 2 Cor. v. 10.

'And that servant which knew his Lord's will, and prepared not himself,
neither did according to his will, shall be beaten with many stripes: but he
that knew not, and did commit things worthy of stripes, shall be beaten with
few stripes,' St. Luke, xii. 47, 48. These, and all the passages that speak of
future punishment, constantly hold it forth as a just retribution for the evil
deeds done in this life; but never intimate any thing of what this objection
holds forth, of punishment being continued ad infinitum for crimes committed
hereafter. Besides, it is plain that punishments or corrections are intended to
stop men from sinning, and under the divine agency to take away their sins. 'By
this therefore shall the iniquity of Jacob be purged; and this is all the fruit
to take away his sin,' Isai. xxvii. 9. This is universally allowed to be the
design of troubles and sorrows in the present life, and why not in the next
state also? the Scripture says nothing to forbid this idea, but much to
encourage it; particularly that awful passage where the prophet says, 'And it
was revealed in mine ears by JEHOVAH of Hosts, Surely this iniquity shall not
be purged from you, TILL YE DIE, says the Lord God of hosts,' Isai. xxii. 14.
If then iniquity shall be purged away after death, it is certain that men shall
not always continue to sin in a future state, for they must cease to commit
iniquity, before it can be purged away. And though their punishments may at
first cause them to rage, (as we see is frequently the case in this world) yet
shall they continue un^^ ^he most stubborn shall be entirely subdued and
humbled.


Friend. The^e is another argument of this same kind, viz. that is not founded
upon any particular text of Scripture, which is directly contrary to the one
you have been answering, which I have formerly thought unanswerable in favor
of the doctrine of endless punishment, which is the infinity of sin, being
against an infinite object, containing infinite hatefulness, and justly
therefore deserving infinite punishment. Sin is a crime of infinite magnitude,
because God is a Being of infinite majesty and perfection. Every crime justly
demerits punishment proportioned to its malignity! and consequently every
offense against God demerits infinite punishment. No mere creature can ever
suffer an infinity of punishment in any limited duration. It follows therefore,
that a sinner deserves to be eternally punished. Farther, every man is under
infinite obligations to devote himself to the service of God, his infinitely
glorious Creator, Preserver and Benefactor. To violate an infinite obligation,
is to commit a crime of infinite malignity. A crime of infinite malignity,
deserves infinite punishment. Can it ever be proved then that everlasting, or
endless punishment is not the proper desert of a life of sin? I have often
said, That this argument trite and common as it is, never was, nor ever would
be fairly answered; nevertheless, I am willing to hear what you have to say
upon it.


Minister. As this argument is often urged, as of the greatest weight, and as
you have stated it in its greatest possible force, I shall endeavor to answer
it fairly, and particularly.

If sin is infinite, then we must ascribe to it one of the perfections of the
Deity, which strikes me as something absurd, if not something worse: sin, a
privation, an act of a worm, infinite? Actions must, in my opinion take their
denomination from the actors, and not from the objects. Infinite actions, or
actions of infinite magnitude require infinite power to perform them. If sin is
of infinite magnitude, goodness it more so, as deriving a power from God to the
performance of it. But if you grant that David spoke in the name of the
Mediator in Psalm xvi. you may be at once furnished with a proof, that even
goodness, in the highest state in which it ever was exhibited in the world, was
not considered as of infinite magnitude by the great performer. 'Thou have said
unto Jehovah, Thou art my Lord: my goodness extends not to thee. But to the
saints that are in the earth, and to the excellent, in whom is all my delight,'
Ver. 2, 3. If acts of goodness were of infinite magnitude they must extend to
God, but the speaker, in these words, be he who he may, David or Christ, was
careful to let us know that he did not conceive his acts of goodness infinite.
And if acts of goodness are not infinite, it would be highly absurd to call
evil actions infinite, which proceed wholly from the creature.

I grant indeed that there is a passage of Scripture which mentions the word
infinite as belonging to sin and iniquity, but then it is mentioned in such a
connection as shows it to be used as Josephus frequently mentions it, for a
very great multitude. And t^us it is used by many good authors, who certainly
do not mean to use it in the first and proper sense of the word. The Sacred
Writer, in the passage alluded to, takes particular care to guard us against
any such idea, as though sin was of infinite magnitude, or even virtuous and
righteous actions, which approach far nearer to infinity, as having their
source from the fountain of infinite goodness. For Eliphaz says, 'Can a man be
profitable unto God, as he that is wise may be profitable unto himself? Is it
any pleasure to the Almighty, that thou art righteous? or is it gain to him
that thou make thy ways perfect? Will he reprove thee for fear of thee? Will
he enter with thee into judgment? Is not thy wickedness great? and thine
iniquities infinite?' Job xxii. 2 -- 5. And language very similar to the above
is used by Elihu, 'If thou sinnest, what do thou against him? or if thy
transgressions be multiplied, what do thou unto him? If thou be righteous,
what give thou him? or what receives he of thine hand? Thy wickedness may
hurt a man as thou art, and thy righteousness may profit the son of man,' Job
xxxv. 6, 7, 8.

These expressions, if they teach any thing, I should think expressly declare,
that no actions of men can by any means be of infinite magnitude, in the sense
in which we commonly understand that word; though their numbers and magnitudes
may be so great as to be styled infinite, as the word is sometimes used.

You assert, in consequence of your ideas of infinite sin, that every offense
against God demerits infinite punishment. If the case be so, does it not tend
entirely to take away the distinction which God has made between sins of
infirmity and sins of malice, sins of ignorance and sins of wilfulness, lesser
and greater sins? All sins are offenses against God, and if every offense
against God is of infinite magnitude, how can any be greater? and thus the
distinctions are entirely destroyed, and, all sins will be esteemed equal,
contrary to the whole tenor of the Scriptures.

If every offense against God demerits infinite punishment, then it will
follow, that God cannot render to any according to their ways, nor punish them
as their iniquities deserve, unless they are doomed to endless misery; what
then will become of all those threatenings where God threatens to punish people
for all their iniquities, and yet to show favor to them afterward? This is
impossible upon your plan, for none can ever receive all the punishment due to
their sins during numberless ages. Yet if the word of God be true, he can deal
with transgressors as they have done, and yet be gracious to them afterward,
'For thus says Adonai JEHOVAH, I will even deal with thee as thou have done,
which have despised the oath in breaking the covenant. Nevertheless, I will
remember my covenant with thee in the days of thy youth, and I will establish
unto thee an everlasting covenant. -- That thou may remember and be
confounded, and never open thy mouth any more because of thy shame, when I am
pacified toward thee for all that thou have done, says Adonai JEHOVAH,' Ezekiel.
xvi. 59, 60, 63.

Here is an instance to the purpose, of those whose sins were of the deepest
die, and to whom God threatens to deal as they had done, and to punish them for
all their numerous and aggravated transgressions, and yet to remember mercy for
them afterward, and to be pacified toward them for all that they had done.
All which things would be absolutely impossible, according to your ideas. In
many other parts of Scripture God promises to render to transgressors according
to their works and ways, and ye^ to be afterward gracious unto them. And in
one place, at least, where God is declaring the great mercies which he will
manifest unto the children of Israel, in returning them to their own land, and
causing them to dwell safely therein, he says, 'And first, I will recompense
their iniquity, and their sin double: because they have defiled my land, they
have filled mine inheritance with the carcases of their detestable and
abominable things,' Jer. xvi. 18. What do you think of this? If every offense
is of infinite magnitude, and deserves infinite punishment, which can never be
fully executed, then how can God punish a people for all their iniquiti^s, and
do to the greatest sinners as they have done, yea, and recompense their
iniquity, and their sin double first, and then be gracious to them, and love
them, and be pacified toward them afterward? And the prophet Isaiah says,
'Comfort ye, comfort ye, my people, says your God. Speak ye comfortably to
Jerusalem, and cry unto her, that her warfare is accomplished, that her
iniquity is pardoned; for she has received of the LORD'S hand DOUBLE FOR ALL
HER SINS,' Isai. xl. 1, 2. Here a fact is said to be accomplished, which upon
your scheme can never be done to all eternity; for if every offense against God
is of infinite magnitude, and deserves infinite punishment, none can ever have
received single for one of their sins, far less DOUBLE for ALL.

And therefore nothing can possibly be more evidently contrary to Scripture
than your trite and common argument, that as, every sin is of infinite
magnitude, so it justly demerits infinite punishment, which as no mere creature
can bear, must necessarily subject all who are recompensed according to their
own doings to endless misery.

Besides, If I was to grant you, contrary to Scripture, reason, and common
sense, that every offense is of infinite magnitude, and naturally deserves
infinite punishment: How would you prove from that the certainty of endless
misery? Do you make nothing of the reconciliation which our Lord Jesus has made
for all sinners, and for all sins?

Let me ask you seriously, Did not Christ make a full and complete offering and
propitiation for the sins of the whole world? Is it not certain that his merits
were far greater than the demerits of all mankind? Is he not the Lamb of God,
who takes away the sin of the world? If Christ died for all men, without
exception, as you grant, and removed all their iniquities, and bore them away,
and reconciled all to God by his death while they were enemies: much more as he
has paid so great a price for their ransom, he will recover them out of their
lost estate, and save them by his life. 'Where sin abounded, grace did (or
shall) much more abound. That as sin has reigned unto death, even so might
grace reign through righteousness unto eternal life, by Jesus Christ our Lord,'
Romans v. 20, 21.

I conclude, that let sin be ever so great, the grace of God is greater: and if
you will have it that sin is of infinite magnitude, I hope you will not deny
the propitiation of Jesus Christ, which he made for all sins, the same
character. Therefore if you magnify sin, and insist upon the greatness of its
demerit, I will endeavor to magnify the all powerful Redeemer above it, and
speak of his power to redeem all the human race, for whom he shed his blood.
And then you will gain nothing in favor of the doctrine of endless damnation,
by all your arguments founded upon the infinity of sin: Christ being far more
infinite to save, than sin can be to destroy: and as he has undertaken to
redeem and bring back those who were lost, there is no danger of his failing to
perform it.


Friend. I must confess that what you have said on this head entirely convinces
me, that we cannot found the eternity of punishment, upon the infinity of sin;
and you have given me more satisfaction upon many points in these conversations
than I ever expected to receive. I am indeed at length almost persuaded to
receive your sentiments, though I once thought that it was impossible to answer
all my objections, yet you have gone far toward it. Nay, I cannot at present
recollect any thing material, but what you have answered. I would not however
be too hasty in adopting this system, but after your example consider it well.
But there is certainly something more grand, beautiful, and harmonious in this
view than can be found in any other scheme; for both the other systems end in
darkness and black night, one in endless damnation, and the other in gloomy
annihilation. But on your plan light rises out or obscurity, and a glorious day
succeeds the darkest scenes. This view of things sets the Book of divine
Revelation in the most pleasing light, and appears, for aught any thing that I
can see, consistent with the Divine perfections. But why, since you believe the
universal Restoration, do you not mention it more freely and fully, in your
public discourses?


Minister. On the other hand, some ask me, Why do you ever mention it at all in
your sermons; since it is not essential to salvation to believe it? To them I
give these answers. 1. St. Paul declared to Timothy, that this universal Gospel
of God's being the Savior, or Restorer, of all men, but especially of those
that believe, was a faithful saying, and worthy of all acceptance; and that
they labored and suffered reproach, because they trusted in God, as the
universal Savior. But he was so far from being ashamed of this belief, that he
said to Timothy, 'These things command and teach,' 1 Timothy iv. 9, 10, 11. And so
am I determined to do, at proper opportunities; notwithstanding the reproach
and contempt awaiting me for so doing. 2. Though it is frequently said to be a
matter of little or no consequence, if true; yet, if it be any part of the
record God has given of his Son, (as I think I have proved) we are in danger
of making him a liar, if we believe it not: See 1 John v. 9, 10, 11. 3. Though
you may be Christians, and not believe it; yet I cannot; though once I could
also: But now the evidences of its truth appear so plain to my mind, that it
would be criminal in me not to believe it; and since I do believe it, would it
not be highly dishonest in me to deny it? I have never done so yet, when asked;
and God forbid, that I should be ashamed to publish, what he has commanded to
be made known. 4. I have commonly acted merely on the defensive, and I never
should, that I know of, have preached it in public, or but rarely, far less
have written upon the subject, had it not been represented as a dangerous and
destructive heresy; and people been cautioned against hearing me, on that
account. 5. I have been frequently desired to preach upon the subject,
expressly; and could not well refuse, without betraying a cowardly disposition.
6. I ask, Who is the best man; he who preaches the truth contrary to his
judgment, for interest, or to gain applause; or he that fairly speaks as he
thinks, without disguise; although he knows that it will displease his best
friends on earth; even upon the supposition that he errs, in many points? If
there be an heretic in the world, it is the man, who, for the love of money or
applause, or through the fear of man, preaches that to others which he himself
does not believe. 'He that is such, is subverted, and sins; being condemned
of himself,' Tit. iii. 11. 7. If we are to hold forth nothing to mankind, but
what all are agreed in, we must discourse upon very few subjects: for I do not
recollect so much as one, but what people either disagree about the thing
itself, or the manner of explaining and holding it: No! not even the being and
perfections of God: nor any point of doctrinal, experimental, or even practical
religion. 8. We are to endeavor to teach mankind what they know not, as well
as to confirm them in what they are already taught; should keep back nothing
that may be profitable to them; should give meat to strong men, as well as milk
to babes, and should not shun to declare the whole counsel of God. We ought to
justify the ways of God to men, to show the necessity and harmony of Divine
Revelation, and take pains to convert infidels; all which things are more
promoted by this view than any other.


As to your question, why I do not dwell more upon it? I answer: 1. There are a
thousand other subjects in the Bible, besides this; and all deserve
consideration, according to their weight and importance. 2. I have an utter
aversion to going always in the same round of matter or manner; and, therefore
I frequently vary in both. 3. There are many other subjects of more present
importance than the belief of this; such as, repentance, faith, hope, love,
obedience, etc. and therefore ought to be more frequently insisted on, in
proportion to their present use. 4. There are many scenes of providence and
grace to take place in the universe, before the general Restoration; such as
the Millenium, the calling of the Jews, the universal spread of the gospel
through the earth, etc. These things are much nearer, and therefore the
Scripture speaks more of them; and what God most speaks of, in his word, we
should discourse of most to the people. 5. This doctrine, though it may have
its use in converting men; and certainly enables those who believe it, to set
forth the terrors of the Lord, and his mercies, in a more striking manner than
otherwise they could; yet it is chiefly useful in comforting the people of God,
and, in part, relieving them from that bitter anguish which their tender minds
feel, from the consideration of the vast numbers that perish; and, therefore,
may not be so proper for a popular audience as many other subjects. 6. The plan
of this grand Restoration is so vast, includes so many different and seemingly
contradictory dispensations, that it cannot be fairly stated, and fully
defended, in one sermon, and especially the objections answered; and many
persons are not capable of taking in and digesting at once, so many subjects as
are necessary to the understanding of this matter, and have not patience to
attend to a long series of demonstrations, arguments, and proofs; and,
therefore, this doctrine should not be introduced by any man, in any place,
unless he has opportunity to give it a fair investigation; and, therefore, I
never mention it at all, at my first preaching in any place; nor unless I have
sufficient opportunities to discuss it. 7. Christ says to his disciples -- 'I
have yet many things to say unto you; but ye cannot bear them now,' St. John
xvi. 12. And St. Paul says -- 'And I, brethren, could not speak unto you as
unto spiritual, but as unto carnal; even as unto babes in Christ: I have fed
you with milk, and not with meat; for hitherto ye were not able to bear it;
neither yet now are ye able,' 1 Cor. iii. 1, 2. 'Strong meat belongs to them
that are of full age; even those who, by reason of use, have their senses
exercised, to discern both good and evil,' Heb. v. 14. Therefore, as the
Savior and his apostles adapted their subjects and discourses to the
circumstances of their hearers, and treated them in a gentle manner; so should
we. Prudence, patience, and care, should always be used in discoursing on a
doctrine so deep and awful as this; and, especially, as it has been so little
known of late ages. 8. I would wish to establish well the first principles of
Christianity, before I meddle with any thing else: and as to the doctrine of
the Restoration, I would rather that it should seem to be naturally inferred
from truths already known, than delivered as an independent system: I,
therefore, seldom or ever make it a leading point in my discourses; but
sometimes lead to it, as a natural consequence of what has been said. After
all, I would choose that men should discover it themselves, by carefully reading
the Scriptures, without prejudice, believing them to be strictly true: by
living in love toward God and man; by walking in humility, often reflecting on
their former estate; and constantly viewing the sufficiency of Christ, and the
boundless love of their great Creator: rather than to learn it of any man, far
less still, of such an unworthy worm as I am. 9. As far as I know my own heart,
truth, in love, is my constant aim. I am unconnected with any party; and am not
so prejudiced in favor of any thing that I hold, but that I would willingly be
convinced in any thing, by proper evidence; and when so convinced, I am ready
to retract publicly: As, therefore, I do not feel myself personally interested
to support the system, right or wrong; I have, therefore, dwelt much less upon
it, than most preachers do upon their particular sentiments. 10. When I first
embraced these views, I was obliged to give some account of my reasons; and I
chose rather to do it by writing than preaching: Accordingly, I published my
sentiments, and answers to many objections; which publications being in the
hands of those to whom I preached, made it less necessary for me to discourse
upon those matters in public, or even in private, as I could refer to what I
had written: and with the same view, I am inclined to publish these familiar
discourses, which we have had together; after which it will be less necessary
than ever for me to preach the Restoration publicly; yet, I will not wholly
avoid it, at convenient times, and in proper circumstances. 11. Lastly, as I
know so much of the nature of man, as to be sensible that he turns, with
disgust and loathing, from what is perpetually crammed down his throat; but
relishes that which he falls upon, as it were accidentally, and comes into by
little and little: I have always made it a rule never to introduce it, in
public or private, unless where it was earnestly desired, nor ever to continue
it long together; and, above all, never to question people upon the subject,
after discoursing upon it: asking them, saying, Do you believe it? etc. Nor
would I ever wish to press them with the arguments at once, and oblige them
immediately to yield; as this kind of conduct, so far from answering any good
purposes, commonly sets them against what is thus intruded upon them. It is the
best way to give time and leisure to persons, whom you would wish to convince;
and let them exercise their own faculties.



Friend. I must confess that what you have advanced is highly satisfactory to
me, and I trust will be so to many others, who may read these conversations,
which I hope to have the pleasure of seeing in print before long; and in the
mean time, I wish for a blessing to attend your labors, and that you may be an
instrument of much good to mankind in your day and generation, and that you may
obtain a crown of life from the Lord the righteous Judge, in the day of his
appearing.


Minister. I thank you most kindly for your benevolent wishes, I heartily wish
the same blessing may come to yourself. And if I have been an instrument of
giving you any satisfaction, let all the glory be to God, but let me have an
interest in your prayers.


FINIS.

