THE RISE, PROGRESS, AND PRESENT STATE OF MEDICINE. A DISCOURSE, Delivered at
CONCORD, July 6th, 1791. BEFORE THE MIDDLESEX MEDICAL ASSOCIATION.

BY B. WATERHOUSE, M. D. PROFESSOR OF THE THEORY AND PRACTICE OF PHYSIC IN THE
UNIVERSITY OF CAMBRIDGE, AND VICE PRESIDENT OF THE ASSOCIATION.

CONCORDIA PARVAE RES CRESCUNT. Sallust. BOSTON: Printed by THOMAS and JOHN
FLEET, M,DCC,XCII.

AT a Meeting of the Middlesex Medical Association, held at Concord, July 6th,
1791.
VOTED, That the Hon. Oliver Prescott, James Winthrop, Esquire and the Rev. Ezra
Ripley, be a Committee to wait on Doctor Benjamin Waterhouse, and return him
the Thanks of this Association for his ingenious and learned Discourse,
delivered this Day, and request of him a Copy for the Press.

Attest. Joseph Hunt, Secretary.

SHOULD this Discourse ever be read beyond the bounds of the Massachusetts, it
perhaps would be necessary to inform the reader, that the MIDDLESEX Medical
Association is so called from it is being composed of practitioners living in
the County of Middlesex only.

This county deviates a little from a square, but it is area is nearly equal to
a square of forty miles on a side. It is divided into forty one towns, and from
a late enumeration is found to contain rather more than forty two thousand
inhabitants.

The principal towns are Cambridge, Concord, Charlestown, Medford and
Watertown. CAMBRIDGE is distinguished by the UNIVERSITY. A Society, that has
for more than a century furnished supplies of Statesmen, qualified to support
the rights of mankind, and men eminent in every branch of literature.

CONCORD, a town pleasant and flourishing, is situated nearly in the center of
the county. CHARLESTOWN is connected with BOSTON by a bridge fifteen hundred
feet long. Cambridge, Concord, and Charlestown, were rendered famous by the
military events of 1775 and 1776.

Middlesex is watered by five rivers; the Merimac, the Charles, the Concord,
the Nashua, and the Mistic.

The southern and northern sides of the country are hilly; but cannot be
considered as mountainous, few of the hills exceeding an hundred feet in
height, being generally wooded or cultivated quite to the summit.

The climate is very fine, the air generally serene, and the temperature mild.
The extreme variation of Fahrenheit's thermometer may be considered as an
hundred degrees in an year; but it is in very few instances that in the course
of the year it reaches either extreme. Ninety two degrees may be considered as
the extreme of summer heat; and five or six degrees below 0 as that of the
winter cold. Instances are to be found of it is exceeding these limits, but they
are so rare, as to be exceptions to the general rule. At Newton, which joins to
Cambridge, the bills of mortality have been kept for a series of years with
great exactness. By them it appears that the annual number of those who have
died within ten years, past, is one out of seventy, and for the nine years
preceding one out of eighty. In London and Paris it is computed that one out
of twenty die annually. In Boston one out of forty five,

An opinion has prevailed that the Americans fall short of the longevity of the
inhabitants of Europe. After premising that we are less attentive in collecting
the instances of long life here than in Europe, we shall enumerate a few
extracts from the newspapers during 1789 and 1790.

Mrs. Kinzey, N. Car. aged 114. Mr. Elithrop, Con. 105. Mr. Carter, Con. 107.
Mr. Williams, Con. 101. Mrs. Dowset, Con. 103. Mrs. Dixon, Mass. 101, and Mrs.
Newton, 106, whose mother was 113, and sister, 102. Mrs. Chapman, Mass. 101.
Mr. Hayley, N. Hamp. 101, and Mrs. Ulrick, 105. Mr. Van Verts, Albany, 124. Dr.
Vanlear, Penn. 104, and Mr. Montz, 100, and Mrs. Brenneison, 100.

About forty years ago died at Newton, a Mrs. Davis, aged 116. For more
particulars see the Rev. Jonathan Homer's Century Sermon, page 23.




Apples, pears, peaches, cherries, grapes, and currants are among our fruits,
and by cultivation arrive at great perfection. The three last sorts are
indigenous, but it is not so certain of the rest. The oak, chestnut, walnut,
oilnut, pine, maple, button or plane tree, elm, ash and birch are among the
trees that variegate our forests and beautify the face of the country.

The best part of the foregoing description is extracted from a more particular
account of Middlesex, written by Judge Winthrop, which we hope he will publish
at large.

An Abstract from the Constitution of the MIDDLESEX MEDICAL ASSOCIATION.
I. AS health is a blessing which sweetens all enjoyments, and long life that
which all men naturally desire, so he who labors to teach his fellow creatures
how to secure the one, and to attain the other, may justly be numbered among
the benefactors of mankind.

II. SEEING, the mind and body have such a mutual influence on each other,
that, examined apart, they can never be thoroughly understood, it is incumbent
on every one who takes upon himself the title of Physician, to examine and
study the constitution and influence of both, in order that he may preserve to
his fellow creatures that greatest of blessing, a sound mind in a sound body.

III. IT is the duty of the Physician, by a skilful direction of the powers of
human nature, to preserve as long as possible, the life, the health, and
faculties committed to his care. The charge is important, the field extensive,
and the calling honorable.

IV. To qualify himself for such noble purposes, it is his duty to examine the
animal economy, to attend to the outward operations of nature, and to the
qualities and operations of medicines, in order to investigate the causes of
diseases, and to learn their cure.

V. As of all natural bodies, none are found so variously compounded as the
human; so the inquiry into its nature, is to be placed among the most subtle
and difficult of studies. The most improved and readiest measures ought
therefore to be pursued to facilitate an inquiry so difficult.

VI. THE Medical Art is the offspring of experience: yet life is too short,
occasion too sudden, experiment too dangerous, and judgment too insufficient
for any one person to acquire a competent knowledge of diseases, and their
remedies, by his own experience.

VII. As Physic therefore must grow up from a succession of discoveries and
experiments handed down from generation to generation, it is evident, that any
individual, however warmly disposed to promote the utility of his profession,
can do but little, unless he has the united observations of others to assist
him. Hence the expediency of Societies and Associations.

VIII. OF the various methods of attaining and diffusing Medical knowledge,
none is found so effectual or desirable, as a friendly intercourse and
association of its professors, especially when their principal aim is mutual
improvement.

IX. MOREOVER, by thus associating, such liberal and generous sentiments will
probably be cultivated, as tend to eradicate prejudices and unworthy practices,
which at times have not only disgraced the profession, but injured mankind.

X. CONVINCED of these things, and of the necessity of making observations
ourselves, instead of relying on those made in a distant quarter of the globe,
WE, whose names are hereunto subscribed, do form ourselves into a Society, by
the name of the MIDDLESEX MEDICAL ASSOCIATION, and do agree to the regulations
following:

I.
THERE shall be annually chosen, by ballot, a PRESIDENT, VICE PRESIDENT,
SECRETARY, Three COUNSELORS and a TREASURER.

XIII. As the other twelve articles relate merely to the internal regulations,
and differ very little from those of similar societies, they are omitted. --

AND it shall be the duty of each member to promote the interest of this
Association, to advance its honor and its reputation. He shall vindicate and
support the character of each associate, as far as justice and propriety will
admit, ever esteeming it dishonorable to advance his own reputation on the
ruin of another.

XIV.
Whereas manifold inconveniences have arisen, from the want of a regular and
uniform method of educating pupils in physic, especially in the country,
whereby candidates for practice, when offered to the regularly appointed
examiners, have been embarrassed and obstructed, though otherwise not ill
informed: It is therefore the desire of this Association to remedy as speedily
and prudently as possible, an inconvenience so loudly complained of.

XV.
As this matter may not have been sufficiently considered, it will not perhaps
be useless to remark, that for want of regularity and method, the young mind
often perplexes itself, and makes not an advantageous use of the real helps
within its reach. Much the greatest difficulty the student has to encounter, is
to know how to avoid those who are only the compilers and transcribers of those
who went before them, and apply himself to the few original authors. The
systems of physic are mostly compilations, and differ from one another, rather
in neatness, order, and elegance, than in any thing material. Hence the
expediency of using a set of approved authors in the various branches of
medicine. It is therefore earnestly recommended to each and every member of
this Association, to direct his pupils to as regular and uniform course of
study as may be, and to imitate, as nearly as possible, the order now
established in the most eminent medical schools.

XVI.
In order that the education of pupils should be more uniform and reputable, it
is the sense of this Association, that before a person be qualified to enter
upon the study of physic, it is necessary that he have not only an accurate
knowledge of his native tongue, but so much of the Latin and Greek, as to
translate them by the help of a dictionary.

XVII.
Before any pupil offer himself to the Censors of the Massachusetts Medical
Society, for examination, the Physician who recommends him shall be certain
that he has such a knowledge of Anatomy as is necessary to understand the
animal economy, both in its sound and morbid state; likewise an acquaintance
with diseases, and the usual method of treating them; also a knowledge of the
principles of Chemistry, Materia Medica, and the operation of remedies -- an
acquaintance with at least the elementary parts of Mathematics, of Natural
History, and Natural Philosophy, although not absolutely enjoined, are deemed
very desirable.

XVIII.
The advantage of teaching Physic by Lectures is confessed by the usage of all
Europe, but has never been enjoyed among us until within a few years: WE being
persuaded that great advantages will result from such a systematical mode of
teaching all the branches of the medical art, do hereby recommend to all such
as are or may become our pupils, to attend the Medical Lectures which are
annually given at our UNIVERSITY at CAMBRIDGE.

XIX.
By such a procedure, the pupil will be fitted for examination by the Medical
Professors in the UNIVERSITY, or by the Censors of the MASSACHUSETTS MEDICAL
SOCIETY.

XX.
By these and similar modes, this Association hope not only to inspire and
diffuse a spirit of order and regularity in medical education, but to enlarge
the sphere of it; being thoroughly convinced that it is only from such a
system, that quackery can be banished from the land, and the honest physician
rise to usefulness and eminence.

QUERIES put to each Member at the opening of every meeting.
1. HAVE you met with any thing in any medical author, since our last meeting,
suitable to be communicated to this association?

2. What was the last Epidemic that visited the district where you reside, and
what were the remedies particularly serviceable in it?

3. Do you know of any instance, since our last meeting, of the resuscitation
of any one apparently dead; and the method pursued?

4. Is there any difficult point in the theory or practice of physic, which you
would gladly have discussed at this time?

5. Do you know of any deserving beginner in the practice of physic, too young
to become a member, whom this association can any way serve or encourage?

6. Have you any weighty affair in hand as a physician, in which you think the
advice of this association may be of service?

7. Do you think of any thing at present in which this association may be
serviceable to mankind, to their country, or to themselves?

The OFFICERS of the MIDDLESEX MEDICAL ASSOCIATION for the year 1792.
PRESIDENT. Honble OLIVER PRESCOTT, M. D. VICEPRESIDENT. BENJAMIN WATERHOUSE,
M. D. COUNSELORS. Honble JOHN BROOKS, JOSIAH BARTLETT, M. B. ISAAC HURD, A. M.
TREASURER. TIMOTHY MINOT, A. M. SECRETARY. JOSEPH HUNT, A. M.
ON THE RISE, PROGRESS, AND PRESENT STATE OF MEDICINE, A DISCOURSE.
IN complying with the request of this association, I perceive nothing more
difficult, than to bestow on what is common the grace of novelty, and to render
so dry a subject as physic in any degree entertaining to a mixed audience. Our
theme leading to the frigid and formal style of a lecture, rather than the
animated strains of an oration.

THE history of the medical art is so well known to the members of this
society, that my task will be rather to remind than inform them: Yet what
subject can be more suitable for our first discourse, than the history of the
rise and progress of the HFALING ART: That art whose improvement and diffusion
is the end and aim of our association?

THE origin of most arts is involved in fable, and wrapped in great obscurity;
that of medicine seems covered with almost an impenetrable veil. Until the
greater purposes of society were answered, the necessities of mankind supplied,
architecture and other necessary arts introduced, men of genius had neither
leisure nor inclination to record their theories of the origin of mankind, and
the rise of the arts. The remedies first sought for, in the earlier ages, were
probably some mild, tenacious, plastic substances, suitable to defend a wound
from air, and secure it from external injuries. Accident and random experiment
may have increased the number of such simple remedies, which may have been
treasured up by a particular family, or some individual of a tribe. But at
these early periods of society, when letters were unknown, what was once out of
sight was lost forever.

IF we search the oldest book we have for information on this subject, we
search in vain. This will not appear so extraordinary to those, who reflect
that the sacred history is confined to but a part of Asia, and a small portion
of the north east part of Africa; and that it is so concise in regard to time,
that the history of twenty centuries is comprised in eleven short chapters. See
Genesis.


WE find the author of these annals, the hebrew legislator and general, giving
directions for the health of his people; but no mention is made of Physicians,
as a distinct profession, until the embalming of Jacob. Prior to these
writings, is the era of absolute darkness; and we have no account by which we
can judge of ancient tradition, unless we admit that of the Chinese, whose
great antiquity, corroborated by astronomical observations, carries the history
of the human race a vast way further back. Yet their slight acquaintance with
anatomy, and their ignorance of chemistry, render their great knowledge in
physic as doubtful as their chronology.

AS we receive so little light from these ancient prose writers, let us turn
toward those earlier luminaries the Poets.

POETRY has every where preceded prose, and the powers of the imagination
always have been indulged, before the operations of the judgment were
exercised. Those early effusions of genius were epic poetry, or exaggerated
history, recording battles, heroes and ghosts; dwelling on the mavelous, and
often the incredible. In these fabulous ages it was the custom to dress
instruction in the garb of allegory. Thus the Egyptian, Grecian and Roman poets
attributed the origin of the Healing Art to the Sun, who was called Orus by the
Egyptians, Phoebus and Apollo by the Greeks and Romans. Conceiving the sun to
be the parent of life and cheerfulness, whose genial warmth and vivifying
energy animated and sustained all nature; they adored it as the resplendent
source of light, life, health and joy. They saw nothing on earth which bore so
striking a resemblance to this heavenly luminary, as he, who relieved pain,
dissipated melancholy, dispelled diseases, and prolonged life. Thence they
concluded that the first physician was an offspring or emanation of the "Prime
cheerer light." Accordingly we find the classical poets representing Apollo, as
the primary GOD of physic; and his son Aesculapius whom they also deified, as
its first professor. They likened the human body to a delicate musical
instrument, easily disordered, and therefore united music and medicine in
Apollo. They conceived that the office of the physician, was to tune this
complicated organ the body, to make every part act in concert, and reduce the
whole to harmony. See Bacon de augment. Scientiar.


THE person of Aesculapius is so envelloped in fable, that we scarcely know
when, or where he lived. He is confounded by some with Melampus, who lived
about 100 years after Moses, and who having traveled into Egypt, brought from
thence into Greece, not only the art of physic, but much of their theology and
superstition, together with their magic or divination.

FROM every account we must conclude, that Aesculapius was highly venerated for
his knowledge and usefulness. The ancients not only placed him among their
GODS, but erected more than sixty temples to his honor in Greece, and in the
Grecian colonies. These Aesculapian temples were the first schools of physic.
People resorted to them from all quarters, in order to be healed of their
diseases. Remarkable cures were engraven and hung round their walls in form of
votive tablets; The learned Graterus has preserved several of these
inscriptions. One is as follows: "Lucio affecto lateris dolor, et desperato ab
omnibus hominibus, oraculum reddidit Deus. Veniret; et ex tribomo tolleret
cinerem, et una cum vino comisceret, and poneret supra latus. Et convaluit; et
public gratias egit Deo; et populus congratulatus est illi." What a pompous
account of that application so frequently employed by our country people, a bag
of ashes for the side ach!
and from thence were sent out the first clinical practitioners.

AMONG the ruder nations, the priest, the conjuror, and the physician were
united in the same person. Diodorus relates that it was the custom anciently to
apply to the professors of vaticination to obtain health. L. v. p. 235. We find
in scripture, that when Asa applied to the physicians, it was condemned as an
impiety. Chron. xvi 12. Jeroboam sent his wife to the prophet when his son
Ahijah was sick.
It was so among the Egyptians, Babylonians and Grecians; among the people of
India, where they are called Brachmans; among the ancient Germans, French, and
Britons, where they were called Druids. It was so among the Mexicans and
Peruvians; and obtains at this day among our Aboriginals. The untutored mind is
apt to ascribe all dismal diseases and shocking accidents to the influence of
invisible beings: and the priests, not only cherished this opinion, but
studiously inculcated, that their cure must be sought from the Deities, through
the interposition of their ministers.

THE state of physic in Greece, at the period celebrated by Homer, was very
similar to what it now is among the aboriginals of this continent. Like their
heroes, our Indians know how to treat wounds; and when baffled in the cure of
any terrible disorder, have recourse like the Grecians, to incantations and
enchantments. See Homer's account of the plague in the Grecian camp, B. I.
They likewise derived their skill from the same source, random trials, or
empericism.

THE Philosophers of Greece were so much engaged in the vain and useless search
after the primary matter, that they neglected medicine, which was so far from
being digested into a system, that no one gave it sufficient attention to make
it a distinct profession. This was the case till about 400 years before Christ,
when the famous HYPPOCRATES made collections from the public records of cure,
the inscriptions or tablets in the Aesculapian temples, where he was educated,
reduced the whole into some order of science, and laid so just and rational a
foundation of physic for future ages, that he deservedly obtained the name of
the FATHER OF MEDICINE. Boerhaav. academ. Lect v. I.


THEMISON was the founder of the methodic sect. He professed to have discovered
a short, and easy method of attaining medical knowledge, by reducing all
diseases into two classes, viz. from tension, and from the opposite fault,
relaxation. Juvenal speaking of him, says, "Quot Themison aegro autumno
occiderit uno." Whether this be intended as a compliment or sarcasm, we leave
critics to determine.
As this doctrine has lately been revived, we shall speak of it, with its
patron Themison and his follower Thessalus, in another place.

ABOUT 200 years before the christian era, physic and surgery, which in Greece
had been practiced by the same person, were separated at Rome into three
distinct provinces, the Dietetic, Pharmaceutic and Surgical. The above
mentioned sects were in existence when the celebrated GALEN quitted his native
country, Asia minor, to practice at Rome. GALEN was a man of real genius,
improved by a careful education under the best teachers of the age He laid the
foundation of his greatness in the school of the Stoics, then studied with the
Academics, and finished with the Peripatetics and Epicureans. After this he
devoted himself to medicine, and collected the writings of the most celebrated
physicians, especially Hippocrates, whom he professed to admire and follow.
There is, however, says Boerhaave, this essential difference between the
doctrine of Hippocrates and Galen, the first is almost always supported by
experience, and consists of observations, while the other depends almost wholly
on reasoning; and it has accordingly happened, that the system of Hippocrates
has afforded but little matter of exception to those who came after him,
whereas, that of Galen has been a subject of just and well grounded censure.
Nevertheless, Galen's doctrine, though in general false, and inapplicable, says
Cullen, was received and implicitly followed by all the Physicians of Asia,
Africa, and Europe, for more than 1400 years! He was supposed to have brought
every part of medicine to perfection, and his system thought infallible, and
universally appealed to as an oracle.

WE cannot set a very high value on the theories of the ancient physicians,
when we consider the data upon which they reasoned. Their notions respecting
the animal economy were absurd and confused to the highest degree. They
supposed that the veins had their origin in the liver; that they were the only
vessels that conveyed blood through the body; that in these it only moved
backward and forward: that the arteries arising from the heart, contained the
animal spirits which were elaborated in that organ. They believed that the
blood never entered the arteries, unless in a diseased state. As to the means
of our nourishment, they had no just idea of it, and even supposed that the
chyle was absorbed in the liver, and there concocted into blood. Aikins' Med.
Memoirs.


AFTER the sixth century, a dark and dismal chasm intervened in medicine,
literature, and the arts. All was ignorance, wonder, and credulity. The human
mind, neglected, uncultivated, and oppressed, sunk to the lowest grade of
debasement. Millot Elements of Hist.


THE most remarkable revolution recorded in the history of the human mind, is,
the darkness and ignorance which enveloped Europe, while the Arabians were
making progress in useful knowledge. The Caliph Haroun Al Raschid established
an University at Bagdad, and qualified his countrymen to be instructors of all
Europe. Wherever these Mahometans built a temple for worship, there they
erected a medical school and an hospital. They first introduced chemistry into
medicine; and, though blended with many absurdities, its introduction
occasioned a great revolution in the theory and practice of physic. Diseases
were now supposed to arise from a predominant acid, or an alkali; and the
various operations of the human body, were attempted to be explained on the
principles of fermentation or effervescence. Nay, they asserted that all the
operations of the Universe were explicable on chemical principles. At this
period, many wasted their time and talents in the delirious pursuit of
transmuting the baser metals into gold.

IN the beginning of the XVIIth century, the whole system of Galen, as well as
the theory of the chemists, was overturned by the discovery of the circulation
of the blood by Harvey; who demonstrated that the human body was an hydraulic
machine, whose actions and offices depended upon the circulation of the blood,
which alone being stopped, the whole must perish. For, in this system, the
blood was considered as the primum mobile of the whole machine; and to
something in the blood were attributed all the disorders to which we are
liable. Harvey first made an application of this doctrine by publishing his
practice of physic conformable to the laws of the circulation, and by degrees
all Europe followed him.

THIS was the era of experiment in which several great geniuses flourished.
Societies for promoting and diffusing experimental knowledge were established
in different parts of Europe, and patronized by monarchs. The English Bishops
possessed the power of licencing practitioners of physic until the beginning of
the 16th century, when this grievance was redressed by the establishment of the
London College of Physicians by an act of Henry viiith. By virtue of this
authority it is expressly declared, that no one shall be permitted to exercise
physic in any of the dioceses in England till he be examined by the President
and three of the Elects, or Censors, and have letters testimonial from them;
unless he be a graduate in either University, who, as such, by his very degree,
has a right to practice all over England. See Friend's history Phys. vol. 2.
The Edinburgh royat College of Physicians was founded in 1681. It has similar
powers to the royal College of London. But that the rights of the University
may not be infringed, their charter declares, that the College are to license
all persons, who have taken their degrees in any of the Universities in
Scotland -- And that all persons who have taken the degeee of Master of Arts in
said Universities, or a degree of Doctor in any celebrated Universities abroad,
shall, upon producing their respective Diplomas to the President and College,
be licenced by them to practice physic within their jurisdiction, without
passing a trial on that occasion. See their charter in Maitland's history of
Edinb. p. 376.

The Royal Society of London was founded in 1663. L' Academic Royale de
Sciences was erected in France 1666. The Academia Naturae Curiosorum was
established in Germany in 1670. A royal literary society was instituted at
Berlin in 1711. Another at Petersbourg 1725. The King of Sweden followed the
example of Peter the great, and erected a literary academy in 1739, as did the
King of Denmark in 1746. In 1731 an Academy for surgery was founded in Paris.
The present King founded the Royal Society for Medicine in 1776.

The University of Paris, founded by Charlemagne in the year 800, was the first
that conferred the degrees of bachelor and doctor in the year 1231. The
University of Leyden was founded in 1574. It has twenty-six professors. There
is no college of Physicians in any of the United Provinces. Physicians, before
they can be legally authorized to practice, are required to produce a Diploma
from some Dutch University, which is registered by the magistrates of the town
in which they mean to reside. Our University of Cambridge was founded in 1638,
but the medical professorships not till 1782.


The art of printing had already produced a glorious change in the affairs of
men. It gave wings to literature; and spread it around the globe. Philosophy
revisited the earth, and converted Europe, which a century before was one large
field of battle, into a theater of triumph!

Upon the discovery of any new principles by philosophers or the introduction
of any new and popular theory, physicians almost always attempt to apply them
to the explanation of the actions of the human body, and all the causes of
diseases. Thus, when Galileo had introduced mathematical reasoning, and excited
the world to investigate the laws of mechanics, physicians attempted to explain
all the phenomenon of the animal economy, on mathematical and mechanical
principles. The same was noticed concerning the chemists, and may be remarked
at this time of the laws of electricity.

THE famous Stabl perceiving the insufficiency of the preceding systems,
maintained that the rational and immaterial soul was the true source of every
function, both vital and natural. Thus experiment, or the use of our senses,
was discarded for a time from medicine, and metaphysics, or reasoning on
probabilities, usurped its place.

SUCH was the state of medicine when Boerhaave began to teach. The figure this
great man made in the medical world, will justify our dwelling a little on his
character and works. It is perhaps unnecessary to say, that he was a professor
in the University of Leyden, and that he died about 50 years ago. Boerhaave was
son of the parish minister of a village near Leyden, and he himself was
educated for that profession. From the information of his biographers and his
own writings, we learn, that from the perusal of early writers in divinity, he
was struck with the profoundest veneration for the simplicity and purity of
their doctrines, and the sanctity of their discipline; but as he descended to
the lower ages, he found the peace of christianity broken by useless
controversies, and its doctrines sophisticated by the subtleties of the
schools. He found the holy writers interpreted according to the reigning
philosophers, and chimeras of metaphysicians adopted as articles of faith. He
then quitted the pursuit of divinity, and applied to the study of physic, when
he was more than xxx years of age. But he found it nearly the same in physic as
he experienced in divinity. He perceived that the moderns had widely deviated
from the simplicity and purity of the ancients; chimeras and idle notions
adopted as articles of belief, or rules of practice, and the writings of the
founder of our profession strangely corrupted and misapplied.

WHEN Boerhaave began to practice physic, he received but little encouragement.
His business was at first very small, and his circumstances by no means easy.
But superior to every discouragement, he continued his search after truth and
knowledge; determined that prosperity, were he ever to enjoy it, should be the
consequence, not of mean artifice, cringing solicitation, or degrading
complacency, but of real merit and solid learning. Nor was he disappointed.
After giving lectures at Leyden for a series of years with great applause, his
reputation bore some proportion to his merit, and extended itself to distant
countries; insomuch, that scarcely a learned society in Europe, but was eager
to elect him a member, scarcely a crowned head, but sought some means to honor
him. He died at Leyden in the year 1738, aged 79 years, leaving behind a
glorious and untainted memory. Schulten's life of Boerh. Med. Dict. Art. Boerh.
-- also his life by Johnson.


BOERHAAVE'S Institutes, or theoritical work, contains all the discoveries in
anatomy and physiology known at that time; and whatever relates to the laws of
the animal economy and the operations of medicines. His aphorisms or practical
work, are collected from the Greek medicinal writers, the Arabians and some of
the Moderns; and his reasonings are founded on the structure of the parts and
laws of mechanics. In his lectures on these aphorisms he labored to show how
nature acts in producing the symptoms of distempers, and her methods of
relieving herself either with, or without the assistance of art. Perhaps it
comprises more medical knowledge, than any book extant of its size.

THE most striking feature in the Boerhaavian theory, is the explanation of all
the phenomenon of the animal economy on mechanical principles. It asserts,
that the human body is truly a mechanical structure, and possesses all the
properties belonging to a subject best qualified for mechanical speculation;
therefore a mechanical frame and that the human machine, is by the same laws
explicable by geometry; and there is nothing, he thinks, in all its solids or
fluids but what is explicable upon mathematical principles.

HE founds his pathology, or doctrine of diseases, on the change of the quality
of the fluids, producing sometimes a predominant acid, and sometimes times a
predominant alkali. Another fruitful source of diseases, was a spontaneous
gluten, or lentor in the fluids, and a too violent motion of the circulating
blood; this he supposed arose from the preternatural irritation of the heart,
or from some acrimony present in the blood itself. These opinions make the
foundation of his theory of fevers and inflammations.

THE first who ventured to attack the Boerhaavian system, was the learned Dr.
Frederic Hoffman: who asserted that the body was so far from depending on the
quality of the fluids, that the state and crasis of the fluids themselves,
entirely depended on the nervous power; and that a flight alteration in this
power was capable of instantaneously changing the blood, and all the other
humors, into a different nature from what they formerly were. He therefore
published it as his opinion "that the greater part of diseases, if not all of
them, were affections of the nervous system." This hypothesis, amplified and
further illustrated, is the celebrated Cullenian System. See Encyclop. Brit.
Art. Medicine.


DR CULLEN, who died a year or two since in Scotland, after bestowing great
encomiums on Boerhaave, who he says improved and refined upon every thing that
had before been offered, pointed out, as he supposed, the imperfections and
desiciencies of this famous system, in order to show the necessity of
attempting a new one. And he has shown pretty clearly, that the doctrine of
acidity, and an alkali, is erroneous; and that the causes which Boerhaave
adduces as producing the spontaneous gluten, are by no means probable. Nay, he
asserts farther, that Boerhaave's doctrine of acrimony and lentor of the fluids
is purely hypothetical; and that the reasonings concerning them, are so far
from improving physic, that they have often misled the practice of it.

THE brain is considered in the Cullenian hypothesis as the primary organ, on
which the welfare of the system principally depends; and the Nervous system, as
the substratum, or fundamental stamen of the whole body: for it supposes the
living muscular fibers to be a continuation of the substance of the brain, or
congeries of those infinitessimally small threads called nerves. Hippocrates
believed that the heart and the blood constituted the mainspring of motion and
sensation, but was unacquainted with the properties of the Nervous system,
which have been in a great measure overlooked by all his successors until the
time of Dr Thomas Willis, 1650.
Cullen conjectures, that the cortical part of the brain, or common origin of
the nerves, is a secretory organ, in which the gluten of the blood, or
coagulable lymph, being freed from all saline matter, before adhering to it,
becomes fit for the nourishment of the solids, and being poured in a
sufficiently diluted state, upon the origin of the nerves, is filtrated along
their fibers, and is thence conveyed to every part of the body for its
nourishment.

BY this system, the circulation of the blood instead of being the principal,
or vital function, as in the Boerhaavian, becomes so much a secondary one, in
the animal economy, that it serves little other purpose than the nutrition of
the body. When a large blood-vessel is wounded, the evacuation of the blood,
causes a collaps of the vessels, and death ensues: yet Cullen reminds us, that
the vessels must necessarily be in a certain state of distention, in order that
the nervous fluid should move. * Boerhaave tells us, that when a person faints
away, or lies some time under water, there is wanted a circumgiration of the
liquors in the blood vessels. Cullen admitting this, only contends, that the
first movement must arise in the nervous system, which exciting the blood
vessels to action, they propel the fluids contained in them and life
immediately returns, with heat, color, agility, cogilation, and every vital and
natural action. Hence we see that these eminent teachers meant the same thing,
they only began the explanation in different parts of the circle. It would not
be very difficult to prove, that both in their theory and their practice, the
difference is more in words, than in reality. Cullen considers almost all
diseases as arising from an affection of the nervous power. This power, or vis
medicatrix natureae, is the same that Hippocrates calls "NATURE," whose
efficacy he so much celebrates in removing diseases; a power acknowledged and
extolled by Boerhaave.

THE state of science is very different now from what it was 200 years since.
The philosophy of Aristotle misunderstood, the false theories of Galen, and the
jargon of the Chemists, formed so thick a cloud, that truth and nature could
scarcely be seen through it. When this was dispelled by Lord Bacon and others,
the era of experiment followed. Philosophers and physicians labored to
accumulate facts. Societies were every where established for this express
purpose. A diffusive manner of writing crept in, and grew up among authors. It
was the fashion to print not only all that a man thought, but to quote all that
he found any body else thought: and he was scarcely esteemed a literary man,
who published any thing less than a folio. But now it is wholly different.
Instead of that diffusive manner of writing, authors feel the necessity of
consolidating and concentrating science. They find that the substance of folios
may be digested into a few pages, and the essence of libraries compressed
within a few volumes. The late Dr John Brown has attempted to simplify the
science of medicine, by reducing all diseases to two forms, namely, sthenic and
asthenic, the former signifying an excess, and the latter a defect of the vis
vitae, or invigorating principle. See the author's Synopsis of his course of
Lectures from P. 20, to 23.


THUS Themison 1700 years since, boasted that he had discovered a short and
easy method of attaining medical knowledge, by reducing the causes of all
diseases to two heads; the one tension, and the other relaxation; or in the
language of Dr. Brown, sthenic and asthenic. He considered every remedy as a
tonic or relaxant. His follower Thessalus carried this doctrine still farther,
and by declaring that he could abridge the study of medicine, to fix months, he
gained many pupils from among those who wished to acquire a science without the
trouble of study, or pains of thinking. Pliny observes that although Thessalus
boasted he had so abridged the study of medicine, that he could teach it in six
months, he notwithstanding wrote more books on that art than could be read in
that time. -- See also what Caelius Aurelianus says of this "conqueror of
Physicians," as be called himself.


It must be left to the old and experienced physician to determine, whether the
disorders arising from those peculiar conditions observable in particular
persons, or in particular parts of the body, called Idiosyncrasies can be
explained by that general principle which pervades the Brunonian system.
Boerhaave and Cullen were experienced practitioners, but Brown never confirmed
his speculations by much practice. It is possible that this sudden meteor of
intelligence, which for a while may appear to shoot its beams into the regions
of obscurity, will as suddenly withdraw its luster, and leave mortals again to
grope their way. See Dr. Johnson's pref. to Shakesp.


NEED we be surprised that our profession has been accused of contradictory
theories and systems, as well as discordant maxims in practice: or wonder that
many suppose it merely a conjectural art? Have we not seen that opinions
prevalent in one age, as truths above the reach of controversy, have been
confuted and rejected in another, and have risen again to reception in remoter
times? Yet the ignorance and inattention of some physicians should not be
adduced against the stability of the art itself. Amid the fluctuations of
theories, a discerning eye may discover certain fundamental principles which
are as firmly established as those of any science. Does not daily practice
convince us, that both acute and chronic diseases have the same marks annexed
to them, which were described 2000 years ago? Even in nervous disorders, amid
all their tumultuous anarchy of accessory symptoms, we recognize their
essential marks and elementary types. See Black's historical sketch of Medicine
and Surgery.


PHYSIC, like many other arts, may be practiced without theory, or knowledge of
it is principles. A man may know how to bleed without understanding any thing of
physiology, or anatomy. He may have learnt how to stop that bleeding, and yet
be ignorant of the circulation of the blood. And a man may learn how to cure an
acute pain in the side, by copious bleeding, without knowing there is such a
membrane as the pleura. Many practitioners have known the efficacy of Tartar
Emetic, without having chemistry enough to know it is component parts. And, yet,
such is the weakness and credulity of many of our country people, that they
often prefer such to a learned physician. The fact is, theory, and practice are
mutually subservient to each other. Theory is defective without experience;
which in its turn is equally defective without theory. It has been observed
that the man who acts from experience alone, though he act ever so well is but
an Empiric, or Quack, and that not only in medicine, but in every other
subject. It is then only, that we recognize art, and that the Empiric quits his
name for the more honorable one of artist, when to his experience he adds
science, and is thence enabled to tell us, not only what is to be done, but why
it is to be done. Harris's Hermes.
Nevertheless a Physician does not establish his character by what he knows and
thinks, so effectually as by what he actually does and orders for the sick.

FEW things discourage the student of medicine more than the great variety of
disorders, and astonishing number of concomitant symptoms. When he reflects on
the short period of human life, the necessary avocations, which must
unavoidably divert his attention, he is ready to relinquish the pursuit in
despair.

YET modern improvements in a great measure have removed this inconvenience, by
reducing all known disorders that afflict mankind to certain determinate
species, in imitation of the writers upon botany. Such a systematic
arrangement, called, Nosology, by bringing those diseases together, which agree
in the greater number of circumstances, and require nearly similar treatment,
shows, that though there may be a great variety in the names, there needs not
much in the method of cure.

Nosology, therefore, in some measure, has rescued the study of medicine from
confusion, and reduced it to such order and simplicity, that the discouraging
catalogue of diseases, so perplexing to students, is resolved by Dr. Cullen
into four classes, and these to 150 genera, which are again divided into 1387
species. So true it is, that the more we know of any art, or science, the
greater number of particulars, we are able to resolve into generals; and thus
reduce its principles within narrower bounds.

Anatomy and Physiology have experienced great improvement within these 50
years. One of the great sources of error among our forefathers (says Pott) was
the imperfect state of their anatomy, which kind of knowledge, has been so
cultivated in our times, as to convert ignorance into a vice. The most
important anatomical discovery since that of the circulation by Harvey, is,
that which demonstrates the Lymphatics to be a distinct system appropriated to
the sole purpose of absorption.


Baron Haller, has collected and condensed, all the valuable anatomical and
physiological discoveries; and after having displayed every part of the human
body, he explained every function, pointed out the errors of preceding
authors, and made such important additions of his own, that were all the books
of anatomy and physiology, excepting his, destroyed, they would, alone, be
sufficient to convey to future ages, the present stock of knowledge in those
branches of science. Haller made a catalogue of medical books. Their number
exceeded 30,000* yet from the days of Hippocrates to the xvth century (a space
of nearly 2000 years) there were not produced thirty volumes, which at this day
merit perusal. To read the rest would (to adopt the expression of Voltaire)
encumber the head with a jumble of words, and burden the memory to no useful
purpose.

Whoever wishes to see an universal library of medical and surgical books,
published during the last 300 years, will be gratified by consulting Vander
Linden, Merklin and Haller's methodus discendi artem, etc. with the literary
journals of Italy: the Bibliotheque raisonne of France: the Reviews of Leipsic
and of London.




Surgery has been cleared from the lumber of a thousand errors, and raised from
it state of degradation. Not only the coarse and useless applications, but the
multitude of awkard and unmanageable instruments, which encumbered the art,
have given way to methods less painful, and more intelligible. Surgeons
perform, now, not only many cures by mild and gentle means, which formerly were
deemed incurable, but give nature an opportunity of exerting those powers with
which she is invested by the Creator.

THE study of Natural History, so necessary and ornamental to the physician, is
now rendered easy and delightful. Linnaeus, by his learned classification,
leads the student, as by an Ariadne's clue, through the turnings and labyrinths
of the three kingdoms of nature. Botany too, that beautiful handmaid of physic,
so much neglected by the ancients, has been successfully addressed by the
moderns. The lovers of botany will find in this country an unexplored treasure,
amply rewarding their attention. Notwithstanding theory cannot claim the power
of discovering the medicinal virtues of plants, it has nevertheless greatly
faciliated this charming study by arranging all the vegetables that diversify
and adorn the earth into classes, orders, genera and species.

SINCE knowledge has become more generally diffused, a benevolent philosophy,
subservient to life and public utility, has taken the place of those
theological disputations, which distracted the last century. A spirit of free
iniquiry distinguishes the medical, and other professions. The authority of
great names is less venerated. The world begins to grow weary of theories which
lead to no useful consequences, and have no foundation but in the imagination
of ingenious men. Gregory's comparative view.


MUCH literary as well as political advantages have accrued to the UNITED
STATES, and to those of New England in particular, from the American
Revolution. It had been heretofore thought indispensably necessary to resort to
foreign universities, to complete the system of medical education, and to
acquire there the theory and practice of physic, which the want of regular
schools and established hospitals in this country, rendered unattainable. At
that period, an ambition of acquiring the highest qualifications in the
profession, naturally led the medical student to the celebrated European
Schools: and the honors they bestowed, were considered as conferring
distinction and respectibility on the candidates. The ambition was laudable.
But it must at the same time be confessed, that from the novelty of situation,
it sometimes failed of being followed by the advantages expected; and the
expense attending it was a circumstance, which must necessarily have cramped
their exertions.

THE various institutions founded within a few years in this commonwealth, have
laid a broad foundation for improvement in science, and the arts: and the
establishment of a MEDICAL SCHOOL in the UNIVERSITY at CAMBRIDGE, by affording
regular means of instruction, in the different branches of the profession, has
given to the present a decided superiority over former times, and in a great
degree has forever precluded the necessity of a foreign education.

A country so completely independent in other respects as the United States,
however ready to receive information in the higher grades of science, by the
cultivation of literary correspondences abroad, should blush to be indebted to
foreign seminaries for the first principles of professional instruction.

OF the various methods of cultivating and diffusing medical knowledge, none is
more desirable, than an amicable association of neighboring practiotiners;
especially when their aim is mutual improvement and the good of mankind. These
generous sentiments gave birth to the Middlesex Medical Association; a society
whose grand object is to improve our art by a free and friendly communication
of our skill and experience, and to cultivate those manly sentiments, which
tend to eradicate narrow prejudices and unworthy practices.

A military spark, which was first struck out in this County, burst into a
flame and spread throughout the continent. This till then almost unnoticed part
of the world, drew the attention of all nations, who regarded us with
admiration, while we conquered armies, and founded such an Empire as the world
has never seen, and framed a constitution, which is the pride of man, and glory
of the human understanding. The European world still regards us: many with an
anxious solicitude to see in what order and degree those dispositions and arts,
which characterize polished humanity arise among us. They cannot but observe
that the County so famous for having first dared to resist what they deemed to
be despotism, stands the first in the cultivation of those arts which grace
social life and increase human happiness. MIDDLESEX, so distinguished for its
University and for its Militia; so celebrated in arts and arms, will we doubt
not, still continue to take a liberal pride in promoting those arts which
improve the world and dignify mankind.

A noble example is afforded in your worthy townsman Dr. Cuming. You who were
his fellow citizens must feel at the mention of his name the tender remembrance
of friendship reviving in your breasts! you, who recollect him the sensible,
generous, warmhearted, upright friend; the able honest and experienced
physician! Dr. Cuming possessed an understanding fraught with the principles of
his profession, happily blended with great benevolence. And his generous
donation to the medical branch of your University, while it excites our
gratitude sufficiently evinces his opinion of the importance, and practibility
of a complete medical education within ourselves.

ANIMATED by the example of the Eminent, who have gone before us, let us press
on to still further improvements. Let us leave the flowery path of speculation
for the more arduous one of experiment. That benevolent philosophy which
distinguishes this age, and this country, will help us to cultivate and diffuse
the benefits of the art we profess, and inspire us with the pleasing hope of
being able to preserve to our fellow creatures, that greatest of blessings, "A
SOUND MIND, IN A SOUND BODY." -- The field is extensive, the charge important,
and the calling honorable.

A List of the Members of the Middlesex Medical Association, and their places
of residence.
Josiah Bartlett, Charlestown. William Bowers, Billerica. John Brooks, Medford.
Amos Cotting, Marlborough. Joseph Fisk, Lexington. Joseph Fisk, jun. Lexington.
William Gamage, Cambridge. Timothy Harrington, Chelmsford. John Heart, Reading.
John Hay, Reading. Martin Herrick, Reading. Joseph Hunt, Concord. Isaac Hurd,
Concord. T. L. Jennison, Cambridge. Timothy Minot, Concord. Oliver Prescott,
Groton. Oliver Prescott, jun. Groton. * Isaac Rand, Cambridge. Marshall Spring
Watertown. Ebenezer Starr, Dunstable. Benjamin Waterhouse, Cambridge. * Samuel
Whitwell, Newtown. Leonard Williams, Waltbam. Charles Whitman, Stowe.
HONORARY MEMBERS,
Rev. Ezra Ripley, Concord. James Winthrop, Esquire Cambridge.

