John Q. Adams' Oration.

AN ORATION, PRONOUNCED JULY 4th, 1793, AT THE REQUEST OF THE INHABITANTS OF
THE TOWN OF BOSTON, IN COMMEMORATION OF THE ANNIVERSARY OF AMERICAN
INDEPENDENCE.

BY JOHN QUINCY ADAMS.

O NOMEN DULCE LIBERTATIS!

Cic. YE shades of ancient heroes! Ye who toiled,
Through long successive ages to build up
A laboring plan of state; behold at once
The wonder done!
THOMSON. BOSTON: PRINTED by BENJAMIN EDES and SON, in Kilby-Street. MDCC,
XCIII.

AT a Meeting of the Freeholders and other Inhabitants of the Town of BOSTON,
duly qualified and legally warned, in public Town-Meeting, assembled at
FANEUIL HALL, on Thursday the 4th of July, A. D. 1793:

VOTED,

THAT the SELECTMEN be and hereby are appointed a Committee to wait on JOHN
QUINCY ADAMS, Esquire. and in the Name of the Town to thank him for the spirited
and elegant ORATION, this Day delivered by him, at the request of the Town,
upon the ANNIVERSARY OF THE INDEPENDENCE OF THE UNITED STATES OF AMERICA -- in
which, according to the Institution of the Town, he considered the feelings,
manners, and principles which led to that great National Event -- and to
request of him a Copy thereof for the Press.

Attest, WILLIAM COOPER, Town Clerk.

GENTLEMEN,
IN compliance with the polite Request of my Fellow-Citizens, the ORATION
yesterday delivered, again solicits the Indulgence of the Public.

I am, Gentlemen, With sincere Respect, Your very humble Servant, JOHN Q. ADAMS.
BOSTON, JULY 5th, 1793.
AN ORATION.
IT has been a custom, sanctioned by the universal practice of civilized
Nations, to celebrate with anniversary solemnities, the return of the days
which have been distinguished by events the most important to the happiness of
the people. In countries where the natural dignity of mankind, has been
degraded by the weakness of bigotry, or debased by the miseries of despotism,
this customary celebration has degenerated into a servile mockery of festivity
upon the birth day of a sceptered tyrant, or has dwindled to an unmeaning
revel, in honor of some canonized fanatic, of whom nothing now remains but the
name, in the calendar of antiquated superstition. In those more fortunate
regions of the earth where Liberty has condescended to reside, the cheerful
gratitude of her favored people has devoted to innocent gaiety and useful
relaxation from the toils of virtuous industry the periodical revolution of
those days which have been rendered illustrious by the triumphs of freedom.

AMERICANS! Such is the nature of the institution which again calls your
attention to celebrate the establishment of your national Independence. And
surely since the creation of the heavenly orb which separated the day from the
night, amid the unnumbered events which have diversified the history of the
human race, none has ever occurred more highly deserving of celebration by
every species of ceremonial, that can testify a sense of gratitude to the
DEITY, and of happiness, derived from his transcendent favors.

IT is a wise and salutary institution, which forcibly recalls to the memory of
freemen, the principles upon which they originally founded their laboring plan
of state. It is a sacrifice at the altar of Liberty herself; -- a renewal of
homage to the Sovereign, who alone is worthy of our veneration; -- a profession
of political fidelity, expressive of our adherence to those maxims of liberal
submission and obedient freedom, which in these favored climes, have
harmonized the long-contending claims of liberty and law. By a frequent
recurrence to those sentiments and actions upon which the glory and felicity of
the Nation rest supported, we are enabled to renew the moments of bliss which
we are not permitted to retain; we secure a permanency to the exaltation which
the Constitution of Nature has rendered fleeting, and a perennial existence to
enjoyments which the lot of humanity has made transitory.

THE "feelings, manners and principles" which led to the Independence of our
Country; such, my friends and fellow-citizens is the theme of our present
commemoration. The field is extensive; it is fruitful: but the copious
treasures of its fragrance have already been gathered by the hands of genius;
and there now remains for the gleaning of mental indigence, naught but the
thinly scattered sweets which have escaped the vigilance of their industry.

THEY were the same feelings, manners and principles, which conducted our
venerable forefathers from the unhallowed shores of oppression; which inspired
them with the sublime purpose of converting the forests of a wilderness into
the favorite mansion of Liberty; of unfolding the gates of a new world, as a
refuge for the victims of persecution in the old. The feelings of injured
freedom, the manners of social equality, and the principles of eternal justice.

HAD the Sovereigns of England pursued the policy prescribed by their interest,
had they not provoked the hostilities of their Colonists against the feeble
fortress of their authority they might perhaps have retained to this day an
Empire which would have been but the more durable, for resting only upon the
foundation of immemorial custom, and national affection.

INCUMBERED however with the oppressive glory of a successful war, which had
enriched the pride of Britain, with the spoils of her own oppulence, and
replenished the arrogance in proportion as it had exhausted the resources of
the nation; an adventurous ministry, catching at every desperate expedient to
support the ponderous burden of the national dignity, and stimulated by the
perfidious instigations of their dependents in America, abandoned the
profitable commercial policy of their predecessors, and superadded to the
lucrative system of monopoly, which we had always tolerated as the price of
their protection, a system of internal taxation from which they hoped to derive
a fund for future corruption, and a supply for future extravagance.

THE nation eagerly grasped at the proposal. -- The situation, the condition,
the sentiments of the colonies, were subjects upon which the people of Britain
were divided between ignorance and error. The endearing ties of consanguinity,
which had connected their ancestors, with those of the Americans, had been
gradually loosened to the verge of dissolution, by the slow but ceaseless hand
of time. Instead of returning the sentiments of fraternal affection, which
animated the Americans, they indulged their vanity with preposterous opinions
of insulting superiority: they considered us, not as fellow subjects equally
entitled with themselves to every privilege of Englishmen; but as wretched
outcasts, upon whom they might safely load the burden, while they reserved to
themselves the advantages of the national grandeur. It has been observed, that
the nations the most highly favored with freedom, have not always been the
most friendly to the liberty of others. The people of Britain, expected to feel
none of the oppression which a parliamentary tyranny might impose upon the
Americans; on the contrary, they expected an alleviation of their burden, from
the accumulation of ours, and vainly hoped that by the stripes inflicted upon
us, their wounds would be healed.

THE King -- Need it be said, that he adopted as the offspring of his own
affections, a plan so favorable to the natural propensity of royalty toward
arbitrary power. Depending upon the prostituted valor of his mercenary
legions, he was deaf to the complaints, he was inexorable to the remonstrances
of violated freedom. Born and educated to the usual prejudices of hereditary
dominion, and habitually accustomed to the syren-song of adulation, he was
ready to believe what the courtly tribe about his throne did not fail to assure
him; that complaint was nothing more than the murmur of sedition, and
remonstrance the clamor of rebellion.

BUT they knew not the people with whom they had to contend. A people,
sagacious and enlightened to discern, cool and deliberate to discuss, firm and
resolute to maintain their rights. From the first appearance of the system of
parliamentary oppression under the form of a stamp act, it was met, by the
determined opposition of the whole American Continent. The annals of other
nations have produced instances of successful struggles to break a yoke
previously imposed; but the records of History did not perhaps furnish an
example of a people whose penetration had anticipated the operations of
tyranny, and whose spirit had disdained to suffer an experiment upon their
liberties. The ministerial partisans had flattered themselves with the
expectation that the Act would execute itself; that before the hands of Freedom
could be raised to repel the usurpation, they would be loaded with fetters;
that the American Samson would be shorn of his locks while asleep; and when
thus bereaved of his strength, might be made their sport with impunity. -- Vain
illusion! -- Instantaneous and forceful, as an electric spark, the fervid
spirit of resistance pervaded every part of the country; and at the moment,
when the operation of the system was intended to commence, it was indignantly
rejected, by three millions of men; high-minded men, determined to sacrifice
their existence, rather than resign the Liberty, from which, all its enjoyments
were derived.

IT is unnecessary to pursue the detail of obstinacy and cruelty on the one
part; of perseverance and fortitude on the other, until the period when every
chord which had bound the two countries together, was destroyed by the violence
of reciprocal hostilities, and the representatives of America, adopted the
measure, which was already dictated by the wishes of their constituents; they
declared the United Colonies free, sovereign and independent States.

AMERICANS! let us pause for a moment to consider the situation of our country,
at that eventful day when our national existence commenced. In the full
possession and enjoyment of all those prerogatives for which you then dared to
adventure upon "all the varieties of untried being," the calm and settled
moderation of the mind, is scarcely competent to conceive the tone of heroism,
to which the souls of freemen were exalted in that hour of perilous
magnanimity. Seventeen times has the sun, in the progress of his annual
revolutions, diffused his prolific radiance over the plains of Independent
America. Millions of hearts which then palpitated with the rapturous glow of
patriotism, have already been translated to brighter worlds; to the abodes of
more than mortal freedom. Other millions have arisen to receive from their
parents and benefactors, the inestimable recompense of their achievements. A
large proportion of the audience, whose benevolence is at this moment listening
to the speaker of the day, like him were at that period too little advanced
beyond the threshold of life to partake of the divine enthusiasm which inspired
the American bosom; which prompted her voice to proclaim defiance to the
thunders of Britain; which consecrated the banners of her armies; and finally
erected the holy temple of American Liberty, over the tomb of departed tyranny.
It is from those who have already passed the meridian of life; it is from you,
ye venerable assertors of the rights of mankind, that we are to be informed,
what were the feelings which swayed within your breasts and impelled you to
action, when, like the stripling of Israel, with scarce a weapon to attack, and
without a shield for your defense, you met, and undismayed, engaged with the
gigantic greatness of the British power. Untutored in the disgraceful science
of human butchery; destitute of the fatal materials which the ingenuity of man
has combined, to sharpen the scythe of death; unsupported by the arm of any
friendly alliance; and unfortified against the powerful assaults of an
unrelenting enemy, you did not hesitate at that moment, when your coasts were
infested by a formidable fleet, when your territories were invaded by a
numerous and veteran army, to pronounce the sentence of eternal separaration
from Britain, and to throw the gauntlet at a power the terror of whose recent
triumphs was almost co-extensive with the earth -- The interested and selfish
propensities which in times of prosperous tranquillity have such powerful
dominion over the heart, were all expelled, and in their stead, the public
virtues, the spirit of personal devotion to the common cause, a contempt of
every danger in comparison with the subserviency of the country, had assumed an
unlimited control. The passion for the public, had absorbed all the rest; as
the glorious luminary of heaven extinguishes in a stood of refulgence the
twinkling splendour of every inferior planet. Those of you my countrymen, who
were actors in those interesting scenes, will best know, how feeble, and
impotent is the language of this description to express the impassioned
emotions of the soul, with which you were then agitated: yet it were injustice
to conclude from thence, or from the greater prevalence of private and personal
motives in these days of calm serenity, that your sons have degenerated from
the virtues of their fathers. Let it rather be a subject of pleasing reflection
to you, that the generous and disinterested energies, which you were summoned
to display, are permitted by the bountiful indulgence of Heaven to remain
latent in the bosoms of your children. From the present prosperous appearance
of our public affairs, we may admit a rational hope that our country will have
no occasion to require of us those extraordinary and heroic exertions which it
was your fortune to exhibit. But from the common versatility of all human
destiny, should the prospect hereafter darken, and the clouds of public
misfortune thicken to a tempest; should the voice of our country's calamity
ever call us to her relief, we swear by the precious memory of the sages who
toiled, and of the heroes who bled in her defense, that we will prove ourselves
not unworthy of the prize, which they so dearly purchased; that we will act as
the faithful disciples of those who so magnanimously taught us the instructive
lesson of republican virtue.

SEVEN years of ineffectual hostility, an hundred millions of treasure
fruitlessly expended, and uncounted thousands of human lives sacrificed to no
purpose, at length taught the dreadful lesson of wisdom to the British
Government, and compelled them to relinquish a claim which they had long since
been unable to maintain. The pride of Britain, which should have been humbled,
was only mortified. With fullen impotence, she yielded to the pressure of
accumulated calamity, and closed with reluctance an inglorious war, in which
she had often been the object, and rarely the actor of a triumph.

THE various occurrences of our national history, since that period, are within
the recollection of all my hearers. The relaxation and debility of the
political body, which succeeded the violent exertions it had made during the
war: the total inefficacy of the recommendatory federal system, which had been
formed in the bosom of contention; the peaceable and deliberate adoption of a
more effectual national constitution by the people of the union, and the
prosperous administration of that government, which has repaired the shattered
fabric of public confidence, which has strengthened the salutary bands of
national union, and restored the bloom and vigor of impartial justice, to the
public countenance, afford a subject of pleasing contemplation to the patriotic
mind. The repeated unanimity of the nation has placed at the head of the
American councils, the heroic leader, whose prudence and valor conducted to
victory the armies of freedom; and the two first offices of this Commonwealth,
still exhibit the virtues and employ the talents of the venerable patriots,
whose firm and disinterested devotion to the cause of Liberty, was rewarded by
the honorable distinction of a British proscription. Americans! the voice of
grateful freedom is a stranger to the language of adulation. While we wish
these illustrious sages to be assured that the memory of their services is
impressed upon all our hearts, in characters, indelible to the latest period of
time, we trust that the most acceptable tribute of respect which can be offered
to their virtues, is found in the confidence of their countrymen. From the
fervent admiration of future ages, when the historians of America, shall trace
from their examples the splendid pattern of public virtue, their merits will
receive a recompense of much more precious estimation than can be conferred by
the most flattering testimonials of contemporaneous applause.

THE magnitude and importance of the great event which we commemorate, derives
a vast accession from its influence upon the affairs of the world, and its
operation upon the history of mankind. It has already been observed that the
origin of the American Revolution bears a character different from that of any
other civil contest, that had ever arisen among men. It was not the convulsive
struggle of slavery to throw off the burden of accumulated oppression, but the
deliberate, though energetic effort of freemen, to repel the insidious approaches
of tyranny. It was a contest involving the elementary principles of government,
a question of right between the sovereign and the subject which in its progress
had a tendency to introduce among the civilized nations of Europe, the
discussion of a topic the first in magnitude, which can attract the attention
of mankind, but which for many centuries, the gloomy shades of despotism had
overspread with impenetrable darkness. The French nation cheerfully supported
an alliance with the United States, and a war with Britain, during the course
of which a large body of troops and considerable fleets were sent by the French
government, to act in conjunction with their new allies. The union which had at
first been formed by the coalescence of a common enmity, was soon strengthened
by the bonds of a friendly intercourse, and the subjects of an arbitrary
prince, in fighting the battles of freedom, soon learnt to cherish the cause of
Liberty itself. By a natural and easy application to themselves of the
principles upon which the Americans asserted the justice of their warfare, they
were led to inquire into the nature of the obligation which prescribed their
submission to their own sovereign; and when they discovered that the consent of
the people is the only legitimate source of authority, they necessarily drew
the conclusion that their own obedience was no more than the compulsive
acquiescence of servitude, and they waited only for a favorable opportunity to
recover the possession of those enjoyments, to which they had never forfeited
the right. Sentiments of a similar nature, by a gradual and imperceptible
progress, secretly undermined all the foundations of their government; and when
the necessities of the sovereign reduced him to the inevitable expedient of
appealing to the benevolence of the people, the magic talisman of despotism was
broken, the spell of prescriptive tyranny was dissolved, and the pompous
pageant of their monarchy, instantaneously crumbled to atoms.

THE subsequent European events which have let slip the dogs of war, to prey
upon the vitals of humanity; which have poured the torrent of destruction over
the fairest harvests of European fertility; which have unbound the pinions of
desolation, and sent her forth to scatter pestilence and death among the
nations; the scaffold, smoking with the blood of a fallen monarch; the
corpse-covered field, where agonizing nature struggles with the pangs of
dissolution; permit me my happy countrymen, to throw a pall over objects like
these, which could only spread a gloom upon the face of our festivity. Let us
rather indulge the pleasing and rational anticipation of the period, when all
the nations of Europe shall partake of the blessings of equal liberty and
universal peace. Whatever issue may be destined by the will of Heaven to await
the termination of the present European commotions, the system of feudal
absurdity has received an irrecoverable wound, and every symptom indicates its
approaching dissolution. The seeds of Liberty are plentifully sown. However
severe the climate, however barren the soil of the regions in which they have
been received, such is the native exuberance of the plant, that it must
eventually flourish with luxuriant profusion. The governments of Europe must
fall; and the only remaining expedient in their power, is to gather up their
garments and fall with decency. The bonds of civil subjection must be loosened
by the discretion of civil authority, or they will be shivered by the
convulsive efforts of slavery itself. The feelings of benevolence involuntarily
make themselves a party to every circumstance that can affect the happiness of
mankind; they are ever ready to realize the sanguine hope, that the governments
to rise upon the ruins of the present systems will be immutably founded upon
the principles of freedom, and administered by the genuine maxims of moral
subordination and political equality. We cherish with a fondness which cannot
be chilled by the cold unanimated philosophy of skepticism, the delightful
expectation that the cancer of arbitrary power will be radically extracted from
the human constitution; that the sources of oppression will be drained; that
the passions which have hitherto made the misery of mankind, will be disarmed
of all their violence, and give place to the soft control of mild and amiable
sentiments, which shall unite in social harmony the innumerable varieties of
the human race. Then shall the nerveless arm of superstition no longer
interpose an impious barrier between the beneficence of Heaven, and the
adoration of its votaries: then shall the most distant regions of the earth be
approximated by the gentle attraction of a liberal intercourse: then shall the
fair fabric of universal Liberty rise upon the durable foundation of social
equality, and the long-expected era of human felicity, which has been
announced by prophetic inspiration, and described in the most enraptured
language of the Muses, shall commence its splendid progress -- Visions of
bliss! with every breath to Heaven we speed an ejaculation that the time may
hasten, when your reality shall be no longer the ground of votive supplication,
but the theme of grateful acknowledgment: when the choral gratulations of the
liberated myriads of the elder world, in symphony, sweeter than the music of
the spheres, shall hail your country, Americans! as the youngest daughter of
Nature, and the firstborn offspring of Freedom.


