AN ENQUIRY HOW FAR THE PUNISHMENT OF DEATH IS NECESSARY IN PENNSYLVANIA. WITH
NOTES AND ILLUSTRATIONS.

BY WILLIAM BRADFORD, ESQUIRE.

To which is added, AN ACCOUNT OF THE GAOL AND PENITENTIARY HOUSE OF
PHILADELPHIA, AND OF THE INTERIOR MANAGEMENT THEREOF.

BY CALEB LOWNES, OF PHILADELPHIA.

If we enquire into the cause of all human corruptions, we shall find that they
proceed from the impunity of crimes, and not from the moderation of
punishments.

MONTESQ. PHILADELPHIA. PRINTED BY T. DOBSON AT THE STONE-HOUSE, NO. 41, SOUTH
SECOND-STREET. M,DCC,XCIII.

ADVERTISEMENT.
THE following memoir was written at the request, and prsented to the Governor
of Pennsylvania, on the third day of last December. The nature of this
communication, as well as the necessity of completing it by that day, required
brevity; and a more extended view of the subject, was on many accounts
inexpedient. Hence, some information, which might have been proper in a work
designed for general circulation, was suppressed, and the experience of other
countries was rather glanced at than explained.

It having been thought advisable to publish this memoir in its present form,
an opportunity was afforded the writer of making such additions as his other
avocations would permit. Further time would have enabled him to furnish more
accurate and particular information of the experience of the other States: but
those who have interested themselves in this publication, think it ought not to
be any longer delayed.

The additional information might have been advantageously blended with the
original memoir: but as the Senate of the Commonwealth, have honored that work,
by placing it on their journals, there was a propriety in keeping it distinct.
The new matter is therefore thrown into the form of Notes and Illustrations at
the end of the memoir -- a few paragraphs only, necessary to introduce the
notes, being added to the text.

Although the world has seen a profusion of Theory on the subject of the
Criminal Law: it is to be regretted that so few writers have been solicitous
"to throw the light of experience upon it." To supply, in some measure, this
defect -- to collect the scattered rays which the juridical history of our our
own and other countries affords -- and to examine how far the maxims of
philosophy abide the test of experiment, have, therefore, been the leading
objects of this work. The facts adduced, are stated with as much brevity, as
was consistent with clearness; and, as accuracy was indispensible, none have
been lightly assumed, and few without a coincidence of authorities.

Philadelphia, Feb. 26, 1793.
ERRATA.
Page 7, line 5, for prevent, read prevents.

10, line 4, for effectually, read actually.

49, line 5, for have, read has.

50, line 39, for begin, read begins.

51, line 3, after "and," insert indeed.

53, line 34, for Gentor, read Gentoo.

65, line 34, for direction, read discretion.

69, line 1, after "in," insert the.

70, line 4, for "of," read and.

71, line 1^, for deserves read deserve.

AN ENQUIRY, etc.
INTRODUCTION.
THE general principles upon which penal laws ought to be founded appear to be
fully settled. Montesquieu and Beccaria led the way in the discussion, and the
philosophy of all Europe, roused by the boldness of their march, has since been
deeply engaged on this interesting topic. Independent of the force of their
reasoning a remarkable coincidence of opinion, among the enlighted writers on
this subject, seems to announce the justness of their conclusions: and the
questions which still exist are rather questions of fact than of principle.

Among these principles some have obtained the force of axioms, and are no
longer considered as the subjects either of doubt or demonstration. "That the
prevention if crimes is the sole end of punishment," is one of these: and it is
another, "That every punishment which is not absolutely necessary for that
purpose is a cruel and tyrannical act." To these may be added a third,
(calculated to limit the first) which is, "That every penalty should be
proportioned to the offense."

These principles, which serve to protect the rights of humanity and to prevent
the abuses of government, are so important that they deserve a place among the
fundamental laws of every free country. The enlightened patriots who composed
the first National Assembly in France, placed this check on the power of
punishment, where it ought to be placed, among "the rights of a man and a
citizen." They had long witnessed the ferocity of the criminal law, and they
endeavored to guard against it by declaring, in precise and definite terms,
"That the law ought to establish such punishments only as are strictly and
evidently necessary." S. VIII.
Few of the American constitutions are sufficiently express, though they are
not silent, on this subject. That of New Hampshire declares, "That all
penalties should be proportioned to the nature of the offense, and that a
multitude of sanguinary punishments is impolitic and unjust, the true design of
all punishments being to reform, and not to exterminate, mankind." The
constitution of Vermont enjoins the introduction of hard labor as a punishment,
in order to lessen the necessity for such as are capital: and that of
Pennsylvania framed in 1776, directed the future Legislature "to reform the
penal laws -- to make punishments less sanguinary, and, in some cases, more
proportioned to the offenses." But it was in Maryland alone that the general
principle was asserted; and, in the enumeration of their rights, we find it
declared, "That sanguinary punishments ought to be avoided as far as is
consistent with the safety of the state" S. XIV.
. The other constitutions which touch on this subject content themselves with
generally declaring, "That cruel punishments ought not to be inflicted." But,
does not this involve the same principle, and implicitly prohibit every penalty
which is not evidently necessary?

One would think, that, in a nation jealous of its liberty, these important
truths would never be overlooked; and, that the infliction of death, the
highest act of power that man exercises over man, would seldom be prescribed
where its necessity was doubtful. But on no subject has government, in
different parts of the world, discovered more indolence and inattention than in
the construction or reform of the penal code. Legislators feel themselves
elevated above the commission of crimes which the laws proscribe, and they have
too little personal interest in a system of punishments to be critically exact
in restraining its severity. The degraded class of men, who are the victims of
the laws, are thrown at a distance which obscures their sufferings and blunts
the sensibility of the Legislator. Hence sanguinary punishments, contrived in
despotic and barbarous ages, have been continued when the progress of freedom,
science, and morals renders them unnecessary and mischievous: and laws, the
offspring of a corrupted monarchy, are fostered in the bosom of a youthful
republic.

But it is pleasing to perceive that of late this indolence has not been able
to resist the energies of truth. The voice of Reason and Humanity has not been
raised in vain. It has already "forced its way to the thrones of Princes," and
the impression it has made on the governments of Europe is visible in the
progressive amelioration of their criminal codes. A spirit of reform has gone
forth -- the empire of prejudice and inhumanity is silently crumbling to pieces
-- and the progress of liberty, by unfettering the human mind, will hasten its
destruction. See NOTE I.


Happily for Pennsylvania the examination and reform of the pe^^^ laws have
been considered by the Legislature as one of its most important duties. Much
attention has been paid to this subject since the revolution. Capital
punishments have, in several instances, been abolished; and, in others, the
penalty has been better proportioned to the offense. This has been considered
as the commencement of a more general reform; and, if the result of the
experiment shall be found to be such as the friends of humanity wish, it has
been generally expected, that the Legislature would resume the benevolent task.
Proceeding with that caution, which innovation on an ancient system demands,
they have paused in their labors, but it is hoped they have not abandoned the
work.

What success has attended the new system of punishments is, therefore, a
question interesting to humanity. Some years have elapsed since its first
establishment, and we now have data sufficient to calculate its effects. To aid
this important enquiry, -- to review the crimes which are still capital in
Pennsylvania, -- and to examine, whether the punishment of death be, in any
case, necessary, is the object of the present attempt.

ON CAPITAL PUNISHMENTS.
IT being established, That the only object of human punishments is the
prevention of crimes* it necessarily follows, that when a criminal is put to
death, it is not to revenge the wrongs of society, or of any individual -- "it
is not to recall past time and to undo what is already done:" but merely to
prevent the offender from repeating the crime, and to deter others from its
commission, by the terror of the punishment. If, therefore, these two objects
can be obtained by any penalty short of death, to take away life, in such case,
seems to be an authorized act of power.

That the first of these may be accomplished by perpetual imprisonment, unless
the unsettled state, the weakness or poverty, of a government prevent it,
admits of little dispute. It is not only as effectual as death, but is attended
with these advantages, that reparation may sometimes be made to the party
injured -- that punishment may follow quick upon the heels of the offense,
without violating the sentiments of humanity or religion, -- and if, in a
course of years, the offender becomes humbled and reformed, society, instead of
losing, gains a citizen.

It is more difficult to determine what effects are produced on the mind by the
terror of capital punishments; and, whether it be absolutely necessary to deter
the wicked from the commission of atrocious crimes. This is the great problem,
to the solution of which, all the facts I shall have occasion to mention
hereafter, will be directed.

If capital punishments are abolished, their place must be supplied by solitary
imprisonment, hard labor, or stripes: and it has been often urged, that the
apprehension of these would be more terrible and impressive than death. This
may be the case where great inequality is established between the citizens,
where the oppressions of the great drive the lower classes of society into
penury and despair, where education is neglected, manners ferocious, and morals
depraved. In such a country -- and such there are in Europe -- the prospect of
death can be no restraint to the wretch whose life is of so little account, and
who willingly risks it to better his condition. But in a nation where every man
is or may be a proprietor, where labor is bountifully rewarded, and existence
is a blessing of which the poorest citizen feels the value, it cannot be
denied, that death is considered as the heaviest punishment the law can
inflict. The impression it makes on the public mind is visible when a criminal
is tried for his life. We see it in the general expectation -- in the numbers
that throng the place of trial -- in the looks of the prisoner -- in the
anxious attention and long deliberation of the jury, and in the awful silence
which prevails while the verdict is given in by their Foreman. All these
announce the inestimable value which is set on the life of a citizen. But the
reverse of this takes place when imprisonment at hard labor is the punishment,
and the minds of all present, are free from the weight which oppresses them
during a trial of a capital charge. The dread of death is natural, universal --
impressive: and destruction is an idea so simple that all can comprehend and
estimate it: while the punishment of imprisonment and hard labor, secluded from
common observation, and consisting of many parts, requires to be contemplated
or felt, before its horrors can be realized.

But, while this truth is admitted in the abstract, it cannot be denied, that
the terror of death is often so weakened by the hopes of impunity, that the
less punishment seems a curb as strong as the greater. The prospect of escaping
detection and the hopes of an acquittal or pardon, blunt its operation and
defeat the expectations of the Legislature. Experience proves that these hopes
are wonderfully strong, and they often give birth to the most fatal rashness
Soon after the act to amend the penal laws was passed two persons were
convicted, one of robbery the other of burglary, committed previous to it.
These had the privilege of accepting the new punishment instead of the old:
but, they obstinately refused to pray the benefit of the act, and submitted to
the sentence of death in expectation of a pardon. The hopes of one were
realized; but the other was miserably disappointed. The unavailing regret he
expressed when his death warrant was announced and the horrors which seized him
when he was led to execution proved, at once, how terrible is the punishment of
death and how strong are the hopes of pardon!
. Through the violence of the temptation the offender over-looks the
punishment, or sees it "in distant obscurity." Few, who contemplate the
commission of a crime, deliberately count the cost.

These circumstances make it doubtful, whether capital punishments are
beneficial in any cases, except in such as exclude the hopes of pardon. It is
the universal opinion of the best writers on this subject, and many of them are
among the most enlightened men of Europe, That the imagination is soon
accustomed to overlook or despise the degree of the penalty, and that the
certainty of it is the only effectual restraint. They contend, that capital
punishments are prejudicial to society from the example of barbarity they
furnish, and that they multiply crimes instead of preventing them. In support
of this opinion, they appeal to the experience of all ages. They affirm, it has
been proved, in many instances, that the increase of punishment, though it may
suddenly check, does not, in the end, diminish the number of offenders. See
NOTE II.
They appeal to the example of the Romans, who, during the most prosperous ages
of the commonwealth, punished with death none but their slaves. They appeal to
the East Indians, that mild and soft people, where the gentlest punishments are
said to be a curb as effectual as the most bloody code in other countries.
Montesq. B. 14. chapter 15. See NOTE III.
They appeal to the experience of modern Europe, -- to the feeble operation of
the increased severity against robbers and deserters in France, -- and to the
situation of England, where, amidst a multitude of sanguinary and atrocious
laws, the number of crimes is greater than in any part of Europe. They cite the
example of Russia, Beccaria* Voltaire 4. Black. Com. p. 10.
where the introduction of a milder system has promoted civilization, and been
productive of the happiest effects: See NOE IV.
and they applaud the bolder policy of Leopold, which has effectually lessened
the number of crimes in Tuscany, by the total abolition of all capital
punishments. This instructive fact is not only authenticated by discerning
travelers, but is announced by the celebrated Edict of the Grand Duke, issued
so lately as 1786. See NOTE V.
To these might be added the example of Sweden and Denmark: and indeed the more
closely we examine the effects of the different criminal codes in Europe the
more proofs we shall find to confirm this great truth, That the source of all
human corruption lies in the impunity of the criminal not in the moderation of
Punishment. Montesq. B. 6. chapter 12. See NOTE VI.


The experience of America does not contradict that of Europe. Crimes, which
are capital in one state, are punished more mildly in another: and, in the same
state, offenses which were formerly capital are not so at present. Such are
those of horse-stealing, forgery, counterfeiting bills of credit or the coin,
robbery, burglary, and some others: but, I cannot learn that these crimes have
been better repressed by the punishment of death than by a milder penalty.
Horse-stealing has always been treated like the other kinds of simple larceny
in New England and in Pennsylvania: in all the states southward of Maryland, it
is a capital crime. In the latter states the offense seems to be as common as
in the former; and if the severity of the punishment has any beneficial effect,
my enquiries have not been able to ascertain it. On the contrary I have the
best authority for saying, that, in Virginia, the effect is so feeble, that of
all crimes this is the most frequent. New Jersey has made the experiment
fairly. At first it was a felony of death: in 1769 the law was repealed: it was
again revived in 1780; but after a few years experience, the Legislature was
obliged to listen once more to the voice of humanity and sound policy. The
unwillingness of witnesses to prosecute, the facility with which juries
acquitted, and the prospects of pardon, created hopes of impunity which invited
and multiplied the offense. See NOTE. VII.


In the case of forgery the balance is clearly on the side of the milder
punishment. It is capital in New York, but it is not so in Pennsylvania; and,
in the latter state, there have been fewer convicts of this crime than in the
former. It is natural that it should be so; for the public sentiment revolting
against this severity, very few have been executed: and the mischief became so
apparent, that the late Attorney General thought it his duty to present a
memorial to the Assembly and to rerecommend a milder punishment than death.

Another fact deserves notice. Bank bills have been several times forged in the
state of New York: but in Pennsylvania this crime has never been committed,
although the act which made it capital at first, was repealed above seven years
ago.

Counterfeiting the continental bills of credit and uttering them knowingly,
were, as far as I can learn, much more frequent in this state, where they were
capital, than in Connecticut were they were not. It appears, by the annexed
table, that, in the space of two years, while such bills were current, there
were eighteen persons tried for these crimes, of whom eleven were convicted.
This is nearly equal to all the other instances of forgery, not capital, that
have occured in the long term of fourteen years. Robbery, burglary, and the
crime against nature were formerly punished with death in this state: since the
year 1786, they have been as effectually restrained by the gentler penalties of
imprisonment and hard labor.

The experience of Maryland, and, also, of Connecticut, where a similar system
has been adopted with regard to the two first of these crimes, is said to
establish the same fact. See NOTE VIII.
.

Hereafter there may be occasion further to illustrate this part of the
subject: yet, even these facts incline us to suspect, that, in most cases to
which it is applied, the terror of death (lessened as it is by the hopes of
impunity) is neither necessary nor useful. May not milder penalties, strictly
enforced, have as great an effect? Is there not sound wisdom in establishing a
species of punishment in which the grade of criminality may be marked by a
correspondent degree of severity? May we not be allowed to suspect, that any
apparent necessity results rather from the indolence and inattention of
governments than from the nature of things? and, may we not infer, that a
Legislature would be warranted to abolish this dreadful punishment in all cases
(except in the higher degrees of treason and murder) and to make, in this
country, a fair experiment in favor of the rights of human nature.

In no country can the experiment be made with so much safety, and such
probability of success, as in the United States. In the old and corrupted
governments of Europe, especially in the larger states, a reform in the
criminal law has real difficulties to encounter. The multitude of offenders --
the unequal state of society -- the ignorance, poverty and wretchedness of the
lowest class of the people -- corruption of morals -- and habits and manners
formed under sanguinary laws, make a sudden relaxation of punishment, in those
countries, a dangerous experiment. But in America every thing invites to it:
and strangers have expressed their surprise, that we should still retain the
severe code of criminal law, which, during our connection with Britain, we
copied from her. "I am surprised, says a late traveller through America, M.
Brissot. p. 743.
that the penalty of death is not abolished in this country where morals are so
pure, the means of living so abundant, and misery so rare, that there can be no
need of such horrid pains to prevent the commission of crimes." That these
punishments ought to be greatly lessened, if not totally abolished, is the
opinion of many of the most enlightened men in America: among these I may be
allowed to mention the respectable names of Mr. Jefferson, Mr. With and Mr.
Pendleton of Virginia, who, as a committee of revision in their report, to the
General Assembly of that state, recommended the abolition of capital
punishments in all cases but those of treason and murder: a proposal, which,
unfortunately for the interests of humanity, was rejected in the Legislature by
a single vote.

But authorities may mislead and theory may be delusive. Government is an
experimental science: and a series of well established facts in our state is
the best source of rational induction for us. I shall, therefore, after taking
an historical view of our criminal law, proceed to examine the practical
effects of the new system of punishments -- (adopted in 1786, and improved by
new regulations, introduced in 1790) -- of those which are still capital -- and
to accompany them with such observations as a course of some years experience
may suggest.

HISTORICAL VIEW OF THE CRIMINAL LAW OF PENNSYLVANIA.
IT was the policy of Great Britain to keep the laws of the Colonies in unison
with those of the mother country. This principle extended not only to the
regulation of property, but even to the criminal code. The royal charter to
William Penn directs, That the laws of Pennsylvania "respecting felonies,
should be the same with those of England, until altered by the acts of the
future Legislature," who are enjoined to make these acts "as near, as
conveniently may be, to those of England:" This clause, introduced into several
of the charters, was considered as imposing the English statutes. The Assembly
of North Carolina, in their acts, passed 1715, declare, that, "From hence it is
manifest that the laws of England are our laws as far as they are compatible
with our way of living and trade." A similar attempt, to introduce the British
statutes, was more than once made in early times in Pennsylvania but was always
steadily opposed by the General Assembly.
and in order to prevent too great a departure, a duplicate of all acts are
directed to be transmitted, once in five years, for the royal approbation or
dissent.

The natural tendency of this policy was to overwhelm an infant colony, thinly
inhabited, with a mass of sanguinary punishments hardly endurable in an old,
corrupted and populous country. But the Founder of the province was a
philosopher whose elevated mind rose above the errors and prejudices of his
age, like a mountain, whose summit is enlightened by the first beams of the
sun, while the plains are still covered with mists and darkness. He
comprehended, at once, all the absurdity of such a system. In an age of
religious intolerance he destroyed every restraint upon the rights of
conscience, and insured not merely toleration, but absolute protection, If any
one shall abuse or deride another for his persuasion or practice in religion,
he shall be punished as a disturber of the peace, Laws, 1682. Chapter ^.
to every religion under heaven. He abolished the ancient oppression of
forfeitures for self-murder, and deodands in all cases of homicide. He saw the
wickedness of exterminating where it was possible to reform; and the folly of
capital punishments in a country where he hoped to establish purity of morals
and innocence of manners. As a philosopher he wished to extend the empire of
reason and humanity; and, as a leader of a sect, he might recollect that the
infliction of death, in cold blood, could hardly be justified by those who
denied the lawfulness of defensive war. He hastened, therefore, to prevent the
operation of the system which the charter imposed; and among the first cares of
his administration, was that of forming a small, concise, but complete code of
criminal law, fitted to the state of his new settlement: a code which is
animated by the pure spirit of philanthropy, and, where we may discover those
principles of penal law, the elucidation of which has given so much celebrity
to the philosophy of modern times. The punishments prescribed in it were
calculated to tie up the hands of the criminal -- to reform -- to repair the
wrongs of the injured party -- and to hold up an object of terror sufficient to
check a people whose manners he endeavored to fashion by provisions interwoven
in the same system. Robbery, burglary, arson, rape, the crime against nature,
forgery, levying war against the Governor, conspiring his death, and other
crimes, deemed so heinous in many countries, and for which so many thousands
have been executed in Britain, were declared to be no longer capital. Different
degrees of imprisonment at hard labor -- stripes -- fines and forfeitures,
were the whole compass of punishment inflicted on these offenses. Murder,
"wilful and premeditated," is the only crime for which the infliction of death
is prescribed; and this is declared to be enacted in obedience "to the law of
God," as though there had not been any political necessity even for this
punishment apparent to the Legislature. Yet even here the life of the citizen
was guarded by a provision, that no man should be convicted but upon the
testimony of* two witnesses, and, by a humane practice, early introduced, of
staying execution till the record of conviction had been laid before the
Executive, and full opportunity given to obtain a pardon of the offense or a
mitigation of the punishment.

These laws were at first temporary, but being, at length, permanently enacted,
they were transmitted to England, and were all, without exception, repealed by
the Queen in Council. The rights of humanity, however, were not tamely given
up: the same laws were immediately reenacted, and they continued until the year
1718, and might have remained to this day had not high handed measures driven
our ancestors into an adoption of the sanguinary statutes of the Mother
Country. During this long space of thirty-five years, it does not appear that
the mildness of the laws invited offenses, or that Pennsylvania was the theater
of more atrocious crimes than the other Colonies. The judicial records of that
day are lost: but, upon those of the legislative or executive departments and
other public papers, no complaint of of their inefficacy can be found; nor any
attempt to punish these crimes with death. On the contrary, as these laws were
temporary the subject was often before the Legislature, and they were often
re-enacted: which is a decisive proof that they were found adequate to their
object.

Under this policy the province flourished: but during the boisterous
administration of Governor Gookin, a storm was gathering over it which
threatened to sweep away not only this system of laws, but, with it, the
privileges of the people. The administration of government, in all its
departments, had, from the first settlement of the province, been conducted
under the solemnity of an attestation instead of an oath. The laws upon this
subject were repealed in England, and, by an order of the Queen in Council, all
officers and witnesses were obliged to take an oath, or, in lieu thereof, the
affirmation allowed to Quakers in England by the statute of William III. But
the Assembly chose to legislate for themselves on this important subject; and
this, together with the refusal to adopt the English statutes in other cases,
had given offense. The conduct of the Assembly, in their disputes with the
Governor, was misrepresented -- suspicions of disaffection were propagated --
the declining health of the Proprietor left them without an advocate, and his
necessities threatened them with a surrender of the government into the hands
of the crown.

At this moment the Quakers were alarmed with the prospect of political
annihilation. It was said, that the act of 1 George I. which prohibits an
affirmation in cases of qualifications to office or in criminal suits, extended
to the colony and superceded the ancient laws. This construction, which was
advocated by the Governor, and tended to exclude the majority of the settlers
from all offices and even from the protection of the law, threw the whole
province into confusion. The Governor refused to administer the affirmation as
a qualification for office -- the Judges refused to sit in criminal cases --
the administration of justice was suspended, and two atrocious murderers
remained in gaol three years without trial. The Assembly were alarmed, but they
resolutely and forcibly asserted the rights of the people: and Gookin was at
length re-called. 2 Votes of Assembly, 150, 188, 194-5, 200, et passim.


On the accession of Sir William Keith a temporary calm took place -- the
criminals were convicted under the old forms of proceeding, and executed
agreeably to their sentence. A representation and complaint of this was made to
the Crown; and the Assembly were panick struck with the intelligence. They
trembled for their privileges -- they were weary of the contest which had so
long agitated them, and impatient to obtain any regular administration of
justice consistent with their fundamental rights.

They had been assured by the Governor that the best way to secure the favor of
their Sovereign was to copy the laws of the Mother Country, -- "the sum and
result of the experience of ages." The advice was pursued -- a resolution to
extend such of the British penal statutes, as suited the province* was suddenly
entered into. An act for this purpose (containing a provision to secure the
right of affirmation to such as conscientiously scrupled an oath) was drawn up
by David Lloyd, the Chief Justice, and, together with a petition to the Crown,
was passed in a few days. 2 Votes of Assembly, 224, 253-4-5, etc.


So anxious were they to conform, that they not only surrendered their ancient
system, but left it to the British Parliament to legislate for them, in future,
upon this subject: Persons attainted, etc. are to suffer "as the laws of
England now do or hereafter shall direct." Act. 1718. VI.
and so humbled that they departed, in their petition, from their usual style,
But the principle was saved by directing the Speaker to sign it with an
exception.
and directed their Speaker to solicit the Vestry and some members of the
Church of England to join in a similar address. The sacrifice was accepted, and
the privilege of affirmation, so anxiously desired, was confirmed by the royal
sanction.

Thus ended this humane experiment in legislation, and the same year, which saw
it expire, put a period to the life of its benevolent Author.

The royal approbation of this act was triumphantly announced by the Governor,
and such was the satisfaction of seeing its privileges secured, that the
province did not regret the price that it paid.

By this act, which is the basis of our criminal law, the following offenses
were declared to be capital: high treason (including all those treasons which
respect the coin) petit treason, murder, robbery, burglary, rape, sodomy,
buggery, malicious maiming, manslaughter by stabbing, witchcraft and
conjuration, arson, I include arson in this list, because such was the
construction of the act at the time and long after its passing. One Hunt was
actually executed under it. But, on a founder construction it being held to be
a felony within clergy, this benefit was expressly taken away in 1767.
and every other felony (except larceny) on a second conviction. The statute of
James I. respecting bastard children, was extended, in all its rigor, and the
courts were authorized to award execution forthwith.

To this list, already too large, were added, at subsequent periods,
counterfeiting and uttering counterfeit bills of credit, counterfeiting any
current gold or silver coin, and the crime of arson, was extended so as to
include, the burning of certain public buildings. All these crimes, except
perhaps, the impossible one of witchcraft, were capital at the revolution.

We perceive, by this detail, that the severity of our criminal law is an
exotic plant and not the native growth of Pennsylvania. It has been endured
but, I believe, has never been a favorite. The religious opinions of many of
our citizens were in opposition to it: and, as soon as the principles of
Beccaria were disseminated, they found a soil that was prepared to receive
them. During our connection with Great Britain no reform was attempted: but, as
soon as we separated from her, the public sentiment disclosed itself, and this
benevolent undertaking was enjoined by the constitution. This was one of the
first fruits of liberty, and confirms the remark of Montesquieu, Book VI. chapter 9.
"That, as freedom advances, the severity of the penal law decreases."

In obedience to these injunctions, the Assembly proceeded, in the year 1786,
to introduce the punishment of hard labor; and the offenses (formerly capital)
on which its effects have been tried, are, the crime against nature, robbery
and burglary.

We are now to enquire whether this punishment has been less efficacious in
preventing these crimes than the punishment of death. To aid this enquiry, a
table exhibiting a view of the number of persons convicted, acquitted and
executed, since the year 1778, is annexed.

OF THE CRIME AGAINST NATURE.
THIS crime, to which there is so little temptation, that philosophers have
affected to doubt its existence, is, in America, as rare as it is detestable.
In a country where marriages take place so early, and the intercourse between
the sexes is not difficult, there can be no reason for severe penalties to
restrain this abuse. The wretch, who perpetrates it, must be in a state of mind
which may occasion us to doubt, whether he be sui Juris at the time; or,
whether he reflects on the punishment at all. The infamy of detection would, of
itself, be a punishment sufficient to restrain any one who was not certain of
being undiscovered: and what terror has any punishment to him who believes that
his crime will never be known? The experiment that has been made, proves that
the mildness of the punishment has not increased the offense. In the six years
preceding the act, and while the crime was capital, there are on record two
instances of it: in the same period since, there is but one. It was impossible
this last offender could be seduced by the mildness of the punishment, because
at the time, and long after his arrest, he believed it to be a capital crime.

These facts prove, that to punish this crime with death would be a useless
severity. They may teach us, like the capital punishments formerly inflicted on
adultery and witchcraft, how dangerous it is rashly to adopt the Mosaical
institutions. Laws might have been proper for a tribe of ardent barbarians
wandering through the sands of Arabia which are wholly unfit for an enlightened
people of civilized and gentle manners.

ROBBERY AND BURGLARY.
THE salutary effects of this change in our laws are not so evident in the
cases of robbery and burglary as in that of the crime against nature. On the
contrary, a superficial inspection of the annexed table would lead a careless
observer to believe that it has tended to encourage these crimes instead of
suppressing them. It is true, there were, at first, great defects in the plan
and still greater in the execution: and, for some time after its adoption, it
had difficulties to struggle with which nothing but the native merit of its
principle could have surmounted. A detail of these is necessary to enable us
justly to appreciate this new system of punishment.

It must be remarked, that about three-fourths of the convictions of robbery
and burglary, stated in the table, took place in Philadelphia. In a large city
like this there is always a class of men, sometimes greater and sometimes less,
who live by dishonest means, and considering theft as a regular vocation, pass
through all the gradations of simple larceny into the higher departments of
robbery and burglary. It so happened, that about the time of passing the act
for amending the penal laws, there was accumulated in the goal of the city and
county of Philadelphia a great number of persons who had been convicted of
these and other infamous crimes, and were either pardoned by the mercy of the
government, or had undergone the punishment (and some of them the repeated
punishment) of the pillory and whipping-post. These wretches, hardened by the
nature of the punishment they had sustained -- shut up together in idleness --
freely supplied with liquor -- witnesses of each others debauchery --
instructing the inexperienced in the arts of villainy -- and mutually
corrupting and corrupted by each other, were a melancholy proof of the
inefficacy of our former laws, and they were well prepared to despise the new.
In order to clear the goal, and accommodate it to the operation of the new
system, these offenders were, from time to time, discharged, and as soon as
they were at liberty they returned to their old vocation.

It is a fact well known, that among all the convicts which first fell under
the correction of the new law, scarce a new face appeared. Most of those who
were convicted of the two offices in question, were sentenced to undergo an
imprisonment of five, seven or ten years; and had these sentences been strictly
enforced, the benefit of the new system would have been apparent, and these
crimes would have become rare.

Of all offenders these are the most incorrigible. Other offenses are seldom
repeated: but a person once devoted to any species of theft is seldom reclaimed
by any terrors he has undergone or any mercy he has received. Reformation,
though not impossible, must be the work of much time. A strict execution of the
act was, therefore, essential to its success. But it unfortunately happened,
that they were scarcely convicted before many of them were again loose upon the
public. Pardons, so destructive to every mild system of penal laws, instead of
being thought dangerous, were granted with a profusion as unaccountable as it
was mischievous: and escapes, which ought to have been guarded against by the
most vigilant care, were multiplied to an alarming degree. Sixty-eight
different persons were convicted of these offenses previous to the year 1790.
Of these twenty-nine escaped and thirty have been pardoned -- five executed for
capital offenses committed after their escape, and one killed in an affray. I
doubt whether any one male offender served out the time to which he was
condemned by the sentence of the court; and it is certain, that there is not,
at this time, in goal a single person under a sentence pronounced previous to
the year 1791. When to these abuses it is added, that the system itself was
defective in requiring the criminals to be employed abroad, which gave them
opportunities for intoxication, and hardened them against shame -- that their
labor was not equal to that which it is the lot of poverty to endure, while
their fare was much better -- that there were no places for solitary
confinement nor power to inflict it, and no real increase of punishment for a
second offense, we may readily conjecture, that the operations of the system
must have been not only impeded but perverted.

The defects of the system were corrected in 1790 -- the execution of it has
been diligently attended to by the Inspectors, and the prerogative of pardon,
since it has resided in a single Magistrate, is no longer weakly exercised.

Our calculations ought, therefore* to be made on the operations of the
corrected system during the two two last years. From an inspection of the
table, it is evident these crimes have greatly decreased during that period.
The convictions in those two years are, upon an average, considerably less than
those in any two years which precede them.

But, under all the difficulties which, at first, it encountered, and without
allowing for re-convictions which swell the account, let us examine what has
been the general effect of the system, on these crimes, since it was first
adopted. Referring, therefore, to the table, and excluding the year 1778 in
order to make the time previous and subsequent to the act as equal as we can,
the account will stand thus: Before the act. Since the act. Convicted, 81 104
Convicted partially, 9 1 Acquitted, 42 20 Total tried, 132 125

From this statement it appears, that more persons were tried for these
offenses, while they were capital, than-since the punishment has been lessened:
and if we allow for re-convictions the difference will be much greater. It is
true, the number of persons convicted, in the former period, is less than that
of those convicted in the latter: but in this (as well as in the number of
partial acquittals) I see nothing but the humane struggles of the jury to save
the offender from death. At that period the acquittals were more than half the
number of the convictions: since the change in our laws, they do not amount to
a fourth. -- A proof how much the severity of a law tends to defeat its
execution!

It is probable that the number of these crimes would have been less, had a
greater difference been made between their punishment and that of simple
larceny. Perhaps it might have a beneficial effect if solitary confinement and
coarse fare were a necessary part of the punishment. At present, it forms no
part of the sentence on the criminal, but is inflicted, at the discretion of
the Inspectors, on "the more hardened offenders." This is so indefinite a
description, that this salutary rigor may be either capriciously inflicted or
weakly withheld: and, as it is not the certain consequence of the offense, it
can be no check upon the mind of the offender.

It might be sound policy to make a distinction between the punishment of those
who commit these offenses, armed with dangerous and mortal weapons, and of
those who do not indicate such violent intentions. Such a distinction prevails
in the laws of Connecticut, and, also, in those of Milan: and I understood from
from the nephew of the Marquis Beccaria, while he was in America, that
beneficial effects had resulted from this discrimination.

These crimes are still punished with death in the first instance, when
committed by any person, sentenced to hard labor, after an escape: and, also,
on the second conviction, if the offender was pardoned for the first. A similar
provision is found in the laws of Denmark, where robbery is not in the first
instance a capital offense, and where (Mr. Howard assures us) Night Robberies
are never heard of. Howard on Pris. p. 76. Williams on the Northern Gov. 1 vol.
p. 353.


It is evident, from this examination, that the principle of the new system,
properly modified, coincides with the public safety as much as with the
dictates of humanity. The happy result of this experiment is an encouragement
to proceed still further. I have already observed, that no offenders are so
incorrigible as ^obbers and burglars, and on few crimes could the experiment
have been made with so little prospect of success as on these I have been
considering. Succeeding in this, there is little to apprehend from extending it
to other crimes, which, though still capital, are not of the deepest dye.

COUNTERFEITING THE COIN.
BY the act of 1767, the counterfeiting "of any gold or silver coin, which is,
or shall be, passing, or in circulation," is made a felony of death without
benefit of clergy. This not only comprehends all current foreign coins, but
will embrace those of the United States as soon as they come into circulation.

This act is more penal than even the British statutes, for it is not a capital
offense in England to counterfeit any foreign coin at present current in that
kingdom. Black. Com. 89.
If it be necessary to guard our coin by the terrors of an ignominious death,
the act, to be consistent, ought to go further. False money made in another
state or beyond seas, may be imported or uttered without incurring this
punishment. The offense may, therefore, in substance, be committed, and yet the
penalty of the law avoided.

But there does not appear to be any necessity for so violent a remedy. It is
probable this crime will be neither frequent nor dangerous. The perfection of
modern coins renders its commission difficult, and, to counterfeit them with
success, requires not only time and industry, but a degree of skill which few
possess, and which, in this country will always ensure its possessor a
respectable livelihood.

Most people are now a days sufficiently discerning to distinguish the genuine
from false coin* and the Banks, established in this and many of the principal
cities in America, form a valuable check upon the circulation of base money. In
these it is immediately detected; and, if a quantity appears to be abroad,
information of it, and of the marks which distinguish it, is immediately
transmitted to every part of the state by means of the public prints: Add to
this, that the practice of making payments by checks or bank notes, now so
general in this city (which is the usual mart for vending base money) tends
very much to lessen the mischief. There is no longer any danger that false
money will shock the public confidence or embarrass the course of dealing
between man and man. The monstrous folly of considering this offense as an
usurpation of sovereignty, and, therefore, a species of high treason, is past;
and it may now be safely ranked with other base frauds against individuals. The
Edict of the Duke of Tuscany considers the coining of false money as grand
larceny and punishes it as such.. 94*
This crime is not capital in Massachusetts, nor in Connecticutt, nor in
Maryland, nor in North Carolina, as far as relates to foreign coin; and to
every reflecting mind, which is not still enslaved by ancient errors, the
punishment of death must appear to be far beyond the demerits of the offense.
Is it wise, or is just, to confound together dissimilar crimes, and to involve
him who debases a piece of money in the fame punishment with him who is guilty
of deliberate murder?

There is no substantial reason for making this crime capital which does not
equally apply to that of forgery. In the present state of society paper
negotiations require as much protection as the coin. The latter offense, in
general, is more easily committed; and, a single act of forgery, may be more
injurious to the individual than many acts of counterfeiting the coin. Yet, we
find, the paper of the Banks, promissory notes and bills of exchange
sufficiently safe under the mild system of our laws. It is true various acts of
Assembly made it a felony of death to counterfeit and utter the Continental
bills of credit: but it has been already stated, that no beneficial
consequences resulted from this severity.

Only three persons have been tried in Pennsylvania for counterfeiting the coin
since the revolution, and of these two were acquitted. Positive proof of this
crime is rarely to be obtained, and the usual circumstances which attend its
commission, as they amount to proof of an inferior offense, are seldom admitted
by a jury to amount to anything more.

From the experience we have had it is not probable, that many will become the
victims of the law: but, while it remains in our stature book, it furnishes a
precedent for involving, in the same punishment, crimes which are similar in
their nature and effects. I suspect this offense was overlooked at the time the
reform was made in our penal laws, otherwise it would hardly have been
continued in the list of capital crimes.

Of the acts respecting the crime of counterfeiting bills of credit,
loan-office certificates, etc. I shall take no notice, as the offense will
scarcely be committed at this day, and the law will become obsolete of itself,
if it be not repealed.

RAPE.
THE infliction of death for any crime supposes the incorrigibility of the
criminal. But this offense, arising from the sudden abuse of a natural passion,
and perpetrated in the phrenzy of desire, does not announce any irreclaimable
corruption.

Female innocence has strong claims upon our protection, and a desire to avenge
its wrongs is natural to a generous and manly mind. We consult this resentment,
rather than our reason, when we punish this offense with such dreadful
severity. The injury is certainly great: yet, it cannot be denied, that much of
its atrocity resides in the imagination and is the creature of opinion. Why
else do we estimate the degree of the offense so much by the rank, the
situation, and the character of the injured party? Why does a jury frequently
treat this charge so lightly as to acquit against positive and uncontradicted
evidence? Or why do the laws consider the violation of a female slave of so
little moment as to secure the offender from punishment by excluding the only
witness who can prove it? Act for the gradual abolition of slavery.. 7.
In most cases the violation of the natural right and the real injury to the
individual is nearly the same: yet, those who justify the present severity are
obliged to admit, "that is a crime peculiarly liable to vary in the degree of
its atrociousness, according to the circumstances of the case, and, therefore,
peculiarly open to the divine prerogative of pardon." Eden's principles, 238.
The truth is, that in many instances, the common sense of mankind revolts
against the extremity of the punishment, and pardons or acquittals are the
necessary consequence. It is these pardons -- it is these acquittals -- which
create the hopes of impunity and rob the law of all its terrors. It has been as
strictly executed in Pennsylvania as in most countries: yet, of eighteen
persons tried since the revolution for this crime, and positively charged, only
five have been punished.

By a table of capital convictions in Scotland from 1768, to 1782, Howard on
prisons, 485.
it appears, that only one person was convicted of this crime, and that he was
pardoned. See NOTE IX.


William Penn considered imprisonment, stripes and hard labor as a punishment
adequate to this crime and sufficient to check the commission of it. The Grand
Duke of Tuscany prescribes imprisonment at labor, varied as the circumstances
may require. Section 99.
The Legislature of Vermont, so late as the year 1791, has followed the humane
example, and in that state death is no longer inflicted on this offense.

If any one, mistaking the end of punishment, and more intent on vengeance than
the prevention of the crime, deems this chastisement too light, a visit to the
penitentiary house lately erected as part of the goal of Philadelphia, will
correct the opinion. When he looks into the narrow cells prepared for the more
atrocious offenders -- When he realizes what it is to subsist on coarse fare --
to languish in the solitude of a prison -- to wear out his tedious days and
long nights in feverish anxiety -- to be cut off from his family -- from his
friends -- from society -- from all that makes life dear to the heart -- When
he realizes this he will no longer think the punishment inadequate to the
offense.

ARSON.
ARSON is the crime of slaves and children. Its motive is revenge, and, to a
free mind, the pleasure of revenge is lost when its object is ignorant of the
hand that inflicts the blow. Twelve persons have been tried for this offense in
the last fourteen years: and of these, three were negro slaves -- four were
children, and two were vagrant beggars. The remaining three were acquitted
under circumstances which made it probable the fire was accidental.

This offense may be committed so secretly that it is seldom possible to
collect proof sufficient on a charge that is capital. Other crimes are
committed in the presence of witnesses, or are attended with circumstances
which point out the criminal: but in arson there are no eyewitnesses -- the
presumptive proof will seldom be violent, and confessions are only to be
expected from the ignorance of slaves and children. These confessions (too
generally extorted by promises or threats) come before the jury in so
questionable a shape, that they are often disregarded.

Hence the severity of the punishment, in this case, leads in a peculiar manner
to impunity. The proof is so difficult that juries are justified in acquitting,
and the objects convicted are such as the Executive is prompt to pardon. Of
five persons convicted of this crime only one was executed. -- This was a negro
woman in a distant county.

The crime of arson extends only to the wilful burning of a dwelling house,
certain public buildings, or a barn having hay or corn therein. Every other
species of property may be maliciously destroyed by fire, without incurring the
forfeiture of life. Hence, ships and other vessels in harbor or on the stocks
-- hay and grain in stack or barrack -- magazines of arms and provisions --
storehouses of every description -- mills -- theaters and distilleries, are not
protected by these high terrors of the law: and to burn them is considered
merely as a misdemeanor at common law. Here then is a fair opportunity for
comparison. Has the milder punishment encouraged these malicious crimes; or,
has the terror of death, hung up on high, deterred offenders from the crime of
arson? The following fact will answer the question. Since the revolution twelve
persons have been indicted for the crime of arson; and only two for any other
species of malicious burning!

In New Hampshire and Massachusetts this crime is not capital if committed in
the day time: nor in Connecticut, "if no prejudice or hazard to the life of any
person happen therefrom." To burn public vessels or magazines of provision, in
time of war, being a species of treason, is, indeed, capital in that state: but
it is not so if the same offense be committed in time of peace. I cannot learn
that these distinctions have any effect, or that the lesser offense is more
frequent than the greater.

Upon the whole, it seems that solitude and hard labor will be a punishment,
for this crime, as efficacious and more advantageous to the public, than death.
The offender may be reformed and become a useful citizen, and he may be
compelled to repair, by his estate or his labor, the injury he has done. This
was formerly required in most cases, by the laws of William Penn; but, at
present, is swallowed up by the legal maxim which merges the private in the
public wrong: a maxim, invented by fiscal or feudal ingenuity, to prevent the
claims of the injured party from interfering with the forfeiture to the crown
and the escheat to the lord.

MALICIOUS MAYHEM, etc.
THIS offense is described in the words of the English statute, 22 and 23 Car.
II. chapter 1. commonly called the Coventry act. The severity of this act, which
goes considerably beyond all former statutes on the subject, was occasioned by
a malicious assault made upon Sir John Coventry, then one of the members of the
House of Commons. Laws thus made upon the spur of the occasion, and under the
emotions of indignation, are seldom founded upon the permanent principles of
justice or policy.

This act has remained a dead letter in Pennsylvania. No person has been
prosecuted under it, nor can I learn that the crime has ever been committed. I
attribute this to the state of manners, and by no means to the nature of the
penalty. On the contrary, as no prosecution has called it into public notice,
it is probable that very few people know that such an act exists.

New Hampshire, in legislating on this subject, has set us an example of
justice and moderation. There the penalty is fine and imprisonment not
exceeding seven years; and there, as well as in Pennsylvania, the offense is
unknown. The same penalty is prescribed by the laws of the United States. Even
in Georgia, where the attention of the Legislature has been called to it so
late as 1787, the punishment, for the first offense, is the pillory and fine
not exceeding one hundred pounds, half of which goes to the injured party. In
Virginia and North Carolina, though it be a felony, it is not ousted, as with
us, of the benefit of clergy.

MANSLAUGHTER BY STABBING.
The act of 1 Jac. I. usually called, the statute of stabbing, by which this
offense was ousted of clergy, was extended to the province by an express
reference to it in the act of 1718. This statute, which was levelled against a
temporary mischief prevalent in England at that day -- in ^^ich so much
ignorance of the common law is discovered -- which is so rigorous in its
literal meaning as to involve the cases of chance medley and innocent mistake
-- and so obscure and ill drawn that the Judges have been divided on the
meaning of almost every important word in it -- ought never to have been made a
permanent law of Pennsylvania. Its severity, however, has been so mitigated by
judicial construction, that the soundest opinion now seems to be, "That the
party indicted upon it ought not to be convicted, unless the fact, upon
evidence, turns out to be murder at common law." Foster, 301-2.
For this reason it has not been usual, for some years past, to indict any
person on this act in Pennsylvania; and, for the same reason, it ought not to
remain among our laws. It is useless when rightly explained: it may be the
instrument of mischief when it is perverted or misunderstood.

MURDER.
IT has been a question which has divided the philosophers of Europe, whether
it be lawful, in any case, to take away the life of a criminal: and the
negative has been advanced and ingeniously supported in our own country.
"Observations on the injustice and impolicy of punishing murder with death," by
Dr. Rush.
Great names are arranged on the different sides of this question: but, waving
useless refinement, it seems to resolve itself into that which we are
considering, viz. whether it be necessary to the peace, order, and happiness of
society.

Murder, in its highest degree, has generally been punished with death, See
NOTE X.
and it is for deliberate assassination, if in any case, that this punishment
will be justifiable and useful. Existence is the first blessing of Heaven,
because all others depend upon it. Its protection is the great object of civil
society and governments are bound to adopt every measure which is, in any
degree, essential to its preservation. The life of the deliberate assassin can
be of little worth to society, and it were better that ten such atrocious
criminals should suffer the penalty of the present system, than that one worthy
citizen should perish by its abolition. The crime imports extreme depravity and
it admits of no reparation.

"But why should capital punishments have a more powerful effect on these than
on other offenders?" I have already observed, that the fear of death is
universal and impressive: and that its beneficial effects and defeated
principally by the hopes of impunity.

We have had (...) experience what its effect will be when it is applied to a
single crime of such a nature as to exclude the hopes of pardon. In such a
case, where an execution would be as rare as it is dreadful, the wholesome
terror of the law would be wonderfully increased: and this is one reason why a
less punishment should be adopted for other crimes.

If we seek a punishment capable of impressing a strong and lasting terror, we
shall find it in an execution rarely occuring -- solemnly conducted See NOTE XI.
-- and inflicted in a case, where the feelings of mankind acquiesce in its
justice and do not revolt at its severity.

But while I contend that this is the most powerful curb of human governments,
I do not affirm that it is absolutely necessary, or that a milder one will be
insufficient. It is possible that the further diffusion of knowledge and
melioration of manners, may render capital punishments unnecessary in all
cases: but, until we have had more experience, it is safest to tread with
caution on such delicate ground, and to proceed step by step in so great a
work. A few years experience is often of more real use than all the theory and
rhetoric in the world. One thing, however, is clear. Whatever be the punishment
inflicted on the higher degrees of murder it ought to be widely different from
that of every other crime. If not different in its nature at least let there be
some circumstance in it calculated to strike the imagination -- to impress a
respect for life -- and to remove the temptation which the villain otherwise
has to prevent the discovery of a less crime by the commission of a greater.
NOTE XII.


But while I speak thus of deliberate assassination, there are other kinds of
murder to which these observations do not apply: and in which, as the killing
is in a great measure the result of accident, it is impossible the severity of
the punishment can have any effect. The laws seem, in such cases, to punish the
act more than* the intention: and, because society has unfortunately lost one
citizen, the executioner is suffered to deprive it of another.

In common understanding the crime of murder includes the circumstance of
premeditation. In the laws of William Penn, the technical phrase malice
aforethought, was avoided; and "wilful and premeditated murder" is the crime
which was declared to be capital. Yet murder, in judicial construction, is a
term so broad and comprehensive in its meaning as to embrace many acts of
homicide, where the killing is neither wilful nor premeditated. " A. shoots
at the poultry of B. and, by accident, kills a man; if his intention was to
steal the poultry it will be murder: but if done wantonly it will be barely
manslaughter." Again, "A parker found a boy stealing wood in his masters
ground: he bound him to his horse's tail and beat him. The horse took fright,
run away and killed the boy. This was held to be murder." Foster. 259, 292.
In the latter case there was no design to kill; in the former not the least
intention to do any bodily harm.

I am sensible how delicate a step it is to break in upon the definition of
crimes formed by the accumulated care of ages; but, when we consider how
different, in their degree of guilt, these offenses are from the horrid crime
of deliberate assassination, it is difficult to suppress a wish, that some
distinctions were made in favor of homicides which do not announce extreme
depravity. The defect may be, in a degree, supplied by the prerogative of
pardon: yet it shocks the vulgar opinion and lessens the horror of the crime
whenever a murderer is pardoned. It has been said, "Ye shall take no
satisfaction for the life of the murderer:" yet it is often necessary, as the
law stands, to interpose the prerogative of mercy. Even in England, where
restraints are laid upon its exercise in cases of murder, it appears, by tables
See Jansen's Tables in How. Lazar. p. 483-5.
already referred to, that, of eight-one sentenced to die for this crime, seven
were pardoned, -- in Scotland seven out of twenty, -- and in Pennsylvania about
one-fourth of the whole number convicted. Not one of these, thus pardoned, has
ever been prosecuted, to my knowledge, for any other crime.

In the report of the committee of revision to the General Assembly of
Virginia, a reform is suggested so far as relates to homicide accidentally
happening in consequence of a felonious or unlawful act: and it is proposed to
be enacted. "That, in future, no such case shall be deemed manslaughter unless
manslaughter were intended, nor murder unless murder were intended."

Though assassination has been rare in Pennsylvania, it cannot be concealed
that homicides have been very frequent. It appears by the table annexed, that,
in the last fourteen years, there have been tried for murder and manslaughter
no less than one hundred persons, of whom one half were convicted, and
thirty-four of these were for murder. In the same space of time there were but
twenty convicted of this latter crime in Scotland. Even in the city of London,
nearly twice as populous as this state, there were but nineteen persons
executed for murder from 1771 to 1783, a space of twelve years. Howard, p.484-5.
In fourteen years twenty-six have been executed in Pennsylvania.

There is one species of murder which deserves attention. It is that of bastard
children. The horrid severity of the statute of James I. introduced here, had
long been mitigated by a humane practice of requiring some proof that the child
was born alive. This practical construction is now legally authorized, and it
is necessary to give, some "probable presumptive proof of that fact, before the
strained presumption that the child, whose death is concealed, was therefore,
murdered by its mother, shall be sufficient to convict the party indicted." Act
to reform the penal laws. VI.


But does it necessarily follow that a child, which is born alive, must be
destroyed merely because its death is concealed? May not the child perish from
want of care, or of skill, in so critical a moment? A helpless woman, in a
situation so novel and so alarming -- alone, and, perhaps, exhausted by her
sufferings -- may she not be the involuntary cause of her infant's death? and,
if she afterward consults a natural impulse to conceal her shame, is not the
penalty beyond the demerit of the offense? These reflections naturally arise in
the hearts of jurymen; they regard these unfortunate creatures with
compassionate eyes, and I have never known them convict unless there were marks
of violence, or some circumstances that would amount to proof of murder at
common law. The punishment is ever before their eyes, and they tremble at the
consequences of an irretrievable mistake. The presumptions that the child was
born alive have been, not only probable but violent, and yet the act has not
been enforced. There have been fifteen women tried for child-murder since the
year 1778; three only convicted, and, of these, two were pardoned. Where a
positive law is so feebly enforced, there is reason to suspect that it is
fundamentally wrong. The error of this act is apparent. Proof of a crime is
that which satisfies our minds of the truth of the charge. If it does not
produce a belief of the fact laid in the indictment it is not proof of it --
and this belief is neither in our power nor that of the law. It is absurd,
therefore, to say, that this or that circumstance shall be proof of the murder.
To make the concealment a capital crime is one thing: but, to say, that when
the concealment is proved, the jury must, at all events, believe the murder to
be committed -- is a very different one.

In Denmark, women guilty of child-murder are no longer punished with death:
but are condemned to work in spin-houses for life, and to be whipped annually,
on the day when, and the spot where, the crime was committed. "This mode of
punishment, Mr. Howard assures us, Howard on prisons, p. 74.
is dreaded more than death, and since it has been adopted has greatly
prevented the frequency of the crime."

An attempt was made to introduce a similar alteration in the laws of Sweden.
It was recommended by Gustavus III. in his speech at the opening of the Diet of
1786. But this innovation was warmly opposed by the Clergy: and the patriots to
whose consideration it was referred were unanimous in advising the
representatives of the nation to continue the punishment of death. See Journey
through Sweden traslated by Radcliffe. Catteau's View of Swed. p. 159.


There is a provision in the laws of New Hampshire, which is founded in good
sense, and which, while this offense remains capital, it is desirable could be
introduced here. There, the concealment is treated as a crime punishable by
fine, imprisonment or public infamy, according to the circumstances of the
case; while the proof of the murder remains as at common law. If, as is usually
done, the indictment charges both crimes, the jury may acquit of the murder and
find the prisoner guilty of the less offense.

MANSLAUGHTER.
THOUGH manslaughter is not, in common acceptance, a capital crime, I mention
it for the sake of making a single observation respecting its punishment.

Manslaughter, as explained in our law books, is exceedingly comprehensive in
its nature. While its deepest shade partakes of the hue of murder, its lightest
is faintly tinged with the feeble colors of carelessness and inadvertance. The
punishment ought, therefore, to be such as might be varied according to the
circumstances of the case: or, the different degrees of the crime should be
ascertained and marked with a correspondent penalty. The former is the case in
all the New England states, and the court may inflict an infamous punishment,
or fine or imprisonment, or all or either of these as the degree of guilt
requires. This was formerly the law in Pennsylvania; but now every person
convicted of manslaughter is sentenced to be burnt in the hand -- to find
security for his good behavior during life -- and to be sined and imprisoned:
and for the second offense to be hanged.

Beneficial effects resulted from an act of Assembly, passed in the year 1780,
which authorized the Attorney General, with the leave of the court, to proceed
against any person charged with treason, as for as a misdemeanor only. Upon
this principle, might not the Public Prosecutor be empowered to wave the felony
in the lower species of manslaughter, and to indict the defendant for an
unlawful homicide, punishable as a misdemeanor at common law?

PETIT TREASON.
THIS crime, which consists in a wife's killing her husband or a servant his or
her master, is punished differently from the other species of murder. A man
convicted of it is to be drawn and hanged, and a woman to be drawn and burnt.
Is not this distinction unjust, and this mode of inflicting death, handed down
from ferocious ages, injurious to society from it apparent, ^n practice, it is
usual to strangle the woman before her body is committed to the flames. See
NOTE. II.
if not real, barbarity?

In many of the states, as well as by the laws of Congress, it is expressly
enacted, That death shall always be inflicted by hanging the offender by the
neck. We have no such act in Pennsylvania.

The distinction between petit treason and other kinds of murder is abolished
by the laws of Massachusetts. Neither the enormity of its its guilt, nor the
supposed allegiance of the party, require a distinction more than the crime of
parricide which is punished as simple murder.

HIGH TREASON.
HIGH TREASON, when properly limited, has generally been considered as the
highest crime and as involving in it the guilt of murder. In its true meaning
it is an attack upon the sovereignty and existence of the nation.

By the acts of Congress and of several of the states In New Hampshire "to
conspire to levy war" is high Treason: This, if applied to the constructive
levying of war, outdoes the severity of the British Government.
it is properly confined to the levying war and adhering to enemies, and is
described in the words of the statute of Edward III: -- words, whose precise
extent has been settled by the judicial construction of more than four
centuries. In Pennsylvania the description of this crime is more diffuse: and
the act of 1782 is sufficiently severe which makes it high treason to set up a
notice inviting the people to meet for the purpose of erecting a new and
independent government within the bounds of the state, or even to attend at any
meeting for such a purpose.

CONCLUSION.
IT is from the ignorance, wretchedness or corrupted manners of a people tha^
(...) proceed. In a country where these do not prevail moderate punishments,
strictly enforced, will be a curb as effectual as the greatest severity.

A mitigation of punishment ought, therefore, to be accompanied, as far as
possible, by a diffusion of knowledge and a strict execution of the laws. The
former not only contributes to enlighten, but to meliorate the manners and
improve the happiness of a people.

The celebrated Beccaria is of opinion, that no government has a right to
punish its subjects unless it has previously taken care to instruct them in the
knowledge of the laws and the duties of public and private life. The strong
mind of William Penn grasped at both these objects, and provisions to secure
them were interwoven with his system of punishments. The laws enjoined all
parents and guardians to instruct the children under their care so as to enable
them to write and read the scriptures by the time they attained to twelve years
of age: and directed, that a copy of the laws (at that time few, simple and
concise) should be used as a school book. Laws 1682. ch, 60. 112.
Similar provisions were introduced into the laws of Connecticut, and the
Select Men are directed to see that "none suffer so much barbarism in their
families as to want such learning and instruction." The children were to be
"taught the laws against capital offenses," Laws Conn. p. 20.
as those at Rome were accustomed to commit the twelve tables to memory. These
were regulations in the pure spirit of a republic, which, considering the youth
as the property of the state, does not permit a parent to bring up his children
in ignorance and vice.

The policy of the Eastern states, in the establishment of public schools,
aided by the convenient size and incorporation of their townships, deserves
attention and imitation. It is, doubtless, in a great measure, owing to the
diffusion of knowledge which these produce, that executions have been so rare
in New England; and, for the same reason, they are comparatively few in
Scotland. Scotland is nearly twice as populous as London; yet, by the tables
referred to already, it appears, that about thirty criminals are executed,
yearly, in London, while not quite four is the yearly average in Scotland. The
difference between those capitally convicted, in two places, is much greater.
How. p. 9. 483-5.
Early education prevents more crimes than the severity of the criminal code.

The constitution of Pennsylvania contemplates this great object and directs,
That "Schools shall be established, by law, throughout this state." Although
there are real difficulties which oppose themselves to the perfect execution of
the plan, yet, the advantages of it are so manifest that an enlightened
Legislator will, no doubt, cheerfully encounter, and, in the end, be able to
surmount them.

Secondly -- Laws which prescribe hard labor as a punishment should be strictly
executed. See NOTE XIII.
The criminals ought, as far as possible, to be collected in one place, easily
accessible to those who have the inspection of it. When they are together their
management will be less expensive, more systematic and beneficial -- Their
treatment ought to be such as to make their confinement an actual punishment,
and the rememberance of it a terror in future. The labor, in most cases, should
be real hard labor -- the food, though wholesome, should be coarse -- the
confinement sufficiently long to break down a disposition to vice -- and the
salutary rigor of perfect solitude, invariably inflicted on the greater
offenders. Escapes should be industriously guarded against -- pardons should be
rarely, very rarely, granted, and the punishment of those who are guilty of a
second offense should be sufficiently severe.

The reformation of offenders is declared to be one of the objects of the
Legislature in reducing the punishment -- But time, and, in some cases, much
time, must be allowed for this. It is easy to counterfeit contrition; but it is
impossible to have faith in the sudden conversion of an old offender.

On these hints I mean not to enlarge -- but they point to objects of great
importance, which may deserve attention whenever a further reform is attempted.

The conclusion to which we are led, by this enquiry, seems to be, that in all
cases (except those of high treason and murder) the punishment of death may be
safely abolished, and milder penalties advantageously introduced -- Such a
system of punishments, aided and enforced in the manner I have mentioned, will
not only have an auspious influence on the character, morals, and happiness of
the people, but may hasten the period, when, in the progress of civilization,
the punishment of death shall cease to be necessary; and the Legislature of
Pennsylvania, putting the key-stone to the arch, may triumph in the completion
of their benevolent work. See NOTE XIV.


NOTES AND ILLUSTRATIONS.

NOTES AND ILLUSTRATIONS.
NOTE I. Page 5.
IT was a favorite opinion of Dr. Jebb, "That no effort is lost," and the
success which has attended these endeavors to moderate the rigor of the
Criminal Law, tends to confirm it. A slight review of the effects which the
dissemination of these principles have had upon the governments of Europe will
not be foreign to the object of this work, and must be consolatory to the
friends of humanity.

Forty years ago the execrable practice of torture was general on the continent
of Europe, and it was considered to be as necessary in the administration of
justice as capital punishments are at present. Against this cruel institution
all the powers of reason and ridicule were exerted: and the folly as well as
the wickedness of it has been so happily exposed, that it has either been
wholly suppressed, or has become so disreputable as seldom to be exercised. The
King of Prussia set the example of abolishing it in Germany, and the Duke of
Tuscany in Italy; and the example was soon followed in Saxony and in Poland. It
was suppressed throughout all Russia in 1768, though not without some
opposition from the prejudices of the people. In Geneva it has not been used
since the year 1756; and it was totally abolished in Sweden in 1773. Maria
Theresa tacitly suppressed, and the late Emperor Joseph, formally prohibited it
in the Austrian dominions. Louis XVI. about the same time restricted its
exercise in France. The revolution has utterly abolished it in that country as
well as in Avignon, where it was exercised with so much severity that the
jailer there informed Mr. Howard, in 1786, that he had seen drops of blood
mixed with the sweat on the breasts of some who had suffered the torture. Even
in Spain the practice though not formally abolished, is generally reprobated,
and in some of the provinces is no longer used. The Chevalier de Bourgoanne
informs us, that a few years ago an ecclesiastic named Castro, undertook a
formal apology for it; but that his book was received with universal
indignation and was fully refuted by a gentleman of the law, who, in fact, only
expressed the moderate sentiments of the first tribunals of the kingdom, and of
the reasonable part of the nation.

Those, whose imaginations have realized the scenes which were formerly
exhibited in a torture chamber, will consider the destruction of this monster
as no inconsiderable cause of triumph. See Bourg. Trav. 1 vol. 286-7. Howard on
Pris. 154 etc. Lazaretto's. 66. 53. 2 Coxe's Trav. 83. 392. 4. Biblioth.
Philos. 205.

Though I have selected this striking instance, it is but a small part of the
effects produced by this diffusion of light and truth.

To this is to be attributed the general reformation in the civil and criminal
code of Russia. The celebrated "Instructions" of the Empress, written with her
own hand, and deposited with so much care in the gilded vase at Petersburg --
What are they, but the principles scattered through the writings of the
philosophers of Europe, and often expressed in their very words? It was the
same cause which produced the reformation of the criminal law at Vienna in
1785. "The Court (says Baron Reisbach, speaking of the Codex Theresianus)
became ashamed, at the time when all Europe was making an outcry about
humanity, the abolition of capital punishments, etc. of a statute book which
had nothing in it but halters, gibbets, and swords" -- and a reform was
immediately begun.

The amelioration introduced into the laws of Sweden by Gustavus III. begin to
be generally known. -- We now perceive in that country "the character of a
government which listens to the voice of humanity;" and it is easy to trace the
source of this reform to those philosophical writings whose maxims were so
strongly impressed on his mind, that he did not forget them in the last moments
of his life. As to Tuscany, it is acknowledged, that the abolition of capital
punishments and the whole system of Leopold, was introduced with the design of
putting the principles of Beccaria to the test of experiment.

In Spain, the triumphs of reason have not been wanting. Various steps have
been taken under the auspices of Count d' Aranda, to narrow the Jurisdiction
and humanize the proceedings of the inquisition, and with such success, that
some years ago there was an expectation "that the moment was at hand when this
hydra, which philosophy had condemned long before, was to be destroyed." --
Attempts were also made in the year 1783 to reform the criminal law of the
other tribunals of the kingdom. The council of Castile proposed this, and a
committee was appointed to carry the proposal into effect. But what has been
the result I have not been able to learn.

England contenting herself with the superior wisdom, humanity, and justice of
her laws in all respects but one, and too fond of "the ancient order of
things," has alone remained stationary. The nation indeed is fully sensible of
the evil which attends a multitude of sanguinary laws and the government itself
begins to be alarmed with the magnitude of the mischief. Judge Blackstone was
active in prosecuting a reform, and Lord Ashburton, it is said, was prevented
by his death from bringing forward in parliament a plan for that purpose. A
disposition to establish penetentiary houses has been discovered, and this
rational expedient will probably be adopted when the Botany Bay scheme has been
sufficiently tried.

The fermentation of the public mind in Europe excited by greater objects will
prevent for a while any attention to this subordinate subject: but a reform in
the government will in the end hasten that which is so much wanted in the
criminal law. It is impossible that error can long resist the gentle, but
continued impression of reason. The stroke of truth on public prejudice will be
finally irresistible. It resembles that of a grain of sand falling on
unannealed glass. Feeble as it seems to be -- and slow and invisible as its
operations are, no human power can prevent its effects, or preserve from
destruction the object on which it falls. See Reisbach's Trav. 1 vol. p. 106.
Bourg. 1 vol. 320. 1. 186. Jebb on Prisons. Parl. Regist. vol. 18. p. 521.

NOTE II. Page 9.
[ An increase of punishment may suddenly check, but does not in the end
diminish the number of offenders.] -- This principle is well illustrated by
Montesquieu. To the facts adduced by him in support of it, the following may be
added. In 1752, the British parliament passed an act for the better preventing
the horrid crime of murder; by which, in order "to add further terror to the
punishment of death," it was directed that the body of the criminal should be
delivered at Surgeons Hall, to be dislected and anatomized. This expedient, it
is said, carried some terror with it at first, but, we are assured, that this
prejudice is now pretty well worn off. 1 vol. Wenderb. View, p. 78. This is
confirmed by Sir S. T. Jansen, who on comparing the annual average of
convictions for 23 years previous and subsequent to that statute, found that
the number of murders had not all decreased. See his Table in Howard's Lazar.

I am sorry to perceive that this useless, and perhaps pernicious, expedient
has been introduced into the laws of the United States. An anatomical professor
might have found reasons for its adoption, but the single object of the
legislature was or ought to have been to prevent the crime. See Debates Cong. 7
April 1790. Not wholly foreign to this subject is the following striking
passage in the Rights of Man: "It may, perhaps be said, that it signifies
nothing to a man what is done to him after his death: but it signifies much to
the living. It either tortures their feelings or hardens their hearts; and in
either case it teaches them how to punish when power falls into their hands.
Lay then the axe to the root, and teach governments humanity. It is their
sanguinary punishments which corrupt mankind." Rights of Man, 1 Part p. 33.

NOTE III. Page 9.
Facts from which principles are to be deduced ought to be well established. I
am therefore obliged to observe that Montesquieu appears to have taken up that
alluded to in the text, without sufficiently examining into its truth. The
passage in the Spirit of Laws is thus: "The people of India are mild, tender,
and compassionate. Hence their legislators repose great confidence in them.
They have established very few punishments, and these are not severe nor
rigorously executed." This is founded on the authority of Le P. Bouchuel in his
collection of edifying letters. A similar account is given by other European
writers. The authors of "Travels into Europe, Asia, and Africa," published in
1782, says, "The Hindoos are naturally the most inoffensive of mortals. There
is a wonderful mildness in their manners, and also in their laws, by which the
murder of a human creature and of a cow, (one of the sacred animals) are the
only crimes which are punished with death." 1 vol. p. 332. These accounts are
very different from those of the ancients, who represent the punishment of
crimes in India as extremely rigorous: and since the Bramins have been
prevailed upon by the address of Mr. Hastings, to communicate the Hindoo code
to the world, we find that the ancients were right in their representations.
There is a profusion of capital punishments prescribed in that code, and the
cruel manner of inflicting them, bears the stamp of remote and barbarous ages.
This difference is, in some measure reconciled, by Mr. Halhed, the translator
of the Hindoo code, in his preface to that work. Speaking of the chapter on
theft, his words are, "This part of the compilation exhibits a variety of
crimes punished by various modes of capital retribution, contrary to the
general opinion adopted in Europe, that the Gentor administration was
wonderfully mild and averse to the deprivation of life. One cause for this
opinion might be, that since the Tartar Emperors became absolute in India, the
Hindoos, (like the Jews in captivity) though in some respects permitted to live
by their own rules, have, for reasons of government, been in most cases
prohibited from dying by them." p. 62. Be this as it may, little can be
inferred from the example of so peculiar a people, who are more governed by
manners and religion, than by laws; otherwise it might be observed, that those
of the superior cast or tribe, are expressly exempted from capital, though they
are subjected to other punishments: and there is no good ground to believe,
that this exemption ever corrupted the heart or tempted to the commission of
crimes. See Spirit Laws. B. 14. chapter 15. Raynel vol. 1. Sketches Hist. Hindost.
300. 1. Hindoo Code. 1777. passim. Roberts. Ind. 263.

In China, where the population is computed at 60 millions, a strict
administration of justice is said to supersede the necessity of many capital
punishments. We are told that no crimes are punished with death, except treason
and murder; and that in this extensive country, not more than 10 persons are
executed in a year. Sullivans Philos. Raps. 156. There is reason to believe
that the laws of China are at once mild and efficient: But the accounts we have
of that people are imperfect and contradictory. See on this subject Montes. B.
19. chapter 17. B. 6. chapter 9. Duhalde's Hist. vol. 1. Encyclop. art. China.

NOTE IV. Page 10.
Blackstone in his Commentaries, Montesquieu, and others, cite with approbation
the conduct of the Empress Elizabeth, who upon her accession to the throne of
Russia, in 1741, made a vow that no one should be put to death during her
reign. But as there were no fixed and ascertained punishments substituted in
the room of death, and as that defect was often supplied in that arbitrary
government by the infliction of capricious and cruel tortures, it seems rather
to have been a weak affectation of clemency, than a beneficial reform: and it
was not successful in the prevention of crimes. See note X. The present Empress
proceeded with more wisdom. In 1768 she convoked an assembly of deputies from
all parts of the Empire, and laying before them her "Instructions," which
contain an epitome of the principles advanced by the best writers on this
subject, has by their assistance given to the nation a complete code of civil
and criminal laws, the first part published in 1775, the latter in 1780. By
these the penalty of death is abolished in all cases but that of treason: and
definite and certain punishments are prescribed for every offense. Some of
these are of such a nature, that humanity has gained little by the change: but
in general the beneficial effects of the new system are very evident. That
empire has of late been an object of attention to intelligent travelers, and
we have as much authentic information of the internal state of Russia as of
other European countries. Upon an attentive examination of their accounts, I do
not discover, that the suppression of capital punishments has in any degree
tended to encourage crimes: on the contrary, that country is constantly
increasing in civilization and happiness, and the people are as secure in their
persons and property, as they were under the bloody code which formerly
prevailed. There have been no complaints of the inefficacy of the new
regulations as there were of those under the administration of Elizabeth, and
before the establishment of the present system.

The severity with which the punishment of the Knoot is sometimes inflicted on
atrocious criminals, may be thought necessary on account of the remaining
barbarism of a part of the people -- or may arise from a defective execution of
the laws on smaller offenses, and particularly from what Mr. Howard tells us,
p. 86. That in Russia there is little or no attention paid to the reformation
of prisoners. Yet when we consider that under all these defects, -- in so
extensive a country -- where the population is computed at 22 millions of
people, and a considerable part of those still rude -- the government is able
to repress crimes (except in a single case) without the terror of death, we
must admit that it is seldom necessary, and ought rarely to be inflicted. See 4
Blacks. 18. 1 Coxes Trav. 521. 2 ditto. 77-93. 217. William's View etc. 2 vol.
255.

NOTE V. Page 10.
As the example of Tuscany appears to be the most instructive one I meet with,
and is generally cited as conclusive in support of these principles -- I have
endeavored to ascertain the fact with as much accuracy as possible.

General Lee, who viewed the different governments of Europe with the eye of a
philosopher, and whose residence at Vienna furnished him with the best means of
information gives us this account: "When the present Grand Duke acceded to the
Ducal (...), he found in Tuscany the most abandoned people of all Italy, filled
with robbers and assassins. Every where for a series of years previous to the
government of this excellent Prince were seen gallows, wheels, and tortures of
every kind; and the robberies and murders were not at all less frequent. He had
read and admired the Marquis of Beccaria, and determined to try the effects of
his plan. He put a stop to all capital punishments, even for the greatest
crimes; and the consequences have convinced the world of its wholesomeness. The
galleys and slavery for a certain term of years, or for life, in proportion to
the crime, have accomplished what an army of hangmen with their hooks, wheels,
and gibbets, could not. In short, Tuscany from being a theater of the greatest
crimes and villainies of every species, is become the safest and best ordered
state of Europe. Lee's Memoirs, p. 53.

Dr. Moore, whose writings have so happily united profound observation with
amusing bagatelle, imputes the frequency of Murder in Italy to the laxity of
the police, the number of sanctuaries, and the ease with which pardons are
obtained -- that is, to the hopes of impunity. "As soon, say he, as asylums for
such criminals are abolished, and justice is allowed to take its natural
course, that foul stain will be entirely effaced from the national character of
the modern Italians. This is already verefied in the Grand Duke of Tuscany's
dominions. The edict which declared that churches and convents should no longer
be places of refuge for murderers, -- (and the same edict abolished the penalty
of death) -- has totally put a stop to the stilleto; and the Florentine
populace now fight with the same blunt weapons that are used by the common
people of other nations." Vol. 4. Let. 43.

To these might be added the testimony of de Archenholtz, and other writers:
but the most direct and satisfactory evidence that the abolition of capital
punishments has not impaired the public safety, is derived from the edict of
1786.

This was the completion and formal establishment of a system which before that
period had been considered as an experiment. In the introduction, the Grand
Duke states, that on his accession he began the reform, by moderating the rigor
of the old law, and abolishing the pains of death: and that he had waited until
"by serious examination and trial of the new regulations," he should be able to
judge of their tendency. He then proceeds: "With the utmost satisfaction to our
paternal feelings, we have at length perceived, that the mitigation of
punishments, joined to the most scrupulous attention to prevent crimes, and
also a great dispatch in the trials together with a certainty and suddenness of
punishment to real delinquents, has, instead of increasing the number of
crimes, considerably diminished that of the smaller ones, and rendered those of
an atrocious nature very rare: we have, therefore, come to a determination not
to defer any longer the reform of the said criminal laws."

These well established facts go far to prove that a strict administration of
justice is sufficient to repress crimes without a severity of punishment: and
if we contrast the situation of Tuscany with that of the rest of the Italians
states or other countries, where sanctuaries abound, it will establish the
converse of the proposition, and prove that it is the impunity of the criminal
alone which governments ought to dread.

How frequent assassinations have been in Italy is well known: and Mr. Townsend
informs us, that in consequence of this impunity they abound in many parts of
Spain. "In the last sixteen months, says he, they reckon seventy murders (in
Malaga) for which not one criminal has been brought to justice; and in one
year, as I am credibly informed, 105 persons fell in the same manner." 3 vol.
p. 18.

NOTE VI. Page 10.
[ The source of all human corruption lies in the impunity of crimes, not in
the moderation of punishments.] -- The soundness of this principle may be
demonstrated by the example of other European countries, as well as of Russia
and Tuscany; and will be further illustrated if we contrast their situation
with that of England.

It appears that the severity of the ancient criminal laws in Sweden has been
of late so greatly mitigated, that all writers agree, they are ^ remarkable for
the moderation of their punishmen^. We learn from Mr. Coxe, that many offenses
which in other countries are considered as capital, are there chastised by
whipping, condemnation to bread and water, imprisonment and hard labor. More
than 120 strokes of the rod are never inflicted, nor is a criminal sentenced to
bread and water longer than 28 days. 2 vol. 392.

But Mr. Catteau, who published his "View of Sweden" so late as 1789, resided
long in that country, and had the best sources of information. "The criminal
laws (says this elegant writer) which are followed by the Swedish tribunals,
display a striking character of humanity and justice; and for this they are
indebted principally to the reformation they have undergone in the present
reign. These laws establish an exact proportion between the crime and the
punishment: that of death is not yet entirely abolished; but in several cases,
banishment, whipping, paying a fine, and laboring at the public works, are
substituted in its stead. Criminals condemned to die, are generally beheaded:
severer punishments are appointed for those crimes, which shock humanity by
their atrocity; but of these there are few instances in Sweden." P. 158.

S far is this mildness of the laws from injuring the public welfare, that the
character of the whole nation seems to be meliorated by suppressing the
frequency of capital punishments. "Though Sweden is covered with rocks, woods,
and mountains, its inhabitants are mild and peaceable. Theft, murder, robbery,
and atrocious crimes in general, are very uncommon amongst them; and even in
war they do not appear to be sanguinary." Ib. p. 325.

In Denmark, as has been already mentioned, robbery is never punished with
death, except when committed by a convict who has escaped from the public
labor, to which he was condemned. But the administration of justice is strict*
and the consequence is, that robberies, burglaries, and other gross crimes, are
very rare, even in the capital. "Night robberies, says Mr. Howard, are never
heard of in Copenhagen." Pris. p. 76. -- Mr. Williams in his View of the
Northern Governments mentions the same fact and attributes it "to the good
police and the difficulty of escaping out of the island." 1 vol. p. 353. What
is this but acknowledging that it is the certainty and not the severity of the
punishment which prevents offenses!

In Vienna, the late Emperor Joseph began the reform, not by abolishing the
penalty of death, but by an universal requisition to the judges to be mild in
their sentences, and never to inflict capital punishments without necessity.
This mode of submitting the guilty to the descretion of the judges (which now
prevails in Maryland, in most cases of felony, without clergy, and formerly did
in New Jersey, in that of horse-stealing) seems liable to many objections.
Moderate penalties, however, were by this means generally introduced at Vienna;
and it is a fact well authenticated, that aided by a strict police, they have
been found sufficient. Atrocious crimes are seldom committed. Reisb. Trav. II.
vol. p. 106.

The punishment of hard labor, which is the correction inflicted (and
inflicted with great mildness) upon all crimes in Holland, except those of a
very high degree, is attended with the most beneficial effects. These result
principally from the excellent management which prevails in the Rasp and Spin
Houses. Mr. Howard paid particular attention to these wise and benevolent
institutions* and he informs us, that many have been reformed, and have come
out of the Rasp Houses sober and honest; and that some have even chosen to
continue to work in them after their discharge. The great object attended to in
these bettering houses (as they are very properly called) is to reclaim and
reform the criminal; and the consequence is, that by checking the young
offender in his first attempts, gross crimes are prevented. Accordingly we find
that executions are very rare, the annual average in all the United Provinces,
being from 4 to 6.

In Amsterdam, which contains above 250,000 people, there were but six persons
executed in the twelve years preceding 1787. I find that there were in the same
time no less than 572 persons hanged or burnt, in London and Middlesex: and of
these at least three fourths were under twenty years of age. Even the smaller
offenses do not greatly abound in Holland: and the success of these mild
institutions confirms the great principle which is the motto of this work. See
the Tables in How. Laz. p. 256, 7, 8. How. on Pris. p. 66. 45. do. Laz. 74. 18
Parl. Reg. 522.

Let us now examine the situation of England where an opposite principle is
adopted, and where the terror of death is on all occasions resorted to as the
surest means of preventing crimes.

Blackstone in his Commentaries stated the number of capital crimes, (that is,
of felonies ousted of clergy) at 160. Since that time they seem to have
increased: for in 1786, Capel Loft enumerates and states them as follows:
Felonies without clergy 176 Felonies within clergy 65. Jebb on Pris. 96.

Amidst this multitude of sanguinary laws, atrocious crimes are very frequent;
and the feverity of the punishment, by being familiar, is no longer an object
of terror, and by exciting hopes of impunity, has become the parent of crimes.
"I cannot tell, (says Dr. Goldsmith) whether it is from the number of our penal
laws or the licentiousness of our people, that this country should show more
convicts in a year than half of the dominions of Europe united." Wenderborn, an
intelligent German, who lately visited England, assures us, that the punishment
of death is more frequently inflicted in England than in all Europe together,
in the same space of time. Hence it is, that executions lose all their terrors
which attend them in other countries. I. vol. p. 75. The author of Thoughts on
Executive Justice, thus describes the situation of England in 1785: "No
civilized nation, that I know of, has to lament, as we have, the daily
commission of the most dangerous and atrocious crimes; insomuch that we cannot
travel the roads, or sleep in our houses, or turn our cattle into the fields,
without the most imminent danger of thieves and robbers. These are increased in
such numbers, as well as audaciousness, that the day is now little less
dangerous than the night." P. 4. One of the English prints, 9 November 1784,
says, "If robbers continue to increase as they have done for some time past,
the number of those who rob will exceed that of the robbed."

These representations are confirmed by the declarations of the Solicitor
General and Mr. Townsend, in the house of commons in the same year. They
affirm, that in the course of the winter, every day furnished some fresh
account of daring robberies, or burglaries being committed; that few persons
could walk the streets at night, without fear, or lie down in safety in their
beds; for that gangs of 6, 8, 10, or 12 persons together, made it a practice to
knock at doors, and immediately to rush in and rob the house. 18 Parl. Reg. p.
83. 521. Compare this with the situation of Copenhagen, where night robberies
are never heard of."

The number of persons executed in England, may be seen in the tables already
referred to. In the Lent Circuit only, no less than 286 persons were capitally
convicted in 1786, and the annual amount of those transported is from 960 to a
thousand.

It is needless to make observations on these striking facts which prove
conclusively, that the severity of the laws instead of preventing, is
frequently the cause of crimes. The humanity of mankind revolts at a strict
execution of them, and the hopes of impunity become a source of temptation. To
this, Mr. Howard, among others, traces the mischief: "and yet, (he adds) many
are brought by it to an untimely end, who might have been made useful to the
state." Laz. 221. No one will deny the justice of this last observation, when
they learn from the mouth of the Solicitor General of England, "That of those
who are executed, eighteen out of twenty do not exceed 20 years of age." 18
Parl. Reg. 22.

It is difficult to conceive how a free, humane, and generous people should
have so long endured this weak and barbarous policy; or why America should be
fond of retaining any part of a system, as ineffectual as it is severe!

NOTE VII. Page 11.
Horse-stealing is a crime which naturally irritates a nation of farmers: and
when they are provoked by its frequency they are apt to call for a punishment
neither proportioned to the offense nor calculated to prevent it.

This crime became so prevalent in Pennsylvania, during the confusions of the
war, which interrupted the regular administration of justice, that the assembly
thought it necessary to increase the punishment of it. They would have extended
the penalty to death itself, had not the late Judge Bryan, at that time a
member of the legislature (who to a sound understanding added a familiar
acquaintance, with all the philosophy of jurisprudence) strenuously opposed it.
He made it evident to the good sense of the country members, who were intent
upon this punishment, that the severity of the act would defeat its execution,
and that a milder penalty would be a more effectual restraint. The subsequent
experience of Pennsylvania compared with that of New Jersey (where in the same
year the penalty of death was resorted to) fully proves the soundness of this
opinion.

I know not any government in Europe which punishes this offense with death, in
the present day, except that of England; and even there, the humanity of the
nation has almost virtually abolished it. Of ninety persons, who in the space
of 23 years, were convicted at Old Baily, previous to 1771, there were but 22
executed, which is less than a fourth. See Jansens Tables. The multitude who
escape for want of prosecution, or by the tenderness of juries, is much
greater; and it is now so common to grant a reprieve, that a well informed
writer affirms, that the chance of obtaining it is as one to forty in favor of
the thief! Thoughts on Ex. Just. p. 42. One reason of this may be, that many
persons consider it as unlawful to inflict the punishment of death, in any case
of simple theft, since it is warranted by no part of the law given to the Jews.

A similar difficulty in enforcing a punishment so disproportionate to the
offense, has been experienced in some parts of America: and it will every day
become more and more apparent in those states, which still retain this
unnecessary severity. I have very respectable authority (that of the Attorney
General of the United States) for saying, "that within the last ten years,
pardons for horse-stealing have multiplied in Virginia: and while the convicts
might by law put to hard labor, or executed at the will of the executive,
scarce a single horse-stealer suffered death, unless he had repeated the crime,
or was under some very obnoxious circumstances."

NOTE VIII. Page 11.
It may be considered as improper to appeal to the example of Maryland, where
these crimes are still felonies of death, without benefit of clergy. But as the
Court have it in their discretion to adjudge every such offender to hard
labor, instead of pronouncing the sentence of death; the latter is so rare,
that ( (...) purpose of terror or example) it may be considered ^^^^^lished.
The punishment of hard labor, continually offered to the public eye, will be
considered as the only penalty prescribed by the laws; and no offender will
count upon a greater severity, even if he be convicted.

There is reason to believe, that this mild administration of justice has not
produced any increase of crimes -- although the method of treating the male
convicts, does not (...) appear to be the most unexceptionable. How the fact
is, I have no information sufficiently accurate and particular, positively to
affirm. Measures have been taken to procure it, and if it arrives in time, it
shall be added in a postscript.

Whether the task of deciding, at discretion, on the life or death of a fellow
creature, should be imposed on any Court, and how far such a power is
consistent with the spirit of a republic, which is a government of laws and not
of men, may deserve consideration. The degree of the punishment must
necessarily be left to judicial discretion: but its nature ought, as far as
possible, to be ascertained by the laws. See Acts Maryl. Nov. Sess. 1789.

NOTE IX. Page 30.
There is scarce any crime which escapes punishment so often as that of rape.
In support of this, I appeal to the following facts in addition to those
mentioned in the text.

Between the years 1720 and 1732, there were 24 persons tried for this crime at
Old Bailey. Of all these only two were convicted; one of them, the infamous
Col. Charters, who was pardoned; the other, a servant boy, aged fifteen, who
was hanged. Select Trials, etc. 1 and 2 vol.

Jansens Tables do not state the number of acquittals: but they prove this
fact, That in 23 years, no more than 9 persons were convicted of rape, and of
these there were executed -- Two!

Though it is not in my power to state the relative number of persons convicted
or acquitted of this crime in other states, I have such information as
satisfied me that the severity of the punishment produces in America the same
effects which attend it in England and Scotland.

Mr. Randolph, who held the office of Attorney General in Virginia, many years,
informs me, that "thus much may be safely affirmed, that the proportion of the
acquitted to the charged in that state was very great leaving but few convicts.
It seemed as if something more than usual tenderness for life, operated with
the juries on these occasions; and they appeared to lay aside their natural
abhorrence of the act, to seize the smallest symptoms of innocence!"

NOTE X. Page 35.
The practice of punishing murder with death, has been so general among
civilized nations, that some writers have considered it as sanctioned by the
universal consent of mankind, and as absolutely necessary for the safety of
society. It is certain, however, that it has been dispensed with in many
countries at different periods: and a review of the best authenticated facts of
this kind (obscured as some of them may be, by the mist of time) will not be
useless. Taken together they will impress upon our minds these two important
truths -- That the penalty of death is not in its own nature necessary -- and
yet -- That it is dangerous, rashly to abolish it!

The most ancient instance on record, is that of Sabaco, king of Egypt. The
account is to be sound in Herodotus and Diodorus Siculus: That of the latter,
translated by Booth, is thus: "A long time after him one Sabach, an Ethiopean,
came to the throne going beyond his predecessors in his worship of the gods and
kindness to his subjects. Any man may judge of his gentle disposition in this,
that when the law pronounced the severest judgment, I mean sentence of death,
he changed the punishment, and made an edict that the condemned person should
be kept to work in the town, in chains, by whose labor he raised many mounts
and made many commodious canals." p. 34. He thought (says Mr. Goguet) that
Egypt would draw more profit and advantage from this kind of punishment, which,
being for life, appeared to him equally adapted to punish crimes and to repress
them." What its effects were is not so evident: but the ancients speak in terms
of approbation of this clemency: and it is certain, that during his long reign
of 50 years, Sabaco did not see cause to alter it: and his successor Anysis,
seems to have continued it. This example is cited with approbation, by Sir Tho.
Moore, Puffendorff, Grotius, and other modern writers. See Diod. Sic. L. I. chapter
65. Puff. b. 8. chapter 3.. 23. Goug. Orig. Laws, 3 vol. p. 15. 1st Rollin Ant.
Hist. 90.

"Among the Persians it was not lawful either for a private person to put any
of his slaves to death, or for the Prince to inflict capital punishment upon
any of his subjects for the first offense; because it might rather be
considered as an effect of human weakness and frailty than of a confirmed
malignity of heart." 2d Rollin Ant. Hist. p. 221.

Rome furnishes us with a more brilliant and better authenticated example. It
is well known that soon after the expulsion of the Decemviri the Porcian law
ordained, that no citizen of Rome should be put to death. In the happy ages of
the republic, his country was every thing to a Roman, and banishment the
heaviest of punishments! -- For the space of 200 years, from the establishment
of equal liberty to the end of the second Punic war, penalties short of death
were found sufficient for the government of Rome. Simple in their manners --
frugal -- unacquainted with luxury, and intent upon conquering the world, these
proud republicans had neither leisure nor inclination for the commission of
crimes. Livy, more than once triumphs in this moderation of punishments, and no
historian has hinted that during the period I have mentioned, they were
inadequate to their object!

But we must remember at the same time, that capital punishments were found
necessary in the camp, and while they were denied to the magistrate, were
absurdly trusted to the direction of a master and a parent. See 4 Gibbon's
Hist. chapter 44. Quarto.

When Rome lost her liberty, a profusion of capital punishments ensued; and
under the Emperors, the hands of the executioner were every day stained with
the blood of the citizen. But in the decline of the Eastern Empire, an opinion
grew up, that it was unlawful to shed Christian blood: and capital punishments
were sometimes suppressed without substituting any efficient check in their
place. To mutilate an offender and then turn him loose, was but to provoke him
to the commission of new crimes. Hence they became frequent -- insurrections
multiplied -- and the throne tottered from the shameful imbecility of the
laws. Anastatius, it is said, punished no crimes at all: and Mauritius, Isaac
Angelus, and others, by rashly suppressing the punishment of death among so
corrupted a people, endangered their own safety and that of their subjects. See
Rise and Fall of Romans Emp. p. 212. Spir. Laws B. 6. chapter 21.

The conduct of Alexius Comnenus, an enlightened Prince, distinguished equally
for his talents and virtues, deserves a closer inspection; and I regret that I
have no sources of information sufficiently particular to ascertain the effects
of his regulations. I only learn from Mr. Gibbon, "That during his reign of 25
years, the penalty of death was abolished in the Roman Empire: a law of mercy
most delightful to the humane theorist, but of which, the practice in a large
and vicious community is seldom consistent with the public safety. Severe to
himself, indulgent to others, chaste, frugal and abstemious. He despised and
moderated the stately magnificence of the Byzantine Court, so oppressive to the
people, and so contemptible to the eye of reason. Under such a prince*
innocence had nothing to fear, and merit every thing to hope: and without
assuming the tyrannical office of Censor, he introduced a gradual, but "visible
reformation in the public and private manners of Constantinople." V Gibb. Hist.
Decline and Fall, etc. chapter 48.

The punishments inflicted on those who conspired against him, were
confiscation of goods, and banishment* 6 Univ. Hist. 617.

The only countries in modern Europe, in which murder is not punished with
death, are Russia and Tuscany. It has already been mentioned that the Empress
Elizabeth made a vow, that she would put no one to death. This clemency has
been much celebrated, and Blackstone enquires "Was the vast territory of all
the Russia's worse regulated under the late Empress than under her more
sanguinary predecessors?" But Mr. Williams assures us, that the abuse of this
clemency became so intolerable, that the senate requested Catharine II to
re-establish the law, which ordained that certain crimes should be punished
with death. North. Gov. vol. II. p. 255. This appears to have been complied
with: as the same author mentions an instance of four villains being condemned
to be broke upon the wheel for murder, p. 266. The punishment of death,
however, is now formally retained only in the case of high treason: yet, in
that prescribed for murder, it virtually subsists. Though no one is literally
sentenced to die, many are knooted to death. This punishment, says Mr. Howard,
is often dreaded more than death, and sometimes the criminal has endeavored to
bribe the executioner to kill him. It seldom causes immediate death, but death
is often the consequence of it. Pris. 86. 2d Coxe's Trav. 82. Though all felons
are liable to undergo the knoot, yet it is inflicted with this peculiar
severity on murderers, "who never receive any mitigation of their punishment."
To this is added the slitting of the nostrils, and branding on the cheek with
hot irons. This horrid method of torturing the body, attended with such
consequences, may well be dreaded more than the mere loss of life, and I cannot
consider it as any moderation of the punishment. It is probably owing to the
remaining barbarism of some parts of Russia, that this severity is thought
necessary: and the abuse of the clemency of the former reign has been
attributed to this circumstance. 2d Will. North. Gov. 232.

But what shall we say to the example of Tuscany? There, not only are the pains
of death abolished, but every kind of cruel punishment is prohibited. The
beneficial effects have been stated: and General Lee says, "It is a known fact
that since the adoption of this plan, there have been but two murders
committed: one by a little boy of eleven years old, in a stroke of passion; and
the other, not by a native Italian subject, but by an Irish officer." Memoirs,
p. 53. But the point of time to which he refers is not ascertained.

It were desirable to know how far that police which the Grand Duke calls "a
vigilant attention to prevent the commission of crimes," extends, and whether
it coincides with the general liberty of the subject. If it be such as was
established by Spinelli at Rome, or as is in use at Vienna and Madrid, it could
not be tolerated in a free country. D'Archenholtz's Italy, 8. p. 161. 1 Reisb.
Trav. p. 244.

As that part of the edict which abolishes the penalty of death, contains the
reasons upon which it is founded, and is little known in this country, I shall
here insert it.

We have seen with horror the facility with which* in the former laws, the pain
of death was decreed, even against crimes of no very great enormity; and having
considered that the object of punishment ought to consist -- in the
satisfaction due either to a private or a public injury -- in the correction of
the offender, who is still a member and child of the society, and of the state,
and whose reformation ought never to be despaired of -- in the security (where
the crime is very atrocious in its nature) that he who has committed it shall
not be left at liberty to commit any others -- and finally, in the public
example; and that the government, in the punishment of crimes, and in adapting
such punishment to the objects, toward which alone it should be directed,
ought always to employ those means, which, whilst they are the most
efficacious, are the least hurtful to the offender; which efficacy and
moderation we find to consist move in condemning the said offender to hard
labor, than in putting him to death; since the former serves as a lasting
example, and the latter only as a momentary object of terror, which is often
changed into pity; and since the former takes from the delinquent the
possibility of committing the same crime again, but does not destroy the hope
of his reformation, and of his becoming once more an useful subject* and having
considered besides, that a legislation very different from our preceding one*
will agree better with the gentle manners of this polished age, and chiefly
with those of the people of Tuscany, we are come to a resolution to abolish,
and we actually abolish forever, by the present law, the pain of death, which
shall not be inflicted on any criminal, etc. Sect. 51.

NOTE XI. Page 36.
Those who have been witnessess to the solemn manner in which executions are
conducted in some parts of Europe, speak of the impression arising from that
circumstance as wonderfully strong. Dr. Moore describes such an execution which
he was present at in Rome, and mentions in strong language how deeply the
populace were affected by it! See Letter 44, vol. 4. Mr. Howard, remarked the
same thing in Holland: and accounting for the few executions which take place
in United Provinces, says, "one reason of this, I believe, is the awful
solemnity of executions which are performed in the presence of the magistrates,
with great order and seriousness, and great effect upon the spectators. Pris.
45 p.

Whoever will contrast this with the manner in which executions have been
heretofore conducted among us, will readily perceive that though we exhibit
this terrible spectacle, we do not derive from it all the benefits it was
designed to produce.

NOTE XII. Page 37.
"In Russia, says Montesquieu, where the punishment of robbery and murder is
the same, they always murder." He speaks here of the reign of Elizabeth: but
the mischief seems to have continued for some time after Catherine II. ascended
the throne. Mr. Richardson, who was in Russia in 1770, mentions the practice as
existing at that day. "Robberies, (says he) are here very frequent and
barbarous, and constantly attended with murder." Richards. Anecd. p. 323.

This circumstance was not unattended to; and in her instructions, 86. The
Empress declares 'that it is the last injustice to punish in the same manner
the robber, who contents himself with robbing, and him, who not only robs, but
murders at the same time." Accordingly the new code has drawn this necessary
distinction. Robbers are sent to public labor in Siberia, while murderers,
besides undergoing the knoot, are branded in the face with hot irons, kept in
chains, or have their nostrils torn: and except upon a general or particular
amnesty, they receive no mitigation. See 2d Coxe's Trav. 86 and passim.

I believe this discrimination in the punishment has put a stop to the evil
complained of before it was introduced: for among all the later writers on the
state of Russia, I find no one who hints that any such practice prevails at
present in that Empire. See some excellent observations on the the necessity of
this discrimination, 4th Blackst. Com. 10 Montesquieu, B. 6. chapter 16.

NOTE XIII. Page 45.
I firmly believe that the success of all punishments by hard labor and
solitary confinement, must finally depend upon the wisdom of the regulations,
which shall be established in the gaols of penitentiary houses, and upon the
prudence and attention of those, to whom the management of the prisoners is
committed. Some useful hints upon this subject lie buried, under a variety of
other matter, in Mr. Howard's Treatise on Prisons and Lazarettos: and it is
much to be regretted, that no well digested plan for the interior management of
those places of confinement, has hitherto been published. The best substitute
is an account of such plans as are now in use: and Mr. Caleb Lownes, one of the
inspectors of the gaol of Philadelphia, (to whose humane zeal and attention, in
the discharge of this voluntary duty, the public are much indebted) has
undertaken to give a detail of the regulations adopted in the gaol, and
penitentiary house in this place, and of the management and employment of the
convicts. The more minute this information is, the more useful and interesting
it will be, when our sister states turn their attention to the revision and
reform of their criminal laws. In hopes that this event is not very distant, I
shall here add a few principles on this subject, collected from the facts, or
observations of Mr. Howard.

First. That houses for convicts at labor, ought to be in or near a large town
or city, and easily accessible to those who have the inspection of them. This
last circumstance seems to be of the utmost importance.

Second. Mr. Howard uniformly found those houses best managed, when the
inspection was undertaken without mercenary views, and solely from a sense of
duty, and a love to humanity. So reputable is this humane task in Germany, that
at Frankfort, the house of correction is inspected by the Ladies. Pris. 128.
Lazar. 71.

Third. Steady, lenient, and persuasive measures, were always found to be the
best means for preventing escapes; and far preferable to rough usage, which
often made the prisoners desperate. Laz. 206. Pris. 39.

Fourth. The great object to be attended to (especially with young offenders)
ought to be to reclaim and reform them. Many facts prove, that this is not so
difficult as some persons apprehend. Their earnings must therefore be a
secondary consideration; and if the house does not maintain itself, ( as in
many places it will not) that circumstance ought not to be regarded. To promote
this object of reformation, the young offenders ought to be separated from
those who are old and hardened.

Fifth. In order to hold out a real object of terror, solitary confinement, on
coarse diet, should be the invariable portion of every old or great offendre.
This, however, it is best to inflict at intervals, and seldom longer than 20 or
30 days at a time. The observations of Mr. Howard on this subject, deserves
attention, and with them I close this note.

"The intention of solitary confinement, (I mean by day as well as by night) is
either to reclaim the most atrocious or daring criminals -- to punish the
refractory for crimes committed in prison -- or to make a strong impression, in
a short time, upon thoughtless and irregular apprentices, or the like. It
should, therefore, be considered by those who are ready to commit, for a long
time, petty offenders to absolute solitude, that such a system is more than
human nature can bear, without the hazard of distraction or despair: and that,
for want of some employ in the day, health is impaired, and a habit of idleness
and inability to labor in future, is in danger of being acquired. The
beneficial effects on the mind of such a punishment, are speedy proceeding from
the horror of a vicious person's being left entirely to his own reflections.
This may wear off by a long continuance, and a sullen insensibility may
succeed." Laz. p. 169. in notis.

NOTE XIV. Page 45.
A revision of the criminal laws of Pennsylvania, at present occupies the
attention of the Legislature. Those who wish to know the progress that has
already been made in this great work, may find it in the following resolves,
which, on the 22d instant (February) were entered into by the senate.

Resolved, That for all offenses (except murder of the first degree) which are
made capital by the existing laws of Pennsylvania, the punishment shall be
changed to imprisonment at hard labor, varying in duration and severity,
according to the degree of the crime.

Resolved, That the crimes, at present classed under the general denomination
of Murder, be d^^ided into murder of the first and murder of the second degree:
the latter punishable with imprisonment, at hard labor, or in solitude, or
both, for any time not exceeding 21 years.

Resolved, That all murder, perpetrated by poisoning, or by lying in wait, or
by any kind of wilful, premeditated, and deliberate killing, shall be deemed
murder in the first degree: and all other kinds of murder, shall be deemed
murder in the second degree: and the Jury, before whom any person shall be
indicted for murder, if they find the party guilty thereof, shall ascertain
whether it be murder in the first or second degree.

Resolved, That all claims to dispensation from punishment by benefit of
clergy, or benefit of the act of assembly, entitled, "An act for the
advancement of justice* and the more certain administration thereof," shall be
forever abolished, and a definite punishment be prescribed for all offenses, at
present deemed clergyable: the punishment for the second offense, to be the
same in its nature, but in a higher degree.

Resolved, That a committee be appointed to bring in a bill, supplementary to
the penal laws of this state, for the purpose of carrying the preceding
resolutions into effect.

The committee who brought in these resolutions, reporting, "That they have
doubts at present, whether the terrible punishment of death be in any case
justifiable and necessary in Pennsylvania; and are desirous that the public
sentiment on this important subject may be more fully known," and therefore
offering the following resolution, the same was adopted by the senate, viz.

Resolved, That the revision and amendment of the laws, respecting murder of
the first degree, be specially recommended to the early attention of the next
Legislature.

We may, therefore hope, that Pennsylvania will soon give to her sister states,
an example of humane legislation, which may tend, in its consequences, to
meliorate the condition of mankind.

Feb. 26, 1793.
A Table exhibiting a View of the number of Persons convicted of all capital
and certain other Crimes.
Years. Crime against Nature. Robbery. Burglary. Counterfeiting the Coin. Rape.
Arson. Murder. Manslaughter Treason. Counterfeiting bills of credit. Acquitted,
Convicted, Executed, Acquitted, Acquitted of robbery, but guilty of larceny.
Convicted, Executed, Acquitted, Acquitted of burglary, but guilty of larceny.
Convicted, Executed, Acquitted, Convicted, Executed, Acquitted, Convicted,
Executed, Acquitted, Convicted, Executed, Acquitted, Acquitted of murder, but
guilty of manslaughter. Convicted, Executed, Acquitted, Convicted, Acquitted,
Convicted, Executed, Acquitted, Convicted, Executed, 1779 5 4 1 3 2 1 6 1 5 4 1
1 3 5 3 1780 6 3 3 2 2 6 5 1 1 1 4 2 2 1 2 1 4 6 2 1781 3 3 3 7 10 4 2 1 1 2 1
2 1 1 1 1 3 1782 4 15 3 3 8 4 2 1 2 2 2 1 1783 1 1 2 2 3 2 5 1 1 2 3 2 3 5 4 1
1784 4 7 5 4 8 8 1 3 1 2 1 1785 1 1 2 2 3 4 2 1 1 1 7 1 5 5 1 1786 1 2 10 " " "
" " " " " " 3 1 4 3 7 3 4 1787 1 6 5 7 1 3 2 1 1788 1 2 7 3 1^ 1 1 1 1 1 1 3 1
1789 1 1 22 1 2 5 1 3 6 6 1790 1 11 5 1 2 2 2 3 2 1791 2 6 1 1 1792 1 3 5 2 2 1
1 1 2 1 1 1 Total 3 1 26 1 93 21 37 9 100 26 2 1 1 9 9 5 7 5 1 38 11 34 26 12 5
4 4 2 12 11 5

I. The Table states the number of Offenders not of Convictions; therefore,
when a person appears to have been twice convicted of the same crime, at the
same ^^^^^ons, no notice is taken of it in the table.

II. (...) the convictions of 1782, several attainders, by outlawry, are
included: the robberies committed being matter of public notoriety.

III. The dotted line separates those offenses of the year 1786, which were
previous to the act to amend the penal laws, from those which were subsequent
to it.

AN ACCOUNT OF THE ALTERATION AND PRESENT STATE OF THE PENAL LAWS OF
PENNSYLVANIA, CONTAINING ALSO AN ACCOUNT OF THE GOAL AND PENITENTIARY HOUSE OF
PHILADELPHIA AND THE INTERIOR MANAGEMENT THEREOF.

BY CALEB LOWNES.

AN ACCOUNT OF THE ALTERATION AND PRESENT STATE OF THE PENAL LAWS OF
PENNSYLVANIA, etc.
INTRODUCTION.
ENQUIRIES are frequently made by citizens as well as by strangers, about the
interior management of the Goal and Penitentiary house of Philadelphia: and as
I have frequently been requested by respectable characters in other states, who
wished a change in their system, to furnish some account of the means that led
to the present regulations of our prison, and the effects produced by them,
connecting this account with the "Enquiry, etc." may be as proper a mode as any
that can be adopted for giving them the desired information, I have therefore
made the attempt, and if any assistance in my power can contribute to promote a
work of so much importance to mankind as that of reforming the system of
criminal jurisprudence* I shall freely afford it. The many improvements, both
in government and the arts, which have been produced in our time, afford
pleasing prospects to liberal and enlarged minds, and have been a great
encouragement to those who have ventured to combat ancient prejudices, and to
attempt improvements in a science hitherto so little attended to and of so
great importance in every system of legislation.

It is true, society has not been without information upon this interesting
subject. Montesquieu, Beccaria, Lofft, and others, have thrown considerable
light upon it. The benevolent Howard greatly sympathized with the wretched
prisoner -- he has largely displayed the errors in principle, and the cruelties
in practice, of the criminal laws of most countries in Europe; and having
labored with uncommon zeal to alleviate the evils which they have produced,
died in the prosecution of this important service -- but a system founded upon
the clear and unquestionable rights and duties of citizens of a mild and well
ordered government, has not yet met the public eye: -- Pennsylvania has gone
the farthest in the formation of such a system, of any government that has come
to my knowledge, and from the exertions of the present legislature, we have
reason to hope that she will be the first to place the fair "key stone to the
arch of this benevolent work."

A BRIEF ACCOUNT OF THE ALTERATION OF THE PENAL LAWS OF PENNSYLVANIA.
THE distresses of the prisoners and disorders in the prison, in this city, had
long engaged the sympathetic attention of many of the inhabitants. Occasional
relief was often afforded; but the first attempt, essentially to remove these
evils, was made a few years before the revolution; when a society was formed
for that purpose. The war put an end to the society.

In the year 1776, the Convention of Pennsylvania directed a reform of the
penal laws, and the introduction of public hard labor, as a punishment for
offenses. This was attended to by the Legislature; and an essay was made in the
year 1786, by a law which directed, that the convicts should be employed in
cleaning the streets, repairing the roads, etc. have their heads shaved and be
distinguished by an infamous habit. This was literally complied with, but
however well meant, was soon found to be productive of the greatest evils: and
had a very opposite effect from what was contemplated by the framers of the
law. The disorders in society, the robberies, burglaries, breaches of prison,
alarms in town and country -- the drunkenness, profanity and indecencies of the
prisoners in the streets, must be in the memory of most. With these disorders
the numbers of the criminals increased to such a degree as to alarm the
community with fears, that it would be impossible to find a place either large
or strong enough to hold them. The severity of the law, and disgraceful manner
of executing it, led to a proportionate degree of depravity and insensibility,
and every spark of morality appeared to be destroyed. The keepers were armed
with swords, blunderbusses, and other weapons of destruction. The prisoners,
secured by cumberous iron collars and chains, fixed to bomb-shells. Their dress
was formed with every mark of disgrace. The old and hardened offender daily in
the practice of begging and insulting the inhabitants -- collecting crowds of
idle boys, and holding with them the most indecent and improper conversation.
Thus disgracefully treated, and heated with liquor, they meditated, and
executed, plans of escape -- and when at liberty, their distress, disgrace, and
fears, prompted them to violent acts, to satisfy the immediate demands of
nature. Their attacks upon society were well known to be desperate, and to some
they proved fatal!

In this situation of things, the minds of the citizens were variously
affected; some were concerned for the condition to which the laws had doomed
them indiscriminately; others were affected with the scenes which the streets
of the city exhibited -- Scenes which were a disgrace to any people! Whatever
were the motives, exertions were used to alleviate the sufferings of the
prisoners, and, if possible, to apply a remedy for these great and growing
evils.

The magnitude of these sufferings and disorders, at length induced the attempt
of forming a society for that purpose, which was effected under the title of
"The Philadelphia Society for alleviating the Miseries of Public Prisons." --
It soon became large and respectable The notice which the benevolent Howard
took of this society in his account of the principal lazaretto's in Europe,
will show the idea he entertained of its usefulness -- "Should the plan take
place, during my life, of establishing a permanent charity, under some such
title as that at PHILADELPHIA, viz. A Society for alleviating the Miseries of
Public Prisons, and annuities be engrafted thereupon for the abovementioned
purpose, I would most readily stand at the bottom of a page as a subscriber for
L. ^00, or if such society shall be constituted within three years after my
death, this sum shall be paid out of my estate.
and from subscriptions and donations early possessed funds equal to its
object. The constitution is short, and may prove useful, I have annexed it to
this communication.

They appointed a committee of six members to visit the prisons; furnish bread
when necessary; clothe the naked; accommodate differences; discharge those
confined for small debts; and generally to mitigate the sufferings inseparable
from such places of confinement. At the time they visited, the disorders out of
prison equally attracted their attention, and excited a more particular enquiry
into the causes of these complicated evils. They were well assured that the
funds of the society, would be distributed to little effect, unless some means
were used to discover the cause and to remedy the evil. A firm conviction was
soon produced, that the severity of the laws, with the disgraceful mode of
carrying them into effect, joined to a want of government in the prison; the
admission of all kinds of characters to a free communications with the
prisoners; the unlimited use of spirituous liquors; the indiscriminate mixture
of all descriptions of prisoners, without regard to character, sex, or
condition, and idleness in the house, were among the principle causes of the
evils complained of: to remedy which, the Society, in conjunction with the
Corporation, made an application to the Legislature for an alteration in the
penal system, to place the prison under the inspection of some of the citizens;
to erect solitary cells; and to form a plan for its government. This was
complied with, and inspectors were directed to be chosen; who were empowered,
with the approbation of the Mayor, two Aldermen, and two Judges of the Supreme
Court, or two of the Judges of the Common Pleas of Philadelphia county, to make
rules and regulations for the government of all convicts confined in said
prison, etc. The first care of the inspectors was to remove the debtors into
another house, entirely distinct from the convicts prison; to put a stop to all
improper out-door communications; to separate the sexes; to suppress the use of
spiritous liquors of all kinds; to introduce a system of labor, suited to
their situation, trades and strength -- to frame a plan of government for the
house, and directions for the officers, which is hereto annexed -- and
generally to introduce order, decency, economy, and industry.

The business before them was laborious, but the necessity and importance of
the work encouraged them to exertions, which, for a time, were arduous, and
attended with many unpleasant circumstances; but a steady perseverance overcame
many long established injurious customs, and produced the present agreeable
change, an account of which I shall now, as briefly as possible, proceed to
state.

One of the oldest, and not least of the evils, was

GAOL FEES.
This injurious custom, attended with such a variety of evil consequences, was
discontinued, and the KEEPER compensated in a more eligable and permanent
manner, by a yearly salary of 400l. per ann. for himself and clerk; and as a
stimulus to a proper attention to the employment of the prisoners, allowed 5
per cent. on the proceeds of their labor.

GARNISH.
This cruel and disgraceful practice, so well known to the unhappy objects who
have had the misfortune to be committed to these places of confinement --
whether felon or debtor -- guilty or innocent -- able or unable -- strip or
pay, was the first salutation -- this practice was instantly suppressed and is
now unknown.

BREACH OF PRISON.
This disorder, formerly so frequent and alarming, is now effectually remedied.
There were a few attempts soon after the present plan was introduced; but the
present government of the place, with the vigilance of the keepers, have
prevented any escapes by this mode.

PLAN, CONSTRUCTION, etc. OF THE PRISON.
This place of confinement, occupies a lot of 400 feet by 200; on which is
erected a large stone building, 184 feet long the northside, two stories high,
divided into rooms of equal dimensions, viz. 20 by 18 feet -- an entry in the
middle of 7 feet wide, which leads to a hall or passage, extending the length
of the building 11 feet wide, with stairs and windows at each end; the upper
story is exactly on the same plan as the lower; the cellars are also on the
same plan: there are 8 rooms on each floor, all arched, for the twofold purpose
of securing against fire and escapes, with two windows in each room. On the
east and west end are two wings extending 90 feet south, two stories high,
containing five rooms on the floors of each wing, nearly the size of those in
front, but with one window, all arched in the same manner also: the ground
floors of these were formerly occupied as places of greater security, upon the
general principle of dungeons, but have not been used for some time. On the
south side is a large stone building, designed for a workhouse, where the
debtors are now confined. Three hundred feet of the north part of the lot is
appropriated to the use of the convict prison, and one hundred feet of the
south part to the debtors. The first is divided into portions for the
accommodation of the different classes of prisoners. The women have a court
yard of 90 feet by 32; the vagrants, etc. one of the same dimensions. The
penitentiary house, or solitary cells, about 160 feet by 80. Each yard is
furnished with pumps, baths, sewers and necessaries: under the debtor's yard,
on the north side, runs a natural water course, which is arched, and is a great
accommodation.

DISTRIBUTION OF PRISONERS, AND APPRORIATION OF THE BUILDING, etc.
THE MEN CONVICTS,
For security and air, are lodged on the second floor of the east wing; one
room is occupied by the shoe-makers for a shop; one for the tailors and barber
-- the rest for lodging rooms.

THE WOMEN CONVICTS
Are lodged and employed on the first floor, in the west wing, and have the use
of the court yard -- already described.

THE WOMEN VAGRANTS
Have the upper floor of the west wing -- and occasionally, the use of the
women convicts yard.

MEN VAGRANTS
Occupy the first floor of the east wing, and have the use of the yard before
described.

SOLITARY CELLS, OR PENITENTIARY HOUSE.
This building, directed to be built by the legislature, was early undertaken,
and finished with all possible expedition. It is a plain brick building, three
stories high; the first floor is paved with bricks, and is open on the north
and south; three arches, running the length and breadth of the building,
support the rooms and passages of the house. Each floor is divided into 8
cells, 6 by 8, and nine feet high, and two passages running through the middle;
the passages are about 4 feet wide -- have a window at one end, which admits
light and air, and a stove in the middle for to warm the rooms; each cell has a
large leaden pipe, which leads to sewers at the bottom, and which are kept
clean by smaller pipes, leading froma cistern, into which, occasionally, is
conveyed a sufficient quantity of water. The windows are secured by blinds, and
wire to prevent conveyances either in or out. The doors and sashes are so
constructed as to admit as much air as the prisoner desires.

The large yard is occupied by the convicts, for to labor and to air
themselves in. The yard, in which the solitary cells are built, is occupied as
a garden, in which vegetables for culinary, and other purposes, are cultivated.
It is managed by some of the orderly convicts.

PLAN OF GOVERNMENT AND REGULATIONS OF THE HOUSE.
The order and management of the house is directed by the inspectors, who meet
every two weeks, or oftener, as occasion requires; they appoint two of their
number, who continue in their appointment one month, as

VISITING INSPECTORS
Whose duty is to visit the prison, and inspect the management thereof, the
conduct of the prisoners, etc. once a week, or oftener, and report to the board
at their next meeting. See the Rules.

The Governor, and Judges of the Supreme Court, and Mayor, with all the Judges
of the several Courts of this City and County, as well as the Grand Juries,
visit quarterly. A circumstance which greatly promotes the success of the plan,
as it strengthens the hands of the officers, and encourages the prisoners to a
propriety of conduct, and thereby claiming their attention and obtaining a
remission of their sentence; for they well know if they have conducted
improperly, that they have no encouragement to hope; but on the contrary, great
cause to fear; those especially of the worst characters are thus influenced to
a careful attention to preserve a propriety of conduct, in order to have some
plea for their application for a pardon.

Having thus given a short account of the plan and government of the prison and
penitentiary house, I proceed to state the method of treating and employing the
convicts at present pursued by the inspectors. It is not probable that this
will meet the approbation of every one: but it is the best that the
circumstances of the place, and the opportunities of those engaged in the work
would admit of. There have been many opinions about the mode of treating the
convicts. Some seem to forget that the prisoner is a rational being, of like
feelings and passions with themselves. Some think that he is placed there to be
perpetually tormented and punished. Some prescribe a certain time as necessary
to his cure. One will not allow him the light of heaven, or the refreshment of
the breeze; the comforts of society, or even the voice of his keeper: while
another considers a seclusion from his friends and connections, as a ground for
accusation of inhumanity. These opinions have not been overlooked by the
inspectors: they have adopted that plan, which upon full consideration was
deemed best, though not perfect; and the effects of it have not hitherto
disappointed their hopes.

GOVERNMENT.
In every prison good government is necessary; and unless this is kept in view,
it will be useless to change the penal system, or expect benefit, either to the
prisoners or the community.

It is an error very generally entertained, that it is very difficult, if not
impossible, to reduce these characters to order, and to govern them by mild
measures; and that it requires a person of a violent and unfeeling disposition,
to manage or keep them in any tolerable bounds. I shall avoid saying much on
this subject, and limit myself simply, to an account of the management in this
house, and its effects, and let the fact answer those who have been of this
opinion. Mild regulations, strictly enjoined, will meet with little resistance.
There should be no hope of impunity, and there will be little necessity for
seeking for the punishment that shall be the most effectual; but if punishments
be deemed necessary, let those of a disgraceful nature be avoided.

When the present plan was last attempted, the prisoners were informed, that
the new system was now to be carried into full effect -- that their treatment
would depend upon their conduct; and that those who evidenced a disposition
that would afford encouragement to the inspectors to believe, that they might
be restored to their liberty, should be recommended to the governor for a
pardon, as soon as circumstances would admit; but if they were convicted again,
the law in its fullest rigor, would be carried into effect against them. A
change of conduct was early visible. They were encouraged to labor, and a
number were employed at carrying stone, and other laborious work, at the
building of the solitary cells. Their good conduct was remarked. Many were
pardoned, and before one year was expired, their behavior was, almost without
exception, decent, orderly and respectful. This fact is of importance, as it
disproves an opinion, that has led to much distress and cruelty, and will, I
hope, be an encouragement to those who can feel for this unhappy class of
mankind, who have so long been victims to the sad effects of a contrary
treatment.

CLEANLINESS.
The house is white-washed three times a year, or oftener, as occasion requires.

The passages and rooms are washed twice a-week in summer, and once in winter.

The prisoners have clean linen once a week, and are washed every morning.
Towels are hung up in the several passages. The men shave twice a week, and the
baths are used in summer.

DRESS.
The men are clothed in woollen jackets, waistcoats, and trowsers in winter,
and linen in summer, shirts, shoes, etc. The orderly prisoners, who by their
industry earn a sufficiency for the purpose, are allowed a better suit to
attend public worship. The principal objects in their clothing are,
usefulness, economy, and decency.

The women are dressed in plain, short gowns, of woollen in winter, and linen
in summer. Most of the clothing, at present, is spun, wove, and made up in the
house, and is designed to be so altogether in future.

LODGING.
The prisoners are lodged in beds, with sheets and blankets on bedsteads; the
beds are filled with red cedar shavings. We have found this regulation greatly
conducive to cleanliness and decency. The former practice of prisoners sleeping
in their clothes, and being crowded together without any regard to decency, was
destructive to the health of the prisoners, and was attended with many other
ill consequences, especially where men are collected in the manner they are in
prisons.

DIET.
The diet is plain, cheap, and wholesome, but sufficient in quantity, as per
diet list, in the rules and orders annexed. No provisions are allowed beside
the prison allowance, except the more laborious part, while orderly, who are
allowed to get some of the heads of the sheep from the butchers, at their own
expense: this is esteemed an indulgence, and is attended with good effects,
both physical and moral. The molasses is experienced to be very salutary to the
health of the prisoners, as well as useful in gratifying them with a small
luxury. The orderly women are sometimes indulged with tea.

EMPLOYMENT.
The men are employed according to their abilities and circumstances. The
procuring suitable and sufficient employment, was for a considerable time a
great difficulty, but there is now a sufficiency of productive and suitable
labor for all, and a great number more than are now in the prison.

The principal employments are, shoe-making, weaving and tayloring; chipping
logwood, grinding plaster of Paris, beating hemp, sawing and polishing marble;
occasionally swingling flax, picking oakum, wool, cotton and hair; carding wool
for hatters, sawing wood, etc.

The women are employed at heckling, spinning, sewing, and washing.

REWARDS AND PUNISHMENTS.
If the prisoners conduct with propriety, they attract the attention of the
Keepers and Inspectors; who make enquiry into their circumstances; encourage
them to bring forward recommendations from respectable citizens that they have
lived with, or have had a knowledge of them; and, if it should appear proper,
or prudent, they are recommended to the Governor for a pardon. If any old
offenders make application, they are not recommended until there appears some
encouragement from long habits of orderly conduct in the house; and then with
much caution.

There is no corporal punishment, such as stripes, etc. inflicted. But in case
of improper behavior, which very seldom has happened, they are removed to the
solitary cells, and abridged in their diet -- the consequences of which, are
stated in the observations on the effects of this mode of treatment, in this
work. The apprehensions of the consequence of disorderly conduct, and the hopes
arising from a propriety of behavior, has hitherto held them within the limits
of a very commendable attention to the rules of the house.

BREACHES OF PRISON.
There has not been any effected for near two years, (the time that the place
has been under the care of the Inspectors) the last breach was the evening of
the day that the execution of the new system was seriously entered upon; when a
plan of escape was meditated by the greater part of the prisoners; fifteen
actually made their escape, the rest were prevented from effecting their
design, by the activity and resolution of the present keeper.

They have now other and better hopes of obtaining a restoration to liberty,
arising from a propriety of conduct which they know has been a means of
procuring the liberation of many, for first offenses, under the new system. As
the behavior of many that have been thus discharged, has afforded
encouragement to a continuance of the practice, it has, with the government of
the place, mild treatment, and watchfulness of the officers -- not only
entirely secured the place from breaches, but from* any alarms on that account
for a long time.

PHYSICIAN.
A Physician is appointed by law, who visits the prisoners oncea week, or
oftener, as occasion requires, and affords such assistance to the diseased as
the nature of the case requires.

RELIGIOUS DUTIES.
One day in the week being set apart for this purpose, by all denominations of
christians. It is a regulation of the house, that all the prisoners assemble on
that day, for the purpose of public worship; on which some one or other of the
Ministers of the different religious denominations attends. It is rare that the
day is spent without the friendly visits of some well disposed person, for the
purpose of promoting this part of the christian duties -- a service obviously
important, and which, it is to be hoped, will always be attended to by those
who believe it their business to labor for the restoration of such as have
deviated from the paths of rectitude and virtue.

The prisoners are generally desirous of attending, and always conduct
themselves with decency and attention, and some appear to be benefited. The
afternoon of the day, is mostly spent, by many of them, in reading: proper
books being furnished for that purpose.

EFFECTS OF THIS MANAGEMENT ON THE CONDUCT OF THE PRISONERS.
Whilst the Visiting Committee of the Prison Society attended to relieve the
distresses of the prisoners they were considered as their best friends, and it
was impossible but that the committee, on many occasions, might be deceived by
the accounts of the artful and depraved characters in confinement, who, no
doubt, frequently made very improper applications of the assistance afforded
them. But, no sooner was the meditated reform attempted, than they manifested
their opposition, prefering their state of wretchedness, to any alteration that
they knew would deprive them of the indulgence in those excesses of debauchery
and riot, that had long prevailed, in this as well as other prisons -- The
reform was, however, attempted, and persevered in, to the apparent danger of
all concerned in its promotion, from these desperate and disappointed
characters -- consequences not unreasonable to expect. After much labor and
patience, they were reduced to some degree of order. Mild, but firm measures
were adopted, and order and quietness gradually effected -- but not till some
time after the prison was placed under the direction of the Inspectors, who
they knew, were clothed with a power of obtaining a remission of their
sentence, or fixing it, without the most distant prospect of hope; this led to
a circumspection of conduct, for they knew that all improper behavior would be
reported to the Inspectors. Different kinds of labor was introduced, but it
was a considerable time before proper kinds were obtained -- Time and
perseverance, however, overcame this great obstacle, and employment, at length,
became desirable, and much care observed, by the prisoners, to preserve a due
attention to the rules of the house -- any material deviation, being attended
with seclusion from the society and privileges of the orderly prisoners. The
men were early relieved from their irons, and few were found to require
rigorous treatment. But one instance has occurred of refusal to work, which was
soon remedied, by a separation of the criminal, from the orderly prisoners, and
confining him in the solitary cells, where he remained some weeks, without
labor, bed, or furniture, of any kind, except a vessel to hold his drink, and
another his mush, and a blanket. In this chearless habitation, he spent many
anxious hours, confined to the reflections inseparable from guilty minds -- he
was ignorant how long his present situation was to continue -- he was without
employment -- nothing to amuse him -- in a state of suspense and uncertainty,
when the hour would arrive that was to restore him, or how he should atone for
his offense; he made many protestations, and used many means to obtain a
friend. The object being obtained for which he was separated from the rest, he
was restored. -- The the utmost propriety of conduct has been observed by this
man ever since. -- Beside this instance, there has but one occured, of a wilful
violation of the rules, among the men prisoners, which I shall mention very
briefly, which will prove the effect of this mode of treatment, on the conduct
of the prisoners. Two men had some difference -- they agreed to decide it by
fighting, but knowing the consequences of a breach of the rules, agreed to
accomplish it in a room by themselves, in order to keep the other prisoners in
apparent ignorance, who they knew would suffer similar treatment with
themselves, in case of discovery. The scuffling unexpectedly reached the ears
of the Keepers, who repaired to the room, found the disorder, and led the
combatants to the cells, where they had time and opportunity of settling the
matter in dispute in a more reasonable manner.

One more instance is all I shall relate, which was the case of a woman, of an
extreme bad character, an old offender, and very ungovernable, who had made an
attempt to burn the prison. She stood the confinement for some weeks, with
firmness, but, sinding that the Keeper was easy; no provocation offered to keep
up her passions; no remedy; no prospect of resenting her treatment, at length
submitted, but was for some time retained in this chearless place, making many
promises; among the rest, offered to perform two days work, each day, during
her confinement, and to agree to an immediate return to the cells, upon
noncompliance with this promise, or of any of the rules of the house. She was
now informed that the officers had no object in view, beside the strictest
attention to the rules of the house, and the real welfare of those whose lot it
was to be committed to their care; that it was vain to oppose the order of the
place; that her disorderly conduct could only effect herself; and that if she
would accept her restoration upon these considerations, she should have it --
she accepted it. The consequences resulting from this mode of treating
offenders, and of these few instances of seclusion have been the most agreeable
order and quietness, and no occasion of coercion has occured beside, for many
months.

The order in their employments; their demeanor toward the officers; harmony
amongst each other; and their decorum and attention, at times appointed for
religious worship, have been obvious, and are such as have obtained the
approbation of all those who have been witnesses to it; and we trust that the
impressions received in this secluded state of existence, will have a happy
influence toward promoting the great object contemplated by the change of the
Penal Code by the Legislature of this commonwealth.

OBJECTIONS TO THE PRESENT PLAN BRIEFLY CONSIDERED.
The principle objections that have been offered against this plan have been on
account of -- I The Expense. II. Want of Suitable Labor. III. Want of
Accommodation. IV. Want of Security against Escapes. V. Want of Benefit to
Society.


As to the first, the law requires, that an account shall be opened with the
prisoners, which is done, and they are charged with the costs of prosecution,
their diet and clothing, and credited by their labor, and the balance, if
any, is to be given them at discharge, either in money or clothes, at the
discretion of the Inspectors, or both -- considerable balances have been found
in favor of some, and few but now have more or less -- some balances have been
as high as L.10, many near it; so that as to their individual expense, there is
not much doubt of their being able to earn as much as will pay all the expense
they occasion to the county; and unless the numbers become too few, might be
made to contribute toward paying the salaries of the officers of the house.
There are men now in the house who appropriate a part of their earnings to the
support of their families. It is a point carefully attended to, that the
prisoner goes out well clothed, and mostly with money in his pocket; a
regulation too obvious to need much comment. The former plan of turning a poor
wretch, after a long confinement, perhaps for fees only, in idleness, without
the least prospect or possibility of obtaining that support, which he
immediately stood in need of, was miserably defective. The prisoner discharged,
generally stands in more need of the friendly assistance of the humane, than
almost any other character. This assistance is afforded in this city, when
occasion requires, by the Society for Alleviating the Miseries of Public
Prisons.

II. WANT OF SUITABLE LABOR.
This was long a serious objection -- but patience and perseverance have
overcome this difficulty.

Shoe-making, tayloring, weaving, chipping logwood, beating hemp, grinding
plaster of Paris, grinding and polishing marble, will long afford a
sufficiency and variety of employment; and all are sufficiently productive.
Spinning, heckling, picking oakum, wool, flax, and cotton, carding wool for
hatters, with many other employments, may occasionally be profitably used by
the weakly and infirm.

To those who think that the labor should be public, hard, and disgraceful, I
will just observe, that this mode has been tried and proved ineffectual. Hard
labor is comparative, and depends upon the state of the person employed; and
when we take into consideration the nature of the diet, and life of the
prisoners, most of the first mentioned employments is found to be sufficiently
severe.

As to disgraceful labor, or treatment of any kind, it has not had, nor can
have, any valuable tendency toward restoring an offender to usefulness in
society, and it is therefore discontinued.

III. WANT OF ACCOMMODATION.
As to this objection, it is evidently the duty of every government to provide
it. It is a strange kind of economy, to hang our fellow creatures to avoid the
expense of preparing a proper place of confinement: but I may add, that our
empty rooms have increased so as not only to admit of more convenient
accommodation, but far beyond our expectations.

IV. WANT OF SECURITY AGAINST ESCAPES.
I have already stated, that prisoners are, and always may be, secured by
proper care, watchfulness, and lenient treatment -- beside the jailer, turnkey,
and clerk, there are but two officers in the house: one over the men, and one
over the women -- and they are found to be quite sufficient, whilst the place
is conducted upon the present plan.

V. WANT OF BENEFIT TO SOCIETY.
How little effect the former system of punishments had in preventing of
crimes, is too well known to need any explanation at present. We are now to
examine, whether any beneficial consequences have followed the alteration that
has taken place in the treatment of the convicts.

It is not more than two years that the new regulations have had their full
operation, although the law which authorized them, was passed some time before.
But in that short time, the effects which have flowed from them, have been
remarked with much satisfaction by the citizens at large, as well as by those
whose situation offered superior opportunities for observing them. These
effects proceed, either from a real reformation taking place in the minds of
the prisoners, or from a terror of the consequences which they know will attend
a second confinement.

During their continuance in prison, they learn many things which operate as a
check upon the commission of new crimes. They learn the difficulty of evading
justice; and that, as the laws are now mild, they will be strictly put in
execution. They now see that juries are not unwilling to convict, and that
pardons are not granted till they discover some appearances of amendment. The
penalty, though not severe, is attended with many unpleasant circumstances, and
many of them deem the constant return of the same labor and of coarse fare, as
more intolerable, than a sharp, but momentary punishment. They know that a
second conviction would consign them to the solitary cells, and deprive them of
the most distant hopes of pardon. These cells are an object of real terror to
them all, and those who have experienced confinement in them, discover by their
subsequent conduct, how strong an impression it has made on their minds. They
know that mercy abused, will not be repeated, and neither change of name nor
disguise, will enable them to escape the vigilant attention with which they are
examined. These reflections, or reflections like these, have had their weight:
for out of near 200 persons, who at different times have been recommended to,
and pardoned by the governor, only four have been returned: three from
Philadelphia, re-convicted of larceny, and one from a neighboring county. As
several of those, thus discharged, were old offenders, there was some reason to
fear, that they would not long behave as honest citizens. But, if they have
returned to their old courses, they have chosen to run the risk of being hanged
in other states, rather than encounter the certainty of being confined in the
penitentiary cells of this. We may therefore conclude, that the plan adopted
has had a good effect on these; for it is a fact well known, that many of them
were heretofore frequently at the bar of public justice, and had often received
the punishment of their crimes under the former laws.

Our streets now meet with no interruption from those characters that formerly
rendered it dangerous to walk out of an evening. Our roads in the vicinity of
the city, so constantly infested with robbers, are seldom disturbed by those
dangerous characters. The few instances that have occurred of the latter, last
fall, were soon stopped. The perpetrators proved to be strangers, quartered
near the city, on their way to the westward.

Our houses, stores, and vessels so perpetually disturbed and robbed, no longer
experience those alarming evils. We lay down in peace -- we sleep in security.

There has been but two instances of burglaries in this city and county for
near two years. Pick-pockets, formerly such pests to society, are now unknown.
Not one instance has occurred of a person being convicted of this offense for
two years past. The number of persons convicted at the several Courts have
constantly decreased -- Thirty, and upwards, at a session, have frequently been
added to the criminal list: at this time, when both City and County Courts are
but a few days distant, there are but five for trial! Such have been our
measures -- such is the state of things -- and such the effect. If any one can
assign other causes for them, than are here adduced, they must have other
opportunities -- other means of information than I am acquainted with.

APPENDIX.

APPENDIX.
DIRECTIONS FOR THE INSPECTORS, etc. OF THE GAOL OF THE CITY AND COUNTY OF
PHILADELPHIA.
WHEREAS, by a "Supplement to the penal laws of this state," it is enacted,
"that the prison inspectors, appointed in pursuance of the act in such case
provided, and of the said supplement, shall have power, with the approbation of
the Mayor, two Aldermen of the said city, and two of the Judges of the Supreme
Court, or two of the Judges of the Common Pleas of Philadelphia County, to make
rules and regulations for the government of all convicts confined in the said
prison, not inconsistent with the laws and constitution of this Commonwealth."

IT is therefore ordained, that the said inspectors, seven of whom shall be a
quorum, shall meet at the prison, quarterly, on the first Mondays in January,
March, June, and September; and on every second Monday throughout the year;
and, may also be specially convened by the visiting inspectors, when occasion
requires. At their first meeting, they shall appoint two of their members to be
visiting inspectors; one of whom shall serve for one month, and the other for
two months, continuing to make a fresh appointment to this office monthly.

VISITING INSPECTORS.
The VISITING INSPECTORS shall attend at the prison together at least twice in
each week, and oftener if occasions requires; at which times they shall examine
into and inspect the management of the prison, the conduct of the keeper,
deputies and assistants: they shall also carefully enquire into, and report the
conduct and disposition of the prisoners, and see that they are properly and
sufficiently employed; that proper attention to cleanliness is observed; that
due enquiry be made respecting the health of the prisoners, and that their food
is served in quantity and quality, agreeably to the directions of the Board;
that the sick are properly provided for, and that suitable clothing and
bedding are furnished to all -- They shall hear the grievances of the
prisoners, receive their petitions, and bring forward the cases of such, whose
conduct and circumstances may appear to merit the attention of the board --
They shall be careful to prevent improper out-door communications with the
prisoners; that no spirituous liquors be admitted on any pretext whatever,
except by order of the physician -- That no intercourse be admitted between the
sexes -- That the regulations of the board, respecting the distribution of the
prisoners, according to their characters and circumstances, be attended to --
that proper means be used to promote religious and moral improvement, by the
introduction of useful books, and procuring the performance of divine service,
as often as may be.

They shall from time to time report to the commissioners of the county, all
such prisoners who have been sent from other counties, and have incurred a
charge for their maintenance more than the profits of their labor will defray,
in order that the compensation may be had as the law directs.

They shall cause fair returns to be made out, and laid before the board
monthly, of all the prisoners, their crimes, length of confinement, by whom
committed, when and how discharged since the preceding return.

They shall attend to the keeper, deputies and assistants, by observing their
treatment of the prisoners, and suffer no persons addicted to liquor, making
use of profane swearing, or other improper language, to be employed on this
duty.

They shall constantly bear in mind, that all men are free, until legal proof
is made to the contrary; they will therefore take care that no person is held
in confinement on bare suspicion of being a runaway slave; and those persons
who are actually slaves, and not applied for by proper claims within a limited
time, shall be returned to the supreme or other proper court for a habeas
corpus to remove them according to law; and generally they shall see, that the
present and subsequent directions of the board be carried into effect.

KEEPER OF THE PRISON.
The KEEPER OF THE PRISON, besides attending to the safe keeping of the
prisoners, shall carefully inspect into their moral conduct, shall enjoin a
strict attention to the regulations, relative to cleanliness, sobriety and
industry, and be careful to avoid that penalty which is incurred by ^^^^ring a
criminal to escape. He shall also, with the approbation of two of the
inspectors, provide a sufficient quantity of stock and materials, working
tools, and implements for the constant employment of the prisoners. He shall
deliver out their work and receive it from them by weight or measure, as the
case may be, in order that (...) or waste may be prevented, by the prisoners,
and by every laudable means in his power make their labor as profitable as
possible. He shall, as the law directs, keep separate accounts for all convicts
sentenced to labor six months and upwards, in which the expense of clothing
and subsistence shall be charged, and a reasonable allowance for their labor
be credited; (...) accounts shall be balanced at short periods, in order that
the prisoner, at his discharge, may receive the proportion, if any, that is due
to him.

He shall cause all accounts concerning the maintenance of the prisoners to be
entered in a book or books for the purpose, and shall also keep separate
accounts of the stock and materials purchased by him* shall take proper
vouchers wherever money is expended; shall regularly credit the materials,
manufactured and sold, mentioning to whom and when disposed of; and at every
quarterly meeting of the board, shall exhibit his accounts and vouchers for
their approbation and allowance.

TURNKEY.
The TURNKEY shall admit no persons except the inspectors, keeper, his
deputies, servants or assistants, officers and ministers of justice,
counselors or attorneys at law, employed by a prisoner, ministers of the
gospel, or persons producing a written license signed by two of the said
inspectors; and the latter only, in his presence or some one of the officers of
the prison. He shall prevent the admission of any spirituous liquors, or any
other improper article to the prisoners, and on every attempt of this kind that
may be detected, he shall make discovery thereof, in order that the penalty
inflicted by law may be recovered.

KEEPER'S DEPUTIES, etc.
The KEEPER'S DEPUTIES and ASSISTANTS shall be careful to preserve cleanliness,
sobriety and industry among the prisoners; to inform them of the rules of the
house* and to enjoin an observance of them by mild, yet (...) measures; they
shall be careful to prevent embezzlement, waste or destruction of implements or
materials* they shall constantly reside in the house, and inspect the conduct
and labor of the prisoners -- report the negligent, profane or disorderly (who
shall be removed) (...) the industrious quiet and exemplary, that they may be
recommended by the visiting inspectors, who have (...) charge to bring such to
the favoroble notice of the (...).

WATCHMEN.
The WATCHMEN shall continue in the prison all (...) two of whom shall be
within the iron gate, and two (...) the inspectors room -- they shall patrole
the inside constantly, and strike the bell every hour -- they shall report any
remarkable occurence of the night, to the clerk of the prison, on the
succeeding day, who shall commit the same to writing, and lay it before the
visiting inspectors, at their next meeting; and as the safety of the prison so
much depends on their vigilance and attention, it is required, that no
circumstance shall prevent the performance of their regular and frequent rounds.

26th February, 1792. Signed by order of the Board, GEORGE MEADE, Chairman.
APPROVED. JOHN BARCLAY, Mayor.
APPROVED. WILLIAM ROBINSON, jun. THOMAS L. MOORE,
Judges of the Court of Common Pleas.
APPROVED. HILARY BAKER, J. M. NESBIT,
Aldermen.

(...), ORDERS, and REGULATIONS, for the GAOL, of the CITY and COUNTY of
PHILADELPHIA.
I.
(...) persons whatever shall be admitted to a communication with the
prisoners, except the keeper, his (...), servants or assistants -- the
inspectors, officers of (...) counselors, or attorneys at law, employed by a
(...) -- ministers of the gospel, or persons authorized (...) of the inspectors.

II.
The males and females shall be employed, and shall (...) and be lodged in
separate apartments, and shall have no intercourse or communication with each
other.

III.
The prisoners shall be constantly employed in such labor as the keeper (with
the concurrence of the inspectors) may consider best adapted to their age, sex
and circumstances: regard being had to that employment which is most profitable.

IV.
If any of the prisoners shall be found remiss or negligent in performing what
is required of them, to the best of their power and abilities, or shall
wilfully waste or damage the goods committed to their care, they shall be
punished for every such offense, as may be hereafter directed.

V.
If any of the prisoners shall refuse to comply with these regulations, or to
obey the officers of the prison, or shall be guilty of profane cursing or
swearing, or of any indecent behavior, conversation or expression, or of any
assault, quarrel or abusive words to or with any other person, they shall be
punished for the same, in manner hereafter directed.

VI.
The convicts, prisoners for trial, servants, runaways, and vagrants, shall be
separately fed, lodged and employed.

VII.
Offenders shall be reported to the inspectors, and ^^^ished by close, solitary
confinement, and their allo^^^^^ of food reduced -- but in cases where the
security (...) prison is in danger, or personal violence offered (...) the
officers, then the said officers shall use all (...) means to defend
themselves, and secure the (...) such outrage.

VIII.
No officer or other person shall sell any thing (...) the prison, nor buy,
sell or barter any article, by (...) they can have benefit; neither shall they
suffer (...) ^^^tuous or fermented liquors to be introduced, (...) as the
keeper may use in his own family, or for (...) purposes prescribed by the
attending physician, (...) penalty of five pounds, if an officer, and of (...)
from office; or if a prisoner, he shall be proceeded (...) as in the seventh
article.

IX.
The prisoners on the first admission shall be (...) lodged, washed, and
cleansed; and shall (...) such separate lodging, until it shall be deemed (...)
admit them among the other prisoners; and (...) in which they were committed
shall be baked, (...) and laid by; to be returned them at their (...) during
their confinement to be clothed according (...).

X.
Any persons detected in gaming of any kind, shall be proceeded against
agreeably to the 7th article.

XI.
Any person who shall demand or exact a garnish, beg, steal, or defraud, shall
be punished as directed by the 7th article.

XII.
The prisoners who distinguish themselves by their attention to cleanliness,
sobriety, industry and orderly conduct, shall be reported to the inspectors,
and meet with such rewards as is in their power to grant or procure for them.

XIII.
The prisoners shall be furnished with suitable bedding, shall be shaved twice
a week, their hair cut once a month, change their linen once a week, and
regularly wash their (...) and hands every morning.

XIV.
The prison shall be white-washed at least twice in the (...) and oftener, if
occasion requires; the floors shall (...) every morning, and washed on
Wednesdays and Saturdays, from 20th of May to the 1st October, (...) a week for
the remainder of the year.

XV.
The sweepings of the prison shall be collected and deposited in a place for
the purpose, and removed once in every two weeks; and the necessaries shall
also be cleansed (...).

XVI.
The yards of the prison shall be kept free from Cows, (...), dogs, and fowls.

XVII.
The physician for the time being shall keep a register of the sick, their
disorders, and his prescriptions; and (...) ^^der his accounts for the
examination and allowance of the inspectors at each of their quarterly meetings.

XVIII.
At the performance of divine worship, all the prisoners shall attend, except
such as may be sick.

XIX.
The turnkey, deputies and assistants shall be tradesmen, in order that the
trades and employment within the house shall be more effectually and profitable
executed.

XX.
All prisoners committed as vagrants, and who have been convicts, shall be
confined in the cells during their commitment.

XXI.
No provision, other than the prison-allowance, shall be furnished to a convict
or vagrant, without the permission of the visiting inspectors.

XXII.
There shall be wardsmen appointed by the visiting inspectors, whose duty it
shall be to keep the windows, passages, yard, and privies clean, and who also
shall be lodged, and fed in a room by themselves.

XXIII.
Runaway or disorderly apprentices and servants shall be separately fed, lodged
and employed, and the keeper shall give notice to their masters or mistresses,
at the time of their commitment, of the charge that will accrue for their daily
maintenance, who may at their option agree to pay the same, or provide the
necessary food themselves.

XXIV.
The charge for the maintenance of slaves shall be the same as that of
apprentices or runaways.

XXV.
The diet of prisoners shall be -- on

Sunday, one pound of bread, and one pound of coarse meat made into broth.

Monday, one pound of bread, and one quart of potatoes.

Tuesday, one quart of Indian meal made into mush.

Wednesday, one pound of bread, and one quart of potatoes.

Thursday, one quart of Indian meal made into mush.

Friday, one pound of bread, and one quart of potatoes.

Saturday, one quart of Indian meal made into mush.

Besides the above, a half pint of molasses shall be distributed to every four
prisoners, on every Tuesday, Thursday and Saturday.

26th February, 1792. Signed by order of the Board, GEORGE MEADE, Chairman.
APPROVED. JOHN BARCLAY, Mayor.
APPROVED. WILLIAM ROBINSON, jun. THOMAS L. MOORE,
Judges of the Court of Common Pleas.
The foregoing rules, orders and regulations, are also approved by us, HILARY
BAKER, J. M. NESBITT,
Aldermen.

On Tuesday, the 8th day of May, 1787, a number of Gentlemen assembled, and
agreed to associate themselves in a society, to be entitled, "The Philadelphia
Society, for alleviating the Miseries of Public Prisons," when the following
paper was read, and resolved upon to be the future Constitution of this
Society, to wit:
CONSTITUTION of the PHILADELPHIA SOCIETY, for alleviating the Miseries of
Public Prisons.
-- I was in prison, and ye came unto me. And the King shall answer and say
unto them, Verily I say unto you, inasmuch as ye have done it unto one of the
least of these my Brethren, ye have done it unto me.

MATTHEW. xxv. 36. -- 40.
WHEN we consider that the obligations of benevolence, which are founded on the
precepts and example of the author of Christianity, are not cancelled by the
follies or crimes of our fellow creatures; and, when we reflect upon the
miseries which penury, hunger, (...), unnecessary severity, unwholesome
apartments, and (...), (the usual attendants of prisons) involve with (...) it
becomes us to extend our compassion to that (...) of mankind, who are the
subjects of these miseries, by the aids of humanity, their undue and illegal
sufferings may be prevented: the links, which should bind the whole family of
mankind together under all circumstances, be preserved unbroken: and, such
degrees and modes of punishment may be discovered and suggested, as may,
instead of continuing habits of vice, become the means of restoring our
fellow creatures to virtue and happiness. From a conviction of the truth and
obligation of these principles, the subscribers have associated themselves
under the title of "The Philadelphia Society, for alleviating the Miseries of
Public Prisons." For effecting these purposes, they have adopted the following
Constitution:

I. The officers of the society shall consist of a president, two
vice-presidents, two secretaries, a treasurer, four physicians, an electing
committee of twelve, and an acting committee of six members; all of whom,
except the last mentioned committee, shall be chosen annually by ballot, on the
second Second-day, called Monday, in the month called January.

II. The president, and in his absence, one of the vice-presidents shall
preside in all meetings, and subscribe all the public acts of the society. The
president, or in his absence, either of the vice-presidents shall moreover have
the power of calling a special meeting of the society whenever he shall judge
proper. A special meeting shall likewise be called at any time when six members
of the society shall concur in requesting it.

III. The secretaries shall keep fair records of the proceedings of the
society, and shall correspond with such persons and societies as may be judged
necessary to promote the views and objects of the institution.

IV. The treasurer shall keep all the moneys and securities of the society, and
shall pay all orders signed by the president or one of the vice-presidents, --
which orders shall be his vouchers for his expenditures, -- he shall, before he
enter upon his office, give a bond of not less than two hundred pounds, for the
faithful discharge of the duties of it.

V. The business of the physicians shall be to visit the prisons when called
upon by, or to give advice to the acting committee respecting such matters as
are connected with the preservation of the health of persons confined therein,
or subject to the government of the officers of the prisons.

VI. The electing committee shall have the sole power of admitting new members.
Two-thirds of them shall be a quorum for this purpose; and the concurrence of a
majority of them, by ballot, when met, shall be necessary for the admission of
a member. No member shall be admitted, who has not been proposed at a general
meeting of the society; nor shall an election for a member take place in less
than one month after the time of his being proposed.

VII. The acting committee shall visit the public prisons, or such other places
of confinement or punishment as are ordained by law, at least, once every week.
They shall enquire into the circumstances of the persons confined; they shall
report such abuses as they shall discover to the officers of government who are
authorized to redress them; and shall examine the influence of confinement or
punishment upon the morals of the persons who are the subjects of them. They
shall have a right, with the concurrence of the president, or one of the
vice-presidents, to draw upon the treasurer for such sums of money as shall be
necessary to carry on the business of their appointment. Four of them shall be
a quorum. After the first election, two of their number shall be relieved from
duty at each quarterly meeting, and two members shall be appointed to succeed
them.

VIII. Every member, upon his admission, shall subscribe the constitution of
the society, and contribute ten shillings annually, in quarterly payments,
toward defraying its contingent expenses. If he neglects to pay the same for
more than two years, he shall, upon due notice being given him of the
delinquency, cease to be a member.

IX. The society shall meet on the second Second-day, called Monday, in the
months, called January, April, July, and October, at such place as shall be
agreed to by a majority of the society.

X. No law or regulation shall contradict any part of the constitution of the
society; nor shall any law or alteration in the constitution be made, without
being proposed at a previous meeting. All questions shall be decided, where
there is a division, by a majority of votes. In those cases, where the society
is equally divided, the presiding officer shall have a casting vote.

EXTRACT FROM THE REPORT OF THE BOARD OF INSPECTORS OF THE PRISON.
Statement of the number of Convicts, etc. now confined in the Jail of the City
and County of Philadelphia, viz.

Number of Convicts and nature of their crimes. Burglary. Felony. Deceit.
Forgery. Horse stealing. Highway robbery. Receiving stolen goods. Where
Convictected. 1 12 1 2 City of Philadelphia. 16 4 2 1 1 County of Philadelphia.
8 1 County of Huntingdon. 1 2 2 County of Franklin. 4 3 2 County of Berks. 5 1
County of Delaware. 1 2 County of Washington. 2 5 22 2 2 4 1 1 27 Men and 10
Women. 37

The number of Convicts on the 3th day of May, 1791, was 143.

GEORGE MEADE, Chairman.
Philad. 3d of Dec. 1792.
(...) haste in which this work was printed must apologize for the following
ERRATA.
PAGE 5, line 16, for if, read of.

PAGE 7, line 1, for authorized, r. unauthorised.

PAGE 11, line 32, for were, r. where.

PAGE 14, line 17, for are, r. is.

PAGE 23, line 6, for offices, r. offenses.

PAGE 24, line 18, dele two.

PAGE 25, line 13, for fourth, r. fifth.

PAGE 31, line 7, for goal, r. gaol.

PAGE 33, line 2, for lesser, r. less.

PAGE 33, line 4, for puishment, r. punishment.

PAGE 33, line 34, for public, r. public.

PAGE 38, line 16, for eight-one, r. eighty-one.

PAGE 42, line 10, for wave, r. waive.

PAGE 45, line 7, for the, r. this.

PAGE 45, line 9, for Legislator, r. Legislature.

PAGE 45, line 20, for rememberance, r. remembrance.

PAGE 46, line 14, for auspious, r. auspicious.

PAGE 56, line 24, for say, r. says.

PAGE 59, line 5, for descretion, r. discretion.

PAGE 64, line 35, for town, r. towns.

PAGE 65, line 39, for citizen, r. citizens.

PAGE 66, line 19, dele the period, and insert --

PAGE 13, line 31, after our, insert own.

PAGE 28, line 13, after is, in. it.

PAGE 30, line 7, after that, in. this.

PAGE 41, in note, after Radcliffe, in. p. 298.

PAGE 62, line 15, after multitude, in. of offender

PAGE 77, line 13, for offender, read offenders.

PAGE 77, line 13, after offenders, insert were.

PAGE 78, line 18, for communications, read communication.

PAGE 81, line 24 and 32, dele for.

PAGE 83, line 18, dele the first "very,"

PAGE 85, line 8, after except, insert to.

PAGE 86, line 12 and 16, for has, read have.

PAGE 87, line 2, dele the period, and insert a comma.

PAGE 88, line 10, after care, insert was.

PAGE 89 line 12, after rest, in. she.

PAGE 91 line 21, for provide read obviate.

PAGE 93 line 19, for has, r. have.

PAGE ^8 line 19, for convictected r. convicted.


