SIC ITUR AD ASTRA.


JOURNAL OF MY FORTY-FIFTH ASCENSION, BEING THE FIRST PERFORMED IN AMERICA, ON
THE NINTH OF JANUARY, 1793.

Aethereum tr^nabit iter, quo numine BLANCHARD?
Impavidus, sortem non timet Icariam
PHILADELPHIA: PRINTED BY CHARLES CIST, NO. 104. NORTH SECOND-STREET, M, DCC,
XCIII.

INSCRIBED TO GEORGE WASHINGTON, PRESIDENT OF THE UNITED STATES OF AMERICA, THE
PATRON OF LIBERTY, THE LAWS, AND THE FINE ARTS,

BY HIS MOST HUMBLE, AND MOST OBEDIENT SERVANT, BLANCHARD.

INTRODUCTION.
HAVING so happily succeeded in the 45th attempt of my aerial flight, in the
presence of the enlightened citizens of Philadelphia, I thought I could still
afford them some pleasure, by offering to them an accurate description of the
operations preparatory to this ascension, and by acquainting them with my
various situation during this excursion, as well as with the motives which
induced me to a return, and the means I made use of to accomplish it.

I will then account for the thoughts and feelings which agitated my breast at
the time of my ascension: I will display them, with confidence, to those candid
and feeling men, whose eye traced me across the vast expanse of the aerial
regions.

To such as are not unacquainted with the mechanism of the aerostat, some of
these details may appear trifling and superfluous; but as I felt them, I will
therefore describe them: nor do I think I should be justifiable in concealing
from the curious public any part of the operations which attended so
extraordinary an experiment, of which they for the first time witnessed the
complete success.

And here I request the indulgence of my readers for the style of my narrative
-- Elegance is not what I aim at in this performance: Truth is intended as its
sole ornament.

JOURNAL.
I HAD performed my forty-fourth ascension -- All Europe was filled with the
glory of the famous MONTOOL^IER -- The principal cities of the old world had
applauded the happy success of so brilliant a discovery. It was my good fortune
to contribute to it, by the multiplicity of my experiments; I have even, I
trust, developed and enlarged the sublime idea, by subjecting the aerostat to
fixed and certain laws, by which, at any height in the atmosphere, I might
direct its motions at pleasure -- In a word, I enjoyed a satisfaction which
seemed to leave me nothing to wish for. I then thought of terminating my aerial
excursions; and recalling to my mind my original situation, I wished to devote
in a peaceable retreat the most precious moments of my leisure to collecting
together my aerological observations, in order to offer them as fresh food to
the eager thirst of mankind after new sources of knowledge.

THIS first intention of mine was soon altered by an uneasy emotion which
seized my breast. The New World, so interesting by its situation, offered to my
emulation an attraction which I could not resist. This Hemisphere had as yet
only heard of the brilliant triumph of aerostation; and the people who inhabit
it, appeared to me worthy of enjoying the sublime spectacle that it affords. On
my arrival in this city, I was informed that some experiments of this kind had
already been attempted, the ill success of which had disappointed the
expectation of the subscribers. -- I now congratulate myself upon having proved
to the citizens of Philadelphia the truth of what I had advanced.


YE People of America, ye wise and happy Nation, who knowing the full value of
liberty, are not insensible to that of a just submission to the laws, you
attracted all my attention, and the desire of beholding you in the full
enjoyment of the blessings of liberty, under the protection of your newly
established government, fired my soul as much as the wish of acquiring some
glory among you.

MY project was as soon executed as formed. Fearful however of not finding in
the new countries, which I was going to explore, a sufficient quantity of
materials necessary to my experiments, my departure was delayed only by the
time requisite to have them forwarded from London to Hamburg, where I then was.

MY orders being punctually executed, and every thing succeeding to the best of
my wishes, I had the satisfaction to embark with all my apparatus upon the ship
Ceres, Captain Marsh, bound to Philadelphia -- On the 30th of September, 1792,
we sailed, and landed here on the 9th of December, in the same year.

How superior to all the reports of fame Philadelphia appeared* This city so
happily characterised by the name it bears, still preserves, whether
collectively or separately viewed, the glorious stamp of her philosophical
founder. The simplicity of her architecture, the order and regularity of her
plan, the size and cleanliness of the streets, and the conveniences they afford
to the public, every thing reminds us at the first view of the celebrated man,
who chose it should bear a name analogous to his philanthropic feelings, and
gives us also a lively recollection of the wisdom of her rulers, as well as of
the simple and decent manners of her inhabitants.

I MADE it my duty, nay I was proud of attempting in this metropolis my first
aerial ascension in America, and I derived from it the most sanguine
expectations of a complete success. The gracious reception with which I was
welcomed by the hero of liberty, General GEORGE WASHINGTON, President of the
United States, the easy and cheerful access I had to General THOMAS MIFFLIN,
Governor of Pennsylvania, the eagerness which I thought I discovered in the
public to see MONTGOLFIER'S sublime discovery reduced to practice, every thing
seemed to tell me that I might with confidence display the mechanism of an
aerostat, to make it soar above the clouds, and convince the New World that
man's ingenuity is not confined to earth alone, but opens to him new and
certain roads in the vast expanse of heaven.

I SOON gave notice to the public of my intention, and immediately proposed a
subscription for a sum which might lighten the burden of my expenses. These
expenses are indeed extraordinary, both on account of the quantity of the
elementary ingredients of the gas, which are often scarce in the country where
the experiment is made, as prudence requires to have a good provision of it at
hand, to insure success against the unforeseen accidents which chemical
operations are subject to; and on account of the instruments and large
apparatus which are necessary to such an experiment -- Again, the expenses are
increased by the size of the balloon in proportion to the force intended to be
given to it. -- I make this observation to forewarn the Amateurs of this art,
and to caution them against exposing themselves to a rash undertaking. This is
perhaps the reason of the ill success of many in Europe, and the cause why the
improvement of this ingenious discovery has been retarded; nor do I think the
case will be speedily altered, if Chemistry and Mechanics in concert do not
succeed in simplifying the means; in which enquiry I am at present steadily
employed.
I waited not for its being filled: I hastened to announce the time of an
experiment, fixed for the 9th. of January, 1793, at 10 o'clock in the morning.
However, zealous as I was to answer the public expectations, I was sensible,
that as a foreigner, unknown in a country, with whose very language I am
unacquainted, I should have been exposed to great difficulties in the execution
of my design, had not the magistrates of the city stepped forward to
countenance my design, by allowing me to make use of the prison court as the
most suitable place, on account of its spaciousness. I am also much indebted to
the zeal of Mr. Benjamin Nones, who by his kind assistance accelerated my
preparations. Every thing seemed to succeed to my wishes, and to ensure my
success. The day appointed for my experiment rose, one of the finest of the new
year; I will also reckon it among the happiest of my life. It was presaged by a
calm night, a serene sky, spangled with ten thousand glittering stars, whose
light was eclipsed only by that of the returning sun.

AT 4-5-6 o'clock in the morning, by Reaumur's thermometer 0d. 5/10, Fahrenheit
(...) 8/10. I had already repaired to the (...) operations, had examined every
thing (...), and left nothing undone to answer the public expectation. To be
exactly acquainted with the temperature of the air, and with the result of the
various changes of the weather was a matter of great moment with me; I
therefore compared my observations with those that were made by my friend Mr.
Peter Legaux, and I found they perfectly agreed.

FROM 7 to 8 o'clock, the sky being overcast and hazy, the higher current of
air setting from the E. N. N. and the lower from S. S. W. Reaumur's thermometer
standing at 1d., Fahrenheit's at 35d. 4/10 -- my balloon was lying on the
ground, resting on its folds, when the operation commenced; and the inflammable
air began to expand it by degrees.

AT 9 o'clock the mist dissipated, the sky was wrapped in thin clouds, pervious
to the rays of the sun; wind S. W. Reaumur's thermometer 1d. 5/10, Fahrenheit's
35d. 4/10.

AT past 9, the sun which broke in through the clouds, dissipated them in such
a manner that they appeared no more than cobwebs on the irradiated atmosphere
-- A gentle westerly breeze -- Reaumur's thermometer 2d., Fahrenheit's 36d.
5/10.

THE hour fixed for my departure now drew near, and I was anxious to keep my
word with a numerous people, whom repeated discharges of the artillery of the
city had already forewarned of the execution of my experiment; I then disposed
in order all the apparatus requisite for my observations: I adapted Reaumur's
thermometer to the center of an excellent barometer, This barometer, which had
been kindly lent to me by Mr. Benjamin Franklin Bache, was phosphoric and
perfectly freed from air; the interior diameter was 2 lines 5-10, with a bent
reservoir, and moving tube that might easily be brought back again to its
horizontal line, when the lightness or heaviness of air should either depress
or raise the column of mercury. The measurement of heights, as well as of the
differences of horizon, is one of the finest uses to which a barometer can be
applied -- its usefulness is generally acknowledged -- It not only serves to
measure the heights of mountains, and the depth of subterranean caves, and to
ascertain, by accurate observations, made at very different degrees of
elevation, the density of the air; but it also indicates the variations and the
absolute weight of the atmosphere.
in order to rectify, with the greatest possible exactness, the degrees of
expansion or condensation, which the mercury in the barometer should undergo by
the changes in the temperature of the air. The altitude, as corrected at that
time, was 29 inches, 6 lines, 6/10, English measure.

AT three quarters past 9, the sky being clear, a light breeze from the W. N.
W. -- by Reaumur's 3d. by Fahrenheit 38d. 8/10 -- corrected altitude of the
barometer 29 inches, 6 lines 7/16.

AT 10 o'clock, the sky was still finer and clearer; a light breeze from the W.
N. W. -- Reaumur's thermometer in the sun 7d. Fahrenheit's 47d. 8/10 --
corrected altitude of the barometer 29 inches, 7 lines.

ALREADY the balloon, inflated by the inflammable gas, lifted itself from the
ground, and having assumed its spherical form, was equally pressed on all the
points of its concave surface -- Already specifically lighter than the column
of air which it had displaced, it hovered majestically in the middle of that
fluid in a vertical situation, striving to break loose from the fastening which
held it by its base, and reluctantly kept it down. Repeated experiments have
made these various circumstances so many data from which to determine the
moment of my departure.

AT 9 minutes after 10, the sky being clear, serene and propitious, little wind
and nearly calm at the surface of the earth; Reaumur's thermometer in the sun
10d. 5/10, Fahrenheit's 55d. 6/10; corrected altitude of the barometer 29
inches, 7 lines 2/1^, English measure, I affixed to the aerostat my car, laden
with ballast, meteorological instruments, and some refreshments, with which the
anxiety of my friends had provided me. I hastened to take leave of the
PRESIDENT, and of Mr. TERNAN, Minister Plenipotentiary of France to the United
States. I then received from the PRESIDENT the most flattering mark of his good
will in the passport GEORGE WASHINGTON, President of the United States of
America, TO ALL TO WHOM THESE PRESENTS SHALL COME.
THE bearer hereof, Mr. Blanchard a citizen of France, proposing to ascend in a
balloon from the city of Philadelphia, at 10 o'clock, A. M. this day, to pass
in such direction and to descend in such place as circumstances may render most
convenient -- THESE are therefore to recommend to all citizens of the United
States, and others, that in his passage, descent, return or journeying
elsewhere, they oppose no hindrance or molestation to the said Mr. Blanchard;
And, that on the contrary, they receive and aid him with that humanity and good
will, which may render honor to their country, and justice to an individual so
distinguished by his efforts to establish and advance an art, in order to make
it useful to mankind in general.

(Seal.)

Given under my hand and seal at the city of Philadelphia, this ninth day of
January, one thousand seven hundred and ninety three, and of the independence
of America the seventeenth. Signed GEORGE WASHINGTON.


which he was pleased to deliver to me with his own hand. I never felt the
value of glory so much as I did in that moment, in the presence of a Hero, whom
she had constantly attended at the head of armies, and with whom she still
presided over the councils of his country.

THE moment of my departure was announced by the last discharge of the
artillery; I then ascended my car, studied the proportions of aerial gravities,
and threw out as much of my ballast as appeared necessary to leave the aerostat
at liberty, and to render my ascent certain. I soon found myself possessed of
every requisite; I felt myself balanced at 15 inches from the ground. This was
all I wished for; I requested Messieurs Nassy and Legaux, who held the
aerostat, to let it loose.

MY ascent was perpendicular and so easy, that I had time to enjoy the
different impressions which agitated so many sensible and interesting persons,
who surrounded the scene of my departure, and to salute them with my flag,
which was ornamented on one side with the armoric bearings of the United
States, and on the other with the three colors, so dear to the French nation.
Accustomed as I have long been, to the pompous scenes of numerous assemblies,
yet I could not help being surprised and astonished, when, elevated at a
certain height over the city, I turned my eyes toward the immense number of
people, which covered the open places, the roofs of the houses, the steeples,
the streets and the roads, over which my flight carried me in the free space of
the air. What a sight! How delicious for me to enjoy it! This people naturally
serious and reflecting, whose mirth is so much more true and rational, as it is
not apt to give away to the transports of the moment, showed from all parts the
most unequivocal marks of astonishment and satisfaction: I, for a long time,
followed their rapid motions: for a long time could I hear the cries of joy
which rent the air: I thought myself carried on the vows of their hearts. I had
at that instant nothing but the success of my voyage to answer for my
gratitude, and the waving of my colors to express the same. At present I make
it my duty to express the same in this feeble essay; may it be agreeable to the
inhabitants of a city, whose approbation is so glorious for me.

I STILL continued to rise; the calm state of the atmosphere, whereinto I had
now launched, offered no kind of difficulty, and I followed the ascending
motion of my aerostat with a gradual uniformity, at once, easy and majestic.

I WAS at a perpendicular height of 200 fathoms, when I felt a somewhat
stronger breeze spring up, which carried me in an easterly direction toward
the Delaware: here I met a numerous and thick flock of wild pigeons: they
seemed to be much frightened. Alas! it was never my intention in traversing the
etherial regions, to disturb the feathered inhabitants thereof: they separated
into two different parties and left a passage open for me. I soon perceived
them again at a great distance from me. I ascended constantly, being carried
toward the south-east by a light and pleasant breeze. At 10h. 16m. I let go my
anchor, to serve as a point of observation, keeping the same course, though
rather a little more to the southward.

AT 10h. 19-20-21m. bearing constantly toward the S. S. E. my ascent became
more rapid, owing solely to the dilatation of the inflammable gas, which fille^
(...) balloon. At this moment my position was perpendicular over the middle of
the Delaware, which the reflecting sunbeams painted to my eyes of a transparent
white; and at the height I was then at* this river appeared to me like a
ribband of the breadth of about four inches.

AT 10h. 35m. being now in a much more rarefied fluid, and the force of the
inflammable gas having increased in proportion to its dilatation, the aerostat
was soon raised to the highest elevation which it is susceptible of. I had lost
nothing of my ballast consisting of four bags and an half filled with sand,
containing 24lb. English weight each, together 108lb. A little black dog, which
a friend had entrusted to me, seemed to feel sick at this height, he attempted
several times to get out of the car; but finding no landing-place he took the
prudent part to remain quietly beside me: the whining of this little animal
raised nevertheless reflections in my mind, which would have affected me very
much, had not the view of the country, whose vast extent was expanded before my
eyes, opened my mind to softer and more agreeable contemplations.

SEE here, said I to myself, this country for ever famous in history, which by
philosophy as well as by dint of courage has acquired its liberty; its
inhabitants preserve yet the primitive candor of the original virtues of
nature. They felt the galling yoke of an unnatural stepmother, they undertook
to shake it off. Their cause was just; they triumphed; but how glorious did
their wisdom render their victory! Having soon found that there exists no solid
happiness for man living in society, but under the empire of laws, they did not
suffer themselves to be agitated by abstract and metaphysical discussions, they
were as virtuous as brave; knowing their own good and the means to arrive at
prosperity, they knew how to realize them.

OH France! Oh my country! for ages renowned amongst the greatest nations of
the universe, gratitude engages for thee the feelings of a people, which owes
to thee part of its glory and of its happiness; their warmest wishes are for
the success of thy arms and for thy prosperity: thou have so often avenged the
cause of nations against injustice and oppression! Oh France! delightful abode!
may thy splendour still preserve its luster in spite of the tyrants who are
endeavoring to obscure it! May thou, conquering all obstacles, speedily
reach the sublime goal to which thy fair destinies call thee! Accept my honest
wishes for thy success, they are pure as the air I now breathe. Rise at last
more beautiful and more glorious from the conflicts which rend thy bosom, and
like the people of America, hasten to fix thy glory and thy prosperity on the
wisdom and stability of thy laws!

WHAT sweet ecstacies take possession of the soul of a mortal, who leaving the
terrestrial abode, soars into the etherial regions! and to what a degree of
felicity would these transports be raised, by the exuberant and variegated
aspect of nature, when she, in the season of her fecundity, spreads before the
eyes of the husbandman the reward of his labor in the rich and various produce
of the earth!

IF the Philosopher of Geneva tasted with so much delight the pleasure of his
sentimental meditations on the high summits of the mountains of V^lais; with
how many more new beauties would his fruitful genius have enriched the fields
of imagination, had he been transported into these higher regions. I myself
should have forgotten my earthly existence, had I not recollected some
observations, which several learned gentlemen had requested me to make.

AT 10h. 36-37-38m. I found that I was in a state of perfect equilibrium in the
midst of a stagnant fluid* I made haste to avail myself of this happy
circumstance, in order to execute the commissions I had charged myself with.

1st. I BEGAN with emptying the six botttles which Doctor Wistar had put into
my car, containing diverse liquors; they were all filled with that atmospherical
air wherein I was floating, and were stopped up hermetically, as the accuracy
of the experiment required.

2dly. I PASSED on to the observation which Doctor Rush had requested me to
make upon the pulsation of the artery, when I should be arrived at my greatest
height. I found it impossible to make use of the quarter-minute glass which he
had provided for that purpose, but I supplied its place by an excellent
second-watch; and the result of my observations gave me 92 pulsations in the
minute (the average of 4 observations made at the place of my highest
elevation) whereas on the ground I had experienced no more than 84 in the same
given time, average of 4 observations: difference 8 pulsations more at the
height of 5812 English feet, where I then was.

3dly. I HAD been requested by Doctor ^lentworth to make experiments in the
ethereal regions with a lodestone, which he had lent me: on the ground it
raised 5 ounzes averdupois; but at the aforesaid height it would hardly bear 4
ounzes.

4thly. THE lowest state of the mercury in the barometer after having brought
its surface in its lower reservoir to its proper level and corrected its
dilatation, was 69 lines 9/16 French measure, or 74 lines 8/16 English measure,
which according to Mariot, Boil, Deluc and Father Cote gives an elevation of
905 toises 1 foot and 6 inches (the toise at 6 feet) or 5431 feet 6 inches
French measure, and at the usual reduction 968 fathom 4 feet, or 5812 feet
English measure. This was the highest elevation of my balloon, without having
thrown out any of my ballast, except the liquor contained in the 6 bottles
given to me by Doctor Wistar.

AT this moment (10h. 38m.) the thermometer of Reaumur 9d. Fahrenheit's 52d.
^/1^ (the temperature of the air most delightful and quite extraordinary for
this season of the year). These observations were made with so much the more
confidence, as I enjoyed for a long time the calmest reflection. In the mean
while the state of the atmosphere began to change. A whitish cloud withheld
from my sight for several minutes a part of the city of Philadelphia, which
appeared to me only as a most minute and microscopic object. A thick fog
covered the south; toward the east, in the lower region of the atmosphere, a
mist arose, which prevented me from reconnoitring the sea. I was afraid that
the land-wind increasing, might render my descent difficult; every thing
induced me to accelerate it.

I STRENGTHENED my stomach with a morsel of biscuit and a glass of wine. I then
locked up in the box of my car those of my instruments that were apt to break.
My trusty companion, the little black dog, partook equally of my care. I
cleared my car of several decorations which might have obstructed my sight. I
likewise took away the bladders which surrounded it, wherewith I had provided
myself in case of a forced descent on the water. In such circumstances prudence
dictates the most scrupulous precautions. Searching in this manner the interior
parts of my car, I found at my feet a letter from Mr. Legaux and Doctor Nassy:
these two friends had, without my knowledge, joined to this packet, a bottle of
either. I took a few drops of it, which refreshed me very much.

BEING now fully master of all my ways* I opened the valve of the balloon, and
the aerostatic equilibrium was soon broken, but in a manner as exactly
graduated, and as uniform as that which regulated my ascent. I could soon
distinguish with the naked eye those large masses, which are raised above the
surface of the earth. I observed a large forest; I tried to approach it -- I
judged it to be about 1000 or 1200 feet distant; but through my spy-glass it
appeared impenetrable to me, and I gave up the idea of landing there. I now
threw out a quantity of ballast sufficient to give the balloon a superior
equilibrium; it rose again and I followed my course, looking for a more
convenient landing-place. Thinking I had found one, I again opened the valve;
the ascending force diminished; I descended obliquely in a new direction: but
in this second attempt I was not more fortunate than in the first. I perceived
a field covered with stumps of trees, whose stems were yet too strong not to
embarrass and injure my apparel. I kept clear of it, and raising myself by
throwing out more ballast, my direction was such that I could discover a clear
spot in the midst of a thick wood, that is to say, an opening large and free
enough to permit me to descend without any kind of danger: I attempted it for
the third time.

I THEN took the string of the valve in my hand, and letting out the
inflammable air in such proportion, that my course, pressed by a proportionable
quantity of the yet remaining ballast, terminated in a direction of a curve of
45 degrees. I soon found myself at the height of about 80 feet above the
surface of the ground; I reached it like a bird in full flight; the flexible
limbs of the trees around me gave way to the strong pressure of my apparel; I
landed at last and set my foot on ground at 10h. 56m. A. M.

I IMMEDIATELY searched my instruments; they were all well preserved, except
the barometer, which on account of its length I could not put into the box of
my seat, and which I found broken. I delivered at the same time the dog from
his confinement, he ran immediately to drink the muddy water from a
neighboring pool, and returned directly to me. There remained of my provisions
about 5 or 6 pounds of biscuit and two bottles and a half of wine: this
resource made me easy in a place, which was entirely unknown to me, and where
the horizon was on all sides concealed from my view.

WITH the compass in my hand I formed already plans, how to effect my return,
after I should have secured my apparatus against accidents, when I heard a
noise which informed me of the presence of some person near me. It was indeed a
countryman, an (...) neighborhood, who having seen an (...) phenomenon in the
air; had advanced toward the spot, where he supposed it had descended. I spied
him and enjoyed his whole surprise, when he saw through a tuft of trees such a
monstrous machine, balancing on itself, and sinking in proportion, as the
spirit wherewith it was animated left it. He seemed to be frightened, and I was
afraid he would go away again. I let him hear my voice, inviting him to draw
near, but he either did not understand me or was retained by a certain
distrust; and at that time I could not quit my balloon. I did better;
recollecting that the exhilarating juice of the grape was always amongst
mankind the happiest sign of friendship and conciliation, I showed him a bottle
of wine. So much eagerness on my part inspired him with confidence; he
approached, I invited him to drink, he would not venture, I then drank first,
and he followed my example. Becoming soon familiar, he assisted me in my
operations; when another countryman, armed with a gun, came to the spot. Never
did I see the expression of astonishment so striking as in the features of this
man: he dropped his gun and lifted up his hands toward heaven: how I wished to
be able to understand him! The first countryman then came from under the folds
of the balloon, where he had been at work; he spoke to the new-comer, and
persuaded him to draw near with confidence. Come hither, said he, (as it has
been explained to me afterward) this is an honest man who has descended here,
he has excellent wine, whereof he has given me to drink already; he has a
certificate from our WASHINGTON, he has shown it to me; but as I cannot read,
come here and read it. Whilst these picturesque scenes were acting, I saw two
women and several men on horseback arrive, who expressed as much pleasure as
surprise, to see me thus in the midst of my colossal apparatus, which I was
busy to arrange and put in order, for the purpose of facilitating its carriage.
I could not, nor did I know how to answer all the friendly questions which they
asked me; my passport served me instead of an interpreter. In the midst of a
profound silence was it read with a loud and audible voice. How dear the name
of WASHINGTON is to this people! with what eagerness they gave me all possible
assistance, in consequence of his recommendation! My balloon was soon folded up
without any accident and put into my car, which four men took upon their
shoulders and carried about 200 yards to a small house, which I did not expect
so near. A gentleman offered me his horse, but not being sufficiently
acquainted with the vivacity of this animal, I was soon obliged to dismount,
and would have greatly preferred to return in the same manner as I came. I
walked a foot at a good rate, followed by a numerous and jovial company, which
increased in proportion as we advanced. We arrived at a neighboring house,
where they offered me some excellent potatoes; but whether this dish was not to
my taste, or that I was too eager to reach Philadelphia before night, my
stomach rejected these kind offers. I had a certificate of my descent drawn
THESE may certify, that we the subscribers saw the bearer, Mr. Blanchard,
settle in his balloon in Deptford township, county of Gloucester, in the state
of New Jersey, about fifteen miles from Philadelphia, about 10 o'clock 56
minutes, A. M. Witness our hands the ninth day of January, Anno Domini, 1793.

Everard Bolton, Joseph Griffith, Joseph Cheesman, Samuel Taggart, Amos
Castle, Zara North.




. My apparatus was then put on a cart, I mounted a horse not quite so spirited
as the first, and proceeded in company of a great number of horsemen, 3 miles,
to a tavern, where a dinner was prepared for us. It was here that I had the
good luck to meet Jonathan Penrose, Esquire, who kindly determined not to quit
me: I accepted with pleasure a seat, which he offered me in his carriage, to
bring me to the banks of the Delaware; we then crossed the river. When we
arrived at this side, we were 3 miles from the city of Philadelphia, here my
generous companion had another carriage ready, which conveyed us to his house
in Southwark. Whilst I took some refreshment, Mr. Penrose ordered another
carriage, wherein he had the kindness to conduct me to my lodgings, where I
arrived at 7 o'clock Citizens of Philadelphia, who followed Mr. Blanchard in
his 45th ascension and escorted him to Philadelphia after his descent, January
9, 1793.

Jonathan Penrose, Esquire, and his son Thomas, James Smith, Henry Moileure,
Robert Wharton, A Person, name unknown.




. My first care was to go and present my respects to President WASHINGTON, and
to inform him of the happy effects of the passport he had been pleased to grant
me. I had the honor to offer him my colors, which he politely accepted, and
thereby acquired a fresh claim to my gratitude. From thence I waited on Mr.
TERNANT, the patriotic minister of the French Republic to the United States,
and his reception was such as might have been expected from the worthy
Representative of a nation, who places her chief glory in cherishing and
protecting the sciences and the fine arts.

BLANCHARD, Adopted Citizen of the principal cities in Europe, Pensioner of the
French Nation, and member and correspondent of several academies and literary
societies.


