OBSERVATIONS ON DR. RUSH's ENQUIRY INTO THE ORIGIN OF THE LATE EPIDEMIC FEVER
IN PHILADELPHIA:

BY MATTHEW CAREY.

PHILADELPHIA: FROM THE PRESS OF THE AUTHOR.

December 14, 1793.

NUMBER XLVII^. District of Pennsylvania, to wit --
(L. S.) BE it remembered, that on the thirteenth day of December, in the
eighteenth year of the independence of the united states of America, Matthew
Carey, of the said district, has deposited in this office, the title of a
book, the right whereof he claims as author, in the words following, to wit:

Observations on dr. Rush's enquiry into the origin of the late epidemic fever
in Philadelphia. By Matthew Carey. In conformity to the act of the congress of
the united states, entitled, An act for the encouragement of learning: by
securing the copies of maps, charts, and books, to the authors and proprietors
of such copies, during the times therein mentioned.

SAMUEL CALDWELL,
Clerk of the district of Pennsylvania.
OBSERVATIONS, etc.
MY original intention, when I began to write the "short account of the
malignant fever lately prevalent in Philadelphia," w^^ merely to give a detail
of its effects on society, considered in a moral view, and to collect the most
striking facts that occurred in the progress of a calamity, that displayed
human nature in a point of light new to most of our citizens. I designed to
avoid all enquiries that might lead to medical discussions, and therefore not
to touch upon the origin, symptoms, or treatment of the disease. This
determination I changed on finding how very imperfect the pamphlet would be,
without some sketch on those points.

With respect to the origin of the disorder, I was and am in favor of the
prevailing opinion, that it was imported. I gave a statement of such arguments
on both sides of the question, as had made their appearance in the papers. I
was very desirous of being able to introduce those which dr. Rush had long
before declared, he could advance in support of his opinion. But in the three
editions of my little work which have appeared, it has been out of my power to
gratify this desire; as the doctor's essay on the subject made its first
appearance on Wednesday last.

As therefore I had no opportunity of animadverting on this essay in the former
pamphlet, it will not, I hope, be judged improper to attempt a refutation of
the doctor's arguments in a separate publication.

My reason for these preliminary observations, is, to apologize for (what might
otherwise appear presumption) my interfering in a question which appears out of
my sphere, and to belong exclusively to the gentlemen of the faculty.

The first position laid down by dr. Rush, is, that the yellow fever in the
West Indies is always generated by vegetable putrefaction. This is not well
founded. Dr. Hillary makes no mention of vegetable putrefaction producing this
disorder. He ascribes it to the peculiar temperament and habits of living of
the subjects of it. "It is very remarkable," says he, that this fever most
commonly seizes strangers, especially those who come from a colder or more
temperate climate -- and most readily those who use vinous or spiritous liquors
too freely; and still more readily those who labor hard, or use too violent
exercise, and are at the same time exposed to the scorching rays of the sun in
the day time, and soon after expose themselves too suddenly to the cool dews
and damp air of the night. Hillary on diseases of Barbados, page 146.
Dr. Lind gives the same account, and nearly in the same words.

Dr. Mosely, who is the latest and the best writer on this fever, makes no
mention, as far as I could discover, and I examined his book with some care, of
its arising from vegetable putrefaction in the West Indies, nor of any
particular season in which it prevails. He speaks of it as one of the seasoning
disorders to which new-comers are subject, especially those of a plethoric
habit, and those who live irregularly. If it arose from the source to which dr.
Rush ascribes it, dr. Mosely would not certainly have neglected to mention the
fact.

But even admitting the position, that it arises from vegetable putrefaction,
it by no means follows that it was generated here. Indeed, I cannot see that
this argument is in any manner whatever applicable to the question.

Dr. Rush's second position is, that similar degrees of heat are capable of
producing it in every part of the world. This is, if possible, more unfounded
than the first. Dr. Hillary expressly says: It does not appear, from the most
accurate observations of the variations of the weather, or any difference of
the seasons, which I have been able to make for several years past, that this
fever is any way caused, or much influenced by them; for I have seen it at all
times, and in all seasons, in the coolest, as well as in the hottest time of
the year. Ibidem.


To the same purpose, Dr. Lining observes, This fever does not seem to take its
origin from any particular constitution of the weather, independent of
infectious miasmata, as dr. Warren has formerly well observed; for within these
twenty-five years, it has been only four times epidemical in this town, namely
in the autumns of the years 1732, 39, 45, and 48, though none of those years,
(excepting that of 1739, whose summer and autumn were remarkably rainy) were
either warmer or more rainy, (and some of them less so) than the summers and
autumns were in several other years, in which we had not one instance of any
one seized with this fever; which is contrary to what would have happened, if
particular constitutions of the weather, were producttive of it, without
infectious miasmata Essays and observations, political and literary, vol. II.
page 406, 407.


The doctor's third division of his essay, contains these facts. A quantity of
damaged coffee was exposed at a time (July 14th) and in a place (on a wharf,
and in a dock) which highly favored its putrefaction. Its smell was highly
putrid and offensive; so that the inhabitants of the houses in Water and Front
street, which were near it were obliged to exclude it by shutting their doors
and windows. These circumstances are all true, but they do not answer the
purpose intended. Whoever consults the ingenious and interesting experiments
made by dr. Alexander, will see that putrid vegetable matters are so far from
being the sources of putrid disorders, that they are very powerful antiseptics.
As the book is scarce, I shall transcribe his account of one of his curious
experiments.

I reduced a quantity of cabbage leaves to a pulp in a mortar, and set them in
a warm place to putrify. A bowl of strawberries was likewise set along with
them. When both the cabbage leaves and strawberries had undergone a
fermentation, and were in that state in which vegetables are said to be putrid,
I put a bit of mutton into each of them, and covered it over with the pulp.
Another bit was put into a bowl of water for a standard, and they were all set
together in a warm closet. The piece of mutton in the water had evidently
turned putrid, and tinged the water red in one night. Both that piece which was
in the pulp ^f the cabbage, and that in the pulp of the strawberries, were kept
three weeks, and continued sweet and hard, as if they had been salted. The
bowls were then overturned, and their contents lost by accident. From these
experiments it appears, that neither the putrid substance, nor the watery
infusion of vegetables, is septic Alexander's experimental enquiry, 53 -- 4.
.

In this division of his subject, dr. Rush produces several instances of
malignant disorders said to have been generated by putrid vegetable substances;
and among the rest, quotes Lancisis. Of this author's want of penetration, dr.
Alexander makes the following very judicious observation; Whoever reads the
observations of Lancisis with attention, will see that the greatest part of the
putrid epidemics which he mentions, always followed remarkable inundations of
the Tyber; and several of them sooner than the water, left by those
inundations, could have become putrid; so that all, or the greater part of the
putrid diseases ascribed by Lancisis to marsh miasmata, may be fairly
attributed to the effect of moisture alone, independent of any mixture of
putrid effluvia.

The doctor proceeds: The rapid progress of the fever from Water street, and
the courses through which it traveled into other parts of the city, afford a
strong evidence, that it was at first propagated chiefly by exhalations from
the putrid coffee.

This argument applies with equal force either to the generation or to the
importation of the disorder; for as the vessels by which we have the strongest
reason to believe it was introduced, were moored near the wharf where the
coffee lay, it is obvious, that, whether imported or generated, it must have
been driven through every adjacent avenue according to the direction in which
the wind blew.

The doctor's fifth position is, that many persons who had worked, or even
visited in the neighborhood of the exhalation from the coffee, early in the
month of August, were indisposed afterward with sickness, puking, and yellow
sweats, long before the air of Water street was so much impregnated with the
contagion, as to produce such effects. This argument stands on precisely the
same ground as the former one. For the existence of the disorder in that spot,
must have produced the same effect in either case, whether imported or
indigenous.

The sixth position is: The strictest enquiry, accompanied with the greatest
solicitude for proofs, has not been able to discover any other cause of our
late epidemic. Every account of the importation of the "disease, has been
discovered, upon examination, to be inaccurate, contradictory, and without
foundation. The first cases of the yellow fever have been clearly traced to the
sailors of the vessel who were first exposed to the effluvia of the coffee.
Their sickness commenced with the day on which the coffee began to emit its
putrid smell. The disease spread with the increase of the poisonous exhalations.

Amidst the confusion in which this subject is involved -- amidst the
difficulty of producing positive proof Some of the persons who could throw full
light on this subject, are dead -- others removed away -- and there are some
who would not choose to reveal the truth from an unwillingness to engage in any
controversy.
-- let us enquire into the evidence. Let us see whether the opinion of its
generation be not much more improbable than that of its importation -- let us
see whether the presumptions in support of the latter opinion be not so
extremely strong, as fully to satisfy every mind open to conviction.

That several persons arrived in this city in the course of the summer, sick
with the malignant fever, is beyond question. There were, early in August,
several sick people on board the Flora, as appears by the publication of drs*
Cuthrie and Cathrall. Many persons have been landed out of vessels coming to
this port, at different places on the banks of the Delaware, who afterward
died of the yellow fever; and several dead bodies have been buried along the
shore.

About the end of July, mr. John Massey of this city, was at Marcus Hook, where
a woman from Cape Francois had been landed, and had died of the yellow fever.
Some French people who lived near the place of her death, and knew the disorder
of which she died, burned a quantity of tar at the door, to purify the air.

About the same time in July, as this affair happened at Marcus Hook, captain,
Hamilton Sage, from St. Domingo, was landed in a very low state at Chester, in
the evening, and died next morning at four o'clock. His sickness was of only
five days. His skin had all the yellowness, and livid spots that characterised
our late epidemic. Information of this latter fact I have had from a letter
written by dr. William Martin, to a gentleman of the faculty in this city, who
was kind enough to allow me to avail myself of the information it contained.

A single fact, of this kind, would give to the opinion of its importation that
high degree of probability, which is nearly all the nature of the case allows;
for the clothes, or bedding of either of these persons would be sufficient to
spread the disorder, if we reason from the experience of 1762.

The seventh position of dr. Rush, is: It has been remarked that this fever did
not spread in the country, when carried there by persons who were infected, and
who afterward died with it. This, I conceive, was occasioned in part by the
contagion being deprived of the aid of miasmata from the putrid matter which
first produced it in our city, and in part by its being diluted, and thereby
weakened by the pure air of the country. During four times in which it
prevailed in Charleston, in no one instance, according to dr. Lining, was it
propagated in any other part of the state. This argument, by which the doctor
doubtless intended to support his hypothesis, if it answers any pupose,
militates very strongly against him. The yellow fever of Charleston did not
spread into the country -- neither did ours. Yet the former was confessedly
imported. If, therefore, any inference is to be drawn from this fact, it
undubitably is, that ours was likewise imported.

The eighth position of dr. Rush, is: It is very remarkable that in the
histories of the disorder, which have been preserved in this country, it has
seven times appeared about the first or middle of August, and declined, or
ceased about the middle of October -- viz. in 1732, 1739, 1745, and 1748 in
Charleston -- in 1791 in New York, and in 1762 and 1793 in Philadelphia. This
frequent occurrence of the yellow fever at the usual period of our common
bilious remittents, cannot be ascribed to accidental coincidence, but must be
resolved, in most cases, into the combination of more active miasmata with the
predisposition of a tropical season.

Of the seven times in which this disorder appeared in America, five have been
unquestionably by importation, viz. four times in Charleston, and the former
time here, to say nothing of our late misfortune. These instances must have
arisen from an accidental coincidence; and could not possibly have depended on
"the predisposition of a tropical season." Moreover, the arguments advanced
from Hillary and Lining, in page 8 and 9, effectually destroy this position,
even if the facts were as stated.

"Several circumstances," continues dr. Rush, attended the late epidemic, which
do not occur in the West India yellow fever. It affected children, as well as
adults, in common with our annual bilious fevers. Dr. Hume tells us, it never
attacked any person under puberty.

The yellow fever, even in the West Indies, is not always uniform in its
symptoms or effects -- and on its introduction here, may very readily be
supposed to have changed its appearance. Dr. Lind, who, like dr. Lining, is
unexceptionable authority on this subject, after detailing the arguments for
and against the contagious nature of the disorder, says: We can only reconcile
the facts that may be produced on both sides of the question, by supposing that
the yellow fever of the West Indies is sometimes of a mild nature, and
altogether free from infection, while at other times it is more violent and
highly infectious The different appearance of the same disorder, in different
persons and places, is noted by Lind: From one cause, from the same infection,
I have frequently known to proceed what may be termed, from outward
appearances, the yellow, petechial, and miliary fevers; and while in a few the
contagion assumed an intermitting form, and was mild, in others it raged with a
constant fever. Lind on the health of seamen, page 265.
.

One more observation of dr. Rush's, it may be proper to notice. He says: I am
disposed to believe that the instances of the yellow fever being imported, are
very few, compared with those of its being generated in our country. Five times
out of seven, as I have already observed, it was confessedly imported -- and in
the other two instances of its appearance, viz. at New York, 1791, and here
this year, its origination in this country is by no means admitted. In New
York, it was attributed to the exhalations from some putrid mud -- although the
same kind of mud was at other docks, without producing any effect whatever.
Surely then it is improper to assert that the instances of its importation are
few.

I shall now close this subject. The reader has seen that Hillary and Lining
declare positively that this disorder does not depend on the weather Dr. Bruce,
an eminent physician of Barbados, quoted by ^^nd is o^ the same opinion: In
omni anni tempestate (...) e^^^rt hic morbus* symptomata autem graviera
observ^ntur, ubi calor magnus cum multa humidi^ate conjungitur. Lind on hot
climates, 2^7.
-- and Lind and Mosely imply the same thing by their silence -- yet that dr.
Rush declares it arises chiefly, if not wholly from that source -- that our
disorder assumed the same appearances as in former instances when
incontrovertibly imported -- that the yellow fever existed in the West Indies
for many months before it appeared here -- that a very great number of vessels
arrived here from that quarter during the summer -- that having hardly any idea
of danger, we used no precautions, so that it would be more astonishing if we
escaped, than it is, that we caught the disease -- that many creditable people
assure us of sundry sick persons and dead bodies being landed privately from
some of those vessels -- that people in a very advanced stage of the yellow
fever have died at Marcus Hook and Chester, and, for aught we know, at other
places -- that the ships infected with the effluvia of the sick and dead came
freely to our wharves Lind has some remarkable instances of the yellow fever
being communicated by infected vessels, even after the removal of the sick.
When the men from the Cambridge (one of the healthiest ships then in the fleet)
became infected, their infection did not proceed from any person being sick on
board the Neptune; for upon the first complaint, or the appearance of any man
being there taken ill, he was immediately taken to the hospital. And the same
is to be observed, with respect to the numerous infected patients, who were
daily sent for five or six weeks from the North American ships; that is, from
their arrival at Spithead till their purification in the dock. During this
period, no sick man was kept for an hour on board any of them, if the weather
permitted to send him ashore.
-- that there is not the smallest probability of their infected beds, bedding,
or clothes, being destroyed, but on the contrary, that we have every reason to
suppose they were brought to the city and sold here. -- Let every candid man
give these several circumstances a full consideration. Let him be actuated
solely by a disposition to discover the truth, unbiassed by any consideration
of the character of our city -- let him allow him reason free scope -- and I
feel the utmost confidence, that he will pronounce a decided opinion, that the
late malignant fever was, in the year 1793, as in 1762, imported from the West
Indies.

One word more. Every position the doctor has advanced, might be freely
admitted, and still they by no means prove that the disorder was not imported.
If it arose from the coffee -- and that vegetable was, as it must have been, in
a state of putrefaction on its arrival here, the disorder was as effectually
imported by the Amelia, in which the coffee came, as if a sick man had arrived
in her, and spread it in the city, as was the case in Charleston, or as if a
quantity of infected clothes had introduced it, as happened in 1762.

THE END.

