JAMES BOLTON's TREATISE, OF THE UNIVERSAL RESTORATION, PREACHED and COMMANDED
TO BE REACHED, BY JESUS CHRIST.

Thy Kingdom come!

JAMES BOLTON's TREATISE, OF THE UNIVERSAL RESTORATION, Preached, or commanded
to preach in the following Texts:
Genesis iii, ^5. Exodus xxxiv, 6. Lev. xxv, 10.^3.41.54. Job v, 17.18.19. Ps.
xlix, 15.16. lxxxvi, 9.10.15. ciii, 8.9. cvii, 1 -- 15. cx, 1. cxlv, 8.9.10.
Eccles. xii, ^. Isa. xxiv, 22. xxv, 8. xlii, 7.16. xliii, 6.7.18.19.25. xlv,
23.24.25. xlvi, 12.13. xlix, 6 -- 10. compared with Rev. vii, 14. Ps. liii,
4.6.10 -- 12. live, 7.8. lv, 1. lvii, 16. -- 19. Isa. xxxv, 61. lxi, 1.2. Jerm.
iii, 31-33. xxxi, 34. Lam. iii, 31-33. Ezekiel xxxiv, 16. Hosea xiii, 9.14. Micha.
vii, 18.19. Zech. ix, 11. Matt xi, 27. xviii, 11. xxii, 44. xxviii, 18. xii,
20.21. Luke xi, 21.22. xix, 10. John i, 19. iii, 16.17.35. vi, 37 -- 39. xii,
31.32. xiii, 3. Acts iii, 20.21. Romans v, 18 -- 21. iii, 23 -- 29. xi, 25 to
end. xiv, 9.11. i Cor. iii 10 -- 15 xv, 22 -- 57. Ephesians. i, 9.10. vi, 8. Col.
i, ^ -- 21. ii, 15. i Tim. ii, 5.6. iv, 9.10. i Tim. i. 15. ii Tim. i 10. Heb.
ii. 8.9.14 ^5. vii, 17 -- 27. ix, 12, 26, x, 10 -- 14. James ii, 13. i Pet. iii
18 -- 22. iv, 5.6. i John ii. 1.2. iii, 8. iv, 10.14. Phil. ii, 9 -- 11. Rev.
i, 8.18. v, 15, vii, 9, to end. xxi, 4.5.6. and xxii, 2.3.12.13.17.

TWO things that are diametrically opposite to each other, cannot exist to all
eternity; if both are infinite; they will mutually destroy each other, if the
one be infinite, and the other finite, the finite must be destroyed, and which
ever is most powerful, must destroy the other. Now since love and enmity,
holiness and sin, evil and good are exactly opposite to each other, it is
evident, one must at (...) prevail over the other, how long soever contention
and strife may continue, and since goodness is the perfection of GOD, and evil
the imperfection of the creature, there can be no doubt, that as good existed
before evil, so it shall to all eternity, when evil shall be no more. When
every knee shall bow of things in heaven and earth, and under the earth, and
every tongue confess and swear allegiance to God; then shall all rebellions
cease! Isa. 45. Phil. 9. Rev 5.

Christian experience proves the restoration of all things; when a man comes to
see himself lest and undone, vile in God's fight, unworthy of his mercy, and
totally unable to deliver himself from his sin and misery, he is then brought
by the power of GOD, to resign himself into GOD's hands, without reserve, to do
with him according to his will; being convinced that God neither will nor can
do him any injustice, he views him as an holy righteous good and merciful God,
he sees that he is undone without a Savior, Christ is revealed to him as able
and mighty to save, even to the uttermost, he (...) a sufficiency in Christ to
save, not only him the vilest; but the whole world! he sees his love, so rich
boundless and free, and his willingness to save all, that he admires and is
overcome with the transporting view, he beholds his love like a river flowing
down to him as free as water he knows that although he is the most unworthy, yet
God in his unbounded love and mercy has graciously pitied him. Isa 55, 1.46.12,
13. Jerem. 31, 3. Mat. 9. (...) and many more texts are precious to him, be not
only hopes for; but feels and knows salvation; he not only prays for himself;
but prays and longs, that every soul of Adams race might come to know the love
and mercy of God in Christ Jesus, infinitely full free and unmerited, He
beholds in Christ an infinite fullness, sufficiency and willingness, to save all
without exception! he loves all mankind, even his enemies, and wishes that they
might come and partake of his grace, and earnestly desires the salvation of
all, and prays for it, as for his own; he could embrace the whole human race in
the arms of benevolence, If he had as much power as good will, he would bring
all to bow to the scepter of grace, and to become reconciled to God through Jesus
Christ, and obedient to him!

Then let me ask you, can a small drop be longer than the unfathomed abys and
ocean of love? Have you more compassion on your fellow creatures than God that
made them? Can any effect be greater than its cause? Would you bring all to God
and cause them to be happy if you could? And will not he, to whom nothing that
he pleases is impossible, bring all creatures to be reconciled unto himself at
last, and become obedient to him? He has infinitely more love to his creatures,
than all the saints and angels have, he is possessed of infinite power and
wisdom, as well as love, all means to accomplish the works are known to him: He
can do it in a way that shall cause his praise to abound exceedingly, it is his
will and purpose so to do; what then can hinder him from fulfiling it?

Our Lord has commanded us, Matt. 5, 41 -- 48.18, 21. Luke 6, 27 -- 38. to
love all mankind, even our enemies, to do good to them (...) render good for
evil, to forgive them that trespass against us, to pray for them, that we may
be the children of our father who is in heaven, whose tender mercies are over
all his works: But if he does not love all himself and do good to them, and
will never forgive them who trespass against him, and render them good for
evil, he has commanded us to be more perfect in that respect, than himself:
which to suppose is highly absurd. What so all we say to that doctrine that
teaches us, that God hates with a perfect hatred many of those whom he has
commanded us to love as ourselves?

Now is it possible to suppose with any degree of reason, that our Lord would
command us, upon pain of his highest displeasure, to forgive those whom he
hated, and determined to punish while he should exist, without having the least
desire or design to do them good? Has he promised us the greatest blessings, if
we will forgive all men, and will he never forgive them? He that can believe
this, let him believe it. -- Paul exhorts to pray for all men because it is
God's will, that all men should be saved, (or restored) and because that Christ
gave himself ransom for all, to be testified in due time, and commands, saying,
These things do and teach, 1 Timothy 2.1-8. and 4, 9 10 11. to pray without
doubting. O! what (...) word is this! May we, ought we to pray for the
salvation of all men without doubting? Surely God would never have commanded us
to do this, unless it was his secret purpose to restore all men in his own
time. The belief of the doctrine of the restoration of all men, does not in the
(...) and to hinder us from loving all, doing good to all, forgiving all men
their trespasses, and praying for all men but rather encourages us so to do,
from the consideration, that God loves them (...) all, and is determined to
make them all, subjects of (...) kingdom at last.

This doctrine of the restoration does not tend to make us hate God, nor does
it tend to produce selfishness, nor prevent benevolence, meekness, humility,
forbearance, forgiveness, charity and all goodness, it does not tend to produce
pride, envy, malice, rage, fury, wrath or madness against our neighbors or
fellow creatures, but the contrary "Glory to GOD in the highest, and on earth,
peace, good will toward men" It cannot be a licentious doctrine, for the above
reasons, i. e. because it causes benevolence, meekness, humility, forbearance,
forgiveness, charity and all goodness, to abound and increase, and does not
fill our breasts with selfishness or pride, nor cause our breasts to swell with
pale envy and rancarous malice, at the happiness of others. 1 John II, 10. Gal.
V, 14. Romans XIII, 8.9, 10.

Texts where the words eternal, for ever, and everlasting are applied to things
and times, that have had, or must have an end, [also the words, not to be
quenshed, Amos V, 6, Jer. VII, 20. have had an end.] Genesis XIII, 15. XVII,
7.8.13. XLIV, 32. XLVIII, 4. XLIX, 26. Ex. XII, 14.17.24. XXI, 6. xxvii, 21.
xxviii, 43. xxix, 9.28. xxx, 21. xxxi, 16.17. xxxii, 13. Lev. iii, 17. vi,
13.18.20.22. vii, 34.36. viii, 15. x, 9. xvi, 29.3^.34. xxiii, 14.21.31.41.
xxiv, 3. xxv, 30.46. Number. x, 8. xv, 15. xviii, 8. xix, 10. Deuteronomy. iv, 40. xv,
17. xviii, 5, xxviii, 46. Joshua iv, 7. xiv, 9. 1 Samuel ii, 30. iii, 13. xxvii,
12. xxviii, 2. 1 Kings xii, 7. 2 Kings v, 27. xxii, 17. 2 Chro. x. 7. Jer.
xvii, 27. Ezekiel. xx, 45 -- 48. Hab. iii, 6. Jona ii, 6.7. and many more might be
added.

Now the rule for understanding words is this, what must be the meaning of the
word in many places, and what may be the meaning in all places, is the true
sense of the same.

Objection, Although the single word for ever, in the said texts, seems
evidently to intend certain limited periods, yet what can you do with those
texts Rev. xiv, 11. and ditto xx, 10. the misery of the wicked shall endure for
ever? Answer, you bring three texts, which are all that are to be found in the
whole bible, where they are used in that sense; I shall now invalidate those
evidences for endless damnation, by bringing an equal number of texts, where
you will see the words in a limited sense, i. e. Isa. xxx, 8. Jer. vii, 1.7.
ditto xxv, 5. and further read Heb. i, 8. and compare it with 1 Cor. xv, 24.28.

Even Christ's kingdom shall end, 1 Cor. xv, 24.28. if Christ's kingdom shall
have an end, much more satan's! If a reward as such shall cease; how much more
punishment!

The misery of the wicked shall end, because the kingdom of evil shall end.

The subjects of Christ are his natural subjects, he is their rightful
sovereign: But satan's subjects are slaves, led captive by him at his will, he
is an usurper, and all that are in bondage to him belongs to Christ, who will
finally draw them all to himself. When evil is broken, its influence shall no
more prevail over those that are captivated by it; and they shall feel the
consequences of sin in such a manner as to loathe it, and they shall heartily
return, and swear allegiance to their rightful king. All the influence of God
and goodness, shall tend to disolve the kingdom of darkness, and to put an end
to the thraldom and misery of it is unhappy slaves.

If the lake of fire or second death itself shall be destroyed, shall cease and
be no more; there is an end to tormenting pain, and that it shall be destroyed
and be no more, read Isa. xxv, 8. Hos. xiii, 14. 1 Cor. xv, 26.55. death the
last enemy shall he destroyed, if this be true, then not one enemy shall be
left! it would be absurd to say, that although the very last enemy shall be
destroyed, yet many millions shall remain to all eternity, read 1 John iii, 8.
Unless Christ finally destroys the works of the devil, even all sin out of the
universe, his purpose must eternally be frustrated. Heb. ii, 14,

As to Judas Christ promised twelve thrones to the twelve apostles, Matt. xix,
28. and therefore he must be restored, or the promise cannot be fulfiled. And
Christ prayed for his murderers and crucifiers etc. As to what Peter says, Acts
i, compared with Ps. lix 25. St, Paul applies part of said psalm to the Jews,
as (...) as Peter applies it to Judas: See Romans xi, 9.10. and the whole
chapter.

That repentance may find place in hell, see Wis. v, and Luke xvi, ^8.30, If
there was no such a thing as repentance in hell, or the prison after death, how
came Christ to preach to the spirrits in prison? 1 Pet. iii, 19.20 dit. iv, 6.

It may be questioned, whether there it not something in the idea of limited,
yet certain punishment, so just equitable, reasonable, and evident, that is
more calculated to produce belief, and consequently more effectual to destroy
false hopes of escaping it, and also to check that daring presumption, which
rises out of the idea of endless misery, than can be found in the contrary
doctrine. Endless punishment seems to shock tender minds, at least numbers have
no better excuse for finning greedily than this, that there is no hopes of
there being saved, therefore they are determined to sin on, since it can make
no difference.

Though damnation has been commonly understood for many ages, and has been
preached as such, yet it has not prevented evil at all, or very little: Those
people that believe in the universal restoration live stricter: than others who
don't, in general: The german Baptists all believe it, yet no people live
stricter or more moral than they do, and many hundreds besides them, yet it
don't tend to make them licentious. Endless damnation is too unnatural to be
believed; but limited punishment being more reasonable seems more certain.
Certain it is, that where the idea of endless misery prevails, it does not
prevent iniquity in the measure that might be expected, on the supposition of
its being the truth of God. The great number of heathens, who die without ever
being favored with the written gospel, or ever of hearing of endless misery;
the many that die in their infancy and childhood, together with the instances
of idiots, and persons born deaf; all convince me more than any logical
arguments, that God has many ways of instructing and reclaiming his creatures
in another state, than we are acquainted with. It is not so much the intention
of God, merely to restrain sin, as to show in all it is dreadful deformity,
punish it according to it is deserts, and finally show the superabounding of his
grace, in overcoming and totally destroying it out of his creation; which shall
be accomplished, when he that sits upon the throne shall make all things
new, and there shall be no more death, neither sorrow, nor crying, neither
shall there be any more pain, for the former things are passed away, Rev. xxi,
4.

I don't wonder that universal restoration is not admitted by the generality of
learned preachers; for how would it affect their preaching? for instance, would
it not mar a modern sermon, the soul and essence of which is -- damnation --
eternal damnation -- the everlasting torments of hell, etc. etc. expressions of
wonderful force and pathos, and that admit of a very convenient variety of
change. Universal restoration gaining ground, what would become of pulpit
rhetoric, so enobled as it has been by fire and flame, for ever more? by this
craft, said some of old: we have our wealth, and with as strong a jealousy,
might others then cry out, -- nay, spoil us not; for this is the secret fund,
out of which we make up all deficiencies and fill up every chasm.

The doctrine of the restoration of all things, is no new doctrine; many have
wrote upon it, hundreds have preached it, and thousands have believed it, since
the reformation. The truth of this blessed doctrine was well known to the
apostles of Christ, and to the first Christians, was by the apostles and first
Christians declared, and handed down to succeeding generations, and some of the
fathers, (as they are called) as Origin etc. whose writing have been preserved,
were open witnesses for it, and indeed it has had witnesses in all ages, down
to the present day.

Many preachers in our days believe it, although they preach of endless
damnation: For as long as they want to belong to the synod, or council of
learned ministers, or priests, or sanhedrims, they must conform to the rules
and canons of their particular sect, or corporation, which rules canons,
traditions of their elders, or doctrines of men, to them are more sacred, than
the writings of the apostles of Christ; for the scriptures they may turn,
twist, observe some, reject other parts of them, disobey some scripture
commands, alter others etc. but the rights, rules, ordinances and commands laid
down in their symbolical and canonical books, must be punctually observed and
kept, if some of the doctrines therein contained, should even be found to be
diametrically opposie to Christ's doctrine. And as universal restitution is
contrary to their system, they dare not utter it, for fear of man's
displeasure; on the contrary, as endless damnation composes a part of their
system, they must preach it up, or be in danger of being anathematized, by
their brethern in black, i. e. the tribe of Rubies, and then be curtailed of
their titles of honor, greetings in the markets, chief seats in synagogues,
uppermost rooms in feasts, of fine clothings, great yearly sallaries, gaudy
trappings and furniture; and perhaps become as poor as one of the apostles of
our Lord Jesus, when they sojourned on this earthly ball, or as Christ himself,
who had not any thing to lay his head upon, much less fine houses, lands etc.
But if there be a Heretic in the world, it is the man who for the love of
money or applause, or through the fear of man preaches that to others which he
himself does not believe. -- He that is such is subverted, and sins being
condemned of himself, Tit. iii, 11.

Good Lord!
Help us to save free conscience from the paw,
Of hireling wolves, whose Gospel is their maw!
MILTON God has sworn, that to him every knee shall bow, every tongue shall
swear, Isa. xlv 23. That in the name of Jesus, every knee shall bow, of things
in heaven, things on earth, and things under the earth, and that every tongue
shall confess, that Jesus Christ is Lord, to the glory of God the father, Phil.
ii, 10.11. -- Their torments and sorrows shall humble, and bring them down. --
That it is the mystery of his will, according to his good pleasure, which he
has purposed in himself in the dispensation of the fullness of times, to gather
together, or rehead, in one, all things in Christ, both which are in heaven,
and on earth, even in him, Ephesians. i. 9.10. -- And having made peace through the
blood of his cross, he is determined to reconcile all things to himself,
whether things in heaven, or things on earth, Col. i, 20. -- That he works
all things after the counsel of his own will, Ephesians. i, 2. -- That he will have
all men to be saved 1 Timothy ii, 6. -- That the father loves the son, and has
given all things into his hands John iii 25. -- And that Christ said, all that
the father gives me, shall come unto me, and him that comes unto me I will in
no wise cast out. John vi, 37. -- He is faithful who has promised, and in his
own time will fulfill all his purposes and promises. -- See examples of his long
suffering, mercy, and love, in the cases of Manasseh, Nebuchadnezar, Mary
Magdalene, Saul and many others.

As Christ is alpha, so he will be omega; as he was the beginning, so he will
be the ending; as he is the first, so shall he be the last: He will outlive all
sin enmity and evil, and totally abolish and destroy the works of satan, and
the kingdom of satan: He will exist an endless duration, when sin, enmity, and
evil of every kind are no more!

Paul says: that God is the savior of all men, and commands Timothy, saying:
these things command and teach, 1 Timothy iv, 10.11. but our modern preachers
contradict Paul, and make him a liar, for they say, i. e. God or Christ saves
only a small number, and that satan's kingdom shall remain to all eternity, and
that he will have absolute dominion over them, and torment and punish many
millions of souls, that God made unto endless duration: At that rate Christ has
not power sufficient to conquer satan his enemy, nor to destroy his works,
although scripture informs us that he both has, and will make his enemies his
footstool, and bring all things in subjection under him, and will reconcile all
to himself, and that he is the head of all principality and power. O ye blind,
guides! ye defenders of satan's kingdom! how amazed you will be, when the time
of the general restoration comes.

Every person, who by reason of sin and rebellion against God, that will be
cast into the lake of fire, will continue for a time therein, and be
sufficiently punished for the same: But will then be restored by Christ, as
soon as they have undergone their punishment. I should imagine, that if a poor
damned person, should only be a few thousand years in the lake of fire and
brimstone, [as the unbelievers in Noah's time, till Christ preached to them) it
would be a sufficient punishment for their wickedness committed in their short
lives of forty, fifty, or one hundred years, though I don't suppose their pain
will end as soon; but may perhaps may last many thousand years, and after they
are restored, they will not possess as great a degree of happiness, as the
elect, who have followed the Lamb, in the regeneration in their life, and
preserved therein unto the end.

That the fallen angels, as well as all mankind, will, by the judge of the
quick and dead, be judged according to their works, and receive their reward,
according to their desert or deeds, I believe; but that is not against the
restoration of all things. No creature can in such a short time, or a time that
shall have an end, commit as much evil, as to deserve endless punishment in a
lake of flaming fire, for there is no proportion, or likeness between endless
duration, and a time to end, and especially between the short life of a man in
this world, and endless duration: And I should think that the damned, would be
sufficiently tormented, and pay dear enough, for all their evil deeds, that
they done in their thirty, forty or fifty years; if they should remain but
thirty forty or fifty thousand years in hell, for one day's punishment in hell,
would seem longer and severer, than many years in this world, even on a bed of
sickness, God is as good as he is just, and will not give any of the damned one
single stroke more than they deserve; but rather less, as he is a God of love,
mercy and pity, and after all and every one has received their punishment, for
their evil deeds, they will certainly be set free out of prison, and out of
pain, redeemed through Christ, and made happy, both men and fallen angels.
There is no such words in all the scriptures, as endless death, endless
damnation, endless desire or will of sinning. There is no proportion between an
endless punishment, and sins or crimes of forty fifty sixty or seventy or one
hundred years committing: A man of common sense would rather suffer the
greatest tribulations and anguish during a life of sixty or seventy or eighty
years in this world, in order to enter into immediate happiness after death:
than live a life of great pleasure here, and be afterward tormented in fire
and brimstone, if his torments should continue but a few thousand years: He
must be right foolish or mad, that would rather live here in pleasure fifty
sixty or eighty years, and be tormented in hell, if it were but a few thousand
years: than live a godly life, and after death enter into endless glory.

It is contrary to sound reason, to suppose that an allmighty, allwise
allknowing good, and merciful God, should have created many missions of souls
to be tormented in a lake of fire, without end, as well as it is contrary to
scripture. Or that he should punish them so long, for the crimes committed in a
few years. See Isa. lxv 7. lxvi 22. compared with 2 Peter iii, 10.11.12.13.
Rev. xxi, 1. concerning the creation of new heavens and new earth, and the
earth being disolved with fire.

The restoration of all things, after the conflagration, will be gradual, but
the earth will be first restored, at least a considerable part of it, for as we
read of the lake of fire burning with brimstone into which the beast and false
prophet were cast alive, before or at the beginning of the millennium, and the
devil himself at the end of it, before the second resurrection and the
judgment, which lake of fire and brimstone was doubtless in a part of the
earth, before the conflagration turned the whole into an universal lake of the
same kind, so a principal part of the earth may be renewed, and yet a part may
continue as a place of torment, long after the descent of the holy city. But
the new creation of the earth and its surrounding atmosphere, together with the
descent of the holy city from God out of heaven, cannot be for their sakes who
will have dwelt therein for ages before, and who shall go no more out; but for
the sake of those unhappy beings, who being cast into the lake of fire,
experienced the amazing torments of the second death. If God had designed to
leave all those who shall remain on the earth, and perish in the general
conflagration or lake of fire and brimstone, to continue in that miserable
state to all eternity, we should never have heard of the earth being created
anew, by the power of God, nor of the holy city descending from God out of
heaven: But as Jehova, has purposed to create all men anew in Christ Jesus, in
the ages to come, and in the dispensation of the fullness of times, to rehead or
rally all things which now are scattered under one leader, therefore he will
renew the earth, and make it the scene, or stage, whereon these most amazing
wonders shall be performed. God will look down from heaven, upon the earth in
it is melted state, as he did formerly upon it, when it was overwhelmed with
waters, or as a skilful founder watches the state of the melted metal in his
furnace, and knows exactly when to begin his operations, so the great supreme
in his appointed time, seeing that the great fire has dissolved the earth, and
thereby has brought it to a proper state for him to manifest his creating
power upon, and also, that a considerable number of the sufferers are humbled,
and prepared for him to manifest his redeeming power, love and grace, in and
upon; he will than without delay begin to put his gracious designs into
execution, by first renewing a habitation for them, and then renewing them to
dwell therein: than will he cause his holy city to descend from God out of
heaven, to make a long continuance with men. In this glorious city, Christ and
his saints shall reign for ages and ages, (...) things shall be gradually
subdued, and restored: then, and not till then, will Christ deliver up the
kingdom to the father, that God may be all in all, beyond which closeing scene
of the mediator's kingdom, the scriptures do not carry us.

FINIS

