For the Benefit of Youth. FOUR DISCOURSES DELIVERED BEFORE THE PUPILS OF THE
RICHMOND ACADEMY; ONE ON, REMEMBER THY CREATOR, etc. AND THREE ON, THE LORD's
PRAYER.

AUGUSTA: PRINTED BY A. M'MILLAN, BROAD-STREET. M,DCC,XCIII.

TO THE TRUSTEES OF THE RICHMOND ACADEMY THESE DISCOURSES ARE MOST RESPECTFULLY
INSCRIBED.

MY DEAR CHILDREN,
I REQUEST your attention to what I am now going to say to you. It respects
your welfare in this life, and your happiness in that which is to come. It
must, therefore, be worth your attention.

I once was young, like you, but I am now advanced in years, and oppressed with
variety of affliction. I feel that I am hastening fast to that end, which will
be yours, and all the world's, as well as mine.

But whilst it shall please our Great Creator to lend me life and strength, I
wish to be employed in doing good: and a better office I cannot be engaged in
than that of assisting your minds, as they open, to discern and know those
great truths, on which all your hopes of happiness depend.

I mention these things to you, that you may be persuaded, the observations I
shall make, are meant for your benefit, and that there is a real pleasure in
doing good.

That what we are now about may be for good to our souls, let us implore the
blessing of the Almighty in a humble, but servent prayer.

O LORD Merciful Father, Creator and Preserver of all things; Author of life
and health, and Giver of every gift which we enjoy; look down from Heaven Thy
dwelling place, and in mercy behold us now assembled together before Thee.
Grant us the aid of Thy Holy Spirit, so that what we do at this time, may be
for Thy glory, and the benefit of our souls. Make us sensible of Thy great
goodness, and truly thankful for all Thy mercies.

Give us hearts to love Thee above all things; and prepare our minds for a
knowledge of those truths, which concern the happiness of our souls forever.

As we grow in years, grant that we grow in grace, in knowledge and in wisdom,
that we may diligently strive to do* Thy will, and obey Thy Holy Commandments.
Give us good and friendly dispositions, that we may love one another; that we
may foregive all those who offend or injure us, and that we may pity and be
ready to help all those in distress.

Hear us; O Lord our God, we beseech Thee to hear us; and for the sake of Jesus
Christ, our Savior and Redeemer, we humbly implore such blessings and gifts as
may be necessary for making us the happy children of the MOST HIGH GOD, our
Heavenly Father. For Thine is the kingdom, and the power, and the glory,
forever and ever. Amen.

DISCOURSE I.
ECCLESIASTIS XII. I. -- REMEMBER NOW THY CREATOR IN THE DAYS OF THY YOUTH.


MY DEAR CHILDREN,
AS ye have been born in a part of the world that professes Christianity, ye
have no doubt been often told that there is one Supreme Being, God over all:
that He is the Creator of heaven and earth, and of every thing that is in them
contained: that, as He created all things, so He preserves and governs all
things; and that of man He is pleased to require gratitude and obedience. --
Gratitude for blessings bestowed and daily enjoyed; and obedience to His
commands and will, to prepare him for the enjoyment of peace and happiness in
the world to come, with angels and archangels, who there shine brighter than
the starry firmament forever and ever.

These commands, or these things which we are ordered to do, He has been
graciously pleased to make known in the Scriptures, in so plain and simple a
manner, that with a very little attention and care, we may obtain a perfect
knowledge of our duty, or of what we must do to obtain the glorious prize, an
inheritance in the Heaven of Heavens.

The great and gracious purpose, for which you and all mankind were created
into this state of existence, is, that ye should serve and glorify your Creator
God in this world, and, in the world to come, enjoy a happiness so pure and
exalted, that no human heart can conceive its greatness.

For the accomplishment of these great purposes, all the obedience or service,
required of us by the Almighty, is of such a nature, that it contributeth, even
in this life, to our own happiness. Should we not therefore, yield with much
pleasure, such obedience?

Besides, if a life of obedience end in an eternity of bliss, how should we
reverence, love and adore that gracious Being who has been pleased to make us
capable of such exquisive felicity?

Thus, my dear children -- I hope it appears clearly to you, that to serve
God, and keep His commandments, is our best interest. And ye will probably
think that all men cheerfully perform that service, which must end so highly to
their advantage. -- But this, alas! is not the case.

When man was first created, his mind was pure, and his heart took pleasure, in
obeying and worshipping his Almighty Creator. But in this happy state of
innocence, he did not continue long. He disobeyed the commandments of his God,
and incurred guilt, although he knew it endangered his eternal peace, and
exposed him to the dreadful displeasure of the King of Heaven.

This act of disobedience is called the fall of Adam, or the fall of man; and a
dismal fall it has proved to be to all the human race.

To assist your minds to see and understand the good, and to avoid the evil, is
the purpose of my meeting you now: And, if God spare me, I hope to meet you
often on the same important business.

But if ye do not attend with desire to improve; if ye do not keep in your
minds and practice the advice I give you, my earnest endeavors to instruct
you, will all prove fruitless and vain.

But that they may not prove thus vain, ye should implore the blessing of
Heaven. For from Him comes every good and perfect gift; and every blessing
that we enjoy or hope for, is the free gift of His mercy.

To serve the Lord our God with true, faithful, and willing hearts, is, as I
before observed, the grand business that we have to do in this world. It is
inculcated, generally, throughout the Scriptures; but in different places, it
is expressed in different terms. In our text the command is conveyed by the
word, remember -- "Remember now thy Creator."

When ye are told to remember any thing, ye all know it is meant, that ye
should have it often in your thoughts, and give it your attention. But when ye
are told to remember your Creator, it is intended that ye should think of Him
always, or very often, with reverence, gratitude, and love -- with reverence,
with a respect like that ye have for your parents, but much more exalted. This
will prevent your disobedience, and induce you to keep all His commandments.

With gratitude -- because He gave you life, and gives you health, food,
raiment, and all the blessings of this world; and if ye will be good here, He
will make you completely happy in the world to come, and grant you to shine in
the brightness of heavenly glory forever and ever.

Again, ye must think of Him with love. -- Ye should love Him above all things,
because, He has so loved you, and poured upon you so many blessings; and has
been moreover, pleased to tell you how ye may obtain a life of eternal
happiness, and a crown of righteousness in the kingdom of the blessed Redeemer,
where there is glory and bliss, beyond every thing ye can now conceive, and
which shall be yours forever.

Thus the pious Psalmist declares his love -- "Whom have I in Heaven but Thee?
and there is none upon earth that I desire beside Thee." -- Such, my dear
children, should be your love also.

And our blessed Lord Jesus commands that "we love the Lord our God with all
our heart and with all our soul." For He must be worshipped in truth; but how
can ye perform such worship, unless your hearts be wholly devoted to Him?

Solomon, the penman of our text, was highly favored of Heaven, and has been
always celebrated for wisdom. Much search did he make after happiness: But
having tried all experiments that imagination could suggest, he was convinced,
that man's interest and happiness consist in the service of his God, and that
every thing else beneath the sun, is altogether vanity, and therefore unfit to
be made the object of our desires or pursuits. Hence he solemnly asserteth,
that the whole duty of man is, to fear God, and keep his Commandments. And that
he may (...) better and more easily perform this great duty, he (...) to the
practice of it early in life -- "Remember now thy Creator in the days of thy
youth."

To induce you to this pious practice, I beg you to consider, that the Supreme
Being has been graciously pleased to speak you into life -- that although ye
must soon leave this world, yet He will place you in another, which shall never
end, and in which, if ye remember and serve Him here, ye shall be completely
happy for ever and ever, that in this life, ye are blessed with all things
necessary for your support and comfort; and that all these things flow
immediately, from the goodness, and mercy of that Supreme Being; and that to
Him ye are accountable for your manner of using those blessings, and for every
thing else that ye do. For I must observe to you, that the Scriptures assure us
that, "God will bring into judgment, every work and every secret thing, whether
it be good or whether it be evil."

Reflect often I beseech you, my dear children, upon these things. Acknowledge
with thankful hearts, the goodness of the Almighty -- Consider, that He sees
and knows all that ye do; all that ye say, and even all that ye think.
Therefore ye should earnestly endeavor to keep your minds, your words, and your
actions, as free from wickedness as ye possibly can. If ye earnestly endeavor
to do this, and pray to God to give you grace and strength to live as ye ought,
in remembrance of Him, He will most certainly hear your prayer and do whatever
He shall think necessary for you.

For His mercy is infinite, and He withholdeth no good thing from them that
walk uprightly and remember Him so as to live in his fear.

But in this exhortation or command ye should particularly observe, the time
appointed for remembering your Creator -- It is now; the time present -- the
days of thy youth -- To observe this injunction, and to perform now that great
and essential duty, is of the utmost importance to you.

For if ye remember your Creator in the days of your youth: or if whilst ye are
young, and free from the cares of the world, ye do your duty as good children
ought, and avoid every thing that is bad, ye will escape all that misery, which
every kind of wickedness creates in the mind, and which unless it be repented
of, will exclude those who commit it, from everlasting rest and the unspeakable
joys of Heaven.

And unless ye thus remember your Creator whilst ye are young, ye will fall
into those vicious pursuits and practices, to which youth (and indeed old age)
are but too much inclined, and which, if indulged, will make a dreadful
separation, between the Almighty and your souls.

Because, to live in sin, is to live in enmity against the great and holy
Creator: and that enmity, whilst it continues, is worse than death or loss of
the present life.

If the prime of your life, if the days of your, youth should be spent thus,
unhappily, in the practice of wickedness, when old age shall approach, and
infirmities of body tell you, life is nearly at an end, ye shall find it a
difficult task indeed to withdraw your minds from such practices -- The force
of habit is very great, and bad habits are not easily broken.

But for your comfort and encouragement, good habits are also powerful. If ye
accustom yourselves to say your Prayers, as ye ought, at least twice in every
day, and to give thanks to God for the mercies, which you daily enjoy, -- if ye
carefully avoid every thing that is wicked or bad; if ye be dutiful to your
parents, and obliging to one another, -- if ye live as it becomes you to live;
if ye remember your Creator, and strive to do what, in the scripture, He is
pleased to tell you to do, ye will have very great pleasure in such conduct,
and ye will find, as ye grow in years, that ye will have less and less desire,
to pursue those vicious courses, in which bad children, and bad children only,
are fond of indulging themselves.

But if ye will not be persuaded thus to remember your Creator in the days of
your youth; the miserable consequence is, ye will become fixed in vice, and
sinful actions; so that as ye grow up, ye will find but little desire to turn
unto God; neither will ye have pleasure in obeying His commandments. So that if
the change from bad conduct to good conduct be ever effected, it will cost you
much trouble and grief of heart. -- But all this, and many other great evils
will be avoided, if ye obey the text; and great, unspeakably great will be the
gain of your reward. It will be eternal life, that is, eternal happiness in the
Heaven of Heavens.

Death is the fruit, or wages of sin. But although we must all die, yet by the
wonderful power of God, we shall have a future existence. In that state of
existence, if we have done wickedly in this world, we shall suffer severe
punishment: but if, happily, we shall have done the will of our heavenly
Father, we shall receive a great, an infinite reward, and be happy throughout
eternity

Remember then, my dear children, that your greatest care should be, to keep
your minds as free as possible, from spot or stain, and to avoid every thing
that is bad.

Ye live in a wicked world, where, to our shame, vice abounds. But ye daily
receive useful instruction within these walls. The Richmond Academy.
And I trust your parents also, take care to teach you the things that are
right.

Lay up then in your hearts, I beseech you, and carefully remember what I have
now been telling you, and ye shall hereafter receive much comfort and benefit
from them.

And as a farther inducement for you to lead virtuous lives, and to shun
whatever is base, evil or wicked; consider if ye live thus, and be good
children, ye will have the esteem of all who know you -- and above all, your
Father who is in heaven will love you and He will bless you; and when, in His
providence, He shall be pleased to call you hence, He will receive you into his
mansions of everlasting peace and joy: and there, with all the heavenly hosts,
ye will surround the throne of the MOST HIGH GOD, and in rapturous bliss, sing
hosannas to the King of kings, and unto the LAMB for ever and ever.

The Lord of his infinite mercy give you grace, so to remember your Creator in
the days of your youth, that ye may be all prepared for the enjoyment of this
supreme and everlasting happiness, and to His great name be glory, honor and
praise for ever and for ever. Amen.

DISCOURSE II.
MY DEAR CHILDREN,
I AM very sorry that I have been so long deprived of the pleasure of meeting
you here: and I pray God, our Heavenly Father, graciously to grant His blessing
to attend our present meeting, for the glory of His great name, and the good of
our immortal souls.

Humbly, but fervently to offer up our prayers and our praise to our Creator
God, is one of our first and greatest duties. -- That He is pleased to permit,
and even to command us, thus to address Him, is a very great privilege; and, if
rightly performed, it will very much promote our happiness even in this life:
but what is of much greater consequence, it will contribute to our preparation,
for that happiness, which the good, and only the good, enjoy in heaven forever.

In order to induce us the more earnestly to pray to our heavenly Father, we
are assured, that if we ask any thing agreeable to His will, He is graciously
pleased to hear us; and if we keep his commandments, He will mercifully give us
whatever He shall judge proper and necessary for us.

Thus encouraged, we should endeavor to know in what manner it becomes us to
approach the throne of heavenly grace.

Our blessed Lord, whilst in the world suffering for our benefit, was pleased
to give us a form of prayer, and to make a few remarks showing us how we should
perform that great duty.

This form of prayer ye may find in the sixth chapter of St. Matthew's gospel;
and in the ninth verse, it begins thus:

Our Father which art in heaven.

The words Our Father, are designed to raise in our minds that reverence and
love which are most justly due to so great and good a Being. They likewise
teach you to have confidence in His mercy. For, as He disposes of all events,
so He will make all things work together for the good of those, who love Him,
and keep His commandments.

Those words likewise give you this pleasing assurance, that, as a father
pitieth, or is tender and kind to his children; so your heavenly Father will,
of His great mercy, pity, support, and comfort you, during your confinement to
this vain world, in which disappointments and sorrows are so often the portion
of the children of men.

To love your neighbor is repeatedly commanded. But, in scripture language,
the word neighbor comprehends all mankind. This is alluded to in the word
Our; which teaches, that ye should consider God, the Father Almighty, as the
common Father of all the human race; and therefore that ye should consider all
men as your brothers.

If this truth were generally believed, and suffered to direct the conduct of
men, the world would be much better than it is; and mankind would avoid many of
those evils, with which they are afflicted. But though others neglect their
duty; that will not excuse you, if, unhappily, ye neglect yours.

Young as ye are, ye must have some notion of the pleasure of living in this
friendly manner; and in being obliging, each to the other. For, I have the
great satisfaction to hear, that ye spend your days in this house, in that
quiet, and peaceable manner, in which brothers and sisters should live
together. -- Such a life is delightful to those, who have the goodness to
practice it; and it is well pleasing unto the great God of peace and love, who
has been pleased, in His great goodness, to make your duty, your true and real
happiness.

To do good to all men in the world, is not in your power; neither is it
required of you. But it is required that ye be well disposed toward all men,
and be ready to do them good offices, whenever an opportunity presents --
that ye bear malice and ill will against no man, and implore for all, the
blessing of your Father who is in Heaven.

Thus the words Our Father, imply that ye should pray for His goodness to be
extended unto all, so that, through His grace, they as well as you, may be
enabled always to do that which is right, and acceptable unto Him.

These words likewise direct, that ye offer up your prayers with the greatest
reverence and deepest humility. Ye treat your earthly parents with respect, and
that is your duty. Much more then, my dear children, is it your duty, to be
humble and meek, when ye address yourselves in prayer to your Father in Heaven.
For He knows your hearts, and all the imaginations of your mind.

Therefore, when ye are going to pray to your Father in Heaven, ye must raise
your mind to the highest degree of respect, and reverence, and love. It is
impossible to have as much respect as is due to a Being so supremely great and
good.

But when ye address Him in your private prayers, ye need not lift up your
voice. For it is not the sound of your voice; but the disposition of your heart
and mind, that your Father in Heaven regards. Ye must likewise endeavor to
have your whole heart engaged in prayer, and not to suffer your thoughts to
wander from the solemn duty -- Ye must with all your soul desire to be heared.

Whilst ye are engaged in the solemn act of prayer, it will be improper for
your thoughts to run after any thing else, or to be employed about those
things, which, at other times, might usefully engage them, or innocently amuse
you. When ye shall be so happy as to be able thus to restrain your thoughts, so
that they accompany your words, ye will have gained a great point, and your
pleasure in praying will be much greater than I can express, or ye now conceive.

But if ye do not enjoy this pleasure always when ye pray, ye must not be
discouraged. Persevere in your duty with patience and hope; and your heavenly
Father, knowing your sincerity, will, in His own good time, grant the desire of
your soul.

At your years, some of you at least, cannot be supposed capable of
understanding, in its full force, the nature and importance of thus praying to
God your heavenly Father. But if ye daily continue the practice, ye will
habitually acquire respect and reverence for Him, who is the Preserver of your
life: And your minds will receive light and knowledge of this, and of every
other duty, much sooner than, perhaps, ye now imagine ye can.

In your tasks at school, ye often meet with difficulties: But, by often
trying, ye at last overcome all those difficulties. So it is in matters of
religion, and in the duties by it enjoyed. The more ye strive to overcome
difficulties, in restraining your thoughts, and in governing your mind, the
fewer difficulties ye will find; and as those difficulties lessen, your
pleasures will naturally increase. This is sacred truth, and it is great
encouragement for persevering in your duty.

Again. Our Father Who art in Heaven, teach you to raise your thoughts from
this vain world, as the Psalmist raised his. -- "Unto Thee, O Lord, lift I up
my soul." For as your father is in Heaven, thither ought your thoughts also to
ascend; but more particularly when ye are engaged in the solemnity of prayer.

These words likewise teach, that this world is not your place of residence;
that this life must come to an end; that heaven is your home, and that as
heaven is a place of holiness, ye must strive, with all the powers of your
soul, to obtain as much holiness as can be obtained in this life. For without
holiness, ye never can be received into any of the mansions of your heavenly
Father's house, in which pure and holy spirits are enraptured with eternal
bliss.

In fine, these introductory words, our Father, Who art in Heaven, imply that
the Supreme Being, to whom ye address your prayers, is able to grant your
requests, if they be such as He approves, and be offered up in sincerity and
truth. The term Father implies, that He is willing to grant them, and to show
you His mercy, even to the salvation of your souls. And the term Our Father,
implies, that He has no respect to persons: But as He created all, so He will
have mercy upon all, if they will but look upon Him as their Father, and trust
for mercy in Him alone.

Accordingly, when ye approach His presence, or when ye pray to Him, your minds
should be deeply impressed with reverence, humility, and fear. Because He is in
Heaven, and ye upon earth, and also with confidence and love; because ye pray
to your Father, Who knows and will pity your infirmities, and will freely
give whatever His wisdom shall judge proper for you, if ye will fervently ask
in the manner in which ye ought to ask, that is, with such dispositions and
impressions as I have now described.

For when ye so ask, or when ye so pray unto Him, ye show your obedience, and
confess your dependence: And unless ye become obedient, and place in Him your
whole trust and confidence, ye need not look for, nor expect the great blessing
of His favor, either in this life, or in that which is to come.

But to obtain His favor, which is infinitely better than life, too much ye
cannot do. It is indeed the only needful and valuable thing that ye can by any
means obtain. It is life, it is glory; it is happiness and eternal bliss. --
Bliss that can never change, that can never fail to transport pour souls with
rapturous delight; and it must endure, like your souls, for ever and ever.

To assist you in your endeavors to obtain this great, this glorious prize,
that shall make you rich in happiness throughout eternity* is the object of my
discourses with you, which I shall, for that reason, pursue with very great
pleasure. For it will be a particular happiness to me, if, with the blessing of
our Father in heaven, I happily become an instrument in guiding you to His
great salvation. And that ye may obtain it -- that ye may at last be raised to
the communion and fellowship of His holy angels, and the blessed spirits of the
just, I beseech you carefully to remember what has been now said, and
diligently to do, as ye shall acquire knowledge, all those things, which the
Lord your God requires you to do.

And I fervently pray to God, our heavenly Father, of His great goodness to
grant you grace, and to support and strengthen you with His holy spirit, so
that ye may pass this life in His fear, and when this life shall be ended (as
soon it must) to receive you into His kingdom of glory everlasting, where ye
shall shine brighter than the moon and the stars forever and ever.

Hear now our prayer, O merciful Father! we beseech Thee to hear us, for the
sake of thine only son our Lord, and to thy great name be the glory and praise
for ever and forever. Amen.

DISCOURSE III.
MY DEAR CHILDREN,
I HOPE I succeeded last Sunday in my endeavors to explain to your
understanding, with what temper and disposition of mind ye should offer up your
prayers to your Father in heaven: also, what the purport or meaning is of the
preface or first words of that which is commonly called THE LORD's PRAYER.

I shall now begin upon the petitions, which it contains; and although these
are all distinct and separate in their own literal meaning; yet each part so
depends upon the other, that there is a connection throughout the whole.

The first of these petitions is expressed thus, Hallowed be Thy Name.

This implies an earnest desire in you, that your heavenly Father be held in
the utmost respect by all the world: -- and that as His great name is perfectly
sacred, so it should never be used by men, but with the most profound
veneration and awe.

We read in the Bible that "The Lord blessed the Sabbath day and hallowed it,
Exodus 20.11.
and that the temple was hallowed, Kings 9.3.7.
that is, they were set apart for particular purposes; and to be kept holy unto
the Lord. The Sabbath day was set apart from worldly labor, and designed for
devotion, and other religious exercises; and not for mirth and frolic, as it is
now too often used: -- and the temple, was used like our churches, for the
assembling of the people, to offer up their prayers, and their praise to the
most High and to hear His law expounded.

Thus were they both hallowed, both set apart for holy uses, and considered as
things sacred, and devoted unto God and His particular service.

Therefore in this petition ye pray, that your heavenly Father may be ever
thought and spoken of with godly fear: -- that men humble themselves, and exalt
Him in their hearts, and pay Him that homage which is due to the Creator and
Father of all, who alone can give happiness to those who love and serve Him;
and inflict misery upon the scorners that profane His sacred name.

But these words, thy name, imply God Himself with all His attributes of
justice, power, wisdom, mercy and truth; and that He be praised and glorified
for them, as well as for all His wonderful works, and the dispensations of His
providence; of which the most amazing and wonderful is the plan of redemption,
accomplished by Him, who composed this prayer. And this my beloved children,
should endear it to you, that it was designed for your instruction by Him, who
suffered and did for your benefit, infinitely more than ever man did or could
do for his friends.

This petition, likewise, teaches, that ye should never suffer yourselves to
use His sacred name lightly or profanely. I mean in cursing or swearing, (which
is a very wicked, but common practice in the world) or in common discourse,
upon frivolous occasions.

In surprise or merriment it is become fashionable to exclaim, good God! or to
use some expession of that great name. But this is a grievous sin and I hope ye
will never be guilty of it. For it is taking His name in vain; and ye know the
commandment says, "The Lord will not hold him guiltless, who takes His name
in vain."

But as I wish to explain this petition as clearly as I can, I shall put it
into this form.

O Lord! Our heavenly Father! we beseech Thee to enlighten our minds, that we
may know Thee, as we ought; and love and reverence Thee above all things --
Adore* Thee in all Thy attributes; honor Thee in all that we do, and promote
Thy glory by a life of obedience to Thy commandments.

The next petition is, Thy Kingdom come.

As the first petition shows that the praise and glory of God, should be the
first and great desire of all christians, so this petition shows how that is
to be accomplished or fulfilled.

As our heavenly Father is supreme over all, and orders or permits all
things; so all creation is His kingdom. But the kingdom meant in this petition,
is the kingdom of grace, or of righteousness, which is begun in this world, but
is made perfect in the world to come. For in this world, no man can live
altogether free from sin: but in the next world, those who have been so wise as
to become subjects of the kingdom of grace, or to live pious and godly lives,
will be made pure and perfect in holiness. For no sin, nor any thing that
loves sin, can ever approach the mansions of eternal bliss.

Therefore when ye say, Thy Kingdom come, ye pray that it be established in
your hearts. That is -- that your heavenly Father would please to grant you
grace that you may be enabled to serve Him, and keep all his commandments with
a sincere and willing heart. That ye may hate and abhor sin, and every thing
that is displeasing unto God -- that ye may ever love what is good; and
likewise, that all men may love and practice holiness, and live to the praise
and glory of their great Creator.

The establishment of righteousness in your hearts, your growing in grace, or
being good, is a coming or increase of His kingdom upon earth -- Extremely
happy will ye be, my children, when ye shall really have this love of God, and
of that which is good in His sight, or is commanded by Him in the scriptures,
fixed firmly in your hearts. The restrictions of religion will not then appear
grievous; but all its ways, and all the duties it requires, will appear to you
pleasant.

I must again put you in mind, that when ye repeat these words, Thy kingdom
come, ye should have an earnest desire to become good or to be better than ye
are; and that the love of God may so fully possess your minds, as to govern you
in all your actions, and even your thoughts, and so restrain you from wilfully
or willingly doing a bad action upon any account. For although bad actions may
gratify you for the present, or answer some purpose or wish; yet be assured, my
dear children, that in the end, they will prove to you the cause of much and
lasting sorrow.

The third petition is thus expressed: -- "Thy will be done in earth as it is
in heaven."

Thy will be done, implies your acquiescence with the dispensations of your
heavenly Father; or, that ye give up your own wishes and desires, and rather
would that whatever He wills, may come to pass.

This resignation and submission to His will, shall prove to you an endless
source of happiness. Sickness, crosses, and a variety of affliction, are often
the portion even of pious men in this life: And if they, or any of them, should
befall you, to bear them with patience and meekness, will very much lessen the
affliction: And if ye are thus submissive and obedient, your heavenly Father
will support and comfort you with His Holy Spirit. But if ye fret or murmur,
whilst ye suffer affliction, that murmuring will greatly enhance the evil in
your minds, and it will offend your heavenly Father. Because, whilst ye murmur
against any thing that He does, ye behave like disobedient children, and find
fault with the wisdom of His government.

But besides being resigned, ye must be obedient to His commandments, delivered
in the Scriptures for your improvement in pious knowledge, and for your guide
through life. In these instructions or commands, the will of our heavenly
Father is revealed, as far as it is necessary for man to know it in this world;
and by faithfully observing and obeying them, ye will be prepared for Christ's
kingdom of eternal glory, into which, if ye become good here, ye will be
received after death, and there ye shall shine brighter, than the sun in
exquisite bliss, forever and ever.

The words, in earth, imply an earnest desire, that all mankind, as well as
you, may have a just sense of their duty to your heavenly Father, and have the
grace to discharge it with faithful and willing hearts; or with sincerity and
truth.

This part of the petition may be rendered thus:

O Lord, our heavenly Father, whose power disposes of us, and of all things as
seems unto Thee meet; grant us grace to obey Thee in every thing; to deny the
gratification of such affections as are contrary to Thy pure and holy precepts.
Give us, we humbly beseech Thee, a true knowledge of our duty, and create in us
a full and perfect submission to Thy sacred will, so that we may walk humbly
before Thee, with that reverence and fear, which is most justly due unto Thee,
our Father, our King, and our God.

As it is in Heaven. Perhaps there may be a difficulty in conveying to your
understanding the real meaning of these words. Because angels and saints
perform His will in heaven, in a degree of perfection, that is not attainable
in this life. Yet still to aspire after such perfection, should be your wish
and practice, and the more earnestly ye do so, the nearer to it shall ye come,
and the greater satisfaction shall ye have in the performance of all your
duties. This satisfaction will induce a sincere and cheerful compliance, and
obedience: And in that sincerity and (...), ye will imitate the blessed spirits
in heaven; who never become faint or weary in doing their duty, or in
performing the blessed task assigned them.

By these words, then, ye are to understand, that ye implore your heavenly
Father to give you true and sincere hearts, and a right spirit, that ye may not
deceive yourselves; but that with all your mind, and with all your strength, ye
may be enabled to do whatever He has been pleased to command you, with
sincerity, fervency and zeal. Or that ye may be wholly devoted to His service,
and as perfectly obedient as it becomes the children of the Father of mercies.

Thus my beloved children, I have endeavored to explain to you these three
great petitions; the substance or which is this.

Ye implore your heavenly Father, that out of the riches of His grace, He would
be pleased to enable you and all men, to glorify His great and holy name, by
cheerfully submitting to his will, and faithfully performing those things which
he has commanded to be done, and that, in mercy to sinful man, He would be
graciously pleased to hasten the time, when all the world shall acknowledge Him
to be the Lord, and their God, and, through a sincere love of Him, turn from
the evil of their ways, and do only that which is lawful and right before Him
all their days, until He shall be pleased to call them to His mansions of
everlasting rest.

My dear children, beloved in the Lord, I beseech you to think often of these
things, and be assured that if ye live in this manner, according to the spirit
and meaning of this prayer, ye will in this life be sensible that ye enjoy the
savor of your heavenly Father, who will give you every needful blessing: and in
the life to come, ye will inherit, with angels and with saints in light, in
glory, and in bliss to all eternity.

And that ye may so live, and be so forever blessed, I pray God our heavenly
Father, of His infinite mercy to grant for the sake of Christ, our Lord, and to
His great and glorious name be the praise forever and for ever. Amen.

DISCOURSE IV.
MY DEAR CHILDREN,
WE have examined those parts of this excellent Prayer, which have particular
respect to the Deity, and in which ye, with reverence and humility, pray that
your heavenly Father may be glorified by all mankind: And that His high kingdom
of grace may come, or that righteousness be so established in the hearts of all
men, that His will may be obeyed as cheerfully and sincerely upon earth as it
is in Heaven.

We are now come to those petitions, which more immediately refer to ourselves,
and our brethren; and in the eleventh verse, the first of them is thus
expressed:

Give us this day our daily bread. In this petition, ye ask of your heavenly
Father, such things as He shall think necessary for your support in life: And
ye acknowledge your dependence upon His bounty and will, from which proceeds
every good thing respecting this life, and the life that is to come.

Neither is it a general dependence that ye acknowledge; but a daily and
particular one. Ye do not ask for riches, a great abundance of the comforts of
life, after which the covetous seek. But ye ask for food convenient, or such as
shall enable you to perform the offices of life, and duties of a christian,
without having the cares and apprehensions of want to disturb your minds.

Submission to the will of your heavenly Father, in the dispensation of His
providence, is likewise confessed, and, as St. Peter expresses it -- ye cast
all your care upon Him, who cares for you St. Peter, 5.7.
and who will never forsake, or withdraw His protection from those who thus put
their trust in him.

The words us and our, remind you, that such general blessings as ye implore
for yourselves, ye should likewise implore for others, that is, for all
mankind. One great leading principle in the christian religion is, to inculcate
benevolence, or a general good will to all the human race. As your heavenly
Father freely gives you, so ought ye freely to minister to the wants of
others, and be ever ready to assist the distressed.

My children -- thus to relieve the distressed is, perhaps, the greatest
blessing that can be extracted from wealth, and if those upon whom wealth is
bestowed did but know how exalted a pleasure it is, they would so act the
faithful stewards of the Lord, that little should we find of that wretchedness,
which poverty creates in the world.

And always remember, that prosperity enjoineth much thankfulness to the
bountiful Giver: and adversity or affliction teaches patience and resignation,
as well as the extreme folly of placing your affections on the vanities of this
world. For whoever trusts in them, will ruin his soul.

The next petition is in these words: And forgive us our debts as we forgive
our debtors.

My children, this petition is of immense consequence. For unless ye forgive
others, ye by this petition bind down upon yourselves the wrath of Heaven.

In the scriptures, debts and debtors, trespasses and trespassers, offenses and
offenders, are used to imply nearly the same thing. So here, our debts, mean
our offenses against the law of God: and our debtors mean those, who in any
wise commit injuries or offenses against us.

In this petition then ye acknowledge ye are sinners, but through His great
goodness ye hope and pray to be forgiven. But of this pardoning mercy ye can
have no hopes, unless ye forgive those, who injure or offend you. For the words
of this petition expressly mean, that ye pray for mercy only as, or on
condition that ye are forgiving and merciful to others.

Therefore ye must not suffer to remain in your mind malice or ill will against
any; but live in charity and have friendly dispositions toward all. These
charitable dispositions not only conduce to happiness in this life, but to a
preparation of the soul for that felicity, which endures for ever.

Blessed, says the Lord Jesus, blessed are the merciful, for they shall obtain
mercy. St. Matt. 5.7.
This should be, at all times, the disposition of all christians: but in
praying for mercy, the mind should be particularly cleansed from all
displeasure, and every desire that thirsts for revenge. For unless ye are
indeed mercifully disposed to others, ye can by no means become the happy
object of your heavenly Father's mercy.

The Lord pondereth the heart; and if any perverse or uncharitable
dispositions, or desires, are harbored there, He knows it. And our blessed
Lord declares, "when ye stand praying, forgive if ye have ought against any,
that your Father also may forgive you your trespasses; and to enforce the
forgiving of others, He adds, "But if ye do not forgive, neither will your
Father, who is in heaven, forgive your trespasses." St. Mark 11.25, 26.


As in the former petition, your dependence for temporal blessings is
acknowledged; so in this, your dependence for spiritual gifts and graces, is
likewise acknowledged. And of this dependence ye should ever retain a lively
and grateful sense.

And as ye are directed thus daily to implore the forgiveness of your sin, this
should impress upon your minds, the duty and necessity of your being patient,
and kind one to another. But the forgiving of your sins, is an act of free,
unmerited grace in your heavenly Father: Therefore, most certainly, ought ye
freely to forgive others. And unless ye thus forgive your enemies, or those who
offend you, ye cannot hope for the forgiveness of your heavenly Father, who
delights to show mercy to the merciful.

But, besides the mere act of forgiving injuries, ye should forget them. For
whilst ye remember or think of them, it will be difficult to say ye have
forgiven them: And in this petition, ye in fact pray not to be forgiven, unless
ye also forgive.

Thus it is the duty and interest of all to live in amity, and to be charitably
disposed each to the other. Besides, the advantage derived in this life from
such dispositions, they constitute much of the happiness of the life to come.
Therefore, they must be begun here: for in the grave there is neither work nor
device. And unless these charitable dispositions govern yuor mind, ye will be
cruel and vindictive; and it is altogether impossible for such spirits to
obtain mercy, or to enjoy the happiness which mercy creates.

As much of your present happiness depends upon those charitable
dispositions; and as future happiness cannot be obtained without them; I wish
to explain myself as clearly to your understanding, as I possibly can.

Young as ye are, it is very probable, that all of you have been sometimes
offended. Ye have been made angry, and ye have felt a desire to revenge, or to
punish. Now, whilst your mind was so inflamed with anger and resentment, did ye
not feel unhappy? Could any thing please you?

If ye never yet have taken notice of your own unhappiness, when your mind has
been in this manner dissturbed, I beseech you to observe it on some future
occasion. If ye do this, ye will much better understand the necessity of
forgiving others, and of cultivating those kindly affections and dispositions,
which unite mankind, and inspire all with charity and love. And ye will
likewise see, or rather feel from the uneasiness of your mind, that it is
impossible for the cruel and vindictive spirits to taste or enjoy happiness.

I beseech you then, my dear children, as ye hope for happiness, and the mercy
of your heavenly Father, give not your mind to anger; nor to revenge; neither
to uncharitableness: but live in peace and love as it becomes the children of
the God of mercy to live. Let not evil speaking pollute your tongue: nor
malice, nor envy corrupt your heart. They should not be, indeed, so much as
known or heard amongst you.

The last petition is, And lead us not into temptation: but deliver us from
evil.

Temptations means incitement to evil: and to be led into temptation,
implies our yielding to it, or being overcome by it.

As our heavenly Father is all goodness, this expression may surprise you. But
we read that, He chasteneth whom He loves; and scourges every son whom He
receives, Heb. 12.6.
He is likewise said to tempt them, as in the case of Abraham Genesis 22.
. But it is not to lead them into error, it is to try their faith, or to give
them opportunities of exercising it in a particular manner, to strenghten it
and to give good examples to others -- "The Lord your God proves you to know
whether ye love the Lord your God, with all your heart and with all your soul
Deuteronomy. 13.3.
.

So that this petition does not imply a prayer to be kept entirely free from
temptations; but that ye may be so strengthened, as not to be overcome by them;
or that ye may not be tempted above what ye are able to bear. Heb. 12.6.


In this sense ye are to understand this expression, and not as an enticement
to sin. For, as St. James observes, God tempts no man, Cor. 10.23.
that is, He induces no man to commit iniquity.

But instead of enlarging upon the different ways in which your heavenly Father
is said to tempt His children, to prove the sincerity of their faith, and to
strengthen their minds, I shall paraphrase the petition thus:

"Whenever evil shall befall us -- when the world, the devil, or our own evil
desires, shall attempt to ensnare us, do Thou, O Lord, our heavenly Father, do
Thou, in Thy tender mercies -- support and strengthen us; so that we neither
stumble nor fall; but make for us a way to escape -- enable us to sustain the
shock, or rescue us from it." St. James 1.13.


But deliver us from evil, may be extended to the evils of this life, such as
loss of health or of friends, or to the cruel shafts of malice, and so forth.
But the chief object of this petition, is a rescue or deliverance from the
power of the devil, the contagion of sin, the seduction of our own evil
desires, and from every evil frame of heart, and disposition of spirit, which
incline us to sin, or to yield to temptations to commit iniquity.

This teaches, that ye should be always upon your guard, lest ye fall from
duty, and the practice of truth, which is in Christ Jesus our Lord. That ye
should with humble, sincere, and contrite hearts, lament your own weakness, and
implore your heavenly Father to strengthen you with grace, and the aids of His
holy spirit, so that ye may be kept from falling under temptations, and from
doing any thing offensive to His pure and holy eye. And that for His infinite
mercies, he would uphold you through this mortal life, and "restore you to the
joy of His salvation."

For Thine is the kingdom, and the power and the glory, for ever. Amen.

As this prayer begins, so it ends with glory to God, your heavenly
Father; which shows, that whether ye pray, or whatever else ye do, ye should
have an eye to His glory and praise.

But these words may be rendered thus:

We pray for the coming of Thy kingdom, or the increase of righteousness; that
Thy name may be held sacred, and treated with reverence by all mankind; and
that Thy will may be done in all things and by all men: For the kingdom is
Thine, and it is the duty of all to glorify Thy name, and to obey Thy law: We
implore temporal blessings, and the forgiveness of our past offenses, and a
preservation from future transgressionss; because, Thou have the power thus to
provide for, and protect us, and Thou only can forgive us our sins. All these
things we implore, because by hallowing Thy name; by owning Thy kingdom, and by
doing Thy will: by Thy forgiving us, by Thy providing for, and protecting us,
the glory shall be Thine, forever and forever. Amen.

Amen is commonly supposed to mean a full assent to your prayers, and earnest
desire that they may be heard. As if ye should say, "Grant these our humble
requests, good Lord, we beseech Thee." But it also implies a hope, and belief
that they will be heard, as far as they are agreeable to the will of your
heavenly Father, for the sake of His beloved son Jesus Christ our Lord, through
wh^^^ mediation alone we can have access to the Father; who with the son and
Holy Spirit, is one God, over all, blessed forever more. Amen.

My dear children, I hope these remarks will enable you to understand this
prayer better than hitherto you have understood it -- and I pray God our
heavenly Father, to increase your knowledge of all those things, which belong
to your eternal peace, that as ye grow in years, ye may increase in grace; in
wisdom, and in understanding -- that He would protect you through the dangerous
paths of youth, and through all the chances and changes of this life -- that
all your days may be spent in His fear; that ye be preserved unspotted from the
world, and that, at the last, ye be presented with exceeding great joy before
His throne, and become blessed partakers with His saints in light everlasting.

Grant this, O Lord our heavenly Father, we beseech Thee, for the sake of
Christ, and to thy great name, be glory, honor and praise for ever and forever.
Amen.

MORNING.
PRAISE God, my soul; for He is good.
He has preserved me through the night;
He gives me health; He gives me food. --
He blessed me with this morning's light.
With pity, Lord, regard my youth;
From ill protect me through this day
Lies make me hate, and love the truth,
In mercy hear me when I pray.
EVENING.
ANOTHER day of life is past,
I Am so much nearer to my grave.
Lord, let me not time idle waste,
But live like those Thy grace shall save.
In silent watches of this night,
Bliss me with Thy paternal care;
That on return of morning-light,
My heart Thy praises may declare.

