

THE POSTHUMOUS WORKS OF ANN ELIZA BLEECKER, IN PROSE AND VERSE.

To which is added, A COLLECTION OF ESSAYS, PROSE AND POETICAL, BY MARGARETTA
V. FAUGERES.

NEW YORK: Printed by T. and J. SWORDS, No. 27, William-Street. -- 1793. --

To the Public.
IN the publication of Posthumous Works, it has been usual for the Editors or
Publishers to accompany them with a Prefatory Address, -- generally explaining
the particular reasons for offering them to the world, or relating their
peculiar merits, and consequently their claim to the patronage of the lovers of
science. In compliance with this general custom we think it necessary merely to
note, that having been frequently solicited to publish, in a separate volume, a
part of those writings of Mrs. BLEECKER which had appeared in the New York
Magazine, we conceived a collection of all such of her poems and essays as
might with propriety come before the public, ^ould be more likely to meet the
approbation bo^^ of her friends, and of the friends of American l^te^ature.
Having suggested this idea to those who appeared most strenuous for the
measure, we were pleased to find it met their hearty concurrence; and through
the obliging disposition of her husband and daughter, we are now happy in being
able to present this volume to our fellow citizens.

We are indebted to a friend for the idea of adding a number of prose and
poetical essays, which likewise first appeared in the New York Magazine, most
of them under the signature of ELLA, and which are the production of Mrs.
MARGARETTA V. FAUGERES, the daughter of Mrs. BLEECKER. Our obligations to this
lady are much increased by the addition of several Original Essays in verse,
which the reader will find interspersed in that part of the collection which
comprehends her writings.

It is not our intention to recommend this volume by an elaborate display of
its particular merits or peculiar excellencies: the best recommendation we can
give it, is an attentive perusal: and when this is done, that the reader of
taste and elegance will join in asserting, that though it is not faultless, yet
that its merits preponderate, and entitle it to the patronage of every true
American, is the candid opinion of

The PUBLISHERS.
New York, September, 1793.
SUBSCRIBERS NAMES.
THOMAS Allen, 6 cop. Athenian Society, Andrew Anderson, William Bache,
Gardener Baker, Eleazer Ball, John Banks, Andrew D. Barclay, Edward Bartlett,
Anthony Bartow, Johanna Bayard, 2 cop. Christian Beakley, Cornelius Bergen,
Anthony L. Blanchard, John R. Bleecker, jun. Alexander Bleecker, Nathaniel
Bloodgood, Robert Boggs, John Bolen, George Bowne, jun. Walter Bowne, Samuel
Boyd, Laetitia Bradish, Andrew Bradish, Susan V. Bradford, Gasherie Brasher,
George Brewerton, James Brewerton, Henry Brewerton, Catharine Bridgen, William
Briskcoa, Michael Brooks, William Broom, John Burger, jun. Lancaster Burling,
jun. William Bunce, Samuel Burrowe, Thomas C. Butler, Eliza Caldwell,
Calliopean Society, Robert Campbell, Nicholas G. Carmer, Maria Charles, Mrs.
Child's, John Clark, Benjamin Clark, De Wit Clinton, Peter Cole, Richard F.
Cooper, Miss Cooper, Peter S. Cortelyou, Catharine Cox, John Cruger, James
Davidson, Richard B. Davis, Matthew L. Davis, William A. Davis, Peter Deall,
Mrs. Delancey, Thomas Demilt, John De Wint, Henry Dodd, Nathaniel Forster,
Abraham Fowler, Mrs. Fraunces, Hugh Gain, William Gilliland, Charles D. Gold,
Sol. Goodwin, Oliver Goodwin, Thomas Greenleaf, Benjamin Haight, Thomas
Hamersley, Nicholas Hammond, John Harrisson, Ann Julia Hatton, H. Haydock, jun.
2 cop. William Hervey, Sarah Higginson, Robert Hinchman, Peter Hines, Jacob
Hochstrosser, Robert Hodge, Mary Hodgdon, Horanian Liter. Society, William
Hurst, E. Jones, Epaphrus Jones, John B. Johnson, Isaac I* Kip, Isaac Kip,
James Kirkland, Jane Kirkpatrick, Jeremiah Lansingh, Jonathan Lawrence, jun.
John Leonard, Edmund Ludlow, Peter Mabie, Elizabeth Mann, Thomas Marshall, John
M. Mason, Benjamin G. Minturn, Jacob Moon, Benjamin I. Moore, Jacob Morton,
Robert Mott, Townsend McCoun, Archibald McCullum, Dennis McGahagan, Eliza O.
Millen, John W. Mulligan, John Neilson, John L. Norton, Daniel Paris, Euphemia
Paterson, Nathaniel Pearsall, Henry Post, jun. 3 copies. Abraham Prall, William
Rainey, John Read, John Reid, James Riker, Joseph Roberts, Susannah Rodgers,
John Ryers, Joshua Sands, George Service, H. P. Schuyler, Philip Schuyler,
Peter C. Schuyler, G. V. Schoonhoven, Maria Scott, James Seaman, Richard
Seaman, J. Slidell, jun. Thomas R. Smith, George Snowdon, jun. Joseph M.
Stanbury, Daniel Steel, Thomas Stoutenburgh, Samuel Suydam, Mary Swords,
Abraham C. Ten Broeck, Anthony Ten Eyck, Jacob Ten Eyck, Cornelius Tiebout,
James Tillery, John V. Thomas, Christian Tupper, John Utt, Isaac Vanderbeck,
jun. Samuel B. Vanderbilt, Cornelius C. Van Alen, Daniel L. Van Antwerp, Anna
Maria Van Wyck, Gebash Visscher, Harman Vosburgh, James Walker, Sarah Wallace,
George J. Warner, George Wattles, C.R. and G. Webster, 6 cop* Isaac H. Whitney,
Benjamin Williamson, Nathaniel Woodward, William Wyche, Joseph You Will, Joseph
Young, Samuel Young.
But few returns have been made of the subscription-papers sent out of this
city; many likewise that were delivered to individuals, we have heard nothing
of: Should, therefore, any who have subscribed for this volume find their names
omitted, they will be pleased to ascribe it to the cause above mentioned.

CONTENTS.
A Prospect of Death, Page. 220 To Miss Catharine Ten Eyck, ibid The Storm,
Page. 222 Despondency, Page. 225 Elegy on the Death of General Montgomery,
Page. 226 Thaumantia and Fame, Page. 228 Recollection, Page. 229 On Reading
Dryden's Virgil, Page. 230 To Miss Ten Eyck, Page. 231 To Mr. Bleecker, on his
passage to New York, Page. 232 A short Pastoral Dialogue, Page. 236 Hope
arising from Retrospection, Page. 237 On seeing Miss S. T. E. crossing the
Hudson, Page. 239 To Miss M. V. W. Page. 240 To Mrs. De H --, Page. 242 On a
great Coxcomb recovering from an Indisposition, Page. 243 An Evening Prospect,
Page. 244 An Hymn, Page. 246 To Miss Brinckerhoff, on her quitting New York,
Page. 248 To Julia Amanda, Page. 250 Peace, Page. 251 A Pastoral Dialogue,
Page. 253 Return to Tomhanick, Page. 260
CONTENTS. By Mrs. FAUGERES.
ESSAYS.
Benefits of Scolding, Page. 265 Fine Feelings exemplified in the Conduct of a
Negro Slave, Page. 268 A Fragment, Page. 271 The China Aster, Page. 273
POEMS.
A Dream, Page. 275 A Version of the Lord's Prayer, Page. 280 To Alfred, in
Answer to a Complaint, Page. 282 Lines written on a blank Leaf of Colonel
Humphrey's Poems, Page. 285 To Aribert, ibid To the Memory of Aleon, who did at
Sea in the Year 1790, Page. 288 An Address to a Profile, Page. 289 Elegy to
Miss Anna Dundass, Page. 291 Morning, Page. 293 Evening, Page. 295 Night, Page.
298 To Mortimer embarking for the West Indies, Page. 307 A Version of part of
the 7th Chapter of Job, Page. 308 A Salute to the Fourteenth Anniversary of
American Independence, Page. 311 Winter, Page. 312 Friendship, Page. 315 To the
Reverend J*** N*****, Page. 318 To the Moon, Page. 319 Silence, Page. 322 To
Ethelinde, Page. 324 To the same, Page. 326 On seeing a Print, exhibiting the
Ruins of the Bastille, Page. 329 To the Memory of Mrs. Henrietta Anna Maria
Dubuisson, Page. 333 To the Memory of Mrs. Scriba and her infant Daughter,
Page. 336 To Ethelinde, Page. 339 A Version of Mrs. Barbauld's Tenth Hymn,
Page. 3^^ Lines occasioned by Mr. Robertson's refusing to paint for one Lady,
and immediately after taking another Lady's likeness, Page. 345 To Nature,
Page. 346 Arria's Tomb, Page. 347 To a Canary Bird, Page. 349 The Birth Day of
Columbia, Page. 351 July the Fourteenth, Page. 353 To Miss Mason, at
New-Rochelle, Page. 355 The Hudson, Page. 358
MEMOIRS OF Mrs. ANN ELIZA BLEECKER.
MRS. ANN ELIZA BLEECKER was the youngest child of Mr. BRANDT SCHUYLER, of this
city, (the place of her nativity;) she was born in October, anno Domini 1752;
and though in her early years she never displayed any partiality for school,
yet she was passionately fond of books, insomuch that she read with propriety
any book that came to hand long before the time that children in common pass
their Spelling-Books. But though her poetical productions (which made their
appearance very early) displayed a taste far superior to her years; yet, so
great was her diffidence of her own abilities, that none but her most intimate
acquaintance were ever indulged with a view of any of her performances, and
then they were no sooner perused than she destroyed them.

Hence it comes, that none of her compositions previous to the year 1769, are
extant: in that year she married JOHN J. BLEECKER, Esquire of New-Rochelle; and
being willing now to cherish her genius, after a short residence in the
capital, they retired to Poughkeepsie, where they stayed a year or two; and
then taking a liking to the northern parts of this state, they removed to
Tomhanick, a beautiful solitary little village eighteen miles above Albany.
Here Mr. BLEECKER built him an house on a little eminence, which commanded a
pleasing prospect. On the east side of it was an elegantly simple garden, where
fruits and flowers, exotics as well as natives, flourished with beauty; and a
little beyond it the roaring river of Tomhanick dashed with rapidity its
foaming waters among the broken rocks; toward the west, lay wide cultivated
fields; in the rear, a young orchard, bounded by a thick forest; and in front,
(after crossing the main road) a meadow, through which wandered a dimpling
stream, stretched itself to join a ridge of tall nodding pines, which rose in
awful grandeur on the shelving brow of a grassy mountain. Through the openings
of this wood you might descry little cottages scattered up and down the
country, whose environs the hard hand of Industry had transformed into rich
fields and blooming gardens, and literally caused the wilderness to blossom as
the rose -- It is to this scene she alludes where she so beautifully says, Cast
your eyes beyond this meadow,
Painted by a hand Divine,
And observe the ample shadow
Of that solemn ridge of pine.
This was such a retreat as she had always desired -- the dark forest, the
rushing river, and the green valley had more charms for her than the gay
metropolis she had left, and in which she was so well calculated to shine: and
she was so much attached to rural pleasures, that no birds (those of prey
excepted) were ever suffered to be shot near her habitation if she could
prevent it -- indeed, they built their nests unmolested in the very porch of
the house.

And the cultivation of flowers had likewise a large share of her attention, so
much, that where Flora had been remiss in decking the sod, she took upon
herself that office, by gathering seeds from her own garden and strewing them
promiscuously in the woods and fields, and along the clovery borders of her
favorite brook.

'Till the memorable 1777, they lived in the most perfect tranquillity -- fair
prospects were opening on every side -- Her mother, a widow, (an ornament to
the sex) lived with her -- her half-sister, Miss TEN EYCK (...) ^er cheerful
sprightly companion -- and her attentive husband and prattling children closed
the circle, and left her scarce another wish on this side of the grave -- Then,
indeed, the clamorous thunders of War frighted them from their peaceful
dwelling, and the blasting hand of Desolation dispersed them as a flock in the
desert.

Mr. BLEECKER, hearing of the approaches of the infatuated BURGOYNE, had left
Mrs. BLEECKER with the children and servants, while he went to Albany to seek a
place for them, (her mother and sister having just quitted her.) But he had
scarce been gone a day when, as she sat at breakfast, she received intelligence
that the enemy were within two miles of the village, burning and murdering all
before them. Terrified beyond description she rose from the table, and taking
her ABELLA on her arm, and her other daughter (about four years old) by the
hand, she set off on foot, with a young mulatto girl, leaving the house and
furniture to the mercy of the approaching savages. The roads were crowded with
carriages loaded with women and children, but none could afford her assistance
-- distress was depictured on every countenance, and tears of heartfelt anguish
moistened every cheek. They passed on -- no one spoke to another -- and no
sound but the dismal creaking of burdened wheels and the trampling of horses
interrupted the mournful silence. After ^ tedious walk of four or five miles,
she obtained a seat for the children upon one of the wagons, and she walked on
to Stony-Arabia, where she expected to find many friends; but she was deceived
-- no door was open to her, whose house by many of them had been made use of as
a home -- she wandered from house to house, and at length obtained a place in
the garret of a rich old acquaintance, where a couple of blankets, stretched
upon some boards, were offered her as a bed; she, however, sat up all night and
wept, and the next morning Mr. BLEECKER coming from Albany, met with them and
returned to that city, from whence they set off with several other families by
water. At twelve miles below Albany little ABELLA was taken so ill that they
were obliged to go on shore, where she died. The impressions this event made on
Mrs. BLEECKER's mind were never effaced. The remembrance of every circumstance
that led to it -- the return of the season -- the voice of an infant -- or even
the calm approach of a summer's evening, never failed to awaken all her
sorrows; and she being naturally of a pensive turn of mind, too freely indulged
them.

From this they proceeded to Red-Hook, where she met with her mother, who was
declining very fast, and died a little after her daughter's arrival. The
capture of BURGOYNE soon after taking place, they again set off to visit their
little solitude; but, in their journey thither, she had the sorrowful office of
closing the eyes of her last remaining sister. Her own sister, Mrs. SWITS --
her half-sister, Mrs. DARBE, (then Miss TEN EYCK,) is still living.


The description she has given of these events, in a letter to a friend, may
not be unacceptable.

Tomhanick, December 15, 1777.
CURSED be the heart that is callous to the feelings of humanity, and which,
concentered in itself, regards not the wailings of affliction! Excuse my
enthusiasm -- it is the effect of repeated injuries received in my flight; but
thank heaven I have supported every shock with tolerable fortitude, except the
death of my ABELLA -- she indeed had wound herself round every fiber of my
heart -- I loved, I idolized her -- however, my little love languished and
died, and I believe I could then have beheld with less anguish the dissolution
of Nature than the last gasp of my infant. The sensations I felt at the death
of my dear parent were of a different nature -- it was a tranquil sorrow, a
melancholy which I have heard observed soothes the soul instead of corroding
it. While I held the expiring saint in my arms, and saw her just verging into
eternity -- while I dropped tear after tear in solemn silence over her livid
countenance, oh how sincerely did I wish to accompany her from those scenes of
vanity, from which her admirable precepts had so much detached my affections!
Oh my mother! cried I, you lately wept for my ABELLA, we now pay the same
mournful tribute to you! Oh Death! thou greatest evil annexed to human nature,
how do thou dissolve the sweet connections among men, and burst away the
silken bands of Friendship! I thought I had now descended the lowest vale of
mortal sorrow, but the deception vanished at the bedside of my expiring
sister. To enhance the distress, six tender infants were clamouring round their
insensible mother, the one half unconscious of the occasion of the general
grief, and only lamenting because the rest did.

After her interment I returned hither, truly convinced how visionary the eclat
of this world is, and desiring to pass the remainder of my life in a tranquil
enjoyment of the bounties of heaven, neither elated to the extravagance of
mirth, nor sunk to the meanness of dejection.

A. E. B.


From this period till the year 1781, they lived in tolerable tranquillity,
when, in the beginning of August, as Mr. BLEECKER was assisting in the harvest,
he, with two of his men, were made prisoners by a party from Canada, and taken
off immediately. As it was late in the afternoon, Mrs. BLEECKER expected him
with a degree of impatience, and began to be apprehensive that something
uncommon had occurred: a servant was therefore dispatched, who soon returned
with the sorrowful account, that he could not see any of them, and that the
wagon and horses were in the road tied to a tree.

She was at no loss to conjecture what was become of him, for a number of small
parties from Canada were known to be sculking in the woods, for the sole
purpose of carrying off the most active citizens. The neighbors therefore were
immediately alarmed, and the woods, as far as was practicable, were searched;
but they could not discover a single trace of the party. Mrs. BLEECKER, giving
him up for lost, set off for Albany directly, though it was then near night,
and abandoned herself to the most hopeless grief; but, by a wonderful train of
events, Mr. BLEECKER was re-taken by a party from Bennington, after having
passed the last habitation on this side of the Green-Mountains, and when his
conductors for the first time had considered themselves as perfectly secure. He
returned to her in six days, and the joy she felt at finding him operating more
powerfully than the grief she experienced at his loss, a fit of sickness
ensued, which nearly proved fatal. They again returned to Tomhanick.

Though Mrs. BLEECKER was witness to many scenes of distress during the late
war, in many of which she was the principal sufferer; yet, the idea of a far
distant peace, which should again restore her to her friends, gilt the solitary
shades which encompassed her, and bore her up under frequent and poignant
griefs.

In the year 1783, (the spring after the peace,) she re-visited New York, in
hopes of seeing her old acquaintance and friends; but her hopes were far from
being realized -- some were dead; others had left the continent; and the few
who remained were in different states: She saw her half-sister, Miss TEN EYCK,
but once, and then but for a few minutes, as one party was embarking for
New York just as the other arrived at Albany. Her principal correspondents and
much-loved relatives, the Miss V** W***'s, were in Jersey; and as the British
were still here, she could not (without the greatest difficulty) visit them.
But the ruinous condition of her native city gave such a shock to her spirits
as the united efforts of her reason and fortitude were not able to ward off.
The places which she once knew as the scenes of festivity, were now sunk into
dust -- the place that once knew them knowing them no more; or if by hard
searching she at last descried them, they only met her eye as monuments of her
past pleasures -- dreary piles, mo^ldering fast beneath the relentless hand of
Time and War. Her sensibility was too keen for her peace -- She had struggled
on through the war, and had suffered Hope to beguile the hours devoted to
distress: but now the scene was changed -- the illusion vanished, and she
concluded now she should see no more good upon earth. She returned again to her
cottage, where she found her health very rapidly decline; and on the 23d of the
following November, about noonday, (after two days confinement to her bed) her
calm spirit took its flight from its shattered habitation, without a struggle
or a groan. She retained her senses till within a few minutes of her death; and
the last words she uttered to her weeping husband and family, were assurances
of the pleasing prospect Immortality offered her.

It is needless to say her loss was severely felt -- it may be naturally
supposed. The benevolence of her disposition had extended itself to all classes
of people; and in the village where she dwelt, there were several families who
might be called her dependants. To the aged and infirm she was a physician and
a friend -- to the orphan she was a mother -- and a soother of the widow's
woes; all loved -- all honored her: and when they followed her to the grave,
they weeping said, (though differently expressed, still meaning the same,) " We
have lost HER whose equal we shall never see again!"

It is to be regretted that the writings which we now have are but a small part
of what she composed: she was frequently very lively, and would then give way
to the flights of her fertile fancy, and write songs, satires, and burlesque:
but, as drawing a cord too tight will make it break, thus she would no sooner
cease to be merry, than the heaviest dejection would succeed, and then all the
pieces which were not as melancholy as herself, she destroyed. As she seldom
kept copies of her poetical epistles, the most of them are lost; one in
particular, written some little time before she fled from Tomhanick, in 1777,
and directed to General BURGOYNE, was left in her bureau; the bureau was broken
open and its contents plundered by his men; but whether the letter ever reached
him or not, is unknown. In the winters of 1779 and 1780, she amused herself and
friends by writing what she called the Albany Gazette, which was sent by every
opportunity to Fishkill, where several of her relations lived. This lively and
ingenious performance was much admired, and being handed about from one company
to another, is entirely lost. Several political and satirical pieces shared a
similar fate.

Some of those, however, which are left, are here presented to the public. The
political sentiments displayed in several of them will, it is probable,
recommend them to the notice and favor of the Patriot, and the rest may please
the lovers of artless style. Many of them are faulty, but their merits are more
numerous than their defects, and these will be easily pardoned and forgotten by
all who knew her; for Detraction will not rise up against her, after death,
whose virtues, when alive, endeared her to so many admiring friends, and whose
enemies (and Envy created her some) could not speak evil of her.

As most of these pieces were intended for the amusement of herself and
particular friends, and not for the public eye, they appear as they flowed
extempore from her pen. Frequently she wrote while with company, at the desire
of some one present, without premeditation, and at the same time bearing a part
in the conversation.

Mrs. BLEECKER possessed a considerable share of beauty; her countenance was
animated, and expressive of her benevolent, feeling mind; her person, rather
tall, was graceful and elegant; her easy, unaffected deportment and engaging
manners procured her the esteem of most persons at first sight, which generally
increased on a more intimate acquaintance.

M. V. F.
New York, May, 1793.
THE HISTORY OF MARIA KITTLE. In a Letter to Miss Ten Eyck.
Tomhanick, December, 1779. DEAR SUSAN,
HOWEVER fond of novels and romances you may be, the unfortunate adventures of
one of my neighbors, who died yesterday, will make you despise that fiction,
in which, knowing the subject to be fabulous, we can never be so truly
interested. While this lady was expiring, Mrs. C -- V --, her near kinswoman,
related to me her unhappy history, in which I shall now take the liberty of
interesting you benevolent and feeling heart.

MARIA KITTLE was the only issue of her parents, who cultivated a large farm on
the banks of the Hudson, eighteen miles above Albany. They were persons of good
natural abilities, improved by some learning; yet, conscious of a deficiency in
their education, they studied nothing so much as to render their little
daughter truly accomplished.

MARIA was born in the year 1721. Her promising infancy presaged a maturity of
excellencies; every amiable quality dawned through her lisping prattle; every
personal grace attended her attitudes and played over her features. As she
advanced through the playful stage of childhood, she became more eminent than a
Penelope for her industry* yet, soon as the sun declined, she always retired
with her books until the time of repose, by which means she soon informed her
opening mind with the principles of every useful science. She was beloved by
all her female companions, who, though they easily discovered her superior
elegance of manners, instead of envying, were excited to imitate her. As she
always made one in their little parties of pleasure on festival days, it is no
wonder that she soon became the reigning goddess among the swains. She was
importuned to admit the addresses of numbers, whom she politely discarded, and
withdrew herself awhile from public observation. However, the fame of her
charms attracted several gentlemen of family from Albany, who intruded on her
retirement, soliciting her hand. But this happiness was reserved for a near
relation of here is, one Mr. KITTLE, whose merits had made an impression on her
heart. He, although not handsome, was possessed of a most engaging address;
while his learning and moral virtues more particularly recommended him to her
esteem. Their parents soon discovered their reciprocal passion, and highly
approving of it, hastened their marriage, which was celebrated under the most
happy auspices.

MARIA was fifteen when married. They removed to his farm, on which he had
built a small neat house, surrounded by tall cedars, which gave it a
contemplative air. It was situated on an eminence, with a green enclosure in
the front, graced by a well cultivated garden on one side, and on the other by
a clear stream, which, rushing over a bed of white pebble, gave them a high
polish, that cast a soft gleam through the water.

Here they resided in the tranquil enjoyment of that happiness which so much
merit and innocence deferred: the indigent, the sorrowful, the unfortunate were
always sure of consolation when they entered those peaceful doors. They were
almost adored by their neighbors, and even the wild savages themselves, who
often resorted thither for refreshments when hunting, expressed the greatest
regard for them, and admiration of their virtues.

In little more than a year they were blessed with a daughter, the lovelier
resemblance of her lovely mother: as she grew up, her graces increasing,
promised a bloom and understanding equal to here is; the Indians, in particular,
were extremely fond of the smiling ANNA; whenever they found a young fawn, or
caught a brood of wood-ducks, or surprised the young beaver in their daily
excursions through the forests, they presented them with pleasure to her; they
brought her the earliest strawberries, the scarlet plumb, and other delicate
wild fruits in painted baskets.

How did the fond parents hearts delight to see their beloved one so
universally caressed! When they sauntered over the vernal fields with the
little prattler wantoning before them collecting flowers and pursuing the
velvet elusive butterfly, MARIA's cheek suffusing with rapture, "Oh my dear,"
she would say, we are happier than human beings can expect to be; how trivial
are the evils annexed to our situation! may God avert that our heaven be
limited to this life!

Eleven years now elapsed before Mrs. KITTLE discovered any signs of pregnancy:
her spouse silently wished for a son, and his desires were at length gratified;
she was delivered of a charming boy, who was named, after him, WILLIAM.

A French and Indian war had commenced sometime before; but about eight months
after her delivery, the savages began to commit the most horrid depredations on
the English frontiers. Mr. KITTLE, alarmed at the danger of his brothers, who
dwelt near Fort-Edward, (the eldest being just married to a very agreeable
young woman) invited them to reside with him during the war.

They were scarce arrived when the enemy made further incursions in the
country, burning the villages and scalping the inhabitants, neither respecting
age or sex. This terribly alarmed Mrs. KITTLE; she began to prepare for flight,
and the next evening after receiving this intelligence, as she and Mr. KITTLE
were busily employed in packing up china and other things, they were accosted
by several Indians, whose wigwams were contiguous to the village of
Schochticook, and who always seemed well affected to the English. An elderly
savage undertook to be prolocutor, and desired the family to compose
themselves, assuring them they should be cautioned against any approaching
danger. To enforce his argument, he presented MARIA with a belt interwoven with
silk and beads, saying, There, receive my token of friendship: we go to dig up
the hatchet, to sink it in the heads of your enemies; we shall guard this wood
with a wall of fire -- you shall be safe. A warm plow of hope deepened in
MARIA's cheek at this -- Then ordering wine to be brought to the friendly
savages, with a smile of diffidence, "I am afraid," said she, necessity may
oblige you to abandon us, or neglect of your promise may deprive us of your
protection. -- "Neglect of my promise!" retorted he with some acrimony: No,
MARIA, I am a true man; I shoot the arrow up to the Great Captain every new
moon: depend upon it, I will trample down the briars round your dwelling, that
you do not hurt your feet. MARIA now retired, bowing a grateful acknowledgment,
and leaving the savages to indulge their festivity, who passed the night in the
most vociferous mirth.

Mrs. KITTLE, with a sort of exultation, related the subject of their
conference to her husband, who had absented himself on their first appearance,
having formed some suspicion of the sincerity of their friendship, and not
being willing to be duped by their dissimulation. "And now," added MARIA
smiling, our fears may again subside: Oh my dear! my happiness is trebled into
rapture, by seeing you and my sweet babes out of danger. He only sighed, and
reaching his arm round her polished neck, pressed her to his bosom. After a
short pause, "My love," said he, be not too confident of their fidelity; you
surely know what a small dependence is to be placed on their promises: however,
to appear suspicious might be suddenly fatal to us; we will therefore suspend
our journey to Albany for a few days. Though MARIA's soul saddened at the
conviction of this truth; though her fears again urged her to propose immediate
flight, yet she acquiesced; and having supped with the family, this tender pair
sunk asleep on the bosom of rest.

Early the next morning Mr. KITTLE arose, first impressing a kiss on MARIA's
soft cheek, as she slumbered with her infant in her arms. He then awaked his
brother, reminding him that he had proposed a hunting match the preceding
evening. "It is true," replied PETER, but since hostilities have commenced so
near us as the Indians inform, I think it rather imprudent to quit the family.
-- Come, come, replied the other, do not let us intimidate the neighbors by
cloistering ourselves up with women and children. -- I reject the thought,
rejoined PETER, of being afraid. Then having dressed himself, while his brother
charged their pieces, they left the house, and traversed the pathless grass for
many hours without perceiving any thing but small birds, who filled the
fragrant air with melody, "PETER," said Mr. KITTLE, casting his eyes around the
lovely landscape, what a profusion of sweets does Nature exhale to please her
intelligent creatures! I feel my heart expand with love and gratitude to heaven
every moment, nor can I ever be grateful enough. I have health and competence,
a lovely fond wife whose smile would calm the rudest storm of passion, and two
infants blossoming into perfection; all my social ties are yet unbroken --
PETER, I anticipate my heaven -- But why, my brother, do you turn pale? what
dreadful idea stiffens your features with amazement? what in God's name ails
you, PETER? are you unwell? sit down under this tree awhile. -- To these
interrogatories PETER replied, Excuse my weakness, I am not unwell, but an
unusual horror chilled my blood; I felt as if the damps of death pressed already
round my soul; but the vapor is gone off again, I feel quite better. Mr.
KITTLE cheered his brother, attributing his emotion to fear; who, by this time,
having reassumed his composure, entered into discourse with cheerful^ess,
refusing to return home without having killed any thing.

Then rising, they proceeded through lofty groves of pine, and open fields that
seemed to bend under the heavy hand of Ceres. At last, disappointment and
fatigue prevailed on them to return home* they had gone farther than they
apprehended; but passing along the bank of the river within a few miles of Mr.
KITTLE's, they espied a fat do walking securely on the beach, which PETER
softly approaching, levelled his piece with so good an aim that the animal
dropped instantly at the explosion. This seeming success was, however, the
origin of their calamities; for immediately after, two savages appeared,
directed in their course by the firing. Setting up a loud yell, they ran up to
the brothers and discharged their firearms. Mr. KITTLE started back, but PETER
received a brace of balls in his bosom. He recoiled a few steps back, and then
sunk down encompassed by those deadly horrors of which in the morning he had a
presentiment. Mr. KITTLE stood awhile aghast, like a person just waked from a
frightful dream; but on seeing the Indian advancing to tear the scalp from his
dying brother, he suddenly recollected himself, and shot a bullet through his
head: then grappling with the other, who was loading again, he wrested his
firelock from him, and felled him to the ground with the but-end of it. This
was no time for reflection or unavailing laments; the danger was eminent: so
leaving the savages for dead, with a mournful silence Mr. KITTLE hastened to
throw the deer from off his horse, and laid his bleeding brother across him.

When our souls are gloomy, they seem to cast a shade over the objects that
surround us, and make nature correspondent to our feelings: so Mr. KITTLE
thought the night fell with a deeper gloom than usual. The soft notes of
evening birds seemed to be the responses of savage yells. The echo of his
tread, which he never before regarded, now rung dismally hollow in his ears.
Even the rustling of the winds through the leaves seemed attended with a
solemnity that chilled him with cold tremors. As he proceeded with his mournful
charge, his feelings were alarmed for his dear MARIA; he dreaded the agitation
and distress this adventure would throw her in: but it was un^^oidable!

The sound of his horses feet no sooner invaded the ears of MARIA, than seizing
a light she sprung with a joyful impatience to the door, and was met by her
partner pale and bloody, who endeavored to prevent too sudden a discovery of
this calamity. But at the first glance she comprehended the whole affair, and
retiring a few steps, with the most exquisite agony in her countenance, "Oh Mr.
KITTLE!" she cried, clasping her hands together, it is all over -- we are
betrayed -- your brother is killed! -- "Too true, oh, too fatally true!"
replied he, falling on his knees beside her as she sunk down, my angel! the
very savages that solemnly engaged to protect us have deprived him of life; but
I am yet alive, my MARIA, be comforted -- I will instantly procure carriages,
and before morning you and your innocents shall be beyond the reach of their
malevolence.

By this time the family had crowded about them, and with grievous wailings
were inquiring the particulars of this sad adventure. Mr. KIITLE having related
every circumstance with brevity, ordered the corpse to be laid in a remote
chamber, desiring at the same time (...) horse to be saddled for him. Then,
more (...) pressed by his wife's griefs than his own, he led the disconsolate
fair to her chamber, where, being seated, she sighing demanded where he
intended to go at that time of night. "Only," said he, to the village of
Schochticook to hire a couple of wagons; I shall return in an hour I hope,
with a proper guard to secure our retreat from this hostile place. MARIA was
silent; at length she burst into a flood of tears, which his endearments only
augmented. Then expostulating with him, Is it not enough, cried she, that you
have escaped one danger, but must you be so very, eager to encounter others?
besides, you are spent with sorrow and fatigue -- let one of your brothers
perform this silent expedition. -- "It is impossible," replied the tender
husband; how can I dare to propose a danger to them from which I would shrink
myself? their lives are equally precious with mine: but God may disappoint our
fears, my love! He would have continued, but his spouse, rising from her seat,
interrupted him -- At least, my dear, before you leave us give your lovely
babes a farewell embrace, that if fate should -- should separate us, that yet
shall sweeten our hours of absence. Here she found herself clasped in her
consort's arms, who exclaimed, My MARIA! I love you passionately, and if the
least shadow of danger did appear to attend this night's travel, for your sake,
for my blessed children's sake I would decline it: but I have left the Indians
lifeless, who no doubt attacked us from some private pique; nor will they be
discovered until morning. -- "Well then," MARIA answered, I no longer oppose
you; forgive my fears. Meanwhile, as she stepped to the cradle for her suckling,
the fair ANNA, who was listening at the door anxious to hear her parents
sentiments on this occasion, quitted her station and flew to them swift as
light; dropping on her knees before her father, and looked up in his face with
the most attractive graces and the persuasive eloquence of simplicity. Her neck
and features were elegantly turned, her complexion fairer than the tuberose,
and contrasted by the most shining ringlets of dark hair. Her eyes, whose
brilliancy was softened through the medium of tears, for a while dwelt tenderly
on his countenance. At length, with a voi^^ scarce audible, she sighed out, Oh
papa! (...) not leave us; if any accident should happen to you, mamma will die
of grief, and what will become of poor ANNA and BILLY? who will care for me?
who will teach me when my papa, my mamma's papa is gone? " -- "My sweet child,"
replied he, embracing her and holding her to his bosom, there is no danger; I
shall return in an hour, and before tomorrow you shall be safe on the plains
of Albany, and my heart shall exult over the happiness of my family.

Mrs. KITTLE now approached with her playful infant in her arms; but its
winning actions extorted nothing but groans from her pained bosom, which was
more stormy than Ontario-Lake, when agitated by fierce winds. Mr. KITTLE
perciving this uncommon emotion, gently took the child from her, and repeatedly
kissed it, while new smiles dimpled its lovely aspect. "Oh!" said he to
himself, this gloom that darkens MARIA's soul is supernatural! -- it seems
dreadfully portentious! -- Shall I yet stay? But here a servant informing him
that his horse was ready, he blushed at his want of fortitude; and having
^^^quered his irresolution, after the most affecting and solemn parting* he
quitted his house, never to review it more*

MARIA then walked sadly back again, and having assembled the family in a
little hall, they closed and barred the doors. Mrs. COMELIA KITTLE, MARIA's
sister-in-law, was far advanced in her pregnancy, which increased her husband's
uneasiness for her; and they were debating in what manner to accommodate her at
Albany, when the trampling of feet about the house, and a yell of complicated
voices, announced the Indians arrival. Struck with horror and consternation,
the little family crowded together in the center of the hall, while the
servants at this alarm, being in a kitchen distant from the house, saved
themselves by a precipitate flight. The little BILLY, frightened at such
dreadful sounds, clung fast to his mother's throbbing breast, while ANNA, in a
silent agony of amazement, clasped her trembling knees. The echo of their yells
yet rung in long vibrations through the forest, when, with a thundering peal of
strokes at the door, they demanded entrance. Distraction and despair fat upon
every face. MARIA and her companions gazed wildly at each oth^^ till, upon
repeated menaces and efforts to bre^^ open the door, COMELIA's husband, giving
all for lost, leisurely advanced to the door. COMELIA seeing this, uttered a
great shriek, and cried out, O God! what are your doing, my rash, rash,
unfortunate husband! you will be sacrificed! Then falling on her knees, she
caught hold of his hand and sobbed out, O pity me! have mercy on yourself, on
me, on my child! -- "Alas! my love," said he, half turning with a look of
distraction, what can we do? let us be resigned to the will of God. So saying
he unbarred the door, and that instant received a fatal bullet in his bosom,
and fell backward writhing in agonies of death; the rest recoiled at this
horrible spectacle, and huddled in a corner, sending forth the most piercing
cries: in the interim the savages rushing in with great shouts, proceeded to
mangle the corpse, and having made an incision round his head with a crooked
knife, they tugged off his bloody scalp with barbarous triumph. While this was
perpetrating, an Indian, hideously painted, strode serociously up to COMELIA,
(who sunk away at the sight, and fainted o^ a chair) and cleft her white
forehead deeply with his tomahack. Her fine azure eyes just opened, and then
suddenly closing for ever, she tumbled lifeless at his feet. His sanguinary
soul was not yet satisfied with blood; he deformed her lovely body with deep
gashes; and, tearing her unborn babe away, dashed it to pieces against the
stone wall; with many additional circumstances of infer^al cruelty.

During this horrid carnage, the dead were stripped, and dragged from the
house, when one of the hellish band advanced to MARIA, who circling her babes
with her white arms, was sending hopeless petitions to heaven, and bemoaning
their cruelly lost situation: as he approached, expecting the fatal stroke, she
endeavored to guard her children, and with supplicating looks, implored for
mercy. The savage attempted not to strike; but the astonished ANNA sheltered
herself behind her mamma, while her blooming suckling quitting her breast,
gazed with a pleasing wonder on the painted stranger. -- MARIA soon recognized
her old friend that presented her with the belt, through the loads of shells
and feathers that disguised him. This was no time, however, to irritate him, by
reminding him of his promise; yet, guessing her thoughts, he anticipated her
remonstrance. "MARIA," said he, be not afraid, I have promised to protect you;
you shall live and dance with us around the fire at Canada* but you have one
small encumbrance, which, if not remove, will much impede your progress
thither. So saying he seized her laughing babe by the wrists, and forcibly
endeavored to draw him from her ^^^s. At this, terrified beyond conception,
she exclaimed, O God! leave me, leave me my child! he shall not go, though a
legion of devils should try to separate us! Holding him still fast, while the
Indian applied his strength to tear him (...), gnashing his teeth at her
opposition; "Help! God of heaven!" screamed she, help! have pity, have mercy on
this infant! O God! O Christ! can you bear to see this? O mercy! mercy! mercy!
let a little spark of compassion save this inoffending, this lovely angel! By
this time the breathless babe dropped its head on its bosom; the writs were nigh
pinched off, and seeing him just expiring, with a dreadful shriek she resigned
him to the merciless hands of the savage, who instantly dashed his little
forehead against the stones, and casting his bleeding body at some distance
from the house, left him to make his exit in feeble and unheard groans. -- Then
indeed, in the unutterable anguish of her soul, she fell prostrate, and rending
away her hair, she r^ared out her sorrows with a voice louder than natural, and
^endered awfully hollow by too great an exertion. "O barbarians!" she
exclaimed, surpassing devils in wickedness! so may a tenfold night of misery
enwrap your black souls, as you have deprived the babe of my bosom, the comfort
of my cares, my blessed cherub, of light and life -- O hell! are not thy flames
impatient to cleave the center and engulph (...) wretches in thy everburning
waves? are there no thunders in Heaven -- no avenging Angel -- no God to take
notice of such Heaven defying cruelties? Then rushing to her dead infant with
redoubled cries, and clapping her hands, she laid herself over his mangled
body; again softened in tears and moans, she wiped the blood from his ghastly
countenance, and pressed him to her heaving bosom, alternately caressing him and
her trembling ANNA, who, clinging to her with bitter wailings, and kissing her
hands and face; entreated her to implore the savages for mercy. "Do, my angel
mamma," she urged, do beg them yet to pity -- beg them yet to save you for my
poor, poor papa's sake! -- Alas! if we are all killed, his heart will break! --
Oh! they cannot be rocks and stones! -- Don't cry mamma, they will spare us! --
Thus the little orator endeavored to console her afflicted mother; but their
melancholy endearments were soon interrupted by the relentless savages, who
having plundered the house of every valuable thing that was portable, returned
to MARIA, and rudely catching her arm, commanded her to follow them but
repulsing them with the boldness of despair, "Leave me, leave me," she said. I
cannot go -- I never will quit my murdered child! Too cruel in your mercies,
you have given me life only to prolong my miseries! -- Meanwhile the lovely
ANNA, terrified at the hostile appearance of the enemy, left her mamma
struggling to disengage herself from the Indians, and fled p^^cipitately to the
house. She had already concealed he self in a closet, when Mrs. KITTLE pursuing
her, was intercepted by flames, the savages having fired the house. The
wretched child soon discovered her depl^^able situation, and almost suffocated
by the smoke, with piercing cries called for help to her dear, dear mother. --
Alas! what could the unhappy parent do? who^e shee^ (...) ^ames rolled between
them, while in a p^ren^^ of grief she screamed out, O my last tre^s^red my
beloved ANNA! try to escape the devouring fire -- come to me my sweet child --
the Indians will not kill us -- O my perishing babe! have pity on your mother
-- do not leave (...) quite desti^^te! Then turning to the (...) villains who
attended h^^ (...), Why do you not attempt to rescue my sweet innocent? can
your unfeeling hearts not bear to leave ^^e one -- a solitary single one? Again
calling to her ANNA, she received no answer, which being a presumption of her
death, the Indians obliged MARIA and her brother HENRY to quit the house, which
they effected with some difficulty, the glowing beams falling around them and
thick volumes of smoke obscuring their passage. The flames now struck a long
splendour through the humid atmosphere, and blushed to open the tragical scene
on the face of heaven. They had scarce advanced two hundred yards with their
reluctant captives, when the flaming structure tumbled to the earth with a
dreadful crash. Our travelers by instinct turned their eyes to the mournful
blaze; and MARIA, bursting afresh into grievous lamentations, ^^ied, There,
there my brother, my children are wrapped in arching sheets of flames, that used
to be circled in my arms they are entombed in ruins that breathed their
slumbers on my bosom! yet, oh! their spotless souls even now rise from this
chaos of blood and fire, and are pleading our injured cause before our God, my
brother! He replied only in sighs and groans; he scarcely heard her; horror had
froze up the avenues of his soul; and all amazed and tremblings, he followed
his leaders like a person in a troublesome dream.

The distant flames now cast a fainter light, and the northern breeze bent the
columns of smoke over the south horizon. Sad and benighted they wandered
through almost impenetrable swamps, forded the broad stream of Tomhanick and
the rapid river of Hosack; they passed through deserted settlements, where the
yelling of solitary dogs increased the solemnity of midnight, nor halted till
the stars, emitting a feebler luster, presaged the approach of day. MARIA,
overcome by s^^row and fatigue, immediately sunk helpless at the foot of a
tree, while the savages (who were six in number) kindled a fire, and prepared
their meal, (in a calabash) which consisted only of some parched maize
pulverized and enriched with the fat of bears flesh. Observing MARIA had fallen
asleep, they offered not to disturb her, but invited HENRY KITTLE to partake of
their repast. He durst not refuse them; and having swallowed a few mouthfuls of
their unpalatable food, and accepted of a pipe of tobacco, he desired leave to
repose himself, which being readily granted, they soon followed his example,
and sunk asleep, leaving two sentinels to guard against surprise, which
precaution they always make use of.

I am sorry, dear SUSAN, to quit MARIA in this interesting part of her history;
but order requires that we should now return to her spouse, whom we left on his
way through the ^ood.

The village of Sch^^hticook is situated on a circular plain, surrounded by
high hills, rising in form of an amphitheatre. Mr. KITTLE had just gained the
verge, when, chancing to cast his eyes around, he perceived the whole southern
hemisphere suddenly illuminated with a bright blaze; however, being accustomed
to the forest's being often fired to clear it from the under-wood, he was not
much surprised, but proceeded to descend the hill. On his arriving with the
account of his brother's murder, the place was put in the highest commotion;
the men fitting up their arms, and the women clamouring about them, highly
importunate to be removed to Albany; but the night being very dark, this
maneuver was deferred till morning; no^ could Mr. KITTLE prevail on a single
person to return with him during the darkness he felt himself strangely
agitated at this disappointment, and refusing to repose himself, with great
impatience he watched the first orient beam of Phosphor, which appearing, he
fat off for home with two wagons and a guard of three Indians. As he
approached his late happy dwelling, his bosom dilated with the pleasing hope of
soon extricating his beloved family from danger; he chid the slowness of the
carriages, and felt impatient to dissipate the apprehensions of MARIA, to kiss
the pendant tear from her eye, and press his sportive innocents to his bosom.
While these bright ideas played round his soul, he lifted up his eyes, and
through an opening in the woods beheld his farm: but what language can express
his surprise and consternation at seeing his habitation so suddenly desolated!
a loud exclamation of amaze burst from the whole company at so unexpected a
view -- the blood revolted from Mr. KITTLE's cheek -- his heart throbbed under
the big emotion, and all aghast, spurring on his horse, he entered the
enclosure with full speed. -- Stop here unhappy man! here let the fibers of thy
heart crack with excruciating misery -- let the cruel view of mangled wretches,
so nearly allied to thee, extort drops of blood from thy cleaving bosom! -- It
did -- it did. Uttering a deep groan he fell insensible from his horse, while
his attendants, hastening toward him, were shocked beyond conception at the
dismal spectacle; and, starting back with averted eyes from the dead, were
thunder struck, not having power to move or speak. After awhile two Indians
(who being used to sanguinary scenes, recovered themselves first) took a
blanket, and walking backward to the mangled COMELIA, threw it over her naked
body; the others then timidly advanced, and Mr. KITTLE opening his eyes,
groaned again bitterly; then raising himself on his knees, with a look of
unutterable anguish, he called upon his dear MARIA. Alas! no voice but the
solemn repetition of his own cries was articulated to him: then rising with an
air of distraction, he stalked round the bloody scene, and examined the dead
bodies; first uncovering the pale visage of COMELIA, he surveyed in silence her
distorted features; but perceiving it was not MARIA, he gently laid the cloth
over again, and turning furiously, caught up his ghastly infant, whose little
body was black with contusions, and his skull horribly fractured. Almost
fainting under his mournful load, and staggering at the dreadful discovery, he
deposited it again on the bloody earth, and clapping his hands together
repeatedly with violence, O hell! hell! he cried, you cannot inflict torments
so exquisite as those I now suffer! how am I crushed to the center! how deeply
am I degraded below the worms of the sod! O my children! my children! where are
you now? O my wife! my MARIA! the beloved of my bosom, are you too fallen a
sacrifice? Why do I survive these miseries, my God? how can mortality support
them? Burst -- burst my shrinking heart, and punish a wretch for not having
died in the defense of such lovely and innocent beings! Oh! why was I absent in
this fatal hour? why did not their groans vibrate on my soul that I might have
flown to their aid? Thus wildly lamenting and wandering among the smoking
ruins, he picked up some of the calcined bo^^^ of his once beautiful ANNA. At
this sight despair shook his soul afresh, new agonies convulsed his features,
and dropping the sad evidence of his miseries, he extended his arms to Heaven,
and roared out, Revenge! great God! revenge if thou art just and kind as
represented! Oh! that I had the power of an archangel to thunder eternal
horrors on the guilty wretches who have blasted the bud of my happiness, who
have darkened the brightest eyes that ever opened on the light!

The men here interfering, to console him observed, the bones were probably
those of his brother PETER; but on finding his skeleton entire, Mr. KITTLE
insisted that it must have been MARIA and ANNA, who, having hid themselves, had
doubtless perished in the flames. Again, in the furious extravagance of
passion, he tore the hair from his head, and casting himself p^^strate on the
ashes, he gathered the crumbling bones to his bosom, while the big drops of
anguish issued at every pore, till life, unable longer to sustain the mental
conflict, suspended her powers, and once more deprived him of sensation. His
companions having laid him on a wagon, now conferred together in what manner
to proceed, and apprehending an attack from the savages, they unanimously
concluded to lay the dead bodies on the remaining carriage, and make the best
of their way to Schochticook, which they accordingly performed with great
silence and expedition.

You may judge, my dear, what a panic the appearance of this mournful cavalcade
struck over the inhabitants of this defenseless village. Mr. KITTLE was gently
laid on a bed, and being let blood, his respiration became less obstructed,
though he continued senseless till his unfortunate family were interred. Six
weeks elapsed before he recovered any degree of strength; but even then he
appeared pale and emaciated, like a second LAZARUS; his disposition was
entirely changed, his looks were fierce, his attitudes wild and extravagant,
and his conversation, which formerly was sensible, commanding attent^on by a
musical voice, now was incoherent, and his cadence deep and hollow, rather
inspiring terror than any pleasing sensation. Thirsting for revenge, and
perceiving that solitude only tended to corrode his moments with the blackest
melancholy, he soon after entered the British service in the capacity of
gentleman volunteer, and signalized himself by his prudence and intrepidity,
attracting the particular notice of his officers, who being affected with his
misfortunes, proffered their services to him with so much friendship and
candor, as obliged him to accept of them, and yet lightened the obligation.

But doubtless, my dear, your generous sensibility is alarmed at my silence
about Mrs. KITTLE; I think we left her reposing under a tree: she was the first
that awaked as the sun began to exhale the crystal globules of morning, when
half rising, and reclining on her elbow, she surveyed the lovely landscape
around her with a deep sigh; they were on an eminence that commanded an
unlimited prospect of the country every way. The birds were cheerful; the dee^
bounded fearless over the hills; the meadows blushed with the enamel of FLORA:
but grief had saddened every object in her sight; the whole creation seemed a
dark blank to the fair mourner. Again recollection unlocked the sluices of her
eyes, and her soft complaints disturbed her savage companions, who, rising and
kindling up the dying embers, began to prepare their victuals, which they
invited her to partake of. This she declined with visible detestation; and
turning to her brother, with the dignity of conscious merit in distress, "No,"
said she, I never will receive a morsel from those bloody hands yet dropping
with recent murder! -- let me perish -- let the iron hand of famine first pinch
out my vitals and send me after my children! Notwithstanding this, HENRY added
his solicitations that she should accept of some refreshment, remi^^^^g her of
the consequence of her fatal resolution, which could be deemed no otherwise
than suicide. Finding this had no effect, he tried to touch her feelings on a
softer key -- Remember, MARIA, said he, you have a tender husband yet living;
would you wish to deprive him of every earthly consolation? Would you add
affliction to affliction, and after he has performed the sorrowful obsequies of
his children, to crush all his remaining hope by the news of your voluntary
death? No, live my sister! be assured he will soon get us exchanged, when soft
sympathies shall wash away your sorrows; and after a few years, who knows but
the smiles of a new lovely progeny may again dawn a paradise of happiness on
you. MARIA was affected, and half raising her eyes from the earth, she replied,
O my brother! how consoling do your words sink on my heart! though my reason
tells me your arguments are improbable and fallacious, yet it soothes the
tempest of my soul -- I will try to live -- perhaps I may again behold my dear,
dear, dear husband! Here a flood of tears interrupted her.

As this conversation was held in English, the savages were inquisitive to know
the subject of it, at the same time enjoining them both never to utter a
syllable in their presence except in their own uncouth dialect, which, as they
perfectly understood, they could not excuse themselves from. HENRY then
informed them that his sister, objecting to their method of preparing food, had
desired him to prevail with them to indulge her in dressing her meals herself.
This they readily granted, and farther to ingratiate themselves in the
prisoners' favor, they dispatched a young Indian to ^^at for partridges or
quails in the groves ad^oi^^ng them: He instantly returned with (...)
wood-pigeons, scarcely fledged, which he p^esented to HENRY, who cleaned and
broiled them on sticks, with an officious solicitude to please his sister,
which she observed with a look of gratitude, and taking a pigeon from the
stick, began to eat more from complaisance than inclination. HENRY was
delighted at her ready acquiescence, and their repast being ended, they
proceeded on their tiresome journey with less repining than the preceding
night. MARIA was exempted from carrying a burden, yet she found the fatigue
almost intolerable. They continually passed through a scene of conflagration,
the savages firing every cottage in their way, whose mournful blaze catching
the dry fields of grain, would scorch off hundreds of acres in a few moments,
and form a burning path for their destroyers. As the sun advanced to his
zenith, its rays beat fiercely on our travelers, augmented by the crackling
flames around them; when meeting with a cool stream of water, MARIA was
commanded to sit down (being overheated) while the rest approached the
rivulet: the Indian that guarded MARIA was stooping down to drink, when a loud
rustling among the leaves and trampling of bushes attracted his attention; he
listened awhile seemingly much alarmed, then starting up suddenly, he flew to
MARIA, and caught hold of her hair, aiming his hatchet at her head: the
consequence was obvious, and her fate seemed inevitable; yet, with a stoical
composure, she folded her arms across, and waited the fatal stroke with perfect
resignation; but while the weapon was yet suspended over her, chancing to look
around, he perceived the noise to proceed from a large deer, whose antlers were
entangled in the branches of a thicket. Though an uncivilized inhabitant of the
forest, he blushed at his precipitancy, and returning the instrument of death
to his girdle, after some hesitation made this apology: MARIA, this sudden
discovery is well for you; I thought we had been pursued, and we never suffer
our prisoners to be re-taken; however, I was imprudent to attempt your life
before there was a probability of your being rescued* then desiring her to rise
and drink, he quickly shot the deer, his associates helping him to skin it.
Instead of quenching her thirst she sat down pensive on the flowery margin,
casting he eyes carelessly on the stream: she knew not whether to esteem her
late deliverance from death a happy providence or protraction of misery.
Observing the spotted trout, and other fish, to dart sportively across the
water, she could not help exclaiming, Happy! happy animals! you have not the
fatal gift of reason to embitter your pleasures; you cannot anticipate your
difficulties by apprehension, or prolong them by recollection; incapable of
offending your Creator, the blessings of your existence are secured to you:
Alas! I envy the meanest among ye! A gush of tears concluded her soliloquy; and
being called to attend the company, she arose, and they began their journey for
the afternoon. HENRY desiring to have a piece of venison (having left it
behind, seldom incommoding themselves with more than the hide and tallow) they
returned and obliged him with a haunch, which was very fat: at the next
interval of travel he dressed it for himself and MARIA. In the evening they
crossed the river somewhat below Fort-Edward, in a canoe left hid under some
bushes for that purpose. They observed the most profound silence until they
entered the woods again; but it was very late before they halted, which they
did in a deep hollow, surrounded by pines whose tops seemed to be lost in the
clouds. It was necessary here to light a fire, for the wolves howled most
dreadfully, and the whole forest rung with the cries of wild beasts of various
sorts. The confines of hell could not have given MARIA more dismal ideas than
her present situation: the horrid gloom of the place, the scowling looks of her
murderous companions, the shrill shrieks of owls, the loud cries of the wolf,
and mournful screams of panthers, which were redoubled by distant echoes as the
terrible sounds seemed dying away, shook her frame with cold tremors -- she
sunk under the oppression of terror, and almost fainted in HENRY's arms;
however, on perceiving the beasts durst not approach the light, but began to
retire, she became a little more assured, and helped HENRY to erect a booth of
pine branches, making a bed of the same materials in it while he prepared their
supper: having eaten, and kindled a large fire in the front of her arbor, she
laid down and soon fell in a deep sleep. She felt herself refreshed by this
unexpected repose, and the next morning, with some alacrity, continued her
journey, hoping at last to arrive at some Christian settlement. Arriving at
Lake-Champlain, they raised a wigwam on the bank, expecting the coming of
Indians from the opposite shore to carry them over.

Here our unfortunate captives were stripped of their habits, already rent to
pieces by briers, and attired each with remnants of old blankets. In this new
dress Mrs. KITTLE ventured to expostulate with the savages, but it was talking
to the stormy ocean; her complaints served only to divert them; so retiring
among the bushes, she adjusted her coarse dress somewhat decently, and then
^^^^ing herself silently under a spreading tree, indulged herself in the luxury
of sorrow. HENRY, sensible that they expected more fortitude from him, and that
if he sunk under his adverse fortune he should be worse treated, affected to be
cheerful; he assisted them in catching salmon, with which the lake abounds; an
incredible quantity of wild fowl frequenting the lake also, he laid snares for
those of the lesser sort, (not being allowed firearms) and succeeded so well,
that his dexterity was highly commended, and night coming on, they regaled
themselves on the fruits of their industry. The night was exceedingly dark, but
calm; a thick mist hovered over the woods, and the small ridgy waves softly
rolled to the shore, when suddenly a large meteor, or fiery exhalation, passed
by them with surprising velocity, casting on every side showers of brilliant
sparkles. At sight of this phenomenon the Indians put their heads between their
knees, crying out in a lamentable voice, "Do not! do not! do not!" continuing
in the same attitude until the vapor disappeared. HENRY, with some surprise,
demanded the reason of this exclamation; to which they replied, What he had
seen was a fiery dragon on his passage to his den, who was of so malevolent a
temper, that he never failed, on his arrival there, to inflict some peculiar
calamity on mankind. In about five minutes after the earth was violently
agitated, the waves of the lake tumbled about in a strange manner, seeming to
emit flashes of fire, all the while attended with most tremendous roarings,
intermixed with loud noises, not unlike the explosion of heavy cannon. Soon as
the Indians perceived it was an earthquake, they cried out, Now he comes home!
and casting themselves in their former posture, filled the air with dismal
howlings. This was a terrible scene to MARIA, who had never been witness to so
dreadful a convulsion of Nature before; she started up and fled from her savage
companions toward an eminence at some distance, where, dropping on her knees,
she emphatically implored the protection of Heaven: however, she was followed
by an Indian and HENRY; the latter, highly affected with her distresses, taking
hold of her trembling hand, But why, my sister! said he, have you fled from us?
is the gloom of a forest more cheering than the sympathising looks of a friend?
"No, my brother!" replied MARIA; but the thought was suggested to me, that the
supreme God perhaps was preparing to a^enge himself of these murderers by some
awful and uncommon judgment, and I fled from them as LOT did from Sodom, lest I
might be involved in the punishment of their guilt. They conversed in English,
which displeasing the Indian, he ordered them to return to the wigwam,
threatening to bind MARIA fast if she offered to elope again. The shock being
over, silence again spread through the realms of darkness, when a high wind
arose from the north and chilled our half-naked travelers with excessive cold.
The savages (whose callous skins were proof against the inclement weather) not
caring to continue their fires, lest they should be discovered and surprised by
some English party, they passed here a very uncomfortable night; but the wind
subsiding, and the sky growing clear, the sun rose peculiarly warm and
pleasant, streaming ten thousand rays of gold across the lake. MARIA had
scarcely performed her oraisons, when the savages, forming a circle round her
and HENRY, began to dance in a most extravagant manner, and with antic gestures
that at another time would have afforded mirth to our travelers. Having
continued their exercise some time, they incontinently drew out boxes of paint,
and began to ornament their captives with a variety of colors; one having
crossed their faces with a stroke of vermilion, another would intersect it with
a line of black, and so on until the whole company had given a specimen of
their skill or fancy.

Soon after two canoes arrived, in which they passed over the lake, which was
uncommonly serene and pleasant. They proceeded not far on their way before they
were obliged to halt for two days, on account of MARIA's inability to travel,
her feet being greatly swollen and lacerated by the flinty path. At length, by
easy stages, they came in view of an Indian settlement, when MARIA's long
unbent features relaxed into a half smile, and turning to HENRY, "Here, my
brother!" said she, I shall find some of my own sex, to whom simple Nature, no
doubt, has taught humanity; this is the first precept she inculcates in the
female mind, and this they generally retain through life, in spite of every
evil propensity. As she uttered this elogium in favor of the fair, the tawny
villagers, perceiving their approach, rushed promiscuously from their huts with
an execrable din, and fell upon the weary captives with clubs and a shower of
stones, accompanying their strokes with the most virulent language; among the
rest an old deformed squaw, with the rage of a Tisiphone, flew to MARIA, aiming
a pine-knot at her head, and would certainly have given the wretched mourner
her quietus had she not been opposed by the savage that guarded Mrs. KITTLE: he
at first mildly expostulated with his passionate countrywoman; but finding the
old hag frantic, and insatiable of blood, he twisted the pine-knot from her
hand and whirled it away to some distance, then seizing her arm roughly and
tripping up her heels, he laid her prostrate, leaving her to howl and yell at
leisure, which she performed without a prompter. -- MARIA was all in a tremor,
and hastily followed her deliverer, not caring to risk another encounter with
the exasperated virago. By this time the rage and tumult of the savages
subsiding, the new-comers were admitted into a large wigwam, in the center of
which blazed a fire. After they were seated, several young Indians entered with
baskets of green maize in the ear, which, having roasted before the fire, they
distributed among the company.

Mrs. KITTLE and her brother complaining of the bruises they met with a^ their
reception, an old Indian seemed to attend with great concern; then leaving the
place, in a little time returned with a bundle of aromatic herbs under his arm,
the juice of which he expressed by rubbing them between two stones with flat
surfaces; this he gave them to drink, applying the leaves externally. They
instantly found relief from the medical quality of this extraordinary plant,
and composing themselves to sleep, expected a good night's repose; but they
were mistaken, for their entertainers growing intoxicated with spirituous
liquors, which operating differently, it produced a most complicated noise of
yelling, talking, singing, and quarrelling: this was a charm more powerful than
the wand of Hermes to drive away sleep: but grown familiar with sorrow and
disappointment, MARIA regarded this as a trifle, and when HENRY expressed his
concern for her smiling, she replied, We must arm ourselves with patience, my
brother! we can combat with fate in no other manner.

It were endless to recapitulate minutely every distress that attended the
prisoners in their tedious journey; let it suffice, that having passed through
uncommon misery, and imminent danger, they arrived at Montreal. -- Here the
savages were joined by several scalping parties of their tribe, and having
previously fresh painted themselves, appeared in hideous pomp, and performed a
kind of triumphal entry. The throng of people that came out to meet them, threw
MARIA in the most painful sensations of embarrassment; but as the clamours and
insults of the populace increased, a freezing torpor succeeded, and bedewed her
limbs with a cold sweat -- strange chimeras danced before her sight -- the
actings of her foul were suspended -- she seemed to move mechanically, nor
recollected herself till she found she was seated in the Governor's hall,
surrounded by an impertinent, inquisitive circle of people* who were inquiring
into the cause of her disorder, without attempting any thing toward her
relief. Discovering her situation, she blushingly withdrew to a dark corner
from the public gaze, and could not help sighing to herself, Alas! but a very
few days ago I was hailed as the happiest of women -- my fond husband
anticipated all my desires -- my children smiled round me with filial delight
-- my very servants paid me the homage due to an angel -- O my God! what a
sudden, what a deplorable transition! I am fallen below contempt! As she thus
moralized on her situation, an English woman (whom humanity more than curiosity
had drawn to the place) approached MARIA, and observing her tears and deep
dejection, took hold of her hand, and endeavored to smile; but the soft
impulses of nature were too strong for the efforts of dissimulation -- her
features instantly saddened again, and she burst into tears, exclaiming, (with
a hesitating voice,) Poor, forlorn creature! where are thy friends! perhaps the
dying moments of thy fond parent, or husband, have been cruelly embittered with
the sight of thy captivity! perhaps now thy helpless orphan is mourning for the
breast which gave him nourishment! or thy plaintive little ones are wondering
at the long ab^ (...) miserable mother. -- "Oh! (...) more!" interrupted MARIA;
your pity is severer than savage cruelty -- I could stand the shook of fortune
with some degree of firmness, but your soft sympathy opens afresh the wounds of
my soul! my losses are beyond your conjecture -- I have no parent, no sportive
children, and, I believe, no husband, to mourn and wish for me! These words
were succeeded by an affecting silence on both sides: meanwhile the Indians
testified their impatience to be admitted to the Governor by frequent shouts;
at length his Excellency appeared, and having held a long conference with the
savages, they retired with his Secretary, and our prisoners saw them no more.

After their exit the Governor turning round to MARIA and HENRY, demanded who
they were? Mrs. KITTLE's perplexity prevented her reply; but HENRY, in a most
respectful manner, gave him a succinct account of their misfortunes. The
Governor perceiving him sensible and communicative, interrogated him farther,
but he modestly declined giving any political intelligence. Observing that
MARIA suffered greatly in this interview, he soon concluded it, after having
presented several pieces of calicoes and stuffs to them, desiring they would
accept what they had occasion for. Mrs. KITTLE immediately singled out a piece
of black calimanco with tears of gratitude to her benefactor; who, smiling,
observed she might choose a gayer color, as he hoped her distresses were now
over. MARIA shook her head in token of dissent, but could make no reply. He
then dismissed them, with a small guard, who was directed to provide them with
decent lodgings.

HENRY was accommodated at a baker's, while his sister, to her no small
satisfaction, found herself placed at the English woman's who, on her arrival,
had expressed so much good nature. She had scarcely entered, when Mrs. D --,
presenting her with a cordial, led her to a couch, insisting on her reposing
there a little, "for," says she, your waste of spirits requires it.

This tenderness, which MARIA had long been a stranger to, relaxed every fiber
of her heart: she again melted into tears; but it was a gush of grateful
acknowledgment, that called a modest blush of pleasure and perplexity on Mrs. D
-- 's cheek. Being left alone, she soon fell in a profound sleep; and her
friend having prepared a comfortable repast, in less than an hour awaked her,
with an invitation to dinner -- And how do you find yourself, my sister? said
she instinctively, seizing MARIA's hand and compressing it between here is; may
we hope that you will assist us in conquering your dejection? -- MARIA smiled
benignly through a crystal atmosphere of tears, and kissing the hand of her
friend, arose. Having dined, and being now equipped in decent apparel, MARIA
became the admiration and esteem of the whole family. The tempest of her soul
subsided in a solemn calm; and though she did not regain her vivacity, she
became agreeably conversable.

In a few days, however, she felt the symptoms of an approaching fever. She was
alarmed at this, and intimating to Mrs. D -- her fears of becoming troublesome,
Do not be concerned, returned that kind creature; my God did not plant humanity
in my breast to remain there an inactive principle. MARIA felt her oppression
relieved by this generous sentiment; and indeed found her friendship did not
consist in profession, as she incessantly tended her during her illness with
inexpressible delicacy and solicitude. When she was again on the recovery, Mrs.
D -- one day ordered a small trunk covered with Morocco leather to be brought
before her, and opening it, produced several sets of fine linen, with some
elegant stuffs and other necessaries. -- "See," said she, what the benevolence
of Montreal has done for you. The ladies that beg your acceptance of these
things, intend likewise to enhance the favor, by waiting on you this
afternoon. -- "Ah!" interrupted MARIA, I want them not; this one plain habit is
enough to answer the purpose of dress for me. Shut the chest, my dear Mrs. D
--, and keep them as a small compensation for the immense trouble I have been
to you. -- If this is your real sentiment, replied her friend, (shutting* the
chest, and presenting her the key,) return your gifts to the donors; and since
you will reward me for my little offices of friendship, only love me, and
believe me disinterested, and I shall be overpaid. -- I see I have wronged your
generosity, answered MARIA. Pardon me, my sister, I will offend no more. I did
not think you mercenary -- but -- but -- I meant only to disengage my heart of
a little of its burden. -- As this tender contest was painful to both parties,
Mrs. D -- rising abruptly, pretended some business, promising to return again
directly.

In the afternoon MARIA received her visitants in a neat little parlour. She
was dressed in a plain suit of mourning, and wore a small muslin cap, from
which her hair fell in artless curls on her fine neck: her face was pale,
though not emaciated, and her eyes streamed a soft languor over her
countenance, more bewitching than the sprightliest glances of vivacity. As they
entered she arose, and advancing, modestly received their civilities, while
Mrs. D -- handed them to chairs: but hearing a well-known voice, she hastily
lifted up her eyes, and screamed out in an accent of surprise, Good Heaven! may
I credit my senses? My dear Mrs BRATT, my kind neighbor, is it really you that
I see? Here she found herself clasped in her friend's arms, who, after a long
subsiding sigh, broke into ^ears. The tumult of passion at length abating --
"Could I have guessed, my MARIA," said she, that you was here, my visit should
not have been deferred a moment after your arrival; but I have mourned with a
sister in affliction, (permit me to present her to you,) and while our hearts
were wrung with each other's distress, alas! we inquired after no foreign
calamity. Being all seated, I dare not, resumed MARIA, ask after your family; I
am a^^^id you only have escaped to tell me of them. -- Not so, my sister, cried
Mrs. BRATT; but if you can bear the recollection of your misfortunes, do oblige
me with the recital. The ladies joined their entreaty, and Mrs. KITTLE complied
in a graceful manner.

After some time spent in tears, and pleasing melancholy, tea was brought in;
and toward sunset Mrs. D -- invited the company to walk in the garden, which
being very small, consisted only of a parterre, at the farther end of which
stood an arbor covered with a grape-vine. Here being seated, after some chat
on indifferent subjects, MARIA desired Mrs. BRATT, (if agreeable to the
company) to acquaint her with the circumstances of her capture. They all bowed
approbation; and after some hesitation Mrs. BRATT began: --

My heart, ladies, shall ever retain a sense of the happiness I enjoyed in the
society of Mrs. KITTLE and several other amiable persons in the vicinage of
Schochticook, where I resided. She in particular cheered my lonely hours of
widowhood, and omitted nothing that she thought might conduce to my serenity. I
had two sons; she recommended the education of them to my leisure hours. I
accepted of her advice, and found a suspension of my sorrows in the execution
of my duty. They soon improved beyond my capacity of teaching. RICHARD, my
eldest, was passionately fond of books, which he studied with intense
application. This naturally attached him to a sedentary life, and he became the
constant instructive companion of my evening hours. My youngest son, CHARLES,
was more volatile, yet not less agreeable; his person was charming, his wit
sprightly, and his address elegant. They often importuned me, at the
commencement of this war, to withdraw to Albany; bu^, as I apprehended no
danger, (the British troops being stationed above us, quite from Saratoga to
the Lake) I ridiculed their fea^s.

One evening as my sons were come in from reaping, and I was busied in
preparing them a dish of tea, we were surprised by a discharge of muskerry near
us We all three ran to the door, and beheld a party of Indians not twenty paces
from us. Struck with astonishment, we had no power to move; and the savages
again firing that instant, my CHARLES dropped down dead beside me. Good God!
what were my emotions! But language would fail, should I attempt to describe
them. My surviving son then turning to me, with a countenance expressive of the
deepest horror, urged me to fly. "Let us be gone this instant," said he; a
moment determines our fate. O my mother! you are already lost. But despair had
swallowed up my fears; I fell shrieking on the body of my child, and rending
away my hair, endeavored to recall him to life with unavailing laments.
RICHARD, in the meanwhile, had quitted me, and the moment after I beheld him
mounted on horseback, and stretching away to the city. The Indians fired a
volley at him, but missed, and, I flatter myself that he arrived safe. And now,
not all my prayers and tears could prevent the wretches from scalping my
precious child. But when they rent me away from him, and dragged me from the
house, my grief and rage burst forth like a hurricane. I execrated their whole
race, and called for eternal vengeance to crush them to atoms. After a while I
grew ashamed of my impetuosity: the tears began again to flow silently on my
cheek; and, as I walked through the forest between two Indians, my soul grew
suddenly sick and groaned in me; a darkness, more substantial than Egyptian
night, fell upon it* and my existence became an insupportable burden to me. I
looked up to Heaven with a hopeless kind of awe, but I murmured no more at the
dispensations of my God; and in this frame of sullen resignation I passed the
rest of my journey, which being nearly similar to Mrs. KITTLE's, I shall avoid
the repetition of. And now permit me (said she, turning to the French ladies)
to acknowledge your extreme goodness to me. I was a stranger, sick and naked,
and you took me in. You indeed have proved the good Samaritan to me, pouring
oil and wine in my wounds. -- Hush, hush! (cried Madame DE ROCHE,) you estimate
our services at too high a rate. I see you are no connoisseur in minds: there
is a great deal of honest hospitality in the world, though you have met with so
little.

I now reject, (interrupted Mrs. BRATT,) all prejudices of education. From my
infancy have I been taught that the French were a cruel perfidious enemy, but I
have found them quite the reverse.

Madame DE R. willing to change the subject, accosted the other stranger, --
Dear Mrs. WILLIS, shall we not be interested likewise in your misfortunes? --
Ah! do, (added Mademoiselle V.) my heart is now sweetly tuned to melancholy. I
love to indulge these divine sensibilities, which your affecting histories are
so capable of inspiring. -- MARIA then took hold of Mrs. WILLIS's hand, and
pressed her to oblige them. -- Mrs. WILLIS bowed. She dropped a few tears; but
assuming a composed look, she began: --

I am the daughter of a poor clergyman, who being confined to his chamber by
sickness* for several years, amused himself by educating me. At his death,
finding myself friendless, and without money, I accepted the hand of a young
man who had taken a leased farm in Pennsylvania. He was very agreeable, and
extravagantly fond of me. We lived happily for many years in a kind of frugal
affluence. When the savages began to commit outrages on the frontier
settlements, our neighbors, intimidated at their rapid approaches, erected a
small fort, surrounded by a high palisade. Into this the more timorous drove
their cattle at night, and one evening, as we were at supper, my husband (being
ordered on guard) insisted that I should accompany him with the children (for I
had two lovely girls, one turned of thirteen years, and another of six months.)
My SOPHIA assented to the proposal with joy. Mamma* (said she,) what a merry
woman the Captain's wife is; she will divert us the whole evening, and she is
very fond of your company: come, I will take our little CHARLOTTE on my arm,
and papa will carry the lantern. I acceded with a nod; and already the dear
charmer had handed me my hat and gloves, when somebody thundered at the door.
We were silent as death, and instantly after plainly could distinguish the
voices of savages conferring together. Chilled as I was with fear, I flew to
the cradle, and catching my infant, ran up into a loft. SOPHIA followed me all
trembling, and panting for breath cast herself in my bosom. Hearing the Indians
enter, I looked through a crevice in the floor, and saw them, with menacing
looks, seat themselves round the table, and now and then address themselves to
Mr. WILLIS, who, all pale and astonished, neither understood nor had power to
answer them. I observed they took a great pleasure in terrifying him, by
flourishing their knives, and gashing the table with their hatchets. Alas! this
sight shot icicles to my soul; and, to increase my distress, my SOPHIA's little
heart beat against my breast, with redoubled strokes, at every word they
uttered.

Having finished their repast in a gluttinous manner, they laid a firebrand in
each corner of the chamber, and then departed, driving poor Mr. WILLIS before
them. The smoke soon incommoded us; but we dreaded our barbarous enemy more
than the fire. At length, however, the flames beginning to invade our retreat,
trembling and apprehensive, we ventured down stairs; the whole house now glowed
like a furnace; the flames rolled toward the stairs, which we hastily
descended; but just as I sat my foot on the threshold of the door, a piece of
timber, nearly consumed through, gave way, and fell on my left arm, which
supported my infant, miserably fracturing the bone. I instantly caught up my
fallen lamb, and hastened to overtake my SOPHIA. There was a large hollow tree
contiguous to our house, with an aperture just large enough to admit so small a
woman as I am. Here we had often laughingly proposed to hide our children, in
case of a visit from the olive colored natives. In this we now took shelter;
and being seated some time, my soul seemed to awake as it were from a vision of
horror: I lifted up my eyes, and beheld the cottage that lately circumscribed
all my worldly wealth and delight, melting away before the devouring fire. I
dropped a tear as our apostate first parents did when thrust out from Eden.

The world lay all before them, where to choose their place of rest, and
Providence their guide. Ah, EVE! thought I, had thou been like me, solitary,
maimed, and unprotected, thy situation had been deplorable indeed. Then
pressing my babe to my heart, How quiet art thou, my angel, (said I^) sure --
sure, Heaven has stilled thy little plaints in mercy to us. -- Ah! (sobbed
SOPHIA,) now I am comforted again that I hear my dear mamma's voice. I was
afraid grief would have forever deprived me of that happiness. And here she
kissed my babe and me with vehemence. When her transports were moderated. How
cold my sister is, (said she,) do wrap her up warmer, mamma; poor thing, she is
not used to such uncomfortable lodging.

The pain of my arm now called for all my fortitude and attention; but I
forbore to mention this afflicting circumstance to my daughter.

The cheerful swallow now began to usher in the dawn with melody; we timidly
prepared to quit our hiding place; and turning round to the light, I cast an
anxious eye of love on my innocent, wondering that she slept so long. But oh!
horror and misery! I beheld her a pale, stiff corpse in my arms; (suffer me to
weep, ladies, at the cruel recollection.) It seems the piece of wood that
disabled me, had also crushed my CHARLOTTE's tender skull, and no wonder my
hapless babe was quiet. I could no longer sustain my sorrowful burden, but
falling prostrate, almost insensible at the dreadful discovery, uttered nothing
but groans. SOPHIA's little heart was too susceptible for so moving a scene.
Distracted between her concern for me, and her grief for the loss of her dear
sister, she cast herself beside me, and with the softest voice of sorrow,
bewailed the fate of her beloved CHARLOTTE -- her sweet companion -- her
innocent, laughing play-fellow. At length we rose, and SOPHIA, clasping all
that remained of my cherub in her arms, Ah! (said she,) I did engage to carry
you, my sister, but little did I expect in this distressing manner. When we
came in sight of the fort, though I endeavored to spirit up my grieved child,
yet I found my springs of action begin to move heavily, my heart fluttered, and
I suddenly fainted away. SOPHIA* concluding I was dead, uttered so piercing a
cry, that the sentinel looking up, immediately called to those in the fort to
assist us. When I recovered, I found myself in a bed encircled by my kind
neighbors, who divided their expressions of love and condolement between me
and my child. I remained in the fort after this; but, ladies, you may think,
that bereft as I was of so kind a husband and endearing child, I soon found
myself solitary and destitute. I wept incessantly; and hearing nothing from my
dear WILLIS, I at length resolved to traverse the wilds of Canada in pursuit of
him. When I communica^ed this to my friends, they all strongly opposed it; but
finding me inflexible, they furnished me with some money and necessaries, and
obtained a permission from the Governor to let me go under protection of a flag
that was on the way. Hearing likewise that a cartel was drawn for an exchange
of prisoners, I sat out, flushed with hope, and with indefatigable industry and
painful solicitude, arrived at Montreal, worn to a skeleton (as you see ladies)
with fatigue.

I omitted not to inquire of every officer, the names of prisoners who had been
brought in. At length I understood that Mr. WILLIS had perished in jail, on his
first arrival, of a dysentery. -- Here my expectations terminated in despair. I
had no money to return with, and indeed but for my SOPHIA no inclination -- the
whole world seemed dark and cheerless to me as the fabled region of Cimmeria,
and I was nigh perishing for very want, when Mrs. BRATT, hearing of my
distress, sought my acquaintance: she kindly participated my sorrows, and too
-- too generously shared her purse and bed with me. This, ladies, is the story
of a brokenhearted woman, nor should I have intruded it in any other but the
house of mourning.

Here she concluded, while the ladies severally embracing her, expressed their
acknowledgments for the painful task she had complied with to oblige their
curiosity. -- "Would to Heaven!" said Madame DE R. that the brutal nations were
extinct, for never -- never can the united humanity of France and Britain
compensate for the horrid cruelties of their savage allies.

They were soon after summoned to an elegant collation; and having spent best
part of the night together, the guests retired to their respective homes.

During two years, in which the French ladies continued their bounty and
friendship to Mrs. KITTLE, she never could gain the least intelligence of her
husband. Her letters, after wandering through several provinces, would often
return to her hands unopened. Despairing at length of ever seeing him, "Ah!"
she would say to Mrs. D --, my poor husband has undoubtedly perished, perhaps
in his fruitless search after me, and I am left to be a long -- long burden on
your goodness, a very unprofitable dependant.

In her friend's absence she would descend into the kitchen, and submit to the
most menial offices; nor could the servants prevent her; however, they apprised
Mrs. D -- of it, who seized an opportunity of detecting her at her labor.
Being baffled in her humble attempt by the gentle reproaches of her indulgent
patroness, she sat down on the step of the door, and began to weep. I believe,
good Mrs. D --, said she, were you a hard task-master, that exacted from these
useless hands the most slavish business, I could acquit myself with
cheerfulness: my heart is like ice, that brightens and grows firmer by
tempests, but cannot stand the warm rays of a kind. sun. Mrs. D -- was
beginning to answer, when hearing a tumult in the street, they both hasted to
the door, and MARIA, casting her eyes carelessly over the crowd, in an instant
recognized the features of her long-lamented husband, who sprang toward her
with an undescribable and involuntary rapture: but the tide of joy and surprise
was too strong for the delicacy of her frame: she gave a faint exclamation, and
stretching out her arms to receive him, dropped senseless at his feet. The
succession of his ideas was too rapid to admit describing. He caught her up,
and bearing her in the hall, laid his precious burden on a settee, kneeling
beside her in a speechless agony of delight and concern. Meanwhile the
spectators found themselves wonderfully affected -- the tender contagion ran
from bosom to bosom -- they wept aloud; and the house of joy seemed to be the
house of lamentation. At length MARIA opened her eyes and burst into a violent
fit of tears -- Mr. KITTLE, with answering emotions, silently accompanying her;
then clasping his arms endearingly round her, "It is enough, my love," said he,
we have had our night of affliction, and surely this blessed meeting is a
presage of a long day of future happiness; let me kiss off those tears, and
show by your smiles that I am indeed welcome. MARIA then bending fondly forward
to his bosom, replied, sighing, Alas! how can your beggared wife give you a
proper reception? she cannot restore your prattling babes to your arms -- she
comes alone! Alas! her presence will only serve to remind you of the treasures
-- the filial delights you have lost! -- "God forbid," answered he, that I
should repine at the loss of my smaller comforts, when so capital a blessing as
my beloved MARIA is so wonderfully restored to me. Here he was in civility
obliged to rise and receive the compliments of Mrs. BRATT, Mrs. WILLIS, and
Madame DE R --, who, hearing of his arrival, entered just then, half breathless
with impatience and joy. The company increased; an elegant dinner was prepared:
in short, the day was devoted to pleasure; and never was satisfaction more
general -- festivity glowed on every face, and complacency dimpled every cheek.

After tea MARIA withdrew in the garden, to give her beloved an account of what
had befallen her during their separation. The eloquence of sorrow is
irresistible. Mr. KITTLE wept, he groaned, while all impassioned (with long
interruptions of grief in her voice) she stammered through her doleful history;
and yet she felt a great satisfaction in pouring her complaints into a bosom
whose feelings were in unison with here is -- they wept -- they smiled -- they
mourned, and rejoiced alternately, with an abrupt transition from one passion
to another.

Mr. KITTLE, in return, informed her, that having thrown himself into the army,
in hopes of ending a being that grew insupportable under the reflection of past
happiness, he tempted death in every action wherein he was engaged, and being
disappointed, gave himself up to the blackest melancholy. This gloomy scene, he
observed, would soon have been closed by some act of desperation; but one
evening, sitting pensive in his tent, and attentively running over the
circumstances of his misfortunes, a thought darted on his mind that possibly
his brother HENRY might be alive. This was the first time the idea of any one
of his family's surviving the general murder had presented itself to him, and
he caught at the flattering suggestion as a drowning wretch would at a plank.
"Surely, surely," said he, my brother lives -- it is some divine emanation
lights up the thought in my soul -- it carries conviction with it: I will go
after him -- it shall be the comfort and employment of my life to find out this
dear brother -- this last and only treasure. Persuaded of the reality of his
fancy, he communicated his design to a few of his military friends; but they
only laughed at his extravagance, and strongly dissuaded him from so wild an
undertaking. Being discouraged, he desisted; but shortly after, hearing that a
company of prisoners (who were enfranchised) were returning to Quebec, he got
permission to accompany them. After a very fatiguing journey he arrived at
Montreal, and was immediately introduced to the General Officer, who patiently
heard his story, and treated him with great clemency. Having obtained leave to
remain a few days in town, he respectfully withdrew, and turning down a street
he inquired of a man who was walking before him, where lodgings were to be let?
The stranger turned about, civilly taking off his hat, when Mr. KITTLE,
starting back, grew as pale as ashes -- Oh, my God! cried he, panting, oh!
HENRY, is it you! is it indeed you! No, it cannot be. Here he was ready to
fall; but HENRY, with little less agitation, supported him; and a tavern being
at hand, he led him in. The master of the hotel brought in wine, and they drank
off many glasses to congratulate so happy a meeting. When their transports were
abated, HENRY ventured to tell him that his MARIA was living and well. This was
a weight of joy too strong for his enfeebled powers -- he stared wildly about.
At length, recovering himself, "Take care, HENRY," said he, "this is too tender
a point to trifle upon." -- "My brother," replied HENRY, be calm, let not your
joy have a worse effect than your grief -- they both came sudden, and it
behooves a man and a christian to show as much fortitude under the one as the
other. -- Alas! I am prepared for some woeful deception, cried Mr. KITTLE; but,
"HENRY, this suspense is cruel." -- By the eternal God! rejoined his brother,
your MARIA, your wife, is in this town, and if you are composed enough, you
shall immediately see her. Mr. KITTLE could not speak -- he gave his hand to
HENRY, and while (like the Apostles friends) he believed not for joy, he was
conducted to her arms, and found his bliss wonderfully real.

THE STORY OF HENRY AND ANNE. FOUNDED ON FACT.
HENRY and ANNE were born in Germany, in the Marquisate of Bade^^ their parents
dwelt contiguous to each other, and the most sentimental friendship subsisted
between the two families. ANNE was graceful even in infancy; HENRY tall and
majesty, strong and active, though not regularly beautiful their poverty early
introduced them on the fields: their little hands were lacerated by the bearded
grain, and their tender feet wounded by the asperities of a flinty soil. ANNE's
lovely complexion soon lost its delicate whiteness, but was amply recompensed
by the bloom of luxuriant health. Whilst they toiled together in gathering the
stones from the green surface of a meadow, or weeding the vines, the courtly
passenger would stop and gave with pity to see so much elegance and beauty of
form joined to the servility of unremitted labor. HENRY redoubled his
exertions constantly to lessen little ANNE's fatigue; and when their task was
done, they rejoined their companions, assisted them to complete their work, and
with gleeful hearts sported themselves to sleep.

Nor were the old farmers displeased to see the growing affection between their
children: "We shall soon be closer united," said they: HENRY and ANNE (our only
offspring) shall cement our friendship, and perpetuate our names to remotest
centuries. Alas! in the midst of this enchanting vision, an officer, attended
by a file of musketeers, demanded HENRY. He was now seventeen, full grown, and
must enter his Lord's service. It was in vain to expostulate. Without a
farewell sigh from ANNE, or scarce an embrace from his distracted parents, he
must depart. Being escorted to a distant town, he was there initiated into all
the military manoeuvers, and three weeks after joined his regiment, which left
that part of Germany soon after. HENRY's disappointed love sunk him into
melancholy -- he grew ^^^perate, and negligent of life. In a very warm action,
being engaged with the enemy in sight of the General, he vent^red himself
rashly, and fought without caution. It was called intrepidity, and he was
advanc^d to the rank of sergeant. Having acquitted himself with honor, and the
time of his service being elapsed, his Captain gave him his discharge, with
previous offe^ (...) promotion if he would continue in his company. I blush to
decline my officer's generous proposal, said HENRY; but it is better to be
virtuous than fortunate -- I have left three broken hearts at home, I must
hasten to heal them -- the soft voice of my ANNE calls me from the thunder of
Bellona. -- "Go," said his commander in a softened tone, I know what love is --
my HENRY can be happy, I only great; then dropping a tear, Go HENRY -- farewell
-- I know you deserve to be happier than I am.

The interview between the lovers was tender and romantic. -- ANNE, to console
her HENRY's parents, remitted not her assiduities to please them. She
cultivated their garden; she culled the richest fruit and brightest flowers to
amuse them: her active fingers extended an imperceptible thread of flax to
provide them linen of finer texture than the product of Egyptian looms: she
resisted the importunity of HENRY's rivals heroically, while her old father,
weeping for joy, commended her constancy. "My child," said he, thou art no
disgrace to thy lineage; HENRY loves thee, he is worthy of thee, and worthy of
every sacrifice thou can make him; cheer up my little one, he will soon
return. -- No, my father, some inexorable shot will cleave his brave heart. So
saying, she rose agitated from weeding a bed of lupins, when a foot soldier
approached. Scarce had the old man civilly accosted the stranger over the
hedge, when ANNE screamed out, Oh heaven! father, it is our HENRY, our own
HENRY. -- In an instant the family was convened; from tears they made abrupt
transitions to mirth, which soon caught the cars of the good neighbors, who
came in crowds to felicitate the soldier's arrival. His parents invited them to
return the next day and share the general festivity, which they freely
accepted, and assisted to slaughter the poultry and fattest lambs. The
entertainment was truly pastoral. The tables were spread in the vineyard,
beneath verdant arches that were impurpled by weighty clusters of grapes; a
gushing fountain close by dispensed a delicious coolness, and baskets of
flowers filled the air with balmy sweetness. To heighten the scene, the silvery
airs of music, from the violin, harp, and mellifluous flute, softly circled
through the sky. In short, a priest was called and our lovers married.

For two years peace and plenty were their household gods; but then HENRY seeing
a family increasing, began to reflect on the means of supporting them. He had
no land, and had never been taught any mechanical branch of business; however,
after taking advice, he purchased a small stock of merchandise, and prepared to
follow the army. The good parents exhausted themselves to increase his
commodities. "Be frugal and cautious, son," said they; "remember ANNE and her
babe." -- "Ah!" cried HENRY, embracing them, if I dishonor my parents, take
ANNE from my bosom, give my paradise to a stranger, and let me die the death of
a villain!

HENRY visited his beloved friends frequently, but the army being stationed at
a considerable distance from them, after an interval of three years, he sighed
in absence near eleven months; he had accumulated eight hundred pounds in cash
by extraordinary application, which compensated in some measure this painful
separation, when he received a summons to return home. It seems his
father-in-law had been dispossessed of his farm, through inability to discharge
his rent. The good old man retired with his child to HENRY's parents, where
they were cordially received; but grief made insensible inroads in his
constitution; in less than three weeks (having languished a few days) he died
in ANNE's arms.

HENRY burst into tears at the news. Cruel parent, said he, you knew my happy
situation -- why did you let the canker of disappointment abridge your days? my
treasure was your own -- I am infinitely your debtor -- I never yet earned my
RACHEL. -- Having paid a tribute of sincere drops of gratitude and love, he
sighed and went to bed; he slumbered, and saw his ANNE smile with joy at the
gold and silver he poured at her feet: his little ones climbed his knees, and
seemed to be delighted with the glitter of his treasures: his enamoured fancy
called up every pleasing idea to sport round his innocent family, when he was
suddenly awaked by four ruffians, who entered his tent well armed; and,
advancing to his bed, bade him be silent, at the peril of immediate
destruction. Regardless of their menaces, he started up and demanded their
business; upon which they seized and bound him hand and foot, then fell to
rummaging the tent. They soon discovered his money -- what a glorious booty! In
vain did he plead, soothe, and threaten. Leave me a few pieces: leave me but a
little, a very little, to carry me to my poor wife and children. His rhetoric
made no impression -- they left him not a sous.

Being at some distance from the camp, his repeated calls for help were not
heard; at length, in the silence of midnight, a sentinel distinguished a
mournful cry for assistance, and sent a couple of veterans to reconnoitre*
HENRY, now relieved from corporeal confinement, began to feel his heart
contracted and shrunk by ideas of approaching beggary. He looked round him; the
whole creation seemed comfortless and desolate. How shall I behold my domestic
blessings? how shall I look ANNE in the face? would to God I had tilled some
sterile spot of ground, we would have been content in indigence; nature would
have been satisfied with herbs and lentils. Cursed ambition to be rich has
ruined me, and I am a traitor to my family. With these bitter reflections the
day broke, and having collected the little furniture of his tent, he disposed
of it to advantage to the humane soldiery, who universally loved him and pitied
his misfortunes. Having secured his cash in a small bag, he set off with a
reluctant step for home. In vain did the birds carol on the elms that shaded
the road. In vain did the ploughman whistle gleefully, and the lambs wanton
over the green hillocks. No enlivening scene could dissipate his melancholy.

He protracted his journey through fear of being too soon the messenger of ill
tidings. On the second day at noon, having bought a loaf of bread, he sat down
by a rivulet to eat; his tears flowed apace, and he began to deliberate whether
he should return to ANNE or not. He counted his little store, and fell listless
on the grass through despondency. While thus he lay sadly ruminating, a
handsome couple (thinking themselves unobserved) passed through the bushes.
"Alas!" said the man, for six years my EMMA you have sustained the most bitter
poverty with your unfortunate husband. My heart breaks under the oppression of
your misery; I cannot bear it -- return I beseech you, to the Baron; ask his
fatherly forgiveness; he will reinstate you to favor -- and lovely EMMA I
shall die content. -- "I smile," replied the fair one, at your ignorance: gold
and gems and banquets have no charms for me; my heart was formed for social
happiness; I love you, and deprived of your company I should languish and die,
whereas I feel no uneasiness at the absence of riches; we have enough to
subsist comfortably on, though it be coarse; so pray, my dear, drop this
unwelcome delicacy. Here they went out of hearing, and HENRY, struck with the
lady's sentiments, began to resume courage. "I am ashamed," said he, at my want
of fortitude; here is voluntary poverty accepted in preference of an anxious
mind: surely ANNE will have as much philosophy in that article as the
unfortunate EMMA: what a destruction have I escaped! had I wandered away from
my desolate family, we had all been miserable indeed. So thinking, he took his
pack on his shoulders and proceeded or his journey.

The fourth evening, passing leisurely by his deceased parent's door, he
involuntarily turned back and walked in. Here his feelings received a new
shock. Strange faces accosted him -- rudeness and dirt had usurped the place
where ANNE once reigned the goddess of civility and neatness. The green
enclosure, surrounded by jessamine, was trampled on by swine, and lean cattle
browzed on the vines that mantled over ANNE's window. He turned with grief and
disgust from this mortifying scene, and had gone but a little farther, when
ANNE descrying him at a distance, flew like a bird across the meadow, and fell
into his arms. After the first emotions of transport were subsided, HENRY
affectionately embraced his lovely babes and tender parents, who met him on the
road. I miss but one from this beloved company, said HENRY. -- ANNE burst into
tears. My HENRY, you will miss the chief of our good neighborhood -- our
indulgent old Lord is dead; his tyrannical heir oppresses his tenants with
heavy rents and severe exactions, and they have unanimously agreed to shelter
themselves from this great burden, by flying to the wilds of America.

After they were seated in the house, What your spouse advances, said the old
man, is true; and your aged parents would have also been forced to venture
their trembling limbs and gray hairs over the dangerous ocean, had not our
blessed HENRY's industry secured us a competency. This trial was too severe.
HENRY changed countenance, and cast his eyes around with an alarming wildness.
What is the matter with my child? cried his mother. Alas! this encounter was
too sudden. Old and experienced as I am, I feel almost overcome with joy
myself. -- "Ah!" exclaimed her son (recollecting himself) fain would I conceal
from such endearing friends the motive of my distress; but I should expire in
the effort: forgive and pity a wretch who brings home nothing but misery -- who
can see his family fall to ruin, and yet live. -- All astonished they gazed at
each other in silence, while HENRY sobbed, unable to articulate a word. At
length ANNE, all shining through tears, drew nigh and kneeled before him --
Keep us not in suspense, my husband; pour your griefs into our bosoms, and
wrong us not by reserve; you can never bring misery to us whilst you remain
virtuous and loving as now. -- HENRY clasped the sad orator with passionate
fondness in his arms; and after a little hesitation acquainted them with the
particulars of his misfortune.

It was in vain to try to conceal their surprise and disoppointment, though
HENRY's affliction forbad them to fall into repining, or any expression of
discontent. By degrees their chagrin subsided. The poor acquiesce with greater
resignation to calamity than the rich, who seldomer meet with disappointment.
At last, by an insensible gradation, our pensive associates became blessed and
easy. A small repast was provided, and shutting out corrosive Care, they
indulged the hour of festivity with as much glee as if the robbers had restored
the money ten fold.

The story of HENRY's robbery was soon known, and his parents concluded that
their Lord would show some lenity to them; but finding him invariably cruel and
oppressive, they began to attend to the flattering informations about the New
World. -- "At least," said ANNE, we shall go into a land of simplicity -- the
artless savages subsist not by rapine and deceit: pride and hypocrisy and
avarice are strangers where luxury and titles are unknown. -- The old man
dissented from this opinion. Wherever the print of human footsteps have
appeared, there certainly, my child, all human vices follow, though often under
different appellatives; however, we must hazard this adventure. As the Lepers
said at Samaria* if we stay here we shall certainly perish, and if we go away,
at the worst, we can but die.

The ensuing week, as they were merrily chatting on the green before the door,
a sudden cloud overspread the heavens with blackness, which soon fell in a
torrent of rain, intermingled with thunder and lightning. The family retired in
the house; but HENRY hasted to drive the cattle and sheep to a place of
security. All wet and dropping with rain he was returning to the house, when an
elegant phaeton, attended by a number of domestics, stopped at the gate. A
gentleman handed out a lady, who seemed much affrighted with the storm, and
conducted her, with a delicate tenderness, to the door. HENRY opened it wide,
and bowing to the ground, desired them to walk in, presenting them each with a
chair. The noble air, and rich dresses of the new guests, awed our humble
rustics, who scarcely durst lift up their eyes at them, until the gentleman,
saluting the lady, inquired how his fair EMMA did after her fright. HENRY then
instantly recollecting the lady's countenance, with a modest apology for his
boldness, recounted his adventure at the brook -- I presume, added he, this
lady is the very same lovely EMMA whose noble disinterestedness made me blush
at my want of fortitude, and in effect saved my family from ruin. Here EMMA,
starting up, seized his hand -- I little thought, my kind friend, that our
conversation had an auditor at that time* but since you have been a witness of
my distress, rejoice with me in my present happy situation. He^ (...) resuming
her seat, while her spouse hung enamoured over her chair, she favored the
attentive circle with an abridgment of her history. --

I am the only child of the present Baron of Schauffhousen, who was
particularly cautious that my education should render me up an accomplished
lady to the world. On my first introduction into the grande monde, I found
myself encompassed by admirers, whose addresses I permitted from vanity; but
advancing to my twentieth year, my father grew solicitous that I should select
a husband from the number. It was in vain to remonstrate to him that my heart
was disengaged. He insisted on my accepting a partner for life. -- Choose, my
child, (said he,) throughout all the empire: you can ennoble a peasant by your
alliance with him, or cast a new luster over the escutcheon of a prince.

Seven months after this I became acquainted with my present husband; and not
doubting but that the Baron would accede to our union, I permitted the most
violent love to steal into my bosom. I acquainted him in a dutiful and
affectionate manner of my attachment, to which he made no reply; but turning
from me with a stern look (to my surprise) shut his closet door full in my
face. In ten minutes I received this note --

If you are determined, Miss, to debase the nobility of your birth, by a
marriage with your present object, I renounce you forever. Take your jewels and
clothes, and be miserable.

LODOVICUS STRELITZ.


I wept incessantly on the perusal of this cruel billet. I wrote one to my
lover, desiring him to forget me; but before I could dispatch it, my cousin
CHARLOTTE entered the room in great confusion. Begone, EMMA, said she, your
father is exasperated to a degree of madness. He bide me to give you this purse
of pistoles, and commands you to quit the castle instantly. -- "Alas!" said I,
sinking on the floor, I sacrifice my love to my duty. My dear cousin, tell my
old parent I am no longer a rebel to his will. Here I wept bitterly; but the
cruel CHARLOTTE called out, Here, JOSEPH, if the chaise is ready, hand your
young lady in. I am commissioned, dear EMMA, to wait on you to another lodging.
The angry Baron is from home, and I forfeit his favor if I do not oblige you
to submit. -- I then rose from my knees, and sullenly giving my hand to her,
said faintly, I see, CHARLOTTE, you have supplanted me; your undermining arts
have ruined me. She made no reply, and I suffered myself to be conducted to the
chaise. In two hours we came to a neat farm-house. CHARLOTTE formally took
leave of me, and I was shown to a small, clean apartment, where, in a fit of
agonizing despair, I threw myself upon a little bed. The woman of the house,
coming in, informed me that CHARLOTTE had advanced the pay for my year's board
at her house; and concluding I was some refractory child, gave me a long
lecture on obedience to parents. I scarcely heard her.

After a few days I wrote to my father. I begged the intercession of my
relations, but in vain; CHARLOTTE had stopped up every avenue to mercy. Finding
myself rejected totally, I at length yielded to the emotions of a soft passion,
and accepted the hand of my present husband. We lived happily during six years,
when, being seized with a pleu^isy, my physician made a report of my danger and
poverty to my father. We had a small hut on the common. The Baron's coach drove
up to the door. He stooped as he entered, and walked cautiously over the loose
uneven floor of my poor bed-room. I rose up surprised to see him; and as I sat
leaning against a pillow, the old man, in a gush of grief and remorse, fell on
my bed sobbing and unable to speak. My two little ones seeing me weep, came up
with visible concern. The eldest kissed my hand and said, Don't cry any more,
mamma, Mrs. MORELY has sent us bread and milk enough for two days. Here the
Baron redoubled his sighs and seemed nearly suffocated, when I feebly bent
toward him. O my father! am I then forgiven? But what he replied I know not --
I fainted on the pillow. To be short, he took us all home. CHARLOTTE's
indiscretions drew the odium of the family on her, and a broken lieutenant
carried her off to England. My father became excessively fond of my spouse and
children, and we are now upon a visit to an old aunt, who lays a dying, and to
whom I am sole heiress. My friends, continued she, I see by your looks my
history is not impertinent, and I acknowledge myself yet indebted to HENRY for
his obliging partiality to me.

ANNE, with pleased looks, immediately spread a table with a clean diaper
cloth, and placed on it several earthen plates, filled with the most delicious
fruits, some biscuits, a plate with honey-combs, and a flask of wine; while
HENRY, bowing low, thanked the lady for the honor she had done him. I bless
the Almighty, said HENRY, for so signally rewarding virtue. I even rejoice that
the Baron's cruelty gave your excellent qualities an opportunity to shine out
so philosophically in the test of poverty. Believe me, Madam, the luster of
many a soul lies hidden beneath the splendour of affluence, like the Grand
Duke's gems in the green vault. The gentleman smiled -- And many a sentimental
mind, my HENRY, said he, is circumscribed by poverty, and is of little utility
to mankind beyond the limits of his own family. I heartily wish you, my friend,
a fortune equal to your merit; in the meanwhile accept this trifle, handing him
a purse with twenty pistoles. HENRY, amid the highest confusion of blushing
gratitude, received the gift gracefully, and pressed his benefactors to accept
of his little regale. When they had eat, the sun began to shine out with new
luster after the rain, and EMMA proposed to proceed on their journey. She took
a tender leave of HENRY, and kissing ANNE, stepped into the carriage, which
instantly drove out of sight.

Soon after this agreeable interview, they prepared for their long voyage. The
pensive neighbors assembled, and having delivered their ca^tle to the
Marquis's steward, they all embarked in a small vessel on the Rhine. After a
tedious sail down the river, they were taken aboard a ship bound for New York,
in America. A fair wind sprung up; they soon lost sight of the Imperial shores,
and found themselves surrounded by a horizon of waters. The poor cottagers
viewed the uncommon scene with pleasure, mixed with dread; but in a few days
were accustomed to the prospect, and great agitation of the vessel. HENRY, to
lessen the expense, had conditioned to work out his passage; but he could
procure only very indifferent accommodations for his family, the ship being so
crowded. After a few weeks sail ANNE's eldest son sickened and died, and the
mournful parents, with agonizing hearts, committed the babe of their hopes, the
darling of their bosoms, to the waves. There sinks my child, cried ANNE,
weeping, in the depth of the wild ocean: instead of slumbering in my arms, he
is gone to be the food of sea monsters. HENRY supported and comforted her. We
have another, my beloved; let us not sin away the only remaining little one by
fruitless repinings; our son is ascended to his Creator; it is not him that
welters in the deep: O! grieve not that he is taken from the evil to come; from
evils which we shall yet sorrow over! Wisely and mercifully has Providence
proportioned our sufferings to our strength, and given the lenient hand of Time
power to mollify those griefs he cannot cure. In a little space ANNE's sorrows
sunk into a languid serenity. She began to smile as usual, and HENRY was happy.

They had a tedious passage; but at length, one moonshine night, the sailors
cried out, "land!" In a moment they all crowded upon deck: it was very calm,
and near day: a gentle south breeze arose soon after, and by sunrise they
clearly distinguished the little islands covered with verdure, and the white
beach on the bold continent. As they sailed up the Narrows, with a f^ir wind,
the strangers admired the beauty of the country, which they little expected to
find so well cultivated. When they were anchored in the harbor, (...)
requested a s^^ll-boat to go on shore; upon whi^^ an Engli^h sail^r offered his
assistance, rallying him a little; Why, demme brother, these people cannot
understand your gibberish; they will set you in the stocks for a Jesuit. They
got on shore, and the sailor procured for HENRY's little family a decent
apartment in Beaver-street. HENRY expressed his acknowledgments to the generous
sailor, for he really found he should never have been able, in his uncouth
broken language, to make the people understand him.

Here HENRY left his little family while he went to seek a spot on the vacant
lands of this state, where he might accommodate them. He sailed with a Dutch
skipper to Albany, and being informed by him where he might find such a place
as he wished for, he set off early the morning after his arrival on foot. As he
walked along the clovery banks of the Hudson, the long beams of the rising sun
glanced over its crumpled surface, and gilt the opposite shores with peculiar
beauty, the tall pines of the adjacent forest waved in solemn grandeur; the
thrush warbled in the thicket; and at every short distance a little fountain
cast its silvery waves across the way, and supplied the thirsty traveller with
a seasonable regale. Charmed with the scene, HENRY often stopped. He surveyed
each opening prospect with singular pleasure. The bright rays of Hope again
dawned upon his soul, and diffused its enlivening influence through his late
unch^ery heart. "Yes," said he, I feel that we shall, in the uncultivated
forests of America, enjoy that tranquillity which the inhospitable plain^ of
Europe denied us. Here he was interrupted by the appearance of a traveller^ who
no sooner perceived him than he f^ew to him. "O, my HENRY!" -- O, my FREDERICK^
were all they could say f^r some time. They clasped each other in their arms.
They wept and smiled alternately. It was a fellow soldier of HENRY's, a very
dear friend.

After their first transports were over HENRY told him all that had passed
since they parted; and the soldier, in return, told him, that soon after HENRY
quitted the army he lef^ it too, and in hopes of settling happily in the
village where he was born, had returned to it after an absence of some years;
but upon his arrival there, finding his parents dead, and the object of his
sincerest affection married to another, in a fit of grief and rage he left his
native country and came to America. And here, my friend, continued he, I am
happily situated for life; I have married an amiable woman* my neighbors are
all like brothers; and the acquisition of your dear family to our little circle
will add new pleasure to it.

The sun was setting when they entered the beautiful village of Tomhanick. The
farmers had finished their daily task, and were smoking by their doors, while
the younger tribe gamboled on the green before them: the blush of health hung
careless on every cheek, and content smoothed every brow. FREDERICK invited the
cottagers home with him; and as they were seated round a table covered with the
fruits of the season, he related to them the history of HENRY's life. The good
people were affected by the recital of his misfortunes, and promised to assist
him. You have been unfortunate, said an old man* but if you will live as we do*
you shall be happy. The next day they assembled, and in (...) course of two
days they finished a near l^g house for HENRY, such as they themselves dwelt in.

With a heart filled with gratitude and joy, he returned to his ANNE; he
repeated the particulars of his journey and its happy issue, and proposed their
removal to their new habitation as soon as possible. To this they all assented
with pleasure; and having packed up their little effects, and paid their rent,
they set out in a few days for Tomhanick. There they were received with the
most hearty welcomes; and as they were much reduced, each of the neighbors
contributed something to raise HENRY's stock, and make him happy. There they
reside still, beloved and respected by all, and find their industry rewarded by
prosperity and contentment. The four last paragraphs of this story were written
by Mrs. MARGARETTA V. FAUGERES -- indisposition having prevented Mrs. BLEECKER
(her mother) from completing it.


LETTERS.
MY DEAY GIRL,
WHEN I had wrote you my last narrative of distresses, I was afraid I had
discouraged you, by my complaints, from continuing a correspondence so pleasing
to me. My soul was then responsive only to the voice of grief, and the whole
world seemed cheerless to me as the fabled region of Cimmeria. The tempest of
my soul has again subsided: But, my dear, as you desire to know how we are
circumstanced, in compliance with your request, I must again wound your
feelings with a lamentable story: therefore, sadden your countenance
accordingly; and I stipulate, that between every paragraph you shall pause and
make a moral reflection.

The tories have visited many of our neighbors in a hostile manner, under the
disguise of Indians. This struck a panic over the stoutest of us; but yesterday
they seized an old man, and proposed the plundering of our house to him; he
declined it, though a disaffected person himself, and acquainted us with our
danger; also, that the banditti were thirty in number. You may guess (but it is
likely you will not) that our disorder on this exceeded the confusion of
AGRAMONTA's camp: every thing topsey-turvy, every one hurrying to secret some
little bundle in an unsuspected vacancy, and one dreadful apprehension
expelling another; for SUSAN and I ventured up in a loft without light, where
specter have been gamboling for at least a dozen centuries -- by report.

We still remain greatly alarmed, and never undress for bed. However, we have
passed the preceding season in security and pleasure* we have frequently had
sociable dances, which by way of eminence we style a ball. The most
disagreeable of our hours are when we admit politics in our female circle: this
never fails of opening a field of nonsensical controversy among our ladies.

I expect shortly to remove to Tomhanick again, where conversing with my absent
friends will be my chief amusement; and as I highly value a sensible
intelligent writer, I with I knew how to bribe cousin to favor me with her
letters also.

You have omitted, my dear, to mention a syllable of your good mamma and Mrs.
B. but even that is a presumption of their welfare. Please to tender my regards
to them, and accept of Mr. BLEECKER's. My little PEGGY begs leave to kiss your
hands; and I am, dear girl, with unaffected sincerity, your

ANN ELIZA BLEECKER.
C^jemans, April 12, 1779.
Tomhanick, April 8, 1780.
YOU are to look upon my letters as coming from the ends of the earth, (if a
scriptural phrase may be allowed) from an abstracted person who loves and
respects you, and who contemplates your character with the generous refinement
with which we think of our departed friends; that is, remembering their bright
qualities only, while their foibles pass not under the eye of partial
retrospection.

I believe, if ever we meet on this side eternity, my dear cousin, we shall
miss so many of our beloved friends as will effectually damp all transport; we
shall have to mourn over those that are gone, not rejoice over those who are
left. -- No, w^ shall never meet; unnumbered rivers, hills, and other obstacles
arise and intercept the very idea. But think not I dislike my situation here;
on the contrary, I am charmed with the lovely scene the spring opens around me.
-- Alas! the wilderness is within: I muse so long on the dead until I am unfit
for the company of the living.

I am very glad to hear that aunt P. is well; be pleased to send, my tender
regards to her. Desire your dear mamma and cousin B. to accept of my affection.
I receive letters frequently from S. S. he likewise presents his respects to
your family. Mr. B. and SUSAN and PEGGY desire to be remembered.

My dear, may you have happiness here equivalent to your merits, and future
bliss more than a mortal can deserve, is the sincere prayer of your assured
friend,

ANN ELIZA BLEECKER.
I have hinted to PEGGY that I never receive your letters.



MY DEAR COUSIN,
YOUR letter was more acceptable to me than the smiles of the returning spring
after this long rigid winter; (and indeed your silence contributed to make it
more tedious.) But I wonder what caprice of fortune intercepts all my epistles:
surely she owes you several voluminous pacquets which I committed to her care.
And since I am in a vein of wondering, I wonder how you could be so long
ignorant of the place of our KITTY's residence: her stay with us was short; the
charming city tempted her away: but shortly after she emigrated to Halfmoon,
five miles from here, where she remains.

As to myself, I have but little to inform you, unless it should be the history
of my heart, and even in that there is no novelty. I love the same persons, the
same amusements, the same opinions I did ten years ago. But my affection is
almost become a painful sensation to me; for, except my dear little family, all
my friends are dead, or far, far absent. This, the poet observes, is the
perquisite of long life: but my days have been evil and ^ew* I find no
disposition toward new attachments; and if but a few more of those I love drop
from me, I shall be left a wretched individual as I began.

How shall I apologize, my cousin, for writing in this strain to a fair lady
who would choose to hear of none but metaphorical deaths, and innocent murders
caused by her eyes? I will exclude these heavy ideas, and be gay to please my
sprightly correspondent.

I believe Hymen likes a southern clime: our northern blasts would blow out his
torch: but I hope he will return with the Zephyrs, to legitimate several
premature children in our neighborhood, which Love has produced in his
absence. I hear of but one marriage round here this winter. Our girls begin to
tremble. I believe I must send the following advertisement to LOUDON: --

TWO young ladies, possessed of many genteel accomplishments, amiable
qualities, and every grace of person, are willing to accept of any continental
officer as a partner for life, provided he be a gentleman of birth, fortune,
beauty, and honor.

N. B. None need apply but such as have signalized (...) in the present
contest. Upon second thoughts I will defer it, as we cannot possibly keep a
wedding in taste until the war is concluded.

I can rally no more, our situation is so truly critical as to render levity
criminal in us. The savages alarm us daily by sudden eruptions in the country.
-- Dear girl, my paper obliges me to conclude abruptly: you see I have scarce
room to present my love to friends, or style myself your affectionate

ANN ELIZA BLEECKER.

To Miss V --.
DEAR GIRL,
WHILE you are entertaining us with accounts of the brilliant dissipations of
the grande monde, in return I can only inform you that our trees here are
green, th^^ the birds sing, and the rivulets murmur; themes that will not bear
expatiating on without degenerating into downright poetry; and I design at
present to deliver my sentiments in prose. I find you are making greater
lamentations than ever JEREMIAH did at the removal of the camp. Be comforted my
dear; as your irresistiblenesses have certainly captured many hearts in it,
various will be the pretenses of the military petit moitres for remaining at
--; you will have a polite circle of invalids to escort you about the country,
nor be obliged to bend your ear to the unpolished love-tale of a sighing rustic.

But, my dear, I have been considering in what manner you will accommodate
yourselves again to the silent and soft melancholy of a rural scene. Major P
--, who is here, obviates this difficulty by observing, that the ^latter of
three young ladies tongues will be an excellent substitute for the thunder of
cannon, drums, etc. This I would by no means admit, assuring him you were a
superior order of beings to our common chit-chat females, wishing him no
greater punishment for his rash judgment than once to be exposed to an
electrical glance from your fine azure eyes. The Major was convinced, and now
sits in dust and ashes.

As for S****, I know of no one inhabitant of our forest she can reasonably
hope to make a conquest of except our Parson, who, though past his grand
climacteri^, is still a bachelor, and living within point blank shot of her
eyes. It is expected he must soon capitulate or die.

We live perfectly retired, and see very little company at present, as the
ladies in our vicinage are busy hoeing their corn and planting potatoes. As we
are not quite so well calculated for this rural employment, we left the
sunburned daughters of Labor yesterday, and went on pilgrimage to the
Half Moon, to visit Mrs. P****s. Though patience is my particular virtue, in
our return I was really guilty of some unphilosophic invectives against the
road: S**** gr^w captious and sullen: Mr. BLEECKER contracted his brows; but
just as he handed us from the carriage, we were presented with your letters,
which, in a few moments, restored us to our former complacency and good humor.
You see what a good effect your epistles have: if you have any thing of a
generous principle in your composition, I am sure this one motive will induce
you to write often, very often. I have enclosed some verses in compliance with
your desire: they were composed at the time of our retreat from BURGOYNE, the
most melancholy period of my life, so if they are too serious for the
volatility of a gay lady's ideas, hand them over to your good mamma, and I am
convinced she will excuse their imperfections, in respect of their moral
tendency; give my profound respects to her: please to tender my warmest
affection to Mrs. B. and accept the hand of sincere friendship from your

ANN ELIZA BLEECKER.
Tomhanick, June 12, 1779.
To Mr. B --.
Wednesday Evening, July 12, 1779 MY DEAR,
I Could not see the folly and deformity of my impetuous behavior this
morning, while blinded by passion; but after you was gone, when I felt
lonesome, and had leisure for reflection, when my fever returned, and I missed
that tender solicitude which always alleviated my pain when you was near, I
cannot describe how exquisite a compunction seized me; I have been lost the
whole day in sorrow. Good God! how inconsistent is the human mind! obstinate in
passion, and stormy as the Caspian; then again soft and yielding to persuasion,
as snow before the warm influence of a summer heaven; and yet perhaps this
great agitation of the spirits is meant to keep them from subsiding into a
state of insensibility, as strong winds prevent the waters of a lake from
stagnating.

I hope health and pleasure will attend you in your journey, and sometimes I
hope you will call in my idea to amuse your silent hours when you ride alone
through the lofty forest, or along the bank of some placid river, or over some
flowery mead, whose glowing gems glitter beneath the crystal globules of
morning; these objects inspire love and softness, and it is in such moments I
would fain have you think of me. My head aches, I must lie down.

Thursday Evening, July 22.
I HAVE been very sick, and kept my bed all day. Your absence increases my
disorder. O how solitary am I in this great city! Adieu, I am too unwell to sit
up.

Friday Evening, July 23.
I FIND myself better. Mrs. V. S. paid us a visit this afternoon: after tea she
persuaded me to walk out; the evening was lovely, the sun shone with a peculiar
softness through the humid atmosphere, and the glassy Hudson blushed at the
brightness of the painted heaven; (pardon any poetical phrenzy;) but not the
blushing river, nor glowing skies, nor smiling sun could conquer my invincible
melancholy. Here am I returned in as great a humor for moralizing as ever
PLATO was: however, I shall quit troubling you tonight with my reflections,
and perhaps tomorrow a more agreeable subject may occur. You see I continue
writing till some opportunity bids me close the dull journal. Good night.

ANN ELIZA BLEECKER.

To Miss V --.
Tomhanick, Oct. 29, 1779.
I Begin to resent your silence, my lovely cousin. I have sent a large paquet
to --, but find no return. I am not skilled in divination, yet I am tempted to
interpret your omission into an omen of declining friendship. No, I reject the
thought; my P****, my M****, have not such very mutable hearts; my letters have
either wandered astray, or my dear girls have been prevented answering as yet.

I can communicate nothing that may prolong this letter agreeably. The glories
of summer (my usual topic) languish and lose their luster; the airy cliffs and
deep forests echo nothing but storms; we have not even one bird left with whose
warbling I might delight you, nor one shade where I can comfortably recline to
describe a lovely landscape to your ladyship. When vernal suns shall again
kindle a glow of beauty on the face of Creation, I may possibly entertain you
with my Sylvan improvements; till then accept, dear girl, of tea-table news and
politics.

We are flattered here with an account that General WASHINGTON is preparing to
invest New York, that the enemy have evacuated Rhode Island and the Highland
forts, and that Count DE ESTAING's squadron is at the Hook. In consequence of
this our militia are ordered to garrison the frontier towns. Mr. B. marches
tomorrow to Fort-Edward, on a three months expedition; S**** and I, in the
interim, will be cloistered, shut up, imprisoned, (pray help me to a more
emphatical word to express our confinement,) for we have no other passable
gallant, and we dare not venture alone through our woods, which are infested at
present by wolves and bears, who growl even in our very courtyard. S****,
however, depends upon visiting the Albany weekly balls with an escort of
Majors, Cornets, and other military gentlemen; but she is ill-prepared for such
a scene, being, to my knowledge, in the thirty-third page of HOMER's Odyssy,
which will utterly disqualify her for such idle company, and I expect send her
to the loom with PENELOPE.

ANN ELIZA BLEECKER.

To Miss --.
YOU ask me whether I am sincere? To disguise my sentiments is an art I have
yet to learn. I wish, my dear, I had some spice of the hypocrite; I should then
possibly attain a better knowledge of this world, which deserves to be treated
with less candor. I have studied it but superficially; and the more I consider
it, the less I like it. You, my dear, have met with rough tempests in it; and
I, who have encountered rougher, can now sincerely sympathize with you. The
melancholy vein that ran through your letter wonderfully affected me. SUSAN too
has a kind susceptible heart: she feels, she resents your injuries.

Mr. POPE observes, that resignation is the most melancholy of all the virtues;
but we can combat Fate with no other weapon than Patience, and it is not so
hard to effect as we are apt to imagine; the practice is easy and full of
consolation. The over-wearied traveller sits down dejected, benighted, and
thinks he can go no farther; but he soon finds that very respite which was the
result of his despair, has enabled him to proceed cheerly on his journey. Trust
in God then my friend, he will make plain the rough path, and the crooked
straight, your virtues will survive obloquy and reproach, they will even ^hine
the brighter for it, and I am sure you have lost no real friend by it.

When will you come to us? we will shut out the world; we will shut out every
thing but love and joy. My heart tells me we will soon meet, and that is
happiness: Perhaps I may be deceived; but you never will, my dear, in believing
me to be your assured and tender friend,

ANN ELIZA BLEECKER.
Tomhanick, Sept. 3, 1779.
T^ Miss A. M. V --.
WHETHER a sedentary life has a heavy influence on my temper, or that I am
verging to a period of life in which we consider things in a moral point of
view only, I know not; but I find that I often suffer a constraint when I
affect to be gay, and trifle as formerly. But I am under no concern, my dear,
of disgusting you by being serious; your judgment is mature as my years, and
puts us on a level: however, I promise to be lively when I can, and expect you
will not give me cause to make the scriptural complaint, I have piped, and ye
have not danced; I have mourned, and ye have not wept.

We have been often alarmed this summer by unexpected eruptions of the savages
on the frontiers, and once in actual f^ight, when Mr. PARKS was killed at
Fort-Edward. I never saw so general a panic as that affair struck through the
country: but our late suffering by the rapid approaches of an enemy, is some
apology for the present apprehensions.

I hope the winter will restore tranq^illity to ^s, when we shall no more
tremble at the shaking of a leaf, but form a happy circle round the fireside.
Ah, my dear cousin! that circle has been imperfect since the death of my dear
mamma, my dear ABELLA. But let me not repine, I have had my days of more than
human happiness with them; let me also fit out my night of affliction content,
especially since it admits of much alleviation by the presence of a few
surviving beloved friends. Truly, my cousin, friendship is happiness: dissolve
every tender attachment, set the soul independent of all social connections,
and its existence will become comfortless and burdensome. A Paradise could not
satisfy ADAM without an EVE. A fine writer elegantly says, I see no sunshine
but in the face of a friend. To trifle a little with the metaphor -- I am
condemned to moonlight, as I see yours only by reflection; that is, by your
letters.

Dear girl, I admire (in common with the world) your wit and beauty; but it is
your good sense and amiable qualities have fixed me so entirely you
affectionate friend,

ANN ELIZA BLEECKER.
Tomhanick, Sept. 4, 1779.
To Miss V --.
MY VERY DEAR COUSIN,
IT was but yesterday I closed my letter to you; but an hour before my blessed
husband was torn (perhaps for ever) from my arms: he was taken by tories in
sight of his house. O! this cruel disaster has crushed me to the center: I am
sunk deeper than the grave. In the bitterness of my soul I forget to eat my
bread, and mingle my drink with tears. Alas! the man I have lost was too good,
too kind; his qualities were so gentle and amiable; he loved me with too great
an excess of tenderness; with so much delicacy and softness, as becomes very
painful for me to recollect: And his affection seemed to increase every day: he
was always endeavoring to please me; always anxious about my happiness. If I
looked but a little pensive, he was alarmed. It was but two nights ago that he
waked me by putting his hand across my forehead, and finding me in a cold
clammy sweat, he started up and got me a glass of wine. I was not sensible of
any disorder, but was surprised to find myself cold as a corpse. I sat up,
while he, kneeling by the bed side, grasped my hand in an agony of concern and
tenderness. Ah! my beloved, (said he) we must quit this place: you try to hide
your distress from me, but I perceive your mind is filled with dreadful
presages. Alas! my dear, pray for me, that the God of all compassions may pity
him, and restore him to my bleeding bosom. O! my sorrows are swelled to a
deluge; they overwhelm me. Almighty God, I sink, I perish under the stroke of
my hand! save me from temptation in this my hour of darkness and horror! Surely
this is a day of trouble and astonishment to me. O that we all rested in the
quiet grave together!

My dear cousin, try (if you please) to send the enclosed incoherent lines to
my brother. Adieu! adieu! and may the merciful God shower his blessings on your
family.

ANN ELIZA BLEECKER.
August, 1781.
To Miss V --.
MY DEAR PEGGY,
BY a most wonderful train of surprising providence my beloved husband is
restored to my arms. I shall, in the amplest manner, relate his happy escape;
but your gentle bosom can best tell you my happy feelings on this occasion. --
He was busied in the harvest, at a small distance from the house; but having
been previously menaced bv our inveterate tories, and my heart presaging some
heavy calamity, I pressed him to remain at home, but without effect. Toward
evening, parting from his laborers, he was returning home with old MERKEE, a
^hite servant, and a load of wheat; when six men, starting from among the
bushes, presented their fixed bayonets to his breast, bidding him to surrender
or he was a dead man. "I yield myself, cried he in surprise, provided you
promise to use me as a gentleman. -- "You shall be used," replied their leader,
"as a prisoner of war commonly is." Upon this they were taken farther in the
wood, where they pinioned my husband; a cutthroat looking Hessian leading him
by the rope with one hand, while the other h^ld a tomahawk, with which he swore
to dispatch the prisoner if pursued. But his great anguish for me made him
insensible of ferr; he begged, in the most pathetic terms* that the negro might
return to let me know what was become of him, but all in vain. MERKEE wept
bitterly -- "O*" said he, I am an old negro -- no matter for me; but my good
master is a young man, and my dear mistress will break her heart -- she will
die. After a most fatiguing and rapid march, toward day they encamped in a
deep swamp, where they produced General St. LEDGER's orders to take my husband
and bring him to Canada, but to use him tenderly, take particular care of his
health, and not to pillage his house. They had watched for him four days* on a
small as^ent which commanded a full view of whatever was transacted in our
family* but growing impatient, they had determined to storm the house that very
^ight; and swore, had they met with resistance, they would have sacrified the
wh^le family. The pa^ty consisted of three tories, one Hessian, and two
British; they were afterward joined by two more tories. The British were
humane, and wept whe^ever my sad spouse deplored the mournful fate of his wife
and child. After three nights march through horrid woods, (for they slept in
the day) my husband's entreaties prevailed on them to let the boy return with a
letter for me. When he read it to them, most of them shed tears, and swore it
was damned hard a gentleman should suffer so, but they must obey their orders.

When the fourth evening arrived, despairing of relief, (though he still looked
up to God with a hopeless kind of dependence,) three Yankees appeared a little
way off. One of whom, advancing, bade them surrender; but mistaking BLEECKER
for the commander (not observing his ropes,) he presented his piece to shoot
him through the head, when the tories, seeing a large party coming up, grounded
their arms. They all proceeded to Benningt^n, where the party is laid in irons;
while my spouse flew to my arms amid the shouts and congratulations of the
whole city, which had seemed wonderfully anxious about his fate. As to my own
wanderings, they were trifling. I fled instantly from a place where every
object presented me with horror. S --, after weeping for several minutes on my
neck, from a noble exertion of fortitude and friendship, insisted on remaining
there a while to have an eye to our effects. Our wailings filled the dismally
echoing forest; even the tory women melted into tears and compassion, and
several fainted in the hall. You may judge with what a broken heart I entered
Albany; but blessed be the Savior of sinners, I found it kind and sympathising
beyond my merits.

How my dear lover and myself have supported our trials I know not; but (as
MARIA of Molinicus observes) Heaven tempers the wind to the shorn lamb. The
hand of an Almighty Protector was so obvious in leading my husband through his
imminent dangers, and "hair breadth escapes," that on his return home (he told
me) he almost fainted under his gratitude, and had so firm a trust and reliance
on the goodness of God, that had he been surprised by a new party, he would
have been assuredly confident of again escaping. My hour of darkness and
astonishment was very great: I prayed with unknown fervency; but, O! I lifted
my broken heart in despair* great God! I will no more distrust thy love; I will
endeavor no more to offend thee. Ah! how insipid, how trifling appear the
honors, and riches, and vanities of life, to being held in the shadow of his
hand who is the living God; to having him on our side who is the Arbiter of all
nature! Rejoice with us, my cousin.

We shall now remain in Albany. I am, my beloved cousin, your happy and
affectionate

ANN ELIZA BLEECKER.
Albany, August 9, 1781.
To Mrs. F. at Mount-Hope.
I Sit down, dear BETSEY, to congratulate you on a new occasion of happiness to
your family, by the birth of another daughter. This agreeble event I never was
informed of until this morning, and though you may think my compliment of the
latest, yet I would rather be thought impertinent than unfriendly. I fancy you
exclaim with LEAH, (in your exultation) "a troop comes." Happy are you, my
cousin, enjoying health, peace and every domestic blessing. Content has
limited your desires to your own mansion; and there every innocent pleasure
waits to gratify them. All that remains is to wish you may insure those mercies
by a grateful disposition to the giver of them.

Our situation is more precarious. Today* happy in our Sylvan recess,
surrounded by blooming gardens, orchards, and well cultivated fields; the whole
valley echoing with the bleatings of sheep, etc. and an air of tranquillity and
plenty diffused around our cottages: tomorrow, even this very night, the
destroying savage may change this pleasing prospect into desolation and
^ndistinguished ruin: and yet I am unwilling (...) my beloved retreat, the
scene of many recent sorrows to me, but (let me confess with pleasing
recollection) of many, many former blessings The death of my dear mother has
produced a dreadful chasm in my family; and though I have enough round me whose
tender assiduities would console me se^^^le^s misfortune, so capital a loss I
shall mourn through life. I know, by former observation* dear BETSEY, that you
have a very feeling heart: you cannot look back to the period when your mother
and mine interchanged the most delicate offices of friendship, and sat us an
example of the brightest virtue, without a sentiment of gratitude and regret
for their loss; even now their image rises to my fancy, pure, lovely and placid
as while among us: ah! how infinitely exalted and improved by their change!
Pardon this flight, my dear; but let me further insist, that as our education
has given us a similarity of ideas, and an equal bias to friendship, such
congenial minds ought not to lapse into a neglect of each other: permit me,
therefore, my lovely Mrs. F. to renew our obsolete correspondence, and after an
interval of many years, to assure you that I am still, with every sentiment of
regard, your

ANN ELIZA BLEECKER.
Tomhanick, Sept. 6.
To Mis^ M. V --.
I Must decline your compliments (or rather oblique flatteries) my lovely
cousin; my reason will not admit of them, whatever latitude my vanity might
insist on. My rustic muse inhabits too frigid a clime to practice any musical
notes; yet, like all mediocre singers, she is willing to oblige company,
without deferring the favor long, for fear of enhancing their expectation.

I cannot proceed a sentence further without expressing my abhorrence of that
base villain ARNOLD. I think there is wanting in language an appellative,
suitable to his character. Strange! the for a little ^ey a man would bear to
have his reputation stigmatized to eternity, and that a hero, as he was styled.
What a contrast between him and the heroes of antiquity, who sacrificed every
thing, even life, to their fame! Yet my resentment subsides into contempt, when
I reflect what an abject, vile wretch General ARNOLD is become. The land he has
treated with ingratitude, cruelty and perfidy, abhors him, and no doubt the
nation he attempted to serve despises him. A traitor is a general object of
scorn; and if his feelings are not quite lost in apathy, surely he may borrow
CAIN's exclamation* My punishment is greater than I can bear! nor should I be
surprised to hear he had concluded his villainy by some act of desperation. In
consequence of his infernal treaty, a party of twelve hundred tories, Indians,
etc. have made a des^ent on our n^rthern frontiers -- have surprised
Fort-George and Fort-Ann, and yesterday demanded the surrender of Fort-Edward.
Our militia are collecting very fast. Fort-Stanwix we hear is likewise
invested. Alas! my dear girl^ my heart breaks for the distresses around me: The
innocent infants, the simple women perish unresisting -- sometimes crushed in
the flaming ruins of their own houses -- nothing but countenances of perplexity
and horror to be seen, and lamentable wailings to be heard. We are all prepared
for flight upon a nearer approach of the enemy; but sensible the moment we quit
our dwelling* we submit them to be plundered. We are determined to remain until
tomorrow, when perhaps we may have force enough to repel the savages. Dear
girl, wherever I am I shall acquaint you with our situation. May heaven defend
you from hostile alarms; and may you forget the clamours of war in the peacable
enjoyment of domestic blessings. Assure your dear mamma and Mrs. B***** of my
sincere regard; and believe me to be, with every sentiment of esteem, dear
MARIA, your friend,

ANN ELIZA BLEECKER.
Tomhanick, Oct. 12.
October 15.
I HAVE had no opportunity to send this, so before I close it must inform you
that the abovementioned party are returned to Lake-George. But our spouses are
gone again this morning to Ball's-Town, (six miles to the west of this,) where
the Indians have burnt several houses last night, and carried off a number of
prisoners. To add to our apprehensions, thirty suspected Indians have come
among us, under pretense of hunting, and neither threats nor good words can
prevail on them to quit us. The woods are likewise infested with tories, forty
having been discovered in one company. Were they not such night destroyers I am
sensible we could soon discomfit them; but their irruptions are as unexpected
as expeditious.

October 16.
SINCE I wrote the above our panic-stricken neighborhood left their effects
and fled several miles; but becoming a little more assured we are returned. All
the whig families are convened in my house, but not a man amongst us except my
old negro MERKEE, who keeps the horses in readiness for us. Adieu! may God
bless you.

To Miss V --.
HAPPY, my incomparable girl, is the human mind, in enjoying so great a degree
of the benignant heavenly attribute, Love. It is this sweet distinction that
almost raises us to a level with angels; this immortal magnetism by which we
are led to exchange feelings; by which, at this moment, I forget my fears to
rejoice at your safety -- while you, in the midst of pleasure and security,
sadden with generous concern at the presumption of my danger. Blessed be those
sensibilities, my dear; and were they universal, the arts of war would yet have
slept in oblivion.

Your very kind letters came to hand last night, as SUSAN and I were sitting
disconsolate and apprehensive by the fireside; but on perusing them, we
insensibly forgot our gloomy situation, and got so engaged among our R --
friends, that we passed the remainder of the evening in merrier chat than we
had many preceding ones.

Today we have been informed of Governor CLINTON's advantage over the enemy at
Canajohare: no doubt the papers will give you the particulars before this can
reach you: but rejoice with us, my cousin, at this event, which will probably
put a period to this northern massacre. I have wrote M -- a lamentable epistle,
which I would suppress had I time to write another: but our terrors are not
quite subsided; and as I lately boasted of our heroism, I am ready now to write
in a strain of palinody, and make a formal recantation.

I have forgot many passages in JOSEPH, and lost the manuscript; but if I can
possibly recollect it, I shall submit it to your criticism. However, I take the
freedom to trouble you with a little history, MARIA KITTL^.
written some time ago for SUSAN, which being altogether a fact, may give you
some idea of savage cruelty, and at the same time will justify our fears in
your opinion. How this packet in folio will ever arrive to you I know not; it
must be some very civil person who will adventure to take charge of it: whoever
it is, I am highly obliged to him; but really think his trouble will be fully
compensated by the opportunity it will give him of seeing two of the fairest
and most sensible lasses in R --. Forgive this compliment; it is not flattery;
and since your patience can hold out no longer, I must, though reluctantly,
finish this paper with giving you leave to write one in return ten times as
long, to your sincere and affectionate

ANN ELIZA BLEECKER.
October 19.
To Miss V --.
MY DEAR PEGGY,
I AM wholly discouraged from writing any more to your quarter: our letters, I
am sensible, are lost on the way, as I have not received a line from you or M
-- since early last fall. This interruption must certainly be the consequence
of an impertinent curiosity in some people, who break every seal they meet
with, and then destroy the letters for fear of detection. If this should fall
into such hands, I must observe to the gentlemen (few ladies being capable of
such ungenerosity) that such a proceeding betrays a want of common honesty and
common humanity in them. A period is put to many tender friendships by those
impertinents, each party resenting being neglected by the other.

I hope, my dear, this mild winter presents you with every elegant pleasure.
The army being in your vicinage, must certainly be productive of entertainment.
S -- is at Albany, and I believe as sedentary as if she was at Tomhanick. I
expect her with Captains H -- and B -- tomorrow, when we shall ramble together
through our forest while the snow lasts. -- Shall we never see each other? This
unlucky New York -- it is almost ominous to mention it; but I often think of it
with tears, and the longer I am divided from it, the closer my affections are
drawn to i^.

I have spent the winter quite lonesome, Mr. B -- being always absent on public
business, but is now detained in the chimney corner by a broken shin. I hear no
more of K --; we have lately wrote to her, but cannot expect to receive from
her such gay communicative letters any more, as she used to send us from R --.
I hope she finds it agreeable.

I wonder you do not send off one of your beaus express, with a packet to put
me out of pain about you. This undertaking would have a double advantage; it
would highly oblige me, and convince you of your adorer's sincerity by his
obedience. The beauties of antiquity always made trial of their lovers merits,
by urging them on to prodigious exploits; and I defy you to show me a single
knight in history, enamoured of some beautiful princess, who did not encounter
fiery dragons, kill giants, disenchant miserable ladies, and run innumerable
hazards of losing his life for her sake: and shall a modern fair one think that
her slave would refuse to ride two hundred miles to deliver a letter?

I have scribbled until you are tired, so haste to finish, and am, with the
greatest respect to all your dear family, (whom I sincerely love) amiable
cousin, tenderly yours,

ANN ELIZA BLEECKER.
Tomhanick, January 24.
To Miss T** E***.
December, 1781. MY DEAREST SUSAN,
OUR mutual sufferings, through a remarkable train of unfortunate events, have
so endeared you to me, that I bear your absence with sorrow and anxiety. After
your departure my poor PEGGY was seized with a putrid fever, which alm^st sent
her into eternity: my feelings on this occasion were exquisitely painful; but
blessed be God this cloud also passed over my head, and she recovers finely
after two relapses.

Would you believe it, my dear, we are again at Tomhanick, in my old apartment,
agreeably situated in the neighborhood of Mr. and Mrs. B --, who live in the
west part of my house. Albany became insupportable to me; I would rather have
lived in ROLANDO's Cavern, than in that unsociable, illiterate, stupid town; I
prefer solitude to such company; but I miss you, my sister, in every part of
this house; the hall, the little room, etc. continually remind me of the
pleasant hours we have passed together in this unenvied retirement. Will you
not return before spring? Ah! SUSAN, if you do not I shall begin the labors of
our flower beds with a heavy hearts, your favorite lillies will droop; nor
shall I have courage to disengage your pinks from entangling weeds: endeavor,
my dear, to come up; I am sure we shall be happy together. I received your
obliging present, for which I sincerely thank you, and hope you enjoy all
possible felicity in Jersey, whose present gaity is suitable to your youth and
sprightliness: as for my disposition, depressed by calamities, worn out with
sorrows, the pensive softness of a rural life accords best with it. --

Again I am left solitary: Mr. B -- went this morning on an expedition against
the illegitimate Vermonters, (or new claimants) with Col. R --, from the Manor,
who arrived here last night with his regiment, and eat up all my ducks and
sausages. The new claimants are collected at Sinchoick, and form a little army:
they have miserably mauled poor F -- and R --, who keep their beds. Our small
force there increases daily, and begins to brow-beat the enemy: in short, we
are all anarchy and confusion: heaven only knows when it will end.

The most tragical affair has happened here that I ever remember to have heard
of. JAMES YATES, (a son of him at Pitt's-Town,) a few nights ago murdered his
wife, four children, his horses and cow, with circumstances of cruelty too
horrid to mention: by all appearance he is a religious lunatic.

Dear Susan, how shall I conclude? when writing to you my pen insensibly draws
me beyond the common limits of a letter; but I know you will be fond of hearing
every minute particular respecting poor Tomhanick, where I flatter myself you
have enjoyed some hours of pleasure.

Neighbor F -- has had his shop burnt off yesterday, together with his wagon,
sleigh, winter's provision, and many other articles. Your old friend LETTY B --
is well, and at this moment sparking with your old admirer R --. Let me see,
have I no more news? Alas! alas! nothing but dry politics, and I am willing to
spare you the mortification of them. Indeed, my sweet girl, I am penning a long
epistle; but St. PETER knows whether I shall ever find conveyance for it:
however, I will continue to write on in discharge of my conscience, and so good
night; tomorrow I resume my pen. --

Tomorrow did I say? three days ha^^ intervened since I have had leisure to
th^^ or write. Yesterday morning my spouse sent for a horse, upon which Mr. B
-- and myself went in a sleigh to fetch him; but, on our arrival at Sinchoick,
the Yorkers we found had retreated, and the new claimants (reinforced by five
hundred Vermonters) had taken possession of the ground. General ALLEN was
barred up in gold-lace, and felt himself grand as the Great Mogul: they had an
old spiked up field-piece, which, however, looked martial. I sat myself down
among this formidable set, and being cold, mildly desired one of their Captains
to fetch a little dry wood. He obligingly complied, and we soon had a fine
fire. I then began humbly to expostulate with these wise men of the east about
the commencement of this civil war; and at length demanded how they could
expect to support their jurisdiction, in the center of the states, who had not
acceded to their claim? They replied, The four eastern states were their own
people, and would certainly assist them. I told them I could not see how they
dared break through the confederacy while they were sensible all America's
happiness depended upon the union. Captain R -- interrupted, The assistance of
New England would not interfere with the union, as this was a dispute about
land, in which Congress had no concern; and then he damned the Yorkers, and
drank success to Vermont! which extraordinary speech and behavior imposed
silence on some of us.

I returned home, and today visited the York camp at Schochticook, where I
took leave of my dear B --, who is obliged to absent himself from us while the
Vermonters tyrannize.

January 2, 1782.
I CONCLUDE my journal after a long interval; but, dear SUSAN, so many
occurrences have intervened, that I have had scarce time to breathe; our house
has been a perfect garrison for several weeks. Our men intended, last Sunday,
to storm JACKSON's house, where the tories were collected; but they
capitulated: however, we are all in arms. Mr. B -- went plenipo to Bennington
some days ago, where I attended him: we had an interview with all their great
Sakemakers; but the issue was no way favorable to the whigs.

We firmly believe these commotions will be suppressed before spring, when I
shall take it as an instance of your affection if you can relish our rustic
life, and come up among us, if not, I shall submit and grieve. Dear sister, I
thank you for your letter and present, though I never received the latter.
CATY's goodwill and present I regard with affection, and wish her all health
and happiness.

How shall I drop my pen! Adieu, dear girl; we have kept your birthday
yesterday, with some agreeable neighbors, and had a dance in the evening. I am
glad you are happy, which is a great and capital satisfaction to your entirely
affectionate

ANN ELIZA BLEECKER.

To Miss S**** T** E***.
DEAR SUE,
I Value your affection beyond any acquisition; but my situation of late has
been so peculiarly unfortunate, that I have had no leisure to express mine to
you. I am infinitely pleased that you are happy; but I wish some power, partial
to me, had prevented your removal by some very fortunate occurrence. O my
sister! my sister! every fiber of my heart relaxes when I think of you: the
hea^^^^ storm of life has not fallen on my soul with such a weight as the loss
of your company. May the gentlest spirit in heaven be the censor of your
actions! May yo^ be blessed through the remotest ages of eternity! May -- but my
heart grows too full to proceed.

Let us change the subject. We have lived several weeks in a strange commotion:
we have been often attacked by the Vermonters, and defended ourselves with as
much resolution as so many janissaries. Would you believe it, I have been forced
to parade in the line of battle to defend our castle: however, the union was
dissolved, and the new claimants left to shift for themselves; upon which they
were apprehended by the Yorkers, and carried to Albany jail: among whom were M
--, C --, T -- and his two sons, JOHN P --, W --, JOHN S --, and several
others. The same evening I sent a ^^^ssage to Mrs. T --, desiring her to return
the looking-glass she took from us when BURGOYNE came down, upon which she
civily sent it. Our neighborhood looks solitary: Mrs. JACKSON, Mrs. CURRY, and
many more are all fled with their families in a clandestine manner. This
elopement of the tories gives us new apprehensions: we fear they will attempt
in the spring a descent on this quarter; and though the seacoast is well
defended, our poor frontiers are commonly forgotten.

We have not seen the lads this winter. M -- P -- was here yesterday with A --
L --; they have stolen a wedding. L -- S -- and the Major have likewise
concluded their long courtship. J -- H -- is going to die, and old F -- sends
his respects to you.

Miss T -- E --, you have all the news, but I must add one trifle more: -- Your
admirer R -- is no warrior; not all the eloquence of our York party could
induce him to face the enemy: but his situation admits of some apology:
depressed with the loss of you, perhaps he is become indifferent about
character, property, etc. etc.

I should not have mentioned this last mortifying article, but in a late packet
I received a hint as if Mr. R -- was supplanted in your esteem by some R --
petit maitre. Beware of adding to your murders. But, my dear, you have not
entertained me with the smallest account of your reception in New York, and I
claim the favor that you will fill a page on that subject in your next letter.
I also insist, that you shortly make an excursion this way, and bring our fair
cousins with you: the contrast between the gloom of a deep forest and the
brilliancy of a lighted ball-room will make you return to the latter with a
double relish. But the gloom of our forest has no ill influence on our
conversation; we laugh, and sing, and chat in spite of winter and wars; nor
does any thing prompt a momentary sigh, but the loss of our dear SUSAN.

Farewell, my sister; you have long been sensible that I am sincerely your

ANN ELIZA BLEECKER.
B -- and the children long to see you. Don't forget to assure aunt and Mrs. B.
of my friendship for them. Major G --, who will deliver this, is a worthy
gentleman; I recommend him to your acquaintance. One word more and I finish:
FAN has a fine son, and has parted with TITUS because she took a dislike to his
foolish grinning. -- I wish I was with you one half hour, to chat and borrow a
pinch of your perfumed snuff. Adieu, I fear I shall begin again before I close
this.

The tories are all warned off. P -- T -- will soon be married to J -- P --.

Tomhanick, March 4, 1782.


To Miss T** E***.
MY DEAR SISTER,
THIS day (the anniversary of an event sadly important to me) awakes me from a
deception I have admitted since our separation. I have been losing relations,
friends, children and acquaintances many years: but with the last farewell
salute you gave me, in the bitterness of grief I reproached Providence it had
not left me one friend: I retired hither, with my very little family, mourning,
and could not help repeating the words of HEZEKIAH, "I shall go softly all my
days." -- Your letters, PEGGY's and MARIA's I have received, often read, and
wept over; but, conscious that my gloomy ideas would be unseasonable in the
circle of pleasure, I omitted answering as much as possible.

But this day tells me I have yet a kind companion, who might now have lain
fettered in a dungeon, had not Providence interposed. I have an endearing
child, who might have now lain in the dark grave, if the same mercy had not
restored her. And in spite of habit, gratitude shall make me this day cheerful.

Dear SUSAN, you must peruse the above alone: the genuine sentiments of a
broken heart appear ridiculous to inexperienced levity: and though your fai^
companions are sweetly sympathising, their very sensibility induces me to
conceal from them the history of my feelings.

The news of this place is, that Miss P -- T -- is married to Mr. J -- P --;
Mr. S -- T -- obliged to abscond for forgery; and Miss S -- C -- is like to
take H -- G -- for better for worse. To descend a little -- DIANA has lost
SHOCK, and is on the verge of marrying with a certain CUFFE; FAN remains a
widow, and MERKEE is the most constant lover I ever knew: but poor Mrs. F --
was lately delivered of a child who is a terror to every one that sees it. It
seems she was struck with so much horror at the sight of JAMES YATES's murdered
family, that it made too fatal an impression.

I had almost forgot to mention, that simple BETT HERMAN is married to a
Hessian: Mr. B. officiated as priest, and I gave the happy couple a
wedding-dinner, to which we invited our most civilized neighbors. E. and G.
lodge here alternately, to guard Mr. B. and beg their regards may be presented
you.

To return to myself -- an unimportant and almost forgotten subject -- I have
been employed during the winter and spring in attending to my health, which has
been considerably impaired and weather-beaten by the storms of affliction. For
who to dumb Forgetfulness a prey,
This pleasing, anxious being ever resigned;
Left the warm precincts of the cheerful day,
Nor cast one longing, lingering look behind?
GRAY's ELEGY. Forgive my relapsing into melancholy: I will make one more
exertion to be lively, and if I cannot succeed, will conclude my paper.

I have the finest garden in the country. In the center of four grass walks we
have erected a spacious arbor, closely shaded with annual vines, where we
often drink tea, and enjoy the prospect of a lovely collection of flowers on
one hand, and a cool shady orchard on the other; a luxuriant lot of herbage
behind, and directly opposite a blushing vineyard in miniature. Here, often,
when perusing THEOCRITUS, TASSO, and VIRGIL, I drop those pastoral enthusiasts,
to reflect on the hours of friendship I have passed with my SUSAN: my cheek
then glows with delight, pleasure delicately touches my nerves, and all the
springs of life mo^e on cheerily. Ah, SUSAN! I love you more than you imagine.
Wherefore are we separated? if for your advantage, I am more than resigned, I
am contented.

Do you never hear of SAMMY? does he not write to you? Though I dwell in the
depth of a vast forest, that need not limit his love: the still voice of
affection cannot be lost in the thunder of war. What can be the reason he
forgets me? I must either entertain a contempt of my own demerits, or this --
but love and partiality forbid a decision.

After all, my SUSAN, I will endeavor to circumscribe my happiness to the
little lovely spot I occupy, and try to forget the friends whose absence is so
painful to me. O! could I think (like the inhabitants of Topinamboo) that the
mountains which surround me were the limits of the earth, and that the
individual spot I dwelt on was the whole world, I might then truly enjoy the
pleasures it produced.

What ails the lads in your quarter? They must be very insensible, or you three
fair nymphs very cruel, or Hymen surely would light his taper at R --. If this
vein of celibacy continues, I would advise to erect a cloister, and then your
nominal Lady Abbess would have something to do; the Miss W.'s would be large
contributors, as they have taken the veil thirty years ago. But least the
confinement of a number of beauties in a nunnery should cause an insurrection
in the beau monde, we must also contrive to shut up all the gay, sighing,
useless fops in a monastery; and to keep up forms and decencies, Mr. P -- H --,
a superannuated but constant adorer of the widow B. shall be appointed Monsieur
L' Abbe.

We have lived very quiet this summer. Once a party of five men, headed by
ROGER STEVENS, lay concealed in the thicke^ (...) our orchard for three nights;
but Mr. B. getting intelligence of it, the neighbors collected and put them to
slight, very indiscreetly, for they might easily have surprised and taken them.
I went to see the place where they had stationed themselves; they had made a
commodious bed of dry leaves, and had amused themselves with plaiting grass and
making true lovers knots. Dear sister, farewell.

ANN ELIZA BLEECKER.
Tomhanick, August 6, 1782.
To Miss T** E***.
MY CHARMING SUSAN;
YOUR black eyes seem to have done some execution already; but you, more cruel
than the Princess of the Steel Castle, who pitied the Knight of the Burning
Pestle, have discarded your STREPHON without a sigh. But if you continue
invincible to love fifty years hence, when your black eyes begin to twinkle
through "a pair of green spectacles, with silver rima and a shagreen case," you
may possibly repent.

Dear SUSAN, you will easily distinguish this raillery from the undisguised
sentiments of my heart: your letter made me feel that I am indeed your sister:
I love you, my SUSAN; and since your departure there is a chasm in my family,
at my table, at my fireside, that is not filled to my liking by any other; but
so far I am happy, that you are in a family where, with proper attention, you
will gain every useful, every ornamental accomplishment.

Now let me tell you the news of these parts. NANNY BOSTWICK died lately of a
consumption. I went to see the little beauty in her last moments; her piety,
resignation and fortitude were very striking: she smiled disapprobation when,
to console her, I hinted she might recover. Mrs. P -- too lays very ill. Papa,
who was here yesterday, told me she could not recover to all human appearance:
I shall visit her tomorrow, and if this paper is not sealed, will let you know
her true situation. -- I hear Doctor BROWN is dead in Virginia; that H -- is
very much reduced; and that W -- has made a great fortune in New England by
privateering, and improved it by a wealthy marriage. Undoubtedly he omits his
usual question, "What do the ladies say of me?" -- Bless me, I could fill a
volume. S -- C -- has accidentally blessed Vermont with a fatherless son, and is
gone to Canada. We are all well, except JOHNNY. Domine B. dresses like a very
beau. JAMES H -- and MAG S -- traverse the bushes on horseback; and MERKEE
thanks you kindly for recollecting him; but FAN resents your neglect, and begs
me to let you know that she thinks you lose your manners. I suppose you know
that MOLLY P -- is married: yes, I recollect I formerly wrote it to you.

All this nonsense, my sweet SUSAN, will remind you of the many laughing,
indolent hours we have passed, in the cool of summer evenings, on our green,
where we chatted without reserve or impertinent caution, and as the full moon
rose bright in a cloudless sky, when the simple lads and lasses were convened,
we sported in the innocence of childish amusements, and pleased and fatigued
with blindman's-buff, and hide-and-seek, and puss-in-the-corner, we went
sweetly to rest.

SUSAN, all this little chat is for your own inspection. Were you to show this
letter to some belle or fop, you would be the less esteemed for conversing with
such a very rustic, such a stranger to the etiquette of a polite circle. The
well-bred hate simplicity: there is a great gulf between the vulgar adepts of
nature, and the artificial, mechanical sons of ceremony.

Today is my birthday: I have made it a day of thanksgiving to my God, who
has often brought my soul out of trouble, and have made it sacred to the memory
of my best loved friends, by writing them severally long letters. External
rejoicing and festivity I care not for: the secret approbation of my conscience
is all the praise I now seek after, and more, in my esteem, to be valued, than
the acclamations of an empire.

How shall I conclude this incoherent epistle? When I begin to talk to my SUE,
(for, as Mr. POPE says, this is not writing) I know not how to be silent.

Tuesday.
IT is three days since I wrote the above. That evening I was seized with a
fever; I had a sleepless, melancholy night; and the next morning Doctor
YOUNGLOVE bled me; but having a dull lancet, he made too large an orifice, by
which I lost too much blood: he could hardly stop it. I was so weakened that I
have lain yesterday and today in the hysteries, and can just sit up to finish
this for Major V -- B --, who will take my letters with him tomorrow to
Albany. However, I have spirits enough to laugh at my odd figure before
company: I sit up in my short-gown, a cloak over my shoulders, no shoes, no
roll on, with my nightcap. I want a deal of indulgence when I am sick; and
blessed be Providence, your brother is the tenderest of nurses; so many
nameless assiduities, such a winning softness and complacency in his manner, as
palliate my distemper and prevent my complaints. Excuse me; I love to expose my
whole heart to my artless SUSAN.

All our p^^soners are arrived from Canada; they continually pass our door, and
are warmly habited, Mrs. F -- 's sister is returned, but the savages have
murdered two of her children. CHRISTINA F. begs you to remember her. My
STREPHON and my little ones insist on your recollecting them affectionately;
and I must make a frequent repetition when I tell you that you are truly
beloved by your sister,

ANN ELIZA BLEECKER.

To Miss M**** V** W***.
I Have been a sad girl, my dear M --, to suspend writing to my fair one so
long. They tell me you are the prettiest wit about R --, so that I ought to be
cautious how I scribble; but I will go on in the innocence of my heart, and if
you criticize, do it mercifully.

We have had an agreeable jaunt to New England, but in passing the mountains of
Tawkanok I think I never saw a more lovely scene: we had ascended the last
declivity; the valleys below us, interspersed with farms, and plains, and
villages, seemed to be at an incredible depth; when we entered on a level,
overshaded with evergreens, laurel, and hemlock, pine and spruce, intermixed
with red, blue and yellow berries -- imitating the softest bowers of summer.
These greens naturally struck out into long vistas, through which we saw the
gildings of the setting sun long after the mortals below us were sunk in
darkness.

We found the people hospitable and social; were invited cheerfully into almost
every genteel house we chanced to pass; and returned home, like JACOB's sons
from Egypt, with our money, if not in our sack's mouth, at least in our
pockets: but tell SUSAN we left little BENJAMIN behind, who is preceding to
the Nine-Partners.

I begin to find the winter tedious; my circle of friends here is too small;
that of my rustic acquaintance too large: when the heart is not interested, the
mind has little satisfaction in company: your own feelings will confirm my
observation. Dear cuz, cannot you contrive to visit us? In vain would the winds
beat, and the hail rattle; deep snows might confine us, and arctic blasts
condense the atmosphere; still our fires should sparkle, pleasure and joy and
plenty attend us -- and friendship should triumph. Pardon, M --, the transports
of a soul whose feelings are too acute: the distant idea of an interview with
those whom I love elevates me beyond reason, and ten times a day I anticipate
our happy meeting.

I received yesterday a long letter from Mr. A --: he tells me our KITTY is
increasing: possibly I may enclose a letter for him: I wish she would write;
she can (if she will) chat very agreeably. One of these days I intend to tire
cousin B. with an epistle as long and prolix as an homily: we used to be
correspondents, but I am afraid she grows too proud to recollect her country
friends. A certain Colonel told me last week that Mrs. F -- used to be a
charming and instructive companion, but that now she was grown too fine a lady
for conversation. I told him I never would believe that the tinsel of fortune
could rob my B -- of the ornaments of humanity: so please to inform her of the
Colonel's malignity.

Dear M --, accept Mr. B's. respects, and remember me kindly to aunt, and not
less kindly to all the rest of my friends in your house: but, by custom, I must
write formally and with proper distances what you have long known, that I am,
with every sentiment of regard, dear girl, your most affectionate

ANN ELIZA BLEECKER.

To Miss S**** T** E***.
NO, I can admit of no excuse, I have written three letters in folio to my
SUSAN, and have received no answer. After various conjectures about the cause
of so mortifying an omission, I have come to this conclusion, that you have
commenced a very, very fashionable lady -- (you see my penetration) -- and
though I am not in possession of JOSEPH's divining cup, I can minutely describe
how you passed the day when my last letter was handed you; we will suppose it
your own journal.

Saturday Morn, Feb. 12
Ten o'clock. WAS disturbed in a very pleasant dream by aunt V. W. who told me
breakfast was ready; fell asleep and dreamed again about Mr. S.

Eleven. Rose from bed; DINAH handed my shoes, washed the cream poultice from
my arms, and unbuckled my curls: drank two dishes of hyson; could not eat any
thing.

From twelve to two. Withdrew to my closet; perused the title page of the
Pilgrim's Progress: -- came in, and, with an engaging address, presented me
with a small billet-doux from Mr. S. and a monstrous big packet from sister B.
Laid the packet aside; mused over the charming note until three o'clock.

Could not read sister's letter, because I must dress, Major ARROGANCE, Colonel
BOMBAST, and TOM FUSTIAN being to dine with us; could not suit my colors --
fretted -- got the vapors: DINE, handing me the salts, let the vial fall and
broke it; it was diamond cut crystal, a present from Mr. S. I flew up in a
passion -- it was enough to vex a saint -- and boxed her ears soundly.

Four. Dressed; aunt asked me what sister had wrote. I told her she was well,
and had wrote nothing in particular. Mem. -- I silly broke the seal to give a
color to my assertion.

Between four and five. Dined* TOM FUSTIAN toasted the brightest eyes in
company -- I reddened like crimson -- was surprised to see M -- blush, and
looking round saw P -- blush yet deeper than we. I wonder who he meant. TOM is
called a lad of judgment. Mr. S. passed the window on horseback.

Six. Visited at Miss -- 's: a very formal company: uneasy in my stays --
scalded my fingers, and stained my changeable by spilling a dish of tea; the
ladies were excessively sorry for the accident, and Miss V. Z. observed, that
just such another mischance had befallen the widow R. three years before the
war. Made a party at cards until seven in the evening; lost two pistoles. Mem.
-- had no ready cash, but gave an order on --.

From six till three in the morning. Danced with Mr. S. -- thought he looked
jealous -- to punish him I coquetted with three or four pretty fellows,
whispered Colonel TINSEL, who smiled and kissed my hand; in return I gave him a
peculant blow on the shoulder. Mr. S. looked like a thunder-gust; then affected
to be calm as a stoic; but in spit^ of philosophy turned as pale as BANQUO's
ghost. M -- seemed concerned, and asked what a^led him? I don't like M --: I
wonder what charm makes every body admire her: sure, if Mr. S. was civil to
her, it was enough; he need not be so very affectionate. I flew in a pet to a
vacant parlour* and took out sister's letter to read: I labored through ten
lines, contemplated the seal, chewed off three corners, and folding the remains
elegantly, put it in my pocket. I suppose it was full of friendship and such
like country stuff. However, sister wri^^^ out of a good heart to me, and I
will answer it. Mr. S. and I were reconciled through the intercession of P --,
whose lovely humanity every where commands esteem. We passed the hours very
agreeably. On my retiring DINAH attended, and having no paper handy, I gave her
sister's letter to put my hair in buckle, while I read these verses, which
Colonel TINSEL, with a sigh, gave me: -- Lofty cretur, wen de sun
Wantons over you wid his beme,
You smile wid joy -- my lakes alone
Obnoxious ar -- would I war him.


I think the Colonel writes as well as HOMER; I believe he knows as much; what
signifies Greek and Hebrew! I hate your starched scholars that talk Latin.

Well SUSAN, you see that in the arctic wilds of America your secret actions
are brought to light, so I hope you will pay more respect to this epistle.

Mr. B -- begs me, at this very instant, to present his very humble regards to
you, and has made three solemn bows to your ladyship before I could write a
sentence. POLLY S -- is here, and making sad execution among our beaus. We live
here a merry kind of a laughing, indolent life: we suffer no real evils, and
are far from regretting the elegant amusements which attend a city life: all
that I want, my sister, is your company. This constant repetition you must
permit (without repining) in all my letters. I never walk in that angle of my
garden where your flowers are planted, but I heave a sigh, as if it were a
painted monument to your departed body. Can you never come to us? Were it not
for my precarious health, I might even adventure to R --, and kiss cousin B --,
as my old dear friend, whom I tenderly love, though she forgets me: but I am
often sick; and happy am I that my JACK is so good a nurse; the tenderness of
his nature and cheerfulness of his temper, contribute more to my cure than all
the restoratives in the dispensatory.

Tell my sweet cousins I love them all tenderly; recollect me with affection to
aunt V** W***, and permit my PEG and HANNAH to salute you.

ANN ELIZA BLEECKER.
Tomhanick, March 29, 1783. This day fourteen years ago, SUSAN, I was married;
repent, and take a husband.



To Mr. S***** S*******.
I Congratulate you, my dear brother, on the peace; in consequence of which I
sincerely hope you may see many happy years: as for me, my bright prospects lie
beyond the grave; I have little to promise myself on this side of eternity.
Affliction has broken my spirit and constitution; I grow daily weaker and more
emaciated, and depressed with the reflection of leaving my husband and child --
alas! the only treasures I have now on earth.

Let me talk freely to you for the last time, my brother: -- You know your poor
BETSEY was born a solitary orphan: though enjoying a genteel fortune, yet
friendless, and a wanderer, at length I found peace in the company of a tender
husband. Ah, how soon interrupted! my lovely babes died away like summer
blossoms before the frost: still I had a kind mother to complain to; we wept
together: but soon the enemy rushing upon us like a hurricane, we were
scattered like a flock of frighted birds: our dear mother fled to Red-Hook with
SUSAN; I staid awhile at the farm; but a sudden incursion of some savages
hastened my retreat; I took my beautiful ABELLA on my arm, and PEGGY by the
hand, and wandered solitary through the dark woods, expecting every moment to
meet the bloody ally of Britain: however, we arrived safe at Arabia, where I
met my husband, who had been to Albany; he procured a chaise, and took us to
the city; the alarm increasing, we got a passage in a sloop with sister SWITS
and family; twelve miles below Albany my ABELLA died of a dysentery; we went
ashore, had one of my mahogany dining-tables cut up to make her coffin, and
buried the little angel on the bank. I was seized with the distemper; and when
we came to Red-Hook, found my dear mamma wasted to a shadow: she mourned over
the ruins of her family, and carried me to uncle H -- 's, who received us very
reluctantly. Soon after my dear mother died, and I returned to Albany, where,
in a few days, I saw poor sister CATY Mrs. SWITS.
expire. We retired again to Tomhanick, where we lived sometime blessed in
domestic tranquillity, though under perpetual alarms from the savages: at
length, one afternoon, a small party from Canada, who had unperceivedly
penetrated the country, carried off Mr. BLEECKER with his two servants. This
shock I could not support. My little PEGGY and I went to Albany, where we wept
incessantly for five days, when God was pleased to restore him to our arms.
Soon after I fell into premature labor, and was delivered of a dead child.
Since that I have been declining; and though we often fled from the enemy
since, been cruelly plundered, and often suffered for very necessaries, yet
your silence, my brother, hurts me more than these.

Mr. BLEECKER talks of taking me to New York this spring, but I believe I shall
never reach it; my health is so precarious that I dare not, even here, venture
an afternoon's visit. I could wish to see you before I died; but I am used to
disappointments. I have given you my little history that you may see I die of a
broken heart. Farewell, my only brother; may God preserve your family, and
continue all your blessings. When you see my poor little PEGGY, and my poor
little HANNAH SWITS, think of your friends who have perished before you, and
love and pity them for their sakes. Give my kindest love to BETSEY, and accept
of your brother's. I am, dear SAMMY, your very affectionate sister,

ANN ELIZA BLEECKER.
Tomhanick, May 8, 1783.
To Miss S**** T** E***
MY DEAR SUSAN.
INDISPOSITION has of late so dispirited me that I have ^mitted to write to any
of my friends; but within ^hese few days I am sensibly better, and feel this
even (...) in a chatty humor. Let me first of all give you the news -- LYDIA S
-- is married to Mr. JOHN B -- * and Miss POLLY S -- to Lieutenant G -- (son of
ENNIS G -- the tailor;) moreover, NATJE L -- (your old enemy) is likewise
become somebody's espoused wife. Lord STERLING died last night, and (I am quite
a gazette) beau T -- is gone to Canada. The lads lodge with us, and we have
endeavored to pass the winter as gleefully as plenty and simplicity can make
us -- E -- kisses your hands* JAMES is a professed slave to PEGGY S --; and
POLLY will join us tomorrow, when Mr. B. and his spouse intend to leave the
merry circle at Tomhanick, and take a ramble to New England. I have been
informed that Mrs. A -- has blessed the Doctor with a son and daughter; if so, I
give you joy. Did you ever see so incoherent an epistle* however, you must
confess, did I ^educe so much news to order, and tell every thing elegantly, it
would swell my paper beyond the common limit; besides, I do not mean to set up
for "the complete letter-writer." My PEG is quite disappointed at your silence,
and regrets that she ever sent her scrawl to R --: and indeed, SUSAN, (now I
think on it) you have corresponded with me rather like a formal acquaintance
than a warm friend; with every post you might have sent me some scribble*
sometimes a half a quire, sometimes a half a line; the dawnings of friendship,
emotions of humanity, sentiments of piety, or impressions of love, ought to
have been heartily confided in the bosom of your own ELIZA: they would have
brightened my moments of solitude, and have made me forget my oblivious
situation. SAMMY too has helped to embitter my cup of life; he has contracted
his affection within the orb of his little family, and cannot shoot out a ray
of love at this distance, to enlighten and bless a forlorn sister* I love him
sincerely; may he and his be forever happy. My sister, I shall grow too dull if
I proceed; I had better conclude; but I am fond of talking to you. Let me drop
into news again -- POLLY P -- (Mrs. L.) has a fine son; and I had like to have
forgot to mention that Vermont intends again to renew the east and western
claims. Upon a late resolve of Congress, (handed particularly to them) they
have assumed an insulting arrogance of behavior, threaten Congress, and
imprecate New York. In short. I fancy we shall have all our persecutions to go
over again.

But what have your black eyes been doing all this while? have you captured no
heart worth retaining? I am afraid the gentlemen are so severely attracted by
the charms of three fair ones, that (like Mahomet's shrine) they cannot attach
themselves to either. Pray be seen separate.

We have here a rustic beauty come into our forest, that would be much admired
(I mean for person, not manners) by all the beaus of R --: the symmetry of her
form, glitter of her eyes, and lessening shades of vermilion on her cheek,
which lose themselves imperceptibly in a complexion of the most delicate
whiteness; these, when improved in the beau monde by artificial graces, would
make her an irresistible toast; she has the romantic name of MELANESSA; but
being of a tender constitution, not able to work, has no declared admirer.

Full many a gem of purest ray serene,
The dark unfathomed caves of ocean bear;
Full many a flower is born to blush unseen,
And waste its sweetness on the desert air.
GRAV. Dear girl, you are tired with my impertinence, but I haste to relieve
you. Your brother begs you to remember him with tenderness; the children love
you; even FAX and MARKEE solicit your remembrance of them; and O, my sister!
might you but really feel how much I am your affectionate

ANN ELIZA BLEECKER.
Tomhanick, Dec. 10, 1783.
POETICS.
JOSEPH.
WITH many children was the Patriarch blessed,
Yet Joseph he preferred before the rest:
To tend his flock was all the youth's employ*
To serve his God and Sire his only joy:
Ja^^^ of his loved consort now deprived,
Beheld her graces in the son revived:
And all the love he had to Rochel gone.
Was by degrees transferred unto her son*
A silken vest, that cast a various sha^^,
He fondly to the boy a present ma^^*
Here vivid scarlet strove with lively (...)*
The purple* blended with the white* w^^^^en*
And azure spots were interspersed between.
This gaudy robe (the basis of his woe,
The source from which his future sorrow^ ^^ow)
Kindled his elder brethren's wakeful pride:
(When envy mounts, affection will subside)
Their dawning hate in vain to hide they strove,
Each look too plain confessed expiring love.
The sun obliquely shot his humid beams*
When Joseph waked, one morn, and told his dreams:
'My brethren, we, methought, were on a plain,
'And binding into sheaves the yellow grain;
'When mine arose; yours formed a circle round,
'And reverently bowed low to the ground.
At this each face the innate rage expressed:
And Joseph thus, indignant, they addressed.
'Shalt thou indeed a sovereign to us be?
'And shall we fall as suppliants on the knee?
'Vain boy! renounce these hopes -- hence to the field
'A shepherd's crook, not scepter, shall thou wield.'
Again, when slumbers stole upon his eyes,
And active Fancy bade the vision rise,
To him the eleven stars, the orb of day,
And crystal moon respectful homage pay.
This on the morn the wondering youth disclosed
When Jacob the prediction thus opposed:
'Shall I, thine aged sire, whose silver hairs
'And arms unnerv'd proclaim my length of years,
'Prostrate on earth myself thy vassel own?
'And shall thy mother bow before her son?
'Ambition, Joseph, has thy heart possessed,
'And dreams illusive rise from such a guest.'
But yet he wondered what might be designed,
And the presaging visions treasured in his mind.
It chanced his elder sons at early dawn
Led their fair flocks to Dothen's verdant lawn:
There, while the kids and lambs crop off the flowers,
In close converse they pass the eloping hours:
Beneath a cedar's boughs, whose awful shade
Extended over the plain, was Levi laid:
What raised the tears that trembled in his eyes?
Issacher asked; and Levi thus replies:
' Jacob was once impartial in his love;
'To please us all, and we to please him strove*
'Have we not toiled beneath the burning ray
'Of yon bright orb, who rising we survey;
'And when the lamp of night illumes the skies,
'When dews descend and noxious mists arise,
'In silent vales a careful watch we keep,
'And from the rav'ning wolves protect the sheep?
'Is this the kind return for all our care? --
'We ask but equally his love to share;
'And that denied, to aggravate the smart,
'A simpering boy engrosses all his heart:
'What can entitle him to such a claim,
'Domestic labors, or a martial fame?
'In Mamre's groves his hours slide soft away,
'In rest at night, in indolence all day:
'With lies of us he fills the cred'lous ear,
'Too horrid to repeat, or you to hear.
'For this a superb robe adorns his limbs,
'And partial heaven for this in mystic dreams
'Presages a reward. But words are vain^'
Here Levi ceased, and Issacher began.
'Ah! it is too plain, too obvious to the sight,
'That Joseph is our parent's chief delight,
'Although a base usurper of our right:
'You see ambition rising in his soul;
'And when his years mature to manhood roll,
'Elated with the hopes of sway, he will try
'On us, my friends, his dreams to verify.'
He ended: but his cheeks with anger glows'
When bloody Simeon from the ground arose.
Awhile he paused; at length his lips impart
The black design corroding at his heart.
'Brethren, this war of words and coward rage
'Suits not our youth, but meets impotent age;
'Let one decisive stroke remove our fears,
'Obstruct the fates, and calm intestine wars.'
Reuben at Simeon glanced a frown, and spoke:
'The sentence yet in embrio I revoke:
'The Sechemites, (who, murdered on the plain,
'Sad monuments of cruelty remain)
'Have they to death inured your gloomy eyes,
'That for a childish dream your brother dies?
'Would you in guiltless blood your jav'lins stain,
'And Nature's law by such a deed profane?
'My soul shrinks at the thought: loud sounding fame
'Would through the world the fratricide proclaim.
'Brethren, regard his youth -- our father's age;
'One fatal stroke destroys both child and sage:
'Congenial souls: the union of the heart
'Death cannot divide, nor living can we part.
'Ah! tell me, Simeon, is the action brave
'To sink a sage and infant in the grave?
'Mistaken valor, and inhuman deed,
'For one man's fault to make a nation bleed!
'Much more inhuman this: the son conspires
'A harmless brother's death, and aged sire's.
'Think not with their last breath your fears are fled;
'God's vengeance still pursues the guilty head.
'And why abridge his days? Ah! brethren, know,
'By short'ning his, you fill your own with woe.'
He ended unapplauded, and beheld
The object of their contest on the field,
(...) the eye could reach: his glossy hair
C^^l'd on his neck; his robe waved light in air*
Clasped by (...) of gold, that as he run
In brightness seemed to emulate the sun.
Hate, stifled by reproof, flamed in each eye,
When at a distance they perceived the boy;
In every look black discontent was spread,
And Judah, pale with envy, rose and said:
'Vain sophistry! how do our joys subside,
'While that prophetic dreamer swells with pride?
'No; let him die: his vest we'll stain with blood,
'And tell his sire we found it in the wood:
'Some beast, I Will cry, and deep affliction feign,
'Oh Jacob, has thy son, thy Joseph slain!
'If Reuben new objections here create,
'Then let him bear our just, immortal hate.'
When Reuben found his death was now decreed,
Resolved to save the youth, or with him bleed,
He loud exclaim'^ -- 'At least with this comply,
'(Since by our hand the innocent must die)
'I am his brother, give me not the pain
'To see his blood gush from the purple vein,
'To see his soul part from his quivering (...),
'And he^^ the g^oan which ushers in his sleep.
'Where yonder ^edars raise their lofty heads,
'And round the ^^cky place a horror spreads,
'There is a pit, to water long unknown,
'Dar^ its access, with brambles overgrown:
'Here be the child immured: the sides are steep,
'O^ (...) cemented, and profoundly deep;
'A certain and concealed death his fate;
'Guiltless of blood we gratify our hate.'
He hesitated -- by real sorrow moved,
While his proposal all the swains approved.
But Reuben hop^d, when sleep had closed their eyes,
With the loved youth his father to surprise;
Then lead him where he might securely wait
The period when he should ^u^^i^e their hate.
Joseph, soon as his brethren he descries,
A placid sweetness triumphed in his eyes,
Joy tinged his blooming cheeks with deeper red,
He innocently smiled, advanced, and said:
'To Sechem's vale our sire bade me repair,
'If you were well, solicitous to hear:
'I roved over meads enameled with gay flowers,
'I ranged the forests and ^xplor'd the bowers;
'At length my erring steps a stranger led
'To ^^then, where he said your flocks were fed.
'But why this general gloom on every face,
'This stupid grief which saddens all the place?
'O tell me! quick dispel each rising fear,
'O^ let me drop the sympathetic tear.' --
He pleads, impatient for the truth to gain;
But dazzling virtue awed the silent train.
The conscious blood revolting from each cheek,
Rush to the guilty heart and refuge seek.
Now vice prepares the formidable blow,
Yet shrinks, encountering a defenseless foe:
She summons all her forces to her aid,
And big with death, now hovers over his head.
Rapid as lightnings through the ether glance,
So swift they to the astonished youth advance;
Trembling with rage they flew; they seized his hair,
And bade him instantly for death prepare.
Aghast he gazed; he stiffen'd with surprise,
His blood congeals, he scarce believes his eyes;
A sudden horror thrills through every vein,
He casts an anxious look back over the plain;
He sees no hope; then sinking on his knees,
He thus essayed their anger to appease:
'What have I done, my brethren, that your rage
'United should against a child engage?
'Alas! what heavy crime demands my death?'
Here rising tears suppressed his laboring breath;
These when discharged, again the shepherd pleads: --
'Is there no friend, not one who intercedes?
'With guiltless blood pollute not Nature's laws.
'Tell me my fault, and let me plead my cause:
'If innocent, acquit; if guilty found,
'In public then let justice give the wound.'
He ceased to speak, and their decision wait*
When Nepthali exclaimed, 'Our will is fate.'
Then with a cord his trembling hands they bound,
And raised him pale and fainting from the ground:
His terror power of utterance denies,
But yet he weeps and lifts his speaking eyes.
They lead him to the grove, whose solemn shade
The wind and solar ray could scarce pervade;
The dark abyss they found, and opened a way
By which descending Joseph left the day:
The hollow sides re-echo back his moan,
And distant rocks reflect the doubled groan;
In deeper notes his plaintive cries returned,
While low excluded from the light he mourned.
The inhuman rustics soon depart the place
Where conscious Vice now flushed each guilty face:
The sun shone hot; impervious to his ray
A grove of palms the fainting swains survey:
Beneath their shade a silver current stole,
Whose lucid waves over mossy carpets roll.
Here they repair, and seated on the ground,
With roseate wine the shining goblet crowned;
The viands on the velvet grass they spread,
The grape luxuriant and the milk-white bread;
When thoughtful Reuben, sighing, rose and said:
'While you the festive banquet here prepare,
'To seek the straying lambs shall be my care.'
Scarce was he gone, when from a neighboring vale
The frag^ant smells of spicery exhale;
The aromatic loads by camels borne,
From Geliad sent, to Egypt now return:
These were proceeded by a numerous train
Of trafficers, who from fair Midian came.
The inviting shade, where cool the shepherds lay,
Allured the merchants from their tiresome way;
They join the swains, and press the verdant ground,
While the replenished goblet passes round.
But pale remorse, from cool reflection sprung,
On half-repenting Judah's brow was hung;
His brother's groans reverb'rate on his ear,
But yet his envy Joseph's merits fear.
While these contending passions rend his breast
Apart the listening shepherds he addressed:
'My friends, the eldest curse of righteous heaven
'Was to the murderer of a brother given;
'Tho' Joseph's crimes would justify his death,
'We can be just, and yet prolong his breath.
'Let us redeem the victim from the grave,
'And send him to Egyptia as a slave;
'From those far plains he never can return,
'But must repent his faults, submit and mourn:
'No black reflection then will give us pain,
'And useful gold, my brethren, too we gain.'
The mercenary shepherds all agree,
And set him from his gloomy prison free:
He smite his breast, wet with incessant tears;
His languid eyes to heaven he pleading rears,
Whose silent eloquence revealed his fears.
But when he saw the strangers in the shade,
Diffusive hope through all his features spread;
He wiped away the pendant tears, and smiled,
When by the hand proud Ashur took the child;
His sordid soul from all soft ties estranged,
Joseph, without remorse, for gold exchanged:
The youth's simplicity and early bloom,
Each stranger with attractive force overcome:
They paid the shining ore, and journey'd on,
For in the west sunk the declining sun.
Meanwhile, over distant hills, and moss-grown rocks,
The pensive swain pursues the timid flocks.
Now late returning, and overcome with heat,
Secures his charge and seeks a cool retreat;
Beneath a cedar's lengthened shadow laid,
The vast expanse, admiring, he surveyed,
In vivid tints, by setting sol arrayed
Magnificently gay. Here streaked with gold,
The purple clouds their borrowed paints unfold;
The blushing west with deep carnation glows,
And over the skies a bright reflection throws.
-- Now imperceptibly on closing flowers
The silent dews descend in silver showers,
The appearing stars exert a feeble light,
And Reuben welcomes the approach of night:
He rises and explores the dismal shade,
And stooping over the cavern's verge he said:
' Joseph! my brother Joseph! I am come,
'Impatient to reverse thy cruel doom;
'Forgive thy Reuben's part in this black deed,
''Tis stratagem alone thy life has freed:
'Oh Joseph speak! surely thou do survive:
'Oh speak my brother, if thou art alive!
'Alas! no voice but echo's hollow sound,
'No voice but mine remurmers over the ground!
'Where shall I flee, to what dark distant shore,
'To shun reproach? for Joseph is no more.
'Why did my lips (consenting to his death)
'When they pronounced his doom, not lose their breath?' --
Again he calls, and raging in despair,
From his swollen breast the folding garment tears.
Now wild with grief, and wandering through the gloom,
He met the Hebrews all returning home*
A kid they would killed, and in the sanguine gore
Had dipped the robe which blameless Joseph wore.
Soon they appeared on Mamre's peaceful plain,
And entered Israel's tent, a guilty train;
Each feigned to be with anxious care oppressed,
And Simeon, weeping, thus his fire addressed:
'Oh can thou recollect this bloody vest!'
Old Jacob viewed it with a pausing eye;
He trembled, groaned, and scarce could make reply;
An universal horror seized his frame,
At length burst forth th'ungovernable flame:
'It is my son's! (he cried) my son is slain!
'Curst be the hour that rent him from my side!
'What baneful planet did my actions guide?
'Come, death, convey me to the peaceful urn;
' Joseph is dead! why should I live to mourn?'
In vain they try to calm his swelling grief;
He cherished sorrow, and refused relief.
On Mrs. JOHANNA LUPTON.
HER soul, unfettered from the bands of clay,
With swift-wing'd haste to heaven takes its way;
She towers the aeriel space on wings divine,
While weeping friends surround the bloodless shrine:
The softened heart there breathes a tender sigh,
And grief sits pensive in each moistened eye:
Suppress the rising tear, and with her sing,
'Death, where is thy victory? Grave, where is thy sting?'
Sing how with God she rests in endless day,
All tears of sorrow ever wiped away;
'Sing how by tortures heaven her faith has tried;
'The saint endured it, though the woman died!'
Ah, nature will prevail! it is all in vain:
Say, sacred muse, what loss do we sustain?
She wiped the eye of grief -- it ceased to flow;
Her pitying heart still felt another's woe;
Indigent virtue shared her earthly store;
She called herself God's steward for the poor:
A duteous child; a faithful, loving wife;
Serene in death, as tranquil was her life:
A pious mother -- mother now no more;
Her soft solicitude and cares are over:
Sister and friend, each tender name in one.
And is she gone? but heaven's great will be done!
Like Noah's dove, the wanderer found no rest,
Till in his ark her Savior took the guest.
Oh may we meet her on the eternal shore,
Where death shall never separate us more!
To Mr. L*****.
THE sun that gilds the western sky
And makes the orient red,
Whose gladsome rays delight the eye
And cheer the lonely shade,
Withdraws his vegetative heat,
To southern climes retires;
While absent, we supply his seat
With gross, material fires.
It Is new year's morn; each rustic swain
Ambrosial cordials take;
And round the fire the festive train
A semicircle make:
While clouds ascend, of sable smoke,
From pipes of ebon hue,
With inharmonick song and joke
They pass the morning through.
You tell me thi^ is solitude,
This Contemplation's seat;
Ah no! the most impervious wood
Affords me no retreat.
But let me recollect: it is said,
When Orpheus tuned his lyre
The Fauns and Satyrs left the shade,
Warmed by celestial fire*
His vocal lays and lyra made
Inanimated marble weep;
Swift-footed Time then paused, it is said,
And sea-born monsters left the deep:
Impatient trees, to hear his strain
Rent from the ground their roots: --
Such is my fate, as his was then,
Surrounded here -- by brutes.
To the same
DEAR Sir, when late in town you chose
To correspond no more in prose,
My viscious muse -- (but it is in vain
Of her abuses to complain) --
Neglects to aid, as I expected,
And so I must be self-directed.
You Have broke the agreement, Sir, I find;
(Excuse me, I must speak my mind)
It seems, in your poetic fit,
You mind not jingling, when there is wit;
And so to write like Done yon chose,
Whose prose was verse, and verse was prose;
From common tracts of rhyming stray,
And versify another way.
Indeed it suits, I must aver,
A genius to be singular.
On F -- r kept in durance vile,
Did once more erring fortune smile:
Again he would extend his ray,
And shine his riches all away.
Birch said, (and what he said I sing)
'A shilling is a serious thing;'
But like Icarus, F -- r springs,
Where suns dissolved his waxen wings:
No more the wings his weight sustain,
He plunges headlong in the main:
The shades of death steal over his eyes;
And to black Styx the spirit flies.
Life is a grand vicissitude
Of pain and health, of ill and good:
Your goose now mourns a murdered mate,
(Attend while I the fact relate)
He chanced upon a cloudless morn,
To wander in our neighbor's corn;
Perhaps he thought all lands were free,
And none had private property;
Or sure he never had trod the plain,
And picked, like Eve, forbidden grain:
Careless he fed, in graceful ease
And sweet simplicity of geese.
Ill-fated bird! he there was killed
By man, the tyrant of the field.
His widow's wing, Oh dire relation!
Next underwent sad amputation:
Weep not, dear Sir, at this abuse;
She bears it like a patient goose:
I fear the widow is a prude,
Or matters sooner would conclude;
Or else you have a coward heart,
And fear to act the suitor's part.
Of all the things beneath the fun, you know,
Faint heart fair lady never won. Adieu.
To the same.
FROM plains and peaceful cots I send
The humble wishes of a friend:
May love still spread his silken wing,
And life to you be ever spring:
May virtue guide you with her clue,
Life's mazy path to wander through;
And may your offspring the blessed tract pursue:
On you may Heaven benignly smile,
And inward peace external cares beguile;
Long may you live supremely blessed,
Then die, and be a Savior's guest.
The wish is over, permit me to descend
To the familiar converse of a friend.
Well, you have done right to get a wife,
For change the comfort is of life;
Besides, I Have read in ancient story,
A virtuous wife's a crown of glory:
And yet it is true that some adorn
Their husband's brows with crown of horn:
The wisest man on earth we find
Was partial to the female kind,
Till he was tricked a thousand ways,
(But men are wiser nowadays)
Which made the honest Jew exclaim,
They were all vanities, and vain:
His father, you remember David,
Who tore Readiness skirt, and ran away with it,
He also had, (though loved of God)
Plurality of wives allowed:
But since polygamy's abolished,
The wives are chaste, the husbands polished.
Since with plagiary you have taxed me,
And never since for pardon asked me,
To prove my false accuser guilty,
Repeat his borrowed lines I will to ye:
"No goose that swims, but soon or late
"Will find some gander for a mate."
You Will find this couplet, I Will engage,
In Wife of Bath, the hundredth page,
Volume the second, -- works of Pope --
Brother, you're now convinced, I hope.
However, what you prophesied
About the goose, is verified;
She Is slipped her neck in marriage noose,
And owns a sovereign Lord, and goose.
Adieu, Mon Cher Ami; the Muse
Begs you her freedom will excuse.
To the same.
DEAR brother, to these happy shades repair,
And leave, Oh leave the city's noxious air:
I Will try description, friend -- methinks I see
'Twill influence your curiosity.
Before our door a meadow flies the eye,
Circled by hills, whose summits crowd the sky;
The silver lily there exalts her head,
And opening roses balmy odours spread,
While golden tulips flame beneath the shade.
In short, not Iris with her painted bow,
Nor varied tints an evening sun can show,
Can the gay colors of the flowers exceed,
Whose glowing leaves diversify this mead:
And when the blooms of Flora disappear,
The weighty fruits adorn the satiate year:
Here vivid cherries bloom in scarlet pride,
And purple plums blush by the cherries side;
The sable berries bend the pliant vines,
And smiling apples glow in crimson rinds;
Ceres well pleased, beholds the furrowed plain,
And showers her blessings on the industrious swain;
Plenty sits laughing in each humble cot;
None wish for that which heaven gives them not.
Bu^ sweet Contentment still with sober charms,
Encircles us within her blissful arms;
Birds unmolested chaunt their early notes,
And on the dewy spray expand their throats;
Before the eastern skies are streaked with light,
Or from the arch of Heaven retreats the night,
The musical inhabitants of air,
To praise their Maker, tuneful lays prepare.
Here by a spring, whose glassy surface moves
At every kiss from Zephyr of the groves,
While passing clouds look brighter in the stream,
Your poet sits and paints the rural scene.
To Mr. BLEECKER.
YES, I invoked the Muses' aid
To help me write, for it is their trade;
But only think, ungrateful Muses,
They sent dame Iris with excuses,
They Would other business for to follow,
Begged I Would apply to God Apollo.
The God said, as heaven's charioteer,
He had no time to mind us here;
Said if we rac'd round earth like Phoebus
One day, it sadly would fatigue us;
Yet we expect, when tired at night,
He Would stay from bed to help us write:
Nor need we ask his sister Phoebe,
For turning round had made her giddy;
Her inspiration would confuse us,
So counseled us to coax the Muses.
Quite disappointed at this lecture
I left his worship sipping nectar;
But, pettishly as I left his dome,
It chanced I met the Goddess Wisdom.
No wonder she is wise, it is said
She was the product of Jove's head.
'Bright Queen,' said I, 'in these abodes
'I begged a favor of the Gods:
'They wished the poets at the devil,
'And the nine ladies were uncivil:
' Apollo told me he was lazy,
'And called his sister Phoebe crazy.
'Permit me then your kind protection,
'From you I cannot fear rejection.'
Tritonia gave me smiles and nods,
(The unsual compliments of Gods,)
And looked benign as rising sun,
Which gave me courage to go on.
' -- Oh Goddess! let your powerful arms
'Keep young Ulyssus from all harms;
'Attend him in each strange adventure,
'And be, in human form, his mentor:
'Oh bid him shun Circcan feasts,
'Whose magic power turns men to beasts;
'Nor let him touch the fatal tree,
'Lest he forget Penelope:
'Keep him from a Calypso's arms,
'And all the treacherous Syren's charms;
'In Cyclop cells let him not enter;
'Permit him not at games to venture;
'Sure as he does, he is undone,
'Each sharper is a lestrigon;
'Nor city luxury inure him,
'To be a modern epicurian;
'(For Temperance, celestial maid,
'Is still a virtue of the sh^de:)
'And dire diseases burn each vein
'Of those who Temperance profane,
'And kill her sacred beeves in vain.
'The Grecians once to Pluto's glooms
'So sunk for slaughtered hecatombs.
'If men believed in transmigration,
'How would it spare the brute creation?
'But, Goddess! let him soon return,
'Nor twice ten years in absence mourn;
'To those who ^^ve, a month appears
'As long as twenty tedious years.'
Minerva raised her aegis high,
That blazed effulgence through the sky,
And, smiling took the common oath,
To be immensely kind to both;
Then down from heaven's pure ether flew
Swifter than light -- in search of you.
On the IMMENSITY of CREATION.
OH! could I borrow some celestial plume,
This narrow globe should not confine me long
In its contracted sphere -- the vast expan^e,
Beyond where thought can reach, or eye can glance,
My curious spirit, charmed should traverse over,
New worlds to find, new systems to explore:
When these appeared, again I Would urge my flight
Till all creation opened to my sight.
Ah! unavailing wish, absurd and vain,
Fancy return and drop thy wing again*
Could thou more swift than light move steady on*
Thy sight as broad, and piercing as the sun,
And Gabriel's years too added to thy own;
Nor Gabriel's sight, nor thought, nor rapid wing,
Can pass the immense domains of the eternal King:
The greatest seraph in his bright abode
Cannot comprehend the labors of a God.
Proud reason fails, and is confounded here;
-- Man how contemptible thou do appear!
What art thou in this scene? -- Alas! no more
Than a small atom to the sandy shore,
A drop of water to a boundless sea,
A single moment to eternity.
A THOUGHT on DEATH.
ALAS! my thoughts, how faint they rise,
Their pinions clogged with dirt;
They cannot gain the distant skies,
But gravitate to earth.
No angel meets them on the way,
To guide them to new spheres;
And for to light them, not a ray
Of heavenly gace appears.
Return then to thy native ground,
And sink into the tombs;
There take a dismal journey round
The melancholy rooms:
There levelled equal king and swain,
The vicious and the just;
The turf ignoble limbs contain,
One rots beneath a bust.
What heaps of human bones appear
Pil'd up along the walls!
These are Death's trophies -- furniture
Of his tremendous halls;
The water oozing through the stones,
Still drops a mouldering tear;
Rots the gilt coffin from the bones,
And lays the carcass bare.
This is Cleora -- come, let us see
Once more the blooming fair;
Take off the lid -- ah! it is not she,
A vile impostor there.
Is this the charmer poets sung,
And vainly deified,
The envy of the maiden throng?
(How humbling to our pride!)
Unhappy man, of transient breath,
Just born to view the day,
Drop in the grave -- and after death
To filth and dust decay.
Methinks the vault, at every tread,
Sounds deeply in my ear,
'Thou too shall join the silent dead,
'Thy final scene is here.'
Thy final scene! no, I retract,
Not till the clarion's ^ound
Demands the sleeping prisoners back
From the refunding ground.
Not till that audit shall I hear
The immutable decree,
Decide the solemn question, where
I pass eternity.
Death is the conqueror of clay,
And can but clay detain;
The soul, superior, springs away,
And scorns his servile chain.
The just arise, and shrink no more
At graves, and shrouds, and worms,
Conscious they shall (when time is over)
Inhabit angel forms.
ELEGY on the Death of CLEORA.
NO more of Zephyr's airy robe I Will sing,
Or balmy odours dropping from his wing,
Or how his spicy breath revives the lands,
And curls the waves which roll over crystal sands.
No more I Will paint the glowing hemisphere,
Or rocks ambitious, piercing upper air;
The subjects of the grave demand my lay,
Spectator now, I soon shall be as they.
Cleora, art thou gone? thou do not hear
The voice of grief, nor see the dropping tear,
And yet, it soothes my sorrows while I mourn
In artless verse, and weep upon thy urn.
-- Though bright from thee the rays of beauty streamed,
Thy mind irradiate, stronger graces beamed;
The meteor shone so permanent and fair,
Who'd not mistook the vapor for a star?
-- Even then -- when lying poets flattering breath
Pronounced so fair a form exempt from death;
The icy angel met her on the plain,
And bade our friend adorn his ghastly train;
The vital heat forsakes her loitering blood;
The blood stands still -- the springs of life all stood;
Down funk the fair, while nature gave a groan,
To see her noblest structure fall so soon.
But say, some power, where is the spirit fled,
To wait the time when it shall join the dead?
Say, springs her active soul beyond the skies,
Or still around the clay enamored flies?
Or sits exalted on the empyreal height,
'Midst deluges of primogenial light?
Or else expatiates, with enlarged powers,
Where mortal man's conception never soars?
-- Ah! when the brittle bands of life are burst,
To meet her on the shores of bliss, I trust;
Sure I shall know her in the realms above,
By those sweet eyes which beam incessant love:
There we'll renew the friendship here begun,
But which shall last through the eternal noon:
Till then suspend my fond enquiries, where,
And with what souls she breathes immortal air;
Meanwhile, with imitative art I Will try,
Nobly like her to live -- like her to die!
Written in the Retreat from BURGOYNE.
WAS it for this, with thee a pleasing load,
I sadly wandered through the hostile wood;
When I thought fortune's spite could do no more,
To see thee perish on a foreign shore?
Oh my loved babe! my treasure's left behind,
Never sunk a cloud of grief upon my mind;
Rich in my children -- on my arms I bore
My living treasures from the scalper's power:
When I sat down to rest beneath some shade,
On the soft grass how innocent she played,
While her sweet sister, from the fragrant wild,
Collects the flowers to please my precious child;
Unconscious of her danger, laughing roves,
Nor dreads the painted savage in the groves.
Soon as the spires of Albany appeared,
With fallacies my rising grief I cheered;
'Resign'd I bear,' said I, 'heaven's just reproof,
'Content to dwell beneath a stranger's roof;
'Content my babes should eat dependent bread,
'Or by the labor of my hands be fed:
'What though my houses, lands, and goods are gone,
'My babes remain -- these I can call my own.'
But soon my loved Abella hung her head,
From her soft cheek the bright carnation fled;
Her smooth transparent skin too plainly showed
How fierce through every vein the fever glowed.
-- In bitter anguish over her limbs I hung,
I wept and sighed, but sorrow chained my tongue;
At length her languid eyes closed from the day,
The idol of my soul was torn away;
Her spirit fled and left me ghastly clay!
Then -- then my soul rejected all relief,
Comfort I wished not for, I loved my grief:
'Hear, my Abella!' cried I, 'hear me mourn,
'For one short moment, oh! my child return;
'Let my complaint detain thee from the skies,
'Though troops of angels urge thee on to rise.'
All night I mourned -- and when the rising day
Gilt her sad chest with his benignest ray,
My friends press round me with officious care,
Bid me suppress my sighs, nor drop a tear;
Of resignation talked -- passions subdued,
Of souls serene and christian fortitude;
Bade me be calm, nor murmur at my loss,
But unrepining bear each heavy cross.
'Go!' cried I raging, 'stoick bosoms go!
'Whose hearts vibrate not to the sound of woe;
'Go from the sweet society of men,
'Seek some unfeeling tyger's savage den,
'There calm -- alone -- of resignation preach,
'My Christ's examples better precepts teach.'
Where the cold limbs of gentle Laz'rus lay
I find him weeping over the humid clay;
His spirit groaned, while the beholders said
(With gushing eyes) 'see how he loved the dead!
And when his thoughts on great Jerus'lem turned,
Oh! how pathetic over her fall he mourned!
And sad Gethsemene's nocturnal shade
The anguish of my weeping Lord surveyed:
Yes, it is my boast to harbor in my breast
The sensibilities by God expressed;
Nor shall the mollifying hand of time,
Which wipes off common sorrows, cancel mine.
A COMPLAINT.
TELL me thou all pervading mind,
When I this life forsake,
Must every tender tie unbind,
Each sweet connection break?
How shall I leave thee, oh! my love,
And blooming progeny?
If I without thee mount above,
'Twill be no heaven to me.
Ah! when beneath the arching vault
My lifeless form's removed,
Let not oblivion sink the thought,
How much, how long I loved.
Come often my grassy tomb to see,
And drop thy sorrows there;
No balmy dews of heaven shall be
Refreshing as thy tear.
There give thy griefs full vent to flow
Over the unconscious dead,
With no spectator to thy woe
But my attendant shade.
ANOTHER.
STILL apprehending death and pain,
To whom great God shall I complain?
To whom pour out my tears
But to the power that gave me breath,
The arbiter of life and death,
The ruler of the spheres?
Soon to the grave's Cimmerian shade
I must descend without thine aid,
To stop my spirit's flight;
Leave my dear partner here behind,
And blooming babe, whose opening mind
Just lets in Reason's light.
When she, solicitous to know
Why I indulge my silent woe,
Clings fondly round my neck,
My passions then know no commands,
My heart with swelling grief expands,
Its tender fibers break.
Father of the creation wide,
Why have thou not to man denied
The silken tie of love?
Why food celestial let him taste*
Then tear him from the rich repast,
Real miseries to prove?
A PROSPECT of DEATH.
DEATH! thou real friend of innocence.
Though dreadful unto shivering sense,
I feel my nature tottering over
Thy gloomy waves, which loudly roar*
Immense the scene, yet dark the view,
Nor Reason darts her vision through.
Virtue! supreme of earthly good,
Oh let thy rays illume the road;
And when dashed from the precipice,
Keep me from sinking in the seas:
Thy radient wings, then wide expand,
And bear me to celestial land.
To Miss CATHARINE TEN EYCK.
COME and see our habitation,
Condescend to be our guest;
Though the veins of warring nations
Bleed, yet here secure we rest.
By the light of Cynthia's crescent,
Playing through the waving trees;
When we walk, we wish you present*
To participate our bliss.
Late indeed, the cruel savage
Here with looks ferocious stood;
Here the rustic's cot did ravage,
Stained the grass with human blood.
Late their hands sent conflagration
Rolling through the blooming wild,
Siez'd with death, the brute creation
Mourned, while desolation smiled.
Spiral flames from tallest cedar
Struck to heaven a heat intense;
They cancelled thus with impious labor.
Wonders of Omnipotence.
But when Conquest reared her standard,
And the Aborigines were fled,
Peace, who long an exile wandered,
Now returned to bless the shade.
Now Ae^^^^ blows the ashes
From sad Terra's black'ned brow,
While the whist'ling swain with rushes
Roofs his cot, late levelled low.
From the teeming womb of Nature
Bursting flowers exhale perfume;
Shady oaks, of ample stature,
Cast again a cooling gloom.
Waves from each reflecting fountain,
Roll again unmixed with gore,
And verging from the lofty mountain,
Fall beneath with solemn roar.
Here, embosom'd in this Eden,
Cheerful all our hours are spent;
Here no pleasures are forbidden,
Sylvan joys are innocent.
THE STORM.
COME let us sing how when the Judge Supreme
Mounts the black tempest, armed with pointed flame,
What clust'ring horrors form his awful train:
Columns of smoke obscure the crystal skies,
The whirlwind howls, the livid lightning flies,
The bursting thunder sounds from shore to shore,
Earth trembles at the loud prolonged roar:
Down on the mountain forests rush the hail,
The aspiring pines fall headlong in the vale;
The riv'lets, swelled with deluges of rain,
Rise over their banks and overflow the plain.
The Affrighted peasant ope's his humble door,
While from his roof the clatt'ring torrents pour;
He fees his barns all red with conflagration,
His flocks borne off by sudden inundation;
His teeming fields, robbed of their wavy pride,
By cat'rects tumbling down the mountain's side.
The shock suspends his powers, he stands distressed,
To see his toil of years at once reversed.
His tender mate, of philosophic soul,
Reproves his grief, and thus her accents roll
'Exert thy fortitude, for grief is vain,
'Our bread by labor we can yet obtain:
'If riches were the test of virtue, then
'Pale Poverty were infamy to men;
'But since we find the virtuous often dwells
'In public odium, or in lonely cells,
'While those whose crimes blot Nature's aspect over,
'Who burn whole towns, and quench the flames in gore;
'In Pleasure's lap supine their moments spend,
'Yet wish annihilation when they end;
'The laws of retribution then require,
'Our joys begin with death -- when their's expire;
'Reason allows no skepticism here,
'The good must hope, the bad have much to fear:
'And take a retrospect of thy past years,
'What placid scenes on every hand appears!
'To call the tears of black Remorse no crime,
'Can now suffuse thy cheek or cloud thy mind.
'Grieve not that Fate, with elemental strife
'Has torn away our hopes of mortal joys;
'To put our virtues but in exercise
'Are the misfortunes that arise in life.'
The rustic heard his sorrows all away,
Sweet Peace broke on him with a bright'ning ray;
Calmness and Hope their empire repossest,
Amidst the storm he feels serenely blessed;
Amidst the wreck of all his earthly store
He feels more grateful than he did before.
DESPONDENCY.
COME Grief, and sing a solemn dirge
Beneath this midnight shade;
From central darkness now emerge,
And tread the lonely glade.
Attend each mourning power around,
While tears incessant flow;
Strike all your strings with doleful sound,
Till Grief melodious grow.
This is the cheerless hour of night,
For sorrow only made,
When no intrusive ray of light
The silent glooms pervade.
Though such the darkness of my soul,
Not such the calmness there,
But waves of guilt tumultuous roll
'Midst billows of despair.
Fallacious Pleasure's tinsel train
My soul rejects with scorn;
If higher joys she cannot attain,
She Would rather choose to mourn:
For bliss superior she was made,
Or for extreme despair:
If pain awaits her past the dead
Why should she triumph here?
Though Reason points at good supreme,
Yet Grace must lead us thence;
Must wake us from this pleasing dream,
The idle joys of Sense.
Surely I wish the blackest night
Of Nature to remain,
'Till Christ arise with healing light,
Then welcome day again.
ELEGY on the death of Genesis MONTGOMERY.
MELPOMENE, now strike a mournful string,
Montgomery's fate assisting me to sing!
Thou saw him fall upon the hostile plain
Yet tinged with blood that gushed from Moncalm's veins,
Where gallant Wolf for conquest gave his breath,
Where numerous heroes met the angel Death.
Ah! while the loud reiterated roar
Of cannon echoed on from shore to shore,
Benigner Peace, retiring to the shade,
Had gathered laurel to adorn his head:
The laurel yet shall grace his bust; but, oh!
America must wear sad cypress now.
Dauntless he led her armies to the war,
Invulnerable was his soul to fear:
When they explored their way over trackless snows,
Where Life's warm tide through every channel froze,
His eloquence made the chilled bosom glow,
And animated them to meet the foe;
Nor flamed this bright conspicuous grace alone,
The softer virtues in his bosom shone;
It bled with every soldier's recent wound;
He raised the fallen vet'ran from the ground;
He wiped the eye of grief, it ceased to flow;
His heart vibrated to each sound of woe:
His heart too good his country to betray
For splendid posts or mercenary pay,
Too great to see a virtuous land oppressed,
Nor strive to have her injuries redressed.
Oh had but Carleton suffered in his stead!
Had half idolitrous Canadia bled!
It Is not for him but for ourselves we grieve,
Like him to die is better than to live;
His urn by a whole nation's tears bedewed,
His memory blessed by all the great and good:
Over his pale corse the marble In St. Paul's Church, in the city of New York,
is a beautiful monument raised to his memory, by order of Congress, 1783.
soon shall rise,
And the tall column shoot into the skies;
There long his praise by freemen shall be read,
As softly over the hero's dust they tread.
THAUMANTIA and FAME.
'GO Thaumantia,' said Jove, 'and descend from the sky,
'For Fame's golden clarion I hear;
'Go learn what great mortal's desert is so high
'As to ask notes so loud, sweet, and clear.
The goddess in haste met the starry winged dame,
And demands why her notes she does raise?
'For the greatest of patriots and heroes,' said Fame,
'Tell Jove it is WASHINGTON's praise!'
RECOLLECTION.
SOON as the gilded clouds of evening fly,
And Luna lights her taper in the sky,
The silent thought inspiring solemn scene
Awakes my soul to all that it has been.
I was the parent of the softest fair
Who ere respir'd in wide Columbia's air;
A transient glance of her love beaming eyes
Conveyed into the soul a paradise.
How has my cheek with rapture been suffus'd,
When sunk upon my bosom the reposed?
I envied not the ermin'd prince of earth,
Nor the gay spirit of aeriel birth;
Nor the bright angel circumfus'd with light,
While the sweet charmer lived to bless my sight.
What art thou now, my love! -- a few dry bones,
Unconscious of my unavailing moans:
Oh! my Abella! oh! my bursting heart
Shall never from thy dear idea part!
Through Death's cold gates thine image will I bear,
And mount to heaven, and ever love thee there.
On Reading DRYDEN's VIRGIL.
NOW cease these tears, lay gentle Vigil by,
Let recent sorrows dim the pausing eye:
Shall Aeneas for lost Creusa mourn,
And tears be wanting on Abella's urn?
Like him I lost my fair one in my flight
From cruel foes -- and in the dead of night.
Shall he lament the fall of Illion's towers,
And we not mourn the sudden ruin of our's?
See York on fire -- while borne by winds each flame
Projects its glowing sheet over half the main:
The affrighted savage, yelling with amaze,
From Allegany sees the rolling blaze.
Far from these scenes of horror, in the shade
I saw my aged parent safe conveyed;
Then sadly followed to the friendly land,
With my surviving infant by the hand.
No cumb'rous household gods had I indeed
To load my shoulders, and my flight impede;
The hero's idols saved by him remain;
My gods took care of me -- not I of them!
The Trojan saw Anchises breathe his last,
When all domestic dangers he had passed:
So my loved parent, after she had f^ed,
Lamented, perished on a stranger's bed.
-- He held his way over the Cerulian Main,
But I returned to hostile fields again.
To Miss TEN EYCK. Now Mrs. BRIDG^N.

DEAR Kitty, while you rove through sylvan bowers,
Inhaling fragrance from salubrious flowers,
Or view your blushes mant'ling in the stream,
When Luna gilds it with her amber beam;
The brazen voice of war awakes our fears,
Impearling every damask cheek with tears.
The savage, rushing down the echoing vales,
Frights the poor hind with ill portending yells;
A livid white his consort's cheeks invest;
She drops her blooming infant from her breast;
She tries to fly, but quick recoiling sees
The painted Indian issuing from the trees;
Then life suspensive sinks her on the plain,
Till dire explosions wake her up again.
Oh horrid sight! her partner is no more;
Pale is his corse, or only tinged with gore;
Her playful babe is dashed against the stones,
Its scalp torn off, and fractur'd all its bones.
Where are the dimpling smiles it lately wore?
Ghastly in agony it smiles no more!
Dumb with amaze, and stupify'd with grief,
The captur'd wretch must now attend her chief:
Reluctantly ^he quits the scene of blood,
When lo! a sudden light illumes the wood:
She turns, and sees the rising fires expand,
And conflagration roll through half the land;
The western flames to orient skies are driven,
And change the azure to a sable heaven.
Such are our woes, my dear, and be it known
Many still suffer what I tell of one:
No more Albania's sons in slumber lie,
When Cynthia's crescent gleams along the sky;
But every street patrole, and through the night
Their beamy arms reflect a dreadful light.
Excuse, dear girl, for once this plaintive strain;
I must conclude, lest I transgress again.
To Mr. BLEECKER, ^n his passage to New York.
SHALL Fancy still pursue the expanding sails,
Calm Neptune's ^^ow, or raise impelling gales?
Or with her Bleecker, ply the laboring oar,
When pleasing scenes invite him to the shore,
There with him through the fading valleys rove,
Blessed in idea with the man I love?
Methinks I see the broad majestic sheet
Swell to the wind; the flying shores retreat:
I see the banks, with varied foliage gay,
Inhale the misty sun's reluctant ray;
The lofty groves, stripped of their verdure, rise
To the inclemence of autumnal skies.
Rough mountains now appear, while pendant woods
Hang over the gloomy steep and shade the floods;
Slow moves the vessel, while each distant found:
The cavern'd echos doubly loud rebound:
A placid stream meanders on the steep,
'Till tumbling from the cliff, divides the frowning deep.
Oh tempt not Fate on those stupendous rocks,
Where never shepherd led his timid flocks;
But shagged bears in those wild deserts stray,
And wolves, who howl against the lunar ray:
There builds the ravenous hawk her lofty nest,
And there the soaring eagle takes her rest;
The solitary deer recoils to hear
The torrent thundering in the midway air.
Ah! let me intercede -- Ah! spare her breath,
Nor aim the tube charged with a leaden death.
But now advancing to the opening sea,
The wind springs up, the lessening mountains flee;
The eastern banks are crowned with rural seats,
And Nature's work, the hand of Art completes.
Here Philips's villa, The SEAT of Colonel PHILIPS.
where Pom^na joins
At once the product of a hundred climes;
Here, tinged by Flora, Asian flowers unfold
Their burnished leaves of vegetable gold.
When snows ^escend, and clouds tumultuous fly
Through the blue medium of the crystal sky,
Beneath his painted mimic heaven he roves
Amidst the glass-encircled citron groves;
The grape and lucious fig his taste invite,
Hesperian apples glow upon his sight;
The sweet au^iculas their bells display,
And Philips finds in January, May.
But on the other side the cliffs arise,
Charybdis like, and seem to prop the skies:
How often with admiration have we viewed
Those adamantine barriers of the flood?
Yet still the vessel cleaves the liquid mead,
The prospect dies, the aspiring rocks recede;
New objects rush upon the wondering sight,
Till Phoebus rolls from heaven his car of light,
And Cynthia's silver crescent gilds the night.
I hear the melting flute's melodious sound,
Which dying zephyrs waft alternate round,
The rocks in notes responsive soft complain,
And think Amphian strikes his lyre again.
Ah! it is my Bleecker breathes our mutual loves,
And sends the trembling airs through vocal groves.
Thus having led you to the happy isle
Where waves circumfluent wash the fertile soil,
Where Hudson, meeting the Atlantic, roars,
The parting lands dismiss him from their shores;
Indulge the enthusiast muse her favorite strain
Of panegyric, due to Eboracia's plain.
There is no land where heaven her blessings pours
In such abundance, as upon these shores;
With influence benign the planets rise,
Pure is the ether, and serene the skies;
With annual gold kind Ceres decks the ground,
And gushing springs dispense bland health around:
No lucid gems are here, or flaming ore,
To tempt the hand of Avarice and Power;
But sunburned Labor, with diurnal toil,
Bids treasures rise from the obedient soil,
And Commerce calls the ships across the main,
For gold exchanging her superfluous grain;
While Concord, Liberty, and jocund Health
Sport with young Pleasure 'mid the rural wealth.
A SHORT PASTORAL DIALOGUE. Designed for the use of her daughter and niece when
very young.

LUCIA. COME, my Delia, by this spring
Nature's bounties let us sing,
While the popler's silver shade
Over our lambkins is displayed.

DELIA. See how she has decked the ground;
Opening flowerets blush around;
Crystals glitter on each hill,
Polished by the falling rill.

LUCIA. Here the berries bend the vine,
Lucid grapes at distance shine;
Here the velvet peach, and there
Apples, and the pendant pear.

DELIA. View this maple, from whose wound
Honey trickles on the ground:
Who these luxuries can taste
Thankless of the rich repast?

LUCIA. Delia, I could sit all day
Listening to your grateful lay;
But now solar beams invade,
Let us seek a closer sh^de.

HOPE arising from RETROSPECTION.
ALAS! my fond enquiring soul,
Doomed in suspense to mourn;
Now let thy moments calmly roll,
Now let thy peace return.
Why should thou let a doubt disturb
Thy hopes, which daily rise,
And urge thee on to trust his word
Who built and rules the skies?
Look back through what intricate ways
He led thy unfriended feet;
Often mourning in the cheerless maze,
He never forsook thee yet.
When thunder from heaven's arch did break,
And cleft the sinking ship,
His mercy snatched thee from the wreck,
And from the rolling deep:
And when Disease, with threatening mein,
Aimed at thy trembling heart,
Again his mercy intervened,
And turned aside the dart.
When Murder sent her hopeless cries
More dreadful through the gloom,
And kindling flames did round thee rise,
Deep harvests to consume;
Who was it led thee through the wood
And over the ensanguin'd plain,
Unseen by ambush'd sons of blood,
Who track'd thy steps in vain?
'Twas pitying heaven that checked my tears,
And bade my infants play,
To give an opiate to my fears,
And cheer the lonely way.
And in the doubly dreadful night
When my Abella died,
When horror struck -- detesting light!
I sunk down by her side:
When winged for flight my spirit stood,
With this fond thought beguiled,
To lead my charmer to her God,
And there to claim my child;
Again his mercy over my breast
Effus'd the breath of peace;
Subsiding passions sunk to rest,
He bade the tempest cease.
Oh! let me ever, ever praise
Such undeserved care;
Though languid may appear my lays,
At least they are sincere.
I never will distrust thee more,
Though hell should aim her dart;
Innoxious is infernal power,
If thou Protector art.
It is my joy that thou art God,
Eternal, and supreme --
Rise Nature! hail the power aloud,
From whom creation came.
On seeing Miss S. T. E. crossing the Hudson.
IT IS she, upon the sapphire flood,
Whose charms the world surprise,
Whose praises, chanted in the wood,
Are wafted to the skies.
To view the heaven of her eyes,
Wherever the light barque moves,
The green hair'd sisters, smiling, rise
From out their sea-girt groves.
Even Neptune quits his glassy caves,
And calls out from afar,
'So Venus looked, when over the waves
'She drove her pearly car.'
He bids the winds to caves retreat,
And there confined to roar:
'But here,' said he, 'forbear to breathe,
'Till Susan comes on shore.'
To Miss M. V. W.
PEGGY, amidst domestic cares to rhyme
I find no pleasure, and I find no time;
But then, a Poetess, you may suppose,
Can better tell her mind in verse than prose:
True -- when serenely all our moments roll,
Then numbers flow spontaneous from the soul:
Not when the mind is harrassed by cares,
Or stunned with thunders of intestine wars,
Or circled by a noisy, vulgar throng,
(Noise ever was an enemy to song.)
What though the spiral pines around us rise,
And airy mountains intercept the skies,
Faction has chased away the warbling Muse,
And Echo only learns to tattle news;
Each clown commences politician here,
And calculates the expenses of the year;
He quits his plow, and throws aside his spade,
To talk with 'squire about decrease of trade:
His tedious spouse detains me in her turn,
Condemns our measures and neglects her chu^^
Scarce can I steal a moment from the wars
To read my Bible, or to say my prayers:
Oh! how I long to see those halcyon days
When Peace again extends to us her rays,
When each, beneath his vine, and f^r from fear,
Shall beat his sword into a laboring share.
Then shall the ^^ral arts again revive,
Cer^s shall bid the ^^^^ish'd rustic live:
When now the yells of painted sons of blood
With long vibrations shake the lonely wood,
All (...), Pomona shall behold
The branches shoot with vegetable gold;
Beyond the peasant's sight the springing grai^
Shall wave around him over the ample plain;
No engines then shall bellow over the waves,
And fright blue Thetis in her coral caves,
But commerce gliding over the curling seas,
Shall bind the severed shores in ties of peace.
Then WASHINGTON, reclining on his spear,
Shall take a respite from laborious war,
While Glory on his brows with awful grace
Binds a tiara of resplendent rays.
How faint the luster of imperial gems
To this immortal wreath his merit claims!
See from the north, where icy mountains rise,
Down to the placid climes of southern skies,
All hail the day that bids stern discord cease,
All hail the day which (...) the warrior peace:
H^rk! the glad nations make a joyful noise!
And the loud shouts are answered from the skies;
Fame swells the sound wrapped in her hero's praise,
And darts his splendors down to latest days.
To Mrs. D --.
DEAR Betsey now Pleasure the woodland has left,
Nor more in the water she laves,
Since winter the trees of their bloom has bereft,
And stiffen'd to crystal the waves.
Now cla^' all in fur our guest she appears,
By the fireside a merry young grig;
She pours out the wine, our pensiveness cheers,
And at night leads us out to a jig.
Then venture among the tall pines if you dare,
Encounter the keen arctic wind,
Dare this for to meet with affection sincere*
And Pleasure untainted you will find
I know you have Pleasure, my sister, by whiles,
But then she appears in great state;
She is hard of access, and lofty her smiles,
While Envy and Pride on her wait.
Through drawing rooms, Betsey, you will chase her in vain,
The Colonel may seek her in blood;
The Poets agree (and they cannot all feign)
That she is born and resides in the wood.
On a great COXCOMB recovering from an Indisposition.
NARCISSUS (as Ovid informs us) expired,
Consumed by the flames his own beauty had fired;
But N -- o (who like him is charmed with his face,
And sighs for his other fair-self in the glass)
Loves to greater excess than Narcissus -- for why?
He loves himself too much to let himself die.
An EVENING PROSPECT.
COME my Susan, quit your chamber,
Greet the opening bloom of May,
Let us on yon hillock clamber,
And around the scene survey.
See the sun is now descending,
And projects his shadows far,
And the be her course is bending
Homeward through the humid air.
Mark the lizard just before us,
Singing her unvaried strain,
While the frog, abrupt in chorus,
Deepens through the marshy plain.
From yon grove the woodcock rises,
Mark her progress by her notes,
High in air her wings she poises,
Then like lightning down she shoots.
Now the whip-o-well beginning,
Clamorous on a pointed rail;
Drowns the more melodious singing
Of the cat-bird, thrush, and quail.
Pensive Echo, from the mountain,
Still repeats the sylvan sounds,
And the crocus bordered fountain,
With the splendid fly abounds.
There the honeysuckle blooming*
Reddens the capricious wave;
Richer sweets -- the air perfuming,
Spicy Ceylon never gave.
Cast your eyes beyond this meadow,
Painted by a hand divine,
And observe the ample shadow
Of that solemn ridge of pine.
Here a trickling rill depending,
Glitters through the artless bower;
And the silver dew descending,
Doubly radiates every flower.
While I speak, the sun is vanished,
All the gilded clouds are fled,
Music from the groves is banished,
Noxious vapors round us spread.
Rural toil is now suspended,
Sleep invades the peasant's eyes,
Each diurnal task is ended,
While soft Luna climbs the skie^*
Queen of rest and meditation,
Through thy medium I (...)
Him -- the Author of Creation,
Infinite, and boundless power.
It Is he who fills thy urn with glory,
Transcript of immortal light;
Lord! my spirit bows before thee,
Lost in wonder and delight.
A HYMN.
OMNICIENT and eternal God,
Who hear'st the faintest prayer
Distinct as Hallelujahs loud,
Which round thee hymned are.
Here, far from all the world retired,
I humbly bow the knee,
And wish, (as I have long desired,)
An interest in thee.
But my revolting heart recedes
And rushes to the crowd;
My passions stop their ears and lead,
Though conscience warns aloud.
How deeply sinful is my mind?
To every ill how prone?
How stubborn my dead heart I find
Insensible as stone?
The hardest marble yet will break,
Nor will resist the steel;
But neither wrath nor love can make
My flinty bosom feel.
My passions like a torrent roar,
And tumbling to hell's glooms
Sweep me away from Reason's shore,
To "where Hope never comes."
By labor turned the useless stream
Through fertile vales has played;
But for to change the course of sin*
Demands immortal aid.
All nature pays the homage due
To the supremely blessed;
All but the favored being who
Was placed above the rest.
He bids the teeming earth to bear,
The bl^shing flowers arise;
At his command the sun appears
And warms the orient skies.
Oh! was I but some plant or star,
I might obey him too;
Nor longer with the Being war,
From whom my breath I drew.
Change me, oh God! with ardent cries
I Will venture to thy seat;
And if I perish, hell must rise
And tear me from thy feet.
To Miss BRINCKERHOFF, on her quitting New York.
ELIZA, when the southern gale
Expands the broad majestic sail,
While Friendship breathes the parting sigh,
And sorrow glitters in each eye,
The vessel leaves the flying shores,
Receding spires and lessening towers;
And as it cleaves the lucid sea,
The distant tumult dies away:
Then pensive as the deck you quit,
Caressing sable robbed regret,
Indulging every rising fear,
And urging on the pendant tear,
While Recollection's flattering eye
Your former pleasures magnify;
Then shall your guardian spirit smile,
Rejoiced that Fate rewards his toil;
And as he mounts on aerial wing,
Thus to his kindred angels sing:
'Hail, happy hour that snatched my fair
'To ether pure, from city air,
'Where Vice triumphant lifts her head
'And hisses Virtue to the shade;
'Where Temperance vacates each feast;
'Where Piety is grown a jest;
'Where Flattery, dressed in robes of truth,
'Inculcates pride in heedless youth;
'Where often with folded wings I spy
'The torpid soul inactive lie,
'Shut up in sense, forbid to ^ear
'Her plume beyond our atmosphere.
'How blessed my charge, whom gentler fate
'Leads early to the green retreat,
'Where every object thoughts inspire
'Exalted to seraphic fire;
'And where the speculative mind
'Expatiates free and unconfined;
'There surely I shall find access
'To cherish every budding grace,
'Enlarging still each nobler power,
'Till active, like myself they soar.
'And when my pupil learns her worth,
'She'll feel a just contempt for earth,
'And fix her elevated sight
'Alone on primogenial light:
'Nor shall her charms external fade,
'But bloom and brighten in the shade;
'While innate graces still shall rise,
'And dart their radiance through her eyes.'
To JULIA AMANDA.
FAIR Julia Amanda, now since it is peace,
Methinks your hostilities also should cease;
The shafts from your eyes, and the snares of your smile,
Should cease -- or at least be suspended awhile:
It Is cruel to point your artillery of charms
Against the poor lads who have laid down their arms.
The sons of Bellona who Britain defies,
Although bullet proof, must they fall by your eyes?
In vain have they bled, they have ^^^quer'd in vain,
If returning in triumph, the (...) ^^ur chain.
For shame! in the olive's ^ai^^^ious shade
Your murders restrain, and let peace be obeyed;
Since Europe negociates, alter your carriage,
While they treat of peace, make a treaty of marriage.
PEACE.
ALL hail vernal Phoebus! all hail ye soft breezes!
Announcing the visit of spring*
How green are the meadows! the air how it pleases!
How gleefully all the birds sing!
Begone ye rude tempests, nor trouble the ether,
Nor let blushing Flora complain,
While her pencil was tinging the tulip, bad weather
Had blasted the promising gem.
From its verdant unfoldings, the timid narcissus
Now shoots out a diffident bud;
Begone ye rude tempests, for sure as it freezes
Ye kill this bright child of the wood:
And Peace gives new charms to the bright beaming season;
The groves we now safely explore
Where murdering banditti, the dark sons of treason,
Were sheltered and awed as before.
The swain with his oxen proceeds to the valley
Whose seven years sabbath concludes,
And blesses kind heaven, that Britain's black ally
Is chased to Canadia's deep woods.
And Echo no longer is plaintively mourning,
But laughs and is jocund as we;
And the turtle eyed nymphs, to their cots all returning,
Carve 'WASHINGTON,' on every tree.
I Will wander along by the side of yon fountain,
And drop in its current the line,
To capture the glittering fish that there wanton;
Ah, no! it is an evil design.
Sport on little fishes, your lives are a treasure
Which I can destroy, but not give;
Methinks it is at best a malevolent pleasure
To bid a poor being not live.
How lucid the water! its soft undulations
Are changeably tinged by the light;
It reflects the green banks, and by fair imitations
Presents a new heaven to sight.
The butterfly skims over its surface, all gilded
With plumage just dipped in rich dies;
But yon infant has seized the poor insect, ah! yield it;
There, see the freed bird how it flies!
But whither am I and my little dog straying?
Too far from our cottage we roam;
The dews are already exhaled; cease your playing,
Come, Daphne, come let us go home.
A PASTORAL DIALOGUE.
SCENE -- TOMHANICK. 1780. SUSANNA. ELIZA, rise, the orient glows with day,
Already Phosphor darts his amber ray;
The fainting planets vanish from the skies,
Distinct already all the prospects rise;
Begin our walk, but cheer the lonely way
With music, previous to the swallow's lay.

ELIZA. My sister, cease, these hostile shades refuse
Admission to the lute or peaceful Muse;
Lo! the broad standard shades the flowery plain,
Nor crooks (but muskets) arm the awkward swain;
Death's heavy engines thunder through the vale,
And Echo but retorts the savage yell;
From undissembled grief my numbers flow,
And few the graces that attend on woe.

SUSANNA. Yet sing -- even woe a pleasure can impart.
When sweetly warbled, or if told with art.

ELIZA. Columbia rescued from barbaric powers,
Drew all the sons of want unto her shores;
The indigent, the oppressed, a sighing host,
And wretches exiled from their native coast;
For whom European affluence could not spare
A frugal morsel, pining Want to cheer;
Hither repaired, and with incessant toil
Felled the tall trees from the encumbered soil:
From the low cottage now recede the oaks,
The forest answers to the woodman's strokes;
Hard was the toil, but amply (soon) repaid
By golden harvests, which the valleys shade;
Vertumnes added to his native stores
Exotic fruits, and Flora planted flowers:
Then temples rose, the harbors opened wide,
And wealthy ships flowed in with every tide.
Thus rich and happy, virtue made them gay,
And hard got Freedom blessed each cheerful day;
By industry those blessings they obtained,
And learned to value what they dearly gained.
-- Americans! ye thought your labors over,
Ah no! the hydra Envy brings you more.
Now cast thine eyes over the Cerulian Main,
See George conspicuous by his bloody reign;
Hard by Oppression's iron chair is seen,
Where menacing she sits with threatening mein;
Still as the monarch smiles, and to her turns,
Sad Freedom trembles -- all the people mourns.
'Art thou indeed a king,' the fury cries,
'And see thy subjects all like rivals rise?
'A land of princes, opulent and proud,
'Scarce thou thyself distinguished from the crowd:
'Reduce their sumless stores, their power withstand,
'Kings were not made to ask, but to command:
'See the licentious land by riot rent,
'Say, what but fear can keep the slaves content?
'Soon thy rich rival on the Atlantic shore
'Will scorn to ask thy aid, or own thy power:
'Then bow thy scepter heavy over the waves,
'Thy safety urges, and they must be slaves;
'Restrict their trade, severer laws invent,
'And to enforce them be thy armies sent.
Ah simple prince! learn but the easier arts,
With mildest sway to rule thy people's hearts;
Firm as the center then thy throne should stand,
Revered and guarded by a grateful land.
Columbia weeps, she kneels before the throne,
But plaints, and tears, and sighs, avail her none;
One sad alternative alone remains,
The woes of war, or else the tyrant's chains.
This, Virtue from the western mountains heard,
'Be calm, my sons,' she cried, 'I am your guard;
'But if the ambitious homocide shall dare
'To pour across the seas the tide of war,
'Arm, arm in haste! it is heaven's and freedom's cause!'
Consenting nations echoed loud applause.
Now Britain's marine thunders shake the ground,
New Albian's structures fall in ruins round;
The mournful fires extend along the strand,
And ocean blushes as the fires expand;
The flames still rise, till quenched with human blood,
The sanguine stream commixes with the flood;
Then ocean blushes deeper still with gore,
And Desolation shrieks along the shore:
Nor do her coasts alone the fury feel,
Deep in her forests gleams the deadly steel;
Britannia's ally, from his dark recess,
With fell intent invades the shades of Peace.
See the low cot with ivy covered over,
Where age and youth sit smiling at the door;
The virgin carols on the dusty road,
And sprightly music fills the vocal wood:
Calm are the skies, the dewy poppies blow,
Nor man, nor beast is conscious of a foe:
Swift, like a hurricane destruction flies,
The cottage blazes, and its owner dies.
Look from this point, where opening glades reveal
The glassy Hudson shining 'twixt the hills;
There many a structure dressed the steepy shore,
And all beyond were daily rising more:
The bending trees with annual fruit did smile,
Each harvest sure, for fertile is the foil:
Nor need the peasant immolate his ox,
Nor hunger press him to decrease his flocks;
The stately stag a richer feast supplies,
The river brings him fish of various size;
With water fowl his silver lakes abound,
And honey gushes from the maple's wound.
Autumnal showers attemper'd Phoebus' ray,
The blooming meads with deep'ning green were gay,
The birds were cheerful, nor the rustic less,
Joy on his cheek, and in his bosom peace;
Down rushed the tawny natives from the hill,
And every place with fire and murder fill;
Armed with the hatchet and a flaming brand,
They soon reverse the aspect of the land:
Observe, Susanna, not a bird is there,
The tall burnt trees rise mournful in the air,
Nor man nor beast the smoking ruins explores,
And Hudson flows more solemn by those shores.
But ah! I see thee turn away and mourn,
Thy feeling heart with silent anguish torn;
Cheer up, though long and dark has been our night,
The deepest shades precede the morning light;
And when I recollect our heavenly aid,
Hope flushes round and dissipates the shade;
He who revenged the blood of Abel spilt
Has thunders sure for more extensive guilt;
Nor can we doubt, when horrors round us closed
His obvious arm how lately interposed,
To render Britain's northern phalanx BURGOYNE's army.
vain,
To blast the traitor, ARNOLD.
and defeat his plan.
For what contest we? is it thirst of gain,
Or thirst of blood that fills the land with slain?
Ah, no! tenacious of the gift of God
We would defend our Freedom with our blood;
She arms our sons, she bids them nobly dare,
And calls on Conquest to decide the war:
What though the Goddess still defers the blow,
Her arm shall soon repel the invading foe;
Her arm unfurl our starry standard wide,
For Conquest loves to be on Freedom's side.
Then let the disappointed navy fly,
Cursing the winds and inauspicious sky,
While acclamations fill the region round,
And from their hollow ships loud shouts rebound.

RETURN TO TOMHANICK.
HAIL, happy shades! though cl^d with heavy snows,
At ^^ght of you with joy my ^osom glows;
Ye arching pines, that bow with every breeze,
Ye poplars, elms, all hail my well-known trees!
And now my peaceful mansion strikes my eye,
And now the tinkling rivulet I spy;
My little garden Flora have thou kept,
And watched my pinks and lilies while I wept?
Or has the grubbing swine, by furies led,
The enclosure broke, and on my flowrets fed?
Ah me! that spot with blooms so lately graced,
With storms and driving snows is now defaced;
Sharp icicles from every bush depend,
And frosts all dazzling over the beds extend:
Yet soon fair Spring shall give another scene,
And yellow cowslips gild the level green;
My little orchard sprouting at each bough,
Fragrant with clust'ring blossoms deep shall glow:
Ah! then it is sweet the tufied grass to tread,
But sweeter slumbering in the balmy shade;
The rapid humming bird, with ruby breast,
Seeks the ^ar^^rre with early blue bells dressed,
Drinks deep the honeysuckle dew, or drives
The laboring be to her domestic hives:
Then shines the ^upin bright with morning gems,
And sleepy poppies nod upon their stems;
The humble violet and the dulcet rose,
The stately lily then, and ^ulip blows.
Farewell my Plutarch! farewell pen and Muse!
Nature exults -- shall I her call refuse?
Apollo fervid glitters in my face,
And threatens with his beam each feeble grace:
Yet still around the lovely plants I toil,
And draw obnoxious herbage from the soil;
Or with the lime-twigs little birds surprise,
Or angle for the trout of many dies.
But when the vernal breezes pass away,
And loftier Phoebus darts a fiercer ray,
The spiky corn then rattles all around,
And dashing cascades give a pleasing sound;
Shrill sings the locust with prolonged note,
The cricket chirps familiar in each cot,
The village children, rambling over yon hill,
With berries all their painted baskets fill,
They rob the sqirrels little walnut store,
And climb the half exhausted tree for more;
Or else to fields of maize nocturnal hie,
Where hid, the elusive water-melons lie;
Sportive, they make incisions in the rind,
The riper from the immature to find;
Then load their tender shoulders with the prey,
And laughing bear the bulky fruit away.
ESSAYS, IN PROSE AND VERSE.

BY MARGARETTA V. FAUGERES.

ESSAYS.
BENEFITS OF SCOLDING.
1790.
I HAVE often wondered that amongst the numbers who write for the edification
of the public, no one has ever thought fit to expatiate upon the Benefits of
Scolding; nor can I conceive why an art, whose origin we may trace in years
before the flood, and which is so much in use among the moderns* should be
disregarded by writers.

It is an ancient art, and I am persuaded a very beneficial one, not only to
individuals, such as husbands, wives, children, and servants, but to the
community at large. Schools, in particular, are much indebted to it; and though
they may not acknowledge it, nor think it merits an eulogy from their pens, yet
the flourishing state of many of our seminaries speaks loudly in its favor.
People in general would rather suffer corporeal punishment than be lectured
upon their faults; and I have known many who did not mind the rod to be
deterred from a continuance of their follies, merely by the lashes of the
tongue.

A scolding officer has often made his subalterns as angry as hornets in an
engagement; and a coward, when enraged, will fight most courageously. Perhaps
he might have called them cowards in his ill-humour, and they, out of spite,
have exerted themselves and performed wonders, which, had their leader been a
tame, peaceable creature, they would have looked upon as impracticable: and we
know an able politician, when a motion was made in the house of which he was a
member, prejudicial to the state which he lived in, who not only scolded the
house out of countenance, but out of the motion too, and made them lay it by
for years.

The spouse of SOCRATES was of a turbulent temper, which made his friends pity
him much; but SOCRATES was a wise man, and well knowing the utility of
scolding, told them, that she taught him patiently to put up with the humors
of other men.

Scolding is not only good for the mind but the body too. It makes respiration
more free, and cures colds; and by promoting perspiration, has been known to
remove complaints of long standing. Let the following account speak for it: --

A lady of my acquaintance was in a very ill state of health some time ago, as
every body thought in a consumption; but one day (as the Doctors were sitting
by her) luckily something went wrong, and the poor invalid forgetting her
reduced situation, gave vent to her feelings, and scolded most eloquently, and
displayed her talents in such a manner as rectified the mistake, brought on a
profuse perspiration, and greatly relieved her. The benefits arising from such
proceedings were more than she could have expected; she, however, repeated it
with the same success, and is now a hearty woman.

But some may be apt to inquire, "If this is true, might not people live for
ever were they to keep on scolding?" No one, I believe, has ever yet made the
experiment, nor should I dare wish to propagate such an opinion; but this I
know, that almost all scolds live to be pretty old, nor do I remember ever to
have heard of a person who died scolding.

My scolding abilities are at present very slender, but there is room for
improvement; and it is probable, if I should make any considerable proficiency
in that science, I may favor the public with a specimen.

FINE FEELINGS Exemplified in the Conduct of a Negro Slave.
1791.
NOTWITHSTANDING what the learned Mr. JEFFERSON has said respecting the want of
finer feelings in the blacks, I cannot help thinking that their sensations,
mental and external, are as acute as those of the people whose skin may be of a
different color; such an assertion may seem bold, but facts are stubborn
things, and had I not them to support me, it is probable I should not attempt
to oppose the opinions of such an eminent reasoner.

In the interior parts of this state lived (a few years ago) a man of property,
who owned a number of blacks; but formed in Nature's most savage mould, his
chief employment was inventing punishments for his unfortunate dependants, and
his principal delight in practicing the tortures he had invented. Among the
number of his slaves was an old Negro, who, in his younger days, had been a
faithful servant; but captivity and sorrow had at length broken his spir^^ and
destroyed that ambition which actuates the free, and gives energy and life to
all they perform. This was a proper subject for the cruelty of Mr. A -- to act
upon. Upon the commission of the smallest fault, on the most trifling neglect,
he would himself tie MINGO, (as butchers do sheep intended for slaughter) and
after having beaten him till the blood followed every stroke of the whip, he
would retire, leaving the wretch weltering in his gore, exposed to the burning
rays of summer or the gelid gales of winter. When rested he would return, and
after a repetition of his amusement, would release the sufferer, lest a few
more minutes of such extreme agonies should shorten the period of MINGO's woes,
and his master's felicity. However, this mode of punishment becoming a little
troublesome to Mr. A --, he thought of another which he believed would answer
nearly as well: he caused a large ox-chain to be made, and putting it about
MINGO's waist, he brought it round his neck, and there fastened it again,
leaving an end of about four yards, to which he nailed a piece of wood weighing
upwards of forty weight. With this clog the slave was obliged to work -- and
this at night was placed in the master's chamber, (the chain passing through a
hole in the door) while MINGO slept on the ground out side of the house, from
which uncomfortable couch nothing but the most bitter cold excused him.

Seven long years did the miserable being groan under this load, when the
captain of a vessel, hearing of his hard fate, out of pity bought him.

After having paid the money he went home, and sending for MINGO, told him he
was free: -- "You are your own master," said the humane sailor; but you are
old, and helpless -- I will take care of you. -- Overpowered with joy, the old
man clasped the captain's knees; he wept aloud -- he raised his swimming eyes
to heaven -- he would have spoken his thanks; -- but his frame was too feeble
for the mighty conflict of his soul -- he expired at his benefactor's feet!

A FRAGMENT.
1792.
THE darkening storms of Winter are fled -- his joy honors are dissolved --
and the hoarse gale that sported on the foaming bosom of the ocean, and bent
the tall pines of the desert, lies hushed in the cell of Tranquillity -- At the
enchanting call of Spring, the timid Snowdrop unfolds her silvery beauties, and
the fair Hyacinth diffuses abroad her delicate perfume; the green blade raises
its tender stem, and Nature, wiping away her tears, puts on the smile of
loveliness -- But, alas! O Spring! thy charms delight not the sorrowful soul of
JACINTA; in vain do thou sport around her whose heart is the dwelling of woe
-- Solitary as Night she wanders among the tombs -- for ALDELLO, the youth of
her love, sleeps the deep slumber of death -- Yes, he is gone, he is fallen to
dumb Forgetfulness an early prey -- Closed are those animated eyes which beamed
love, and unfeeling is that heart which could once melt at the tale of distress
-- Alas! it no longer responds to the light airs of Festivity, nor heeds the
mellow warblings of Melancholy; but imprisoned within the narrow precincts of
the grave, it is cold -- cold as the clod that conceals it. --

Flow on my tears -- bathe the clayey couch of ALDELLO, and let the sighs of my
breast mingle with the sounds of night, for the friend of my heart is no more
-- I sigh unpitied -- I moan unheard -- and when my tears fall, they fall not
on the bosom of Compassion -- Nightly will I visit the place of thy repose, my
love -- I will think of thy departed virtues, and weep to their memory -- and
this shall be the solace of my griefs: the hand of Spring shall re-decorate thy
turf with verdure -- and the leafless willow that nods over thine urn, shall
she again attire -- Here, fragrant Evening shall shed her sweetest: tears --
and here, the white clover, nightly lifting its moist odours to the winds,
shall blossom to adorn thy grave. --

The THRUSH shall desert the dark forest, to swell
Over thy tomb, my ALDELLO, her sorrowful song;
While the light blowing gales in the mountains that dwell,
Over the slow rol^ing HUDSON the note shall prolong.
* * * * * * * * *
THE CHINA ASTER.
1792.
'I PLANTED it with my own hand,' said my little sister, holding up a withered
China aster, plucked up by the roots -- 'I covered it from the sun -- I watered
it night and morning, and after all -- (wiping her eyes with the corner of her
frock) -- after all, it is dead!' --

Alas! how many are the occurrences in life, thought I, which resemble MARY's
flower. Too easily believing what we wish, we adopt some pretty trifle, and
laying it as it were in our bosom, love it 'as a daughter.' -- Fancy paints it
in gay colors; increasing in beauty we see its little leaves expand, and trace
its progress with anxious solicitude from the swelling bud to the full blow;
and then, when we fondly expect to enjoy it, reality tells us -- after all, it
is dead! --

How often does an only son engross all the cares of his parents, and wind
himself round every fiber of their heart -- To cherish the idol is every wish
on the stretch -- to indulge it are all the rarities of art and nature
procured; sleepless nights and anxious days are their let* and lo! when they
hope to see the end of their labors, struck by the hand of Disease, or debased
by the contaminating touch of Vice, the agonizing parents find, after all, it
is dead! --

And how sanguine are the expectations of those relatives and friends, who
possess a lovely girl, endowed with all the charms of beauty and goodness! how
do they exult in her very idea! she is the solace of their calamities, and the
staff of dependence for their declining years -- Friendship rises in her
defense like a wall -- and Affection nourishes her as the mild dews of Spring
-- Ah! to how little purpose! the canker worm of Love preys upon the delicate
root of this sweet sensitive; and the scorching winds of Disappointment drink
up its moisture -- it fades; the hands of Friendship and Affection are united
to support it in vain; for, The deep drawn often repeated sigh
Has caused Health's blushes to decay;
The tear that moistened Beauty's eye
Has worn its luster quite away.
It languishes and dies -- and Regret, bitterly weeping, raves round the lovely
fallen, and exclaims, after all, it is dead! * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * *
* *

POEMS.
A DREAM.
March, 1789.
WHEN drowsy Sleep had closed my weary eyes
Fancy conveyed me to a sandy shore,
Where the steep cliffs, wet with the midnight dews,
Re-echo'd to the surge's hollow roar;
Night had methought put on her soberest charms,
The silvery stars a feeble glimmer gave,
The winds rung mournful through the elm's green arms,
And the wan moon-beams trembled on the wave;
When from among the rocks the voice of Grief
I heard, it sadly warbled in the air;
Wondering, I turned to view from whence it came,
And lo! a form appeared divinely fair:
Her auburn hair hung creless round her neck,
Sorrow sat weeping in her beauteous eye;
The rose had faded in her downy cheek,
And from her beating bosom fled a sigh:
Grief from her frame the bloom of health had chased,
The flood she approached with tottering pace and slow;
To the blue vault of heaven her eyes she raised,
And, sighing, thus began a tale of woe:
'Still as the eve returns, my pensive soul
'O'er the Atlantic casts a mournful glance,
'And over the swelling surges, as they roll,
'Pursues my BELMONT to the shores of France.
'When he departed tears refused to flow,
'Seal'd were the fountains of my aching eyes,
'And my big heart swelled with oppressive woe,
'Just breathed a wish to yonder beaming skies.
'Ye winds be prosperous, and ye sapphire skies
'Let no black tempest over your bosom move;
'Be calm ye seas, nor let your billows rise
'To agitate the mind of him I love.
'No angel wafted to the skies my prayer;
'Vain was the wish, it sunk upon the shore;
'BELMONT was gone! the part'ner of my care
'Was gone forever, to return no more!
'By winds tempestuous was the vessel driven
'O'er the broad waste where lonely waters roll;
'Darkness hung awful round the lowering heaven,
'And heavy thunders groaned from pole to pole.
'All round the ship the clamorous billows dashed,
' Here mountains rose, there sunk to yawning graves;
'From heaven's wide gates a mighty torrent rushed,
'And plunged them headlong in the foaming waves*
'There sunk forever all my hopes of bliss --
'I bade a long farewell to happiness;
'From that sad moment when the ruthless deep
'On its cold bosom laid my LOVE to sleep.
'Low my fond BELMONT, low now lies thy head;
'Rude surges wash across thy peaceful breast;
'Forgot are all thy cares, thy fears are fled,
'And all thy griefs in blissful flumbers rest!"
She paused; she ceased, checked by a flood of tears;
When from the waters rose her BELMONT's shade;
Serene his aspect as the night was clear;
Thus spoke the angel to the sorrowing maid*
'CALISTA, give thy fruitless sorrows over,
'Oh wipe those riv'lets from thy beauteous eyes,
'Weep for thy faithful, long-lost LOVE no more,
'Nor swell thy bosom with heart-rending sighs.
'Why should thou grieve? why sorrow for the dead?
'Dost thou not know thy plaints are all in vain?
'When low in death the humid corse is laid,
'Nor sighs nor tears shall bring it life again.
'When awful thunders rattled round the skies,
'Mixt with the shriekings of the hopeless crew;
'When lived lightnings dimmed our lifted eyes,
'And Death itself presented to our view!
'Amid this soul-affrighting dismal scene,
'Upon the ROCK OF AGES standing firm,
' My happy spirit rested all serene,
'Nor trembled at the roarings of the storm.
'When gloomy waters ranked me with the dead,
'Quick to the deep my guardian seraphs flew,
'And on their glittering pinnions me conveyed
'Far, far beyond where shines the ethereal blue.
'There on the bosom of unfading Bliss
'I rest, while ages after ages roll;
'Each passing age shall see my joys increase,
'And still enlarging my capacious soul:
'Yet thence my watchful spirit hies,
'With pleasing cares, and hovers round my fair,
'To sooth corroding sorrows that arise,
'And mitigate the pangs of anxious care.
'Adieu much loved CALISTA! weep no more,
'Banish sad thoughts, prepare to meet thy love;
'Soon will this hasty strife of life be over*
'Adieu, CALISTA, we shall meet above!'
The VISION gently faded from mine eyes;
Scarce did his form the yielding waters cleave,
And the soft echo of his tuneful voice
Died on the dashings of the distant wave.
A VERSION of the LORD's PRAYER.
Nov. 1790.
OMNICIENT God! great Ruler of the earth!
Parent of man! exuberent source of good!
Whose hand has spread the south and frigid north,
Whose throne from all eternity has stood.
Upborne on Contemplation's lofty wing,
We bring our supplications to the throne
Of him from whom our choicest blessings spring,
Whose being never has a beginning known.
Thou who with dazzling glory art arrayed,
Forever hallowed be thy sacred name;
Nor may the creature which thy hand has made
Presume his Maker's awful name profane.
But hasten on the blessed important hour,
When all creation thee her Lord shall know,
When all shall feel and own thy mighty power,
And every knee and every heart shall bow.
As by the orders which surround thy hill,
And chaunt their hymns round thy effulgent throne,
And thy commands with tireless speed fulfill;
So let thy will, oh GOD! on earth be done.
Each day convenient food let us receive,
And what thou see we lack do thou bestow;
And oh! may heaven the kind forbearance give
Which daily we our fellow mortals show.
Ah let not Pleasure's facinating baits
Allure us to the slippery paths of Sin!
Nor let her gently lead us to those gates
Which she, alas! will never enter in:
But shield us, Lord, beneath thy potent wing*
Wide over the earth thy peaceful banner spread,
And there let every way-worn pilgrim bring
His cares, and rest beneath its ample shade.
Oh earth! come worship at JEHOVAH's throne
Ye habitants of heaven your anthems raise,
Omnipotence and glory are his own,
HE but is worthy of eternal praise!
To ALFRED, in Answer to a Complaint.
October, 1790.
MY friend it is true, I own it is,
The world's a cheat, as is believed;
And those who look for solid peace
On earth, will find themselves deceived;
There are no pure substantial joys
To be possessed below the skies.
But I believe, beneath the sun,
No power exists, by Reason swayed,
Who has not had, in Life's gay run,
His share of happiness displayed;
A share of that which fills the breast,
And lulls the soul perturb'd to rest.
O Youth! what bliss in thee is found!
Blessed time of gambol, sport and joy,
When music rolls in every sound,
And every object charms the eye;
When few our cares, and soon forgot,
Each pleased, delighted with its lot.
When riper years steal over our head,
They often come replete with good;
But we, by erring Fancy led,
Reject the benefits bestowed,
Some empty flitt'ring form pursue,
And lose the shade and substance too:
Yet are there not of that possessed
Which makes their lives glide on with ease,
Something which makes one mortal blessed
But would destroy another's peace,
Which reconciles him, soon or late,
To the most adverse turn of Fate?
The ragged gray misanthrope,
Disgusted, from the world withdraws,
Yet looks with pitying eye to see
Mankind deride his sapient laws;
Humanely drops a tear and cries,
"O that mankind like me were wise!"
The slave hard laboring at the oar,
Believes his lord's condition worse,
(The gouty, tortured epicure,)
And breathes his pity in a curse;
Nor would the wretch exchange his chain
For all the glutton's wealth and pain.
Even he you think oppressed with care,
The idle beggar at your door,
Who only wants a little share,
A crust, a drink, he asks no more!
He thanks the powers who have not said,
By labor he should earn his bread.
Whatever garments Bliss assumes,
She is to time nor place confined,
Nor straw thatched cot, nor stately rooms,
But dwells in the contented mind:
She holds her empire in the breast --
The cheerful mind is ever blessed.
We mar our peace by pond'ring over
The evils incident to man;
Sorrows to come, ills yet in store,
"We wont be happy when we can."
Let man not then condemn the fates
For ev^ls he himself creates.
LINES Written on a blank Leaf of Col. Humphrey's Poems.
October, 1790.
WHEN first the savage voice of WAR
We heard, Death bellowing from afar
Across the surging seas,
Thy tuneful lyra, had thou strung,
And Liberty's enchantments sung,
The music floating from thy tongue
Had bid the tumult cease:
Soon had it quelled the fierce alarms,
The foes, soothed by its softening charms,
Had gladly thrown aside their arms,
And sued for smiling PEACE.
To ARIBERT.
October, 1790.
OFTEN pleased my soul looks forward to that day
When struggling to ascend the hills of light,
My spirit bursting from these walls of clay,
Through heaven's broad arch shall bend its steady flight:
While a few friends attend the lifeless form,
And place it in the bosom of the earth;
Covering it close, to shield it from the storm
And the cold blusters of the whistling north.
Near the sea shore the corse shall be conveyed;
A small white urn the polished stone shall grace,
And a few lines, to tell who there is said,
Shall Friendship's hand engrave upon the face.
The dark green willow, waving over my head,
Shall cast a sadder shade upon the waves;
And many a widowed swain, and slighted maid,
Shall wear a garland of its weeping leaves:
Far spreads its shadow over the pathless vale --
Through its lank boughs the zephyrs sighing pass,
And the low branches, shaken by the gale,
Bend slowly down and kiss the fading grass.
To this lone place the bird of night shall come;
To me shall hie the widowed tur^le too,
And as she perches on the chilly tomb,
Warble her woes in many a plaintive coo.
There too the trav'ller who h^th lost his way,
By the dim glimmer of the moon's pale beam,
Shall spy the marble which conceals my clay?
And rest his weary feet to read the name.
When over our world Night's auburn veil is cast.
Oh! should thou ever wander near these shores,
Pond'ring the cheerful hours which fled so fast,
With those who were -- but are, alas! no more:
To this lone valley let thy footsteps turn --
Here, for a moment rest thy pausing eye;
Just brush the withered leaves from off my urn,
And yield the tribute of a friendly sigh.
With thee perhaps Matilda too may stray,
To see where lies the friend once held so dear,
And (as she wipes the gathering dust away)
May to my memory drop perhaps a tear:
And should some artless, undesigning friend
Enquire 'whose head rests here?' him you may tell,
As slowly over the sod your steps you bend,
''Tis Ella rests within this humble cell.'
To the Memory of ALEON, who died at Sea in the Year 1790.
February, 1791.
ALEON is dead! -- The sullen trump of fame
Blew the sad tidings to the western shore:
The scythe of Time, the wasting hand of Pain
Has lodged him with the myriads gone before.
How late he wept his brother-warriors dead!
Cut off untimely in Life's early day:
Alas! the kindred spirit too is fled;
We now to him the same sad tribute pay.
He, like themselves, 'the creature of a day,'
Beneath the frigid arm of Death has bowed:
Yes, Aleon lies -- the valiant and the gay,
Deep in the bosom of the stormy flood.
Thus courage, beauty, sentiment, and wit
Bloom in an hour, and bloom but to decay:
Life quits its suppliants, as the airy sprite
Before the morning gale fleets fast away.
Yet to his memory shall a pile be reared,
And each past service meet a kind return;
Still shall his name by freemen be revered,
And laurels spring and blossom round his urn.
'But pensive poetess,' some one may say,
'When these memorials of the good shall fade,
'Will not his worth to time become a prey,
'And sink into Oblivion's darkest shade?'
Ah! surely no -- the triumph ends not here,
Beyond the tomb his brightest prospects rise;
Sublime he soars above this vale of tears --
He gains a life eternal when he dies.
An ADDRESS to a PROFILE.
1791.
BEAUTIFUL profile, much, too much beloved,
By her whose artless heart dictates this lay;
Why is thy dear original removed
From my impatient eyes so far away?
Thou dear resemblance of that noble youth,
Why art thou all that I can call my own
Of him? why not his heart, that seat of truth!
Why are my tender cares to him unknown?
Ah! rather why did I my heart permit
^ondly to roam over Hope's illusive plain
Why for a stranger did its pulses beat,
While fl^^'^ing passions throb'd through every vein?
While I complain, perhaps he gaily roves,
From cruel doubts and disappointments free;
And (sickening thought!) perhaps he fondly loves,
Nor knows there lives a hapless maid like me!
Deceitful Hope! thy flowery courts I Will quit,
Nor more present my offerings at thy shrine,
But scorning censure, weep my wayward fate,
For L**** never -- never can be mine.
ELEGY to Miss ANNA DUNDASS.
March, 1791.
'O ELLA! tune thy lyra,' did thou say?
And art thou, ANNA, pleas I with notes like mine,
Which chord but with the slow ^on'd dirge-like lay,
Which sad and plaintive weep at every line?
Let others ask reful^^ ^t Sol for aid,
When glows the or^ent with pervading day;
Or court the Muses in the balmy shade,
Where vi'lets bloom and dimpling fountains play.
I wait not Phosphor's nor Apollo's beam,
Nor the warm smiles of joy inspiring Spring,
To rouse my Muse -- woe is a ready theme,
And drowsy night the season when I sing.
Such nights, when Luna faintly gilds the waves,
And shad'wy forms fleet over the watery waste;
When restless spirits leave their ^^rsy graves,
And stalking slow, moan to the hollow blast.
It Is then, amidst the universal gloom,
My pensive soul pursues her favorite plan,
Weeps over my friends descended to the tomb,
And mourns the melancholy state of man.
"Child of a day" -- the be^^^^ of an hour,
He hurries swiftly through Life's troublous scene;
Treads the same round which thousands trod before,
Their dies, and is as though he never had been.
Y^^ he must die, the nearest friends must part,
The victor Death accepts not of a claim;
And though the stroke may crush a kindred heart,
He heeds it not -- to supplicate is vain.
But oh! it is sad to see an infant pour
Its plaints round one just ready to depart;
This bursts the heart consigned to Death before,
And adds a sting to his acutest dart.
This, ANN ELIZA, on a dying bed,
Severely felt -- she fondly wept for me;
She strained me in her arms, and weeping said,
"When I am gone -- ah! who will care for thee?
"What tender friend will guide thy infant thought
"When cares shall call thy father far away?
"By whom will thou to act aright be taught?
"Ah! who, my ELLA! who will care for thee?"
Oh! 'twas a bitter pang -- I feel it yet!
My bosom swells with every sigh she gave;
And the soft drops with which her cheeks were wet
Wound the full heart they dropped but to relieve.
But ANNA, lest my sorrows give thee pain,
While thus the tear of fond affection flows,
I Will hush my plaints -- and close the mourning strain,
And bid adieu awhile -- to all my woes.
MORNING.
1791.
THE spicy morn, with purple ray,
Faintly illumes the eastern skies,
While from each dew besprinkled spray
Ambrosial odours gently rise;
Silence still holds the wide domain,
The Zephyrs slumber in the shade;
The stream that creeps along the plain,
Scarce murmurs to the listening glade:
No songstress breathes her artless lay,
No footsteps print the dewy vale,
Over the broad lawn no lambkins stray,
For sleep still nods over hill and dale,
Where pensive Grief forgets to sigh,
There Morpheus still thy station keep,
And with thy signet seal the eye,
The eye which only wakes to weep.
But while I speak, the prospects change,
The warblers dance upon the air,
The fleecy tribe the pastures range,
Refreshed with sleep, and free from care:
All nature bows -- all nature sings,
And to its author homage pays;
Each part a grateful tribute brings,
The whole creation gives him praise.
Be thou not, oh! my languid soul,
An indolent spectator here,
While clouds of cheerful incense roll
To him who rules above our sphere:
Before him pour the lay sincere,
When Morning's beams thine eyes shall bless,
And let the shades of Evening hear
That still thou do his name confess.
EVENING.
1791.
SOL's golden chariot down the western sky
Has rolled, closed are the pearly gates of light;
The varied prospects, fading, leave the eye
Wrapped in the shroud of solitary night.
Hudson, in silence, laves the moon-gilt shores,
The winds hum sullen over the lucid plain,
And Grief her plaints in pensive music pours,
While Echo, sad, repeats the melting strain*
Ah! what a tone arrests my raptured ear,
Sweet as the thrush's note at close of day,
While balmy breezes, through the humid air,
On gilded plumes waft the soft sounds away.
It Is Artha sings, the mournful voice I know,
I know the broken sigh which checks the song,
While accents soft of unaffected woe,
Warm from the heart, drop from her artless tongue. --
"O chilly moon! O paler lamp of heaven!
"The joys I Have known by thy fair light are over,
"And these sad eyes, which hailed returning even,
"See beauty in thy silver ray no more:
"For since my brother slumbers with the dead,
"Each once-lov'd object wears a cheerless gloom;
"Each jocund thought, each happier view is fled,
"Is with my Orlin sunk into the tomb.
" Five years had seen me taste unmingled joys,
"When War's trump blew -- I heard the solemn swell;
"My father heard his struggling country's voice,
"He felt her wrongs -- he rushed to war -- he fell!
"With pious hand my Orlin wiped the tear
"From the pale cheek of her who gave us breath;
"But vain to soothe her anguish was his care,
"She pining sunk, cropped by the hand of Death!
" One yet remained my heedless steps to guide,
"To feel my sorrows he forgot his own;
"Blessed with his care, I had no wish beside;
"But he -- oh, bitter thought! -- he too is gone!
"O life! how complicated are thy woes!
"Fain from thy realm of sorrow would I fly,
"Forgot the goods and ills thou can bestow,
"And pass thy closing gates without a sigh.
"Peace! peace, my heart! thy achings soon will cease,
"Forbear thy pantings, I shall soon rejoin
"The happy spirits of my loves in peace,
"And taste with them the bliss which is divine.
" Silent as Death the moments stole along,
"Last night, as late through mouldering ruins I past;
"The bird of eve had closed her darkling song,
"Nor hung an echo on the dying blast:
"When lo! in sleepless unremitted calls
"The death-watch beat the flying hours away,
"And sighing ghosts bent through the broken walls,
"And slowly whispering, chid my lingering stay.
"O grant me resignation! power supreme!
"'Till thou in love shall summon me away,
"'Till Death shall wake me from this troublous dream,
"And mine eyes open on eternal day."
So be it love -- may Peace her pinions spread
Around the weary couch by Artha pressed;
May angels warble sonnets round her head,
To lull her melancholy soul to rest.
And oh! may heaven, in pity to her woes,
Soothe her sad heart, to many a pang a prey,
And in religion grant her sweet repose,
'Till angels waft her to the realms of day.
NIGHT.
1791.
HAIL TWILIGHT! hail thou sober pleasing form,
Who now approachest us in fair array,
Thou offspring of the Sun, wherever thy light
Is shown, thou giv'st new life to all around;
The weary peasant from the gilded mount,
With joyous heart, descries thee from afar,
And hastening homeward, whistles through the field
His thanks to thee for bringing him relief.
The horse and oxen now forsake the plough,
Or quit the heavy yoke, and seek the shade,
Where in some rolling stream they quench their thirst,
Or on the bank repose their weary limbs
In sleep; enjoy the present hour, nor see
Their future ills, nor recollect the past.
But see the EVENING solemnly draws near;
All Nature welcomes her; the fleecy tribe
Bleat forth their thanks to him who gave them breath,
As slowly to their fold they bend their way,
And their conductor lifts his heart and eyes
In silent awe, and gives his Maker praise:
The feathered choir now warble softliest notes,
And every hill responds to Music's voice;
While wandering breezes through the dewy wood
On their light plumes, the whispering echos bear:
And shall I hold my peace when all around
Invite me to partake with them the rich,
The sweet, the great repast of gratitude?
No! I Will break forth and mingle with the throng,
And thus address my Author and my End:
'LORD, what is man, or what his mighty deeds,
'That thou from thine eternal throne should stoop
'To pity him, and grant him happiness,
'To be his guest* and health to be his friend?
'Where'er we turn we see thy mighty love,
'Thy matchless goodness, and unequalled power:
'Make us to love thee, FATHER, as we aught,
'And make our every action, word and thought
'To speak thy goodness, and to give thee praise."
The queen of night, with her resplendant train,
Shines from behind the hills; her golden lamps
Hung high in heaven, bedeck the dark blue sky,
And grace the earth, and scatter wonted light.
Ye wondrous worlds who now to us appear
Like little orbs, inferior to our own,
Still sparkle bright, and glitter on through time,
And show to all the nations round* that HE
Who built your spheres, is powerful and great!
How calm the night! how silent and serene!
No dreadful whirlwinds blow, nor thunders roar,
Nor earthquake shakes the ground, but all is hushed,
The Zephyrs softly steal through the deep grove,
Fanning the slumbering birds, while Cynthia's beam
Quivers in silence over the glassy stream,
Moved by the breathings of the passing gale*
Not such the eve when BERTRAND left these shores,
Deep howled the storm, heaven's windows opened wide,
And rain, hail, sleet and snow came rushing down
In many a fiery blast, on furious wing:
Then sulphur mixed with ice, and flame with snow,
Black thunders rolled across the angry heaven,
And forked lightnings through the sable skies
Hurled swift destruction on the world beneath;
Old Ocean roared, and from his lowest caves
Sent forth his darkening waves, which round the ship
With force impetuous long dashed to and fro;
But ere the rising of another sun
Oerwhelm'd the passengers with "watery death."
Oh! what a night of sorrow and despair!
BOREAS and NEPTUNE, and AEOLUS fought;
The weeping NAIADS left their oozy beds
And fled for succor to the distant shores,
While frighted THETIS stiff'ning with amaze,
Forgot the power to flee!
Long held the contest, till the pitying SUN
Looked down, and saw how in confusion wild
The watery empire lay; he interposed,
And summed up all his shining rays, a host
Of glittering warriors, whose refulgent spears
Dispersed the fluttering clouds, and calmed the air.
Now Midnight's mournful veil is drawn around*
While the wan moon gleams fainter through the trees,
Vapors opaque the shadowy mountains shroud,
And shricking ghosts fleet fast along the plain.
Now is the mournful time! the hour of woe,
When Poverty's forsaken aged sons
Toss on their thorny couch in deep distress,
And Sorrow's ancient weeping daughters now
Reflect on all their woes, their former griefs,
Their miseries, and dread futurity:
Hark! how that groan, wrung from the heart of woe,
In bitter agonies arrests my ear!
Dismally plaintive rolls the feeble sound,
And calls for succor from some pitying hand:
Ah! the dread King of Terrors even they call
To hurl with speed the long expected dart!
Perhaps he strikes! perhaps just now the soul
Sprung from its bands into eternity!
Dark seems the passage -- all the lights are closed,
And the dim eyes of my affected soul
Open upon the doleful scene, in vain:
How feels the soul just stepping from its barque,
Upon hose boundless shores, dreary and dark,
Where ends all space and time, a stranger there?
She knows not where to turn her wondering form*
Till some kind Spirit, sent from the abode
Of JESUS, takes her to the land of peace,
Or from the realms of sorrow, some black fiend
Seizes her pale, and trembling as she stands,
And plunges her into the gulf of woe!
How silent, O how peaceful is the GRAVE!
Silent and dark as thee, O much loved Night!
There neither Pride nor Discontent can come,
Nor pensive Melancholy, no, nor is
The mournful voice of Sorrow heard to weep!
There are our griefs in sweet oblivion lost,
When every avenue of life is closed;
And though our friends may moan around our couch,
We still sleep on regardless of their plaints:
There finds the weary traveller a rest,
And there the child of Poverty a home;
The bosom that with sharp affliction throbb'd,
And the sad heart that swelled with many a sigh,
There rest in silence, and the sad tongue which
In piteous accents told its miseries
And woes, ceases for ever to complain!
Oh thou repository of the dead!
Thou asylum of many a broken heart!
Close locked within thy cold unfeeling arms
ELIZA's body sleeps! dust sinks to dust!
And the slow worm, unconscious of her worth,
Crawl over my parent's consecrated breast,
That breast so lately filled with every grace,
With every virtue which could charm the soul:
But their meridian soon, too soon they reached;
For while gay Beauty mantled on her cheek,
And jocund Youth sat smiling in her eyes,
Even then the King of Horrors raised his dart
And chilled her blood, and bid her trembling heart
With fond maternal love to beat no more.
Mine was the loss, but sure it was her gain,
Death could but conquer clay, the rest was free.
Methinks I see her leaving mortal life,
Her spirit fluttering to attend the calls
Of waiting angels, whose melodious voice
Wear out the pangs of death, and hail her safe;
While the big soul, burst from its narrow shell,
Expanding flies: the scene grows brighter still;
Some lofty seraphim appears her guide;
With joyful smiles his radiant footsteps shine,
And scatter day and glory from the skies:
They reach the gates where "Bliss forever reigns,"
Where griefs and carking cares no more shall be,
But lost in wondering at the Savior's love,
Each spirit spends eternity in bliss,
In silent rapture, nameless extacy!
Oh thou pure essence! could I follow thee
Still farther on, how would my soul rejoice!
But Nature bids me stop, nor urge my flight
(Eagerly stretched) to where I cannot see.
Forever fled from earth! -- my heart still bleeds
At the remembrance, when in agonies
I saw her lay, when the cold chills of Death
Ran through her frame, and every drop of life
Within its closing channel lay congealed!
Fresh in my mind the uncheery scenes arise,
Each groan again I hear! each piercing cry!
Each languid look I see! the dawn of death,
And the sad beatings of the death bell still
Hum slow and dismal in my frighted ear!
Alas! O GOD! will thou not hear the prayer
Sent from a heart sincere, robbed of a fond
Indulgent parent, whose oft-heard advice
By thine assistance me has brought thus far.
O bow thy mighty ear! still be my GOD,
PROTECTOR, and my GUIDE through Life's sad ways!
That when my soul shall sever from its clay,
And I unmourn'd slide gently in the grave,
My happy spirit, purified, may join
ELIZA, on the shores where Rapture dwells,
And through Eternity's exhaustless round
Praise and adore the SOVEREIGN LORD OF ALL.
To MORTIMER Embarking for the West Indies.
1791.
FAREWELL, my friend, the steady gale
Invites the anxious crew away,
Rolls up the waves, swells every sail,
And lingering chides thy long delay.
And yet, methinks, with falt'ring voice,
A something bids me wish thee stay;
It Is Friendship waits to give advice,
Just hear her speak, and then away.
While wandering over the stormy deep,
Resign thyself to Virtue's sway;
Let Rectitude thy bosom keep,
And Peace shall gild each fleeting day*
And often as with reverted eyes
You sighing look toward your home,
Remember, that benignant skies
Protect you wheresoe'er you roam.
Let gratitude dictate a lay
To him who brought thee over the main,
Where the fair islands greet thine eye,
Where spring and autumn jointly reign.
Though splendid Vice with dauntless hand,
There slights the mask she puts on here;
Where thousands court her loved command,
And worship her with zeal sincere.
Yet when her gay, her frantic train
Would tempt thee to the rounds they run,
Remember, that thou art a man,
That thou art Eboracia's son.
Nor let the senseless, daring proud,
Who flock around unwary youth,
Persuade thee to the impious crowd
Who mock at God, and hate the truth.
But all thy days to Wisdom give,
Improve the moments as they fly;
So shall thou like the righteous live;
So shall thou like the righteous die.
A VERSION of part of the 7th Chapter of JOB.
1791.
AS sighs the lab'rer for the cooling shade,
When glowing sunbeams scorch the verdant blade,
Or as the hireling waits the scanty sum,
By the hard hand of painful labor won;
So waits my spirit, with anxiety,
Death's calm approach, from woe to set me free;
For oh! my days are spent in vanity,
And nights of sorrow are appointed me.
I love not life -- it is a burden grown --
Distress and Care have claimed me for their own,
And pale Disease, with unrelenting hand,
Sports with my sighs, and casts them to the wind.
In vain does night return to bless these eyes;
Sighing, I say, "Oh when shall I arise?
"When will the night be gone!" Convulsed with pain,
I raise my eyes to heaven for aid in vain;
My heart grows faint -- and tossing to and fro,
I waste the lonely hours in sullen woe.
Or if indeed my eyes should chance to close,
And weary nature gain a slight repose,
Then am I scared with terrifying dreams;
Wild shrieks I hear, and melancholy screams,
While hideous shapes crowd on my troubled sight,
Adding new horrors to the glooms of night.
Oh! I Am forlorn -- in bitterness of soul
My cries burst forth -- like floods my sorrows roll --
Forgot -- abandoned -- destitute -- alone --
No pitying ear inhales the heart-wrung groan,
No friendly converse my sad spirit cheers,
No feeling breast receives my bitter tears;
Gone is each comfort -- hope itself is fled;
O that I rested with the quiet dead!
No glimpse of good mine eyes again shall see,
Let me alone -- my days are vanity.
But soft my griefs, my life is but as wind,
Soon will it pass and leave no trace behind;
Soon will my aching heart a respite have,
Lodged in the mouldering chambers of the grave.
As fleets the cloud before the northern blast,
So does the life of mortal beings haste;
And I shall sleep in dust -- there weary pain
Shall never vex my anguish'd frame again:
Then though adversity, with iron hand,
Shall crush the rising honors of the land:
Though war may waste -- and sickness blast in death,
The soul that murder spared upon the heath,
Yet shall I slumber, 'midst the awful roar,
For he that sleeps in death shall wake no more.
A SALUTE to the Fourteenth Anniversary of AMERICAN INDEPENDENCE.
1791.
ALL hail to thy return,
O! ever blessed auspicious morn,
By mercy's author given:
See! to greet the happy day
Sol expands his brightest ray,
And not a cloud obscures his way,
Nor shades the face of heaven.
More sweet this day, the cannons martial roar,
Than all the dulcet sounds which music's soul can pour;
For every gale that over Columbia flies
Bids on its balmy wings some Paean rise,
Some song of Liberty;
And every peal that mounts the skies,
In solemn tones of grandeur cries,
"AMERICA IS FREE!"
Sound, O Fame! thy clarion strong,
Bear the golden notes along,
Let Gallia hear the song;
Beat each heart with pleasure high,
Flush each cheek with purest joy,
Let rapture glitter in each eye,
And tune each grateful tongue.
Hail! O land! -- long may old time behold
Freedom over thee her standard wide unfold,
While ages shall roll on,
'Till to a chaos sinks again this ball,
'Till worlds to primogenial nothing fall,
And quenched thy blaze, O sun!
WINTER.
November, 1791.
OFTEN times the wandering Muse by silence led,
When pensive Night has wrapped the world in sleep,
By dewy lawns and warbling rills has strayed,
Trod the green slope, or climbed the craggy steep;
Or, by the margin of some weeping stream,
Where spreads the sensitive its leafage fair,
Watched the faint quiv'rings of the lunar beam,
Or feeble glimmerings of some distant star;
Or, where some ragged cliff, with lowering brow,
Blackens the surface of the swelling deep,
Where billows dash, and howling tempests blow,
Where wizard shapes their nightly revels keep;
Or on the shelly shores, where spirits roam,
Sounding their sorrows to the midnight gale,
While round their steps the restless waters foam,
And hollow caves respond the dismal wail.
There (as upon the flood floats the moon's rays,
And rolling planets shed their silv'ry light;)
There, wrapped in musings deep, and steadfast gaze,
In solemn rapture has she past the night.
But now the frighted Muse these scenes forsakes,
Quits the gay forest and enameled plain,
The shadowy vales, the smooth pellucid lakes,
For Winter comes with all his blustering train --
He rolls his rapid storms along the skies;
With tumult fraught, the raving tempest roars;
Over the broad beach the heaving surges rise,
Groan in the winds, and foam along the shores.
With hasty wing the vernal season flies,
Some happier clime, with smiles benign to charm,
While the keen arctic whistles round our skies,
And the tall forest nods before the storm.
Despotic Time, who guides the changing year,
Blasts the fair scenes that rose at his command,
And weeping Nature, desolate and drear,
Owns the sad traces of his spoiling hand:
And yet, again shall this same hand unfold
Winter's cold gates, and bid the fountains flow;
Make rosy Spring profusely pour her gold,
And bid her blossoms wear a richer glow.
The lark shall quit the solitary bush,
Smooth her soft plumes, and tune her warbling tongue,
While from some copse the late dejected thrush
Cheers the glad valleys with a sprightly song.
Cease then, O Muse! to drop the useless tear,
Ah! touch no more the melancholy string,
Since Earth again the blooms of life shall wear,
And wintry glooms give place to smiling Spring.
FRIENDSHIP.
January, 1792.
'FRIENDSHIP! I hate thy name -- my rancled heart,
'Forever wounded by thy treacherous hand,
'Bleeding afresh defies the power of art,
'Its pangs to soften, or extract the smart,
'For who, ah who can draw the bitter dart
'Implanted by a chosen, bosom friend?
'Too long I harbored thee within my breast,
'Thou base destroyer of my rest;
'Too long thy galling yoke did bear:
'For while I cherished thee with fostering care,
'Thou did thy poisonous sting prepare,
'And wrung the heart that fondly thee carest.
'But now adieu, thy reign is over,
'For thee that heart no longer sighs;
'And at thy voice shall joy no more
'Suffuse this cheek, nor grace these eyes.
'Thy every transport I Will forego,
'Thy sov'reignty disclaim;
'And if no more thy sweets I know,
'I know no more thy pain.
'Tranquil my hours shall glide away,
'No more a prey to poignant woes;
' Content shall bless each rising day,
'And charm each night with calm repose.
'No more shall tears stray down my cheek,
'Wak'd by thy sympathetic voice,
'Nor griefs, too big for utterance, break
'An injured heart that venerates thy ties;
'Nor sighs all eloquent a language teach,
'That mocks the idle power of speech.'
Thus, once in anguish'd mood I wept and sung;
Warm from the heart the unfeeling accents sprung;
For Perfidy's cold touch had chilled
Each softer, gentler motion there,
And every painful chasm had filled
With weak mistrust and fretful care.
But vain I sought those scenes of bliss,
Which Fancy's flattering pencil drew;
When the delights of smiling Peace
Each hour should brighten as it flew:
With Friendship every joy had fled,
With her each rapture took its ^light;
Nor longer charmed the branching shade,
Nor fragrant morn, nor spangled night.
In vain for me the songster swelled its throat,
In vain the buds their moistened sweets disclose;
Nor cheered their glowing tints, nor soothed the note;
Alas! the selfish heart no pleasure knows.
'Ah, Hope!' sighed I, 'are these thy proffered joys?
'Are these the hours of bliss that should be mine?
'Few have I known since loosed from Friendship's ties.'
Again my vows I offered at her shrine.
Sudden, as from Castalia's favored spring,
As sweet, as soft a tone I hear,
As ever floated on mild Ev'ning's wing*
Or soothed pale Echo's ear.
Caught by the strain, each tear forgot to flow,
Each bitter rising murmur straight represt;
When, with enchanting air and placid brow,
The lovely fair Calista stood confessed.
In feelings lost, tumultuously sweet,
Exultingly I owned her gentle sway,
And blessed the heart whose sympathetic beat
Hailed the young dawn of Friendship's rising day.
To the Reverend J*** N*****.
January, 1792.
HERE, late, where Ruin's standard was unfurled,
And bloody war laid waste our western world,
The mildest beams of Peace benign are shed,
And Piety exalts her conquering head;
Age finds her flowery path, and heedless youth
Submissive kneels the advocate of truth!
With spirits changed we think of feuds no more,
But greet our seniors on a distant shore;
Though barren wilds and mountains intervene,
And the Atlantic rolls her floods between.
Will then fair Olney's aged bard excuse
The weak exertions of a youthful muse?
The genuine wishes of whose heart sincere,
All glowing breathe to heaven for him a prayer.
Long may thou to thy land a blessing be,
And many fruits of thy kind labors see;
May Patience soothe thee in thy worldly cares,
And a bright faith light thy declining years;
'Till late our GOD shall call the Wanderer home,
And bid the longing, hoping exile, "come."
Then may thy soul, upborne on angel's wing,
Fleet to the realms of everlasting love;
With raptured myriads Mercy's source to sing,
And all the fullness of Emanuel prove.
To the MOON.
April, 1792.
WHILE wandering through the dark blue vault of heaven,
Thy trackless steps pursue their silent way,
And from among the starry host of even,
Thou shed'st over slumbering earth a milder day;
And when thou pour'st abroad thy shadowy light
Across the ridgy circles of the stream,
With raptured eyes, O changeful nymph of night!
I gaze upon thy beam.
GREAT was the hand that formed thy round, O Moon!
That marked the precincts of thy steady wheel,
That bade thee smile on Night's oblivious noon,
And rule old Ocean's solemn swell;
GREAT was the POWER, that filled with radiant light
Those Worlds unnumber'd, which from pole to pole
Hang out their golden lamps to deck thy flight,
Or gild the Planets which around thee roll.
From realms of Love, beyond where moves the Sun,
Whose distant beams create our brightest day,
Beyond where Stars their ceaseless circles run,
Or l^rid Night emits his opaque ray;
Mounted on the dark'ning storm,
On the strong whirlwind's ragged pinions borne,
With glory circumfus'd, the Source of Bliss
Sublime, came flying over the vast abyss.
His voice was heard -- in dire dismay
Chaotic Darkness fled away,
While bursting waves of Light the flight beheld,
And all the spacious void triumphant filled.
Without delay, this restless ball
Uprose, obedient to his call;
But that he spoke it into light,
It still had slumber'd in eternal night:
The mountains reared their verdant head,
The hills their destined places found,
And as the fountains poured their waters round,
Ocean submissive wandered to her bed;
The Sun arose -- with beam benign he shone,
And terra cheered with splendours all his own.
"Go gild the morn," his maker said.
Impatient to obey,
Over half the globe his rays he spread,
And blazed along the day.
Then wast thou formed with all the starry train
That decorate the evening skies;
Some made to travel through the sapphire plain,
And some forbid to set or rise.
Long have thou reigned, and from thine amber throne
The various changes of this world have known;
H^st seen its myriads into being rise,
S^^^^e their short hour, and then their life resign;
New generations seize the fickle prize,
And like their sires, but strengthen to decline:
Yet be not vain, (though since thy natal day
Some thousand years their circling course have made)
For lo! the era hastens on apace,
When all thy glory shall for ever fade.
Earth shall the revolution feel,
The change of seasons shall be over,
Time shall forget to guide his wheel,
And thou, O Moon, shall set to rise no more!
SILENCE.
Philadelphia, 1792.
DAY slow retreats on showery wing,
And Evening climbs the eastern skies;
The hovering vapors round the shores arise,
Or to the tall rock's frowzy summit cling:
The hum of busy care is done,
A welcome respite twilight brings;
And in the ear of Labor's son,
The lulling song of Quiet sings.
All, all is still and peaceful as the grave,
Save where the Delaware's distant billows roar,
When driven by rushing gales, the yielding wave
Throws its white waters on the echoing shore.
Hark! the shrill quall wi^h deep swollen note
Breaks the dumb silence of the scene:
The waking breezes sullen round it float,
Fold their soft wings, and sink to rest again.
Hail, lonely hour! enchanting Silence hail!
When no intrusive ^ound thy realm invades,
When fervent thought can pierce Night's closest veil,
And rise exulting over surrounding shades;
Say, will Day's glories with thy clouds compare,
Where boisterous Tumult rolls his thundering car?
Or, can Apollo's blazing beams diffuse
Over the sad heart, surcharged with grief,
So kind a balm -- so sweet relief,
As thy soft winds and odorous dews?
Ah! well thy power I know, while wandering here,
Far, very far from all my heart holds dear;
Where, while remembrance brings their image near,
Down my pale cheek tear follows tear;
And the big sigh, in vain suppressed,
Urges a passage from a swelling breast*
Yet do I know thy soothing power even here,
Though far -- ah me, how far from all my heart holds dear!
To ETHELINDE.
1792.
NO longer let me weep a prey to love,
Sad victim to ill-fated passion's sway;
A thousand sighs will never their source remove,
Nor tears its fond remembrance wash away.
Ah me! -- when sinks the heart by griefs deprest,
And Hope denies her balmy soothings sweet,
And busy Memory wrings the bleeding breast;
Then, surely, then is wretchedness complete.
Come Hope, in Ethelinde's enchanting form,
Come bid my useless tears forbear to flow;
Check the wild passions in my breast that storm,
Rude as the gusts over Erie's surfs that blow.
Why should I grieve? -- no swain with artful tongue
Has broke the vows I ventured to approve;
For Alma's TRUTH my easy heart has won,
Whose form is beauty and whose voice is love.
Does he not feel? -- why then that frequent sigh
When grief or sickness cloud my pensive face?
Or why that pleasure sparkling in his eye,
When cheerfulness and health resume their place?
Why does his cheek with sudden flushes glow,
From a short absence when we meet again?
Or why dejection hang upon his brow,
When other favorites my attention claim?
Oh! if he loves -- with passion such as mine --
Life's varying scenes how easy shall I find?
How light will be the woes of CAROLINE?
How rich the pleasures shared with such a mind?
But -- if I must a common lot deplore --
Oh! if my ALMA choose some happier fair,
Then will I fly to some forgotten shore,
And waste my sorrows on the desert air.
Ha! -- will the forest's echoing glooms be found
More cheering than the voice of Ethelinde?
What! -- can eternal absence heal my wound,
Or blot his loved idea from my mind? --
No, surely, no -- firm as the earth's broad base
Are my affections round his virtues twined;
And Time, beneath whose touch all else decays,
Serves but the ligaments more close to bind.
Then will I stay, a votary to his charms,
And, kneeling victor at Submission's shrine,
Clasp the blessed woman in my conquering arms,
And all the heart that once was mine to her resign.
To the same.
1792.
AH! cease the "dirge like lay," my Ethelinde;
Wipe off the tear that quivers in thine eye,
Nor let the bosom of my best loved friend
Heave with the deep but unavailing sigh.
On the broad pinions of u^wearied Time
Our months and days are swiftly borne away,
And each succeeding hour, in constant chime,
Consigns some dear enjoyment to decay.
Age steals the rose from the dejected cheek,
And plants his ensigns on the unwilling brow;
Cheerfulness sighs -- and Wit forgets to speak,
Lost in eternal torpor -- Oh what woe!
But Grief, (ah me, how well the truth I know!)
Grief, with officious hand, propels us on,
Urges our speed, lest Time should move too slow,
And ere we reach Life's noon, our sun goes down.
Cease then to weep, my beauteous Ethelinde,
Cease thine own rugged path with thorns to strew;
Oh check those griefs I know not to befriend,
Nor give aloose to such immoderate woe!
What! shall my cares on ALMA rest alone?
Shall all thy wishes to MYRTILLO fly?
And shall the heart that meets no kind return,
Burst -- coward like -- and bleed its channel dry?
No, Ethelinde, with generous pride I burn,
ALMA, the noble ALMA, I resign;
And though my heart awhile its loss may mourn,
It never to relenting shall incline.
The gracious Power whose word has given us life,
And mixed our cup with pleasure and with pain,
Will strength afford to pass the mental strife,
Or strength at least the conflict to sustain.
Oh! would but man enjoy the blessings given,
How many tears had never learned to flow!
How few deep sighs had winged their course to heaven!
How few the hearts surcharged with helpless woe!
For us young Evening sheds her soft perfumes;
For us blithe Morn expands her golden eyes;
For us the Sun heaven's azure arch illumes;
And forests bloom for us, and oceans rise.
But oh! the ingrate man, with selfish mind,
He spurns the bliss which heaven designed his own;
His airy wish outstrips the hasty wind,
And grasps at raptures never to be known.
In efforts vain he toils away his days,
Pursuing Fancy in her mad career;
Though still deceived, he still her call obeys,
And sinks at last -- the victim of Despair.
Such is vain man's -- and such has been our lot,
Such the dim mist that dark'd our earliest years;
Fixed on our happiest hours a lasting blot,
And bathed each following day in heart-wrung tears.
Where are the golden joys we once have known?
Where the calm comforts which for us have bloomed?
Smooth, gliding scenes of peace! they all are gone,
All by oblivious Sorrow -- all entombed.
Oh! sad regret, the feeling heart beats full,
Vain prove the attempts wild nature to subdue:
My lyre is struck with wandering hand and dull,
While lawless tears the pausing strings bedew.
On seeing a Print, exhibiting the Ruins of the Bastille.
1792.
AT each return of the auspicious day
Which laid this mighty fabric in the dust,
Let joy inspire each patriotic breast
To bless and venerate its august ray;
Let Gallia's sons attune the harp of joy,
And teach the trump its boldest notes to employ;
Let clarions shrill the deed declare,
And blow their son'rous notes afar;
Let music rise from every plain.
Each vine-clad mount or daisied dell.
And let Aetius float the strain
Across old Ocean's ample swell.
Ah* see the Bastille's iron walls thrown down,
That bulwark strong of Tyranny;
See her proud turrets smoke along the ground,
Crushed by the giant arm of Liberty!
Her gloomy towers -- her vaults impure,
Which once could boast eternal night;
Her dungeons deep -- her d^ns obscure,
Are urged unwilling to the light.
Often in these dreary cells, the captive's moan
Broke the dead silence of the midnight watch,
When Memory, pointing to the days long gone,
To wasting sorrows woke the feeling wretch.
Here everlasting Darkness spread
Her veil over scenes of misery,
Where Sickness heaved an anguish'd head,
And rolled a hopeless eye.
Here drowned in tears, pale Agony
Spread her clasped hands toward the sky,
While all convulsed, extreme Despair
Swallowed the earth in speechless rage,
Or phrenzied gnawed his iron cage,
Tore off his flesh, and rent his hair.
Such were thy glories, O Bastille!
Such the rich blessings of despotic power,
Whose horrid demon quaff'd his fill,
Daily of bitter tears and human gore:
But now it is over -- thy long, long reign is over,
Thy thunders fright the trembling hosts no more;
Thy shafts are spent -- thy sons no more engage
To add new triumphs to thy train,
To bind new victims to thy chain;
For thy most valiant sons are slain
By the fierce strokes of kindled patriot rage.
Rolled in the dust, behold thine honors lie,
The sport -- the scorn of each exploring eye.
Hail gallant Gauls! heroic people hail!
Who spurn the ills that Virtue's sons assail,
Whose hearts benevolent, with ardour bound
The hard^got blessing to diffuse around:
Oh! be your struggles blessed, and may you see
Your labors rivail'd by posterity;
'Till the small flame (which first was seen to rise,
'Midst threatening blasts, beneath Columbian skies,
Which, as it taught its splendours to expand,
Arose indignant from Oppression's hand,
And blazed effulgent over the mighty plain)
Luring your heroes over the stormy main,
'Till this small flame, fed by their nurturing hand,
Not only canopies your native land,
But far extending its prolific rays,
Envelopes neighboring empires in the blaze.
And thou, FAYETTE! whom distant lands deplore,
As now self-banish'd from thy native shore;
Though zeal mistaken, may a shadow throw
Athwart the laurels which adorn thy brow;
Yet shall they bloom -- for in thy generous breast
No soul like Coriolanus is confessed:
To Gallia still thy warmest wishes tend,
And though an injured exile, still a friend!
When grateful nations tell thine acts to Fame,
America shall urge her oldest claim,
Point to the worthies whom her sons revere,
And place FAYETTE with those she holds most dear.
To the Memory of Mrs. HENRIETTA ANNA MARIA DUBUISSON.
October, 1792.
OH! lovely vision! art thou gone?
Do thou repose in Death's dull shade?
Are all thy boasted glories flown?
Do thou too rest among the dead?
Oh, fairest flower that ever bloomed
To deck life's variegated scene,
How short lived have thy beauties been?
No sooner opened than entombed!
With rising joys Hope strewn thy way,
And Hygea's roses decked thy brow;
Lovely, and young, and good, and gay,
Thou were -- but ah! what art thou now?
Cold -- lifeless -- dead -- a senseless clod --
To death's chill grasp an early prey;
Frail as the tenants of the sod
Which shrouds thee from the face of day.
Let frantic Mirth be pensive here;
Here let Youth weep its transient bloom;
Here let vain Beauty drop a tear,
For Harriet moulders in the tomb.
Come, weeping Muse, come form a wreath
To deck the turf where beauty lies;
Where the soft winds of Evening breathe,
Where Morning's sweetest dews arise.
But wherefore mourns my heart thine early doom,
Or strays in weeping silence round thy grave?
Can the dull ear of Death my sighs receive?
Or dwells the ethereal being in the tomb?
No, bursting from Death's dark confines,
And wand'^ing on the gales of even,
It wings its flight to happier climes,
And gains at last -- its long wished heaven.
Tell me, fair essence, when released from clay,
Thy pinions opened in a land unknown,
Did no kind angel haste on purple plume,
To hail thee safe -- and guide thee on thy way?
Did not the echoing Lyra's melting strain
Obliterate the memory of each tear,
To rapture soothe each yet remaining fear,
And urge thy wondering spirit from its chain?
It did -- it did -- the solemn strains
Seem to vibrate on my enchanted ear;
And wilder'd with the floating tones I hear,
Life's ruby current warbles in my veins.
'Welcome from the hands of Pain,
'Welcome from Sin's baneful power,
'Welcome from Death's drear domain,
'Thou shall feel their ire no more.
'All that thou have heard below,
'All that Angel powers can know,
'Peace eternal, joy divine,
'Everlasting love are thine.
'Let the garland we assume,
' Amaranth with myrtle joined,
'Flow'rets of perpetual bloom,
'Thy triumphant temples bind.
'Lo! the walls of Paradise!
'Lo! the pearly gates unfold!
'Darting splendours down the skies;
'Lucid gems and sparkling gold.
'There no Sun, with dazzling beam,
'Gilds the glowing cheek of morn;
'There no Moon, with smile serene,
'Waits mild Evening's calm return:
'There dwells UNCREATED LIGHT,
'Blazing with unfading ray;
'Ne'er we know returning night --
'Blest with everlasting day.
'Hark! -- I hear the ^arbling throng
'Hail thee to thy native home;
'Hark! their Lyras bid thee come --
'Haste, fair Angel, -- haste along!
To the Memory of Mrs. SCRIBA and her infant Daughter.
1792.
THE blasts of December are heard on the hills,
They have scattered their high-drifting snows over the plain;
The breath of rough Boreas the fountains congeals,
And Flora bemoans her blight'd honors in vain.
The Tulip is faded -- its tinges are fled --
The Violet shrinks from the loud-howling gale;
And the soft dewy Rose droops its languishing head,
And ceases its balm-breathing sweets to exhale.
Thy wide desolations, oh Emblem of Death!
Spread glooms and dejections across the sad mind;
And we trace a lost friend in each bare dreary heath;
And we hear their last sigh in the voice of the wind.
Yet the gambols of Spring shall thy rigours unbend,
And cherish the scenes Maia's absence that mourn;
But the Winter of Death has no solace -- no friend --
Nor buds the green Spring for the dust-bearing Urn.
On the cheek of our LAURA how late bloomed the Rose,
And Innocence shot from her eyes its soft ray;
But the blush is extinguished -- no more that cheek glows --
And those eyes drink no more the effulgence of day.
Wife, Sister, Friend, Parent, ah names dear in vain!
As fragile and fair as the gay clouds of dawn;
Ye are vanished, alas! like the breeze on the plain,
And all, but your mournful remembrance, is gone.
My spirit the days that are past often reviews,
And pensively treads where her joys were once strewn;
While a fond retrospection her sorrows renews,
And she weeps over the hours that for ever are flown.
Like some beautiful flow'ret, whose delicate form
Still delights, though overthrown by the tempest's rude breath;
Thus Laura, though pressed by Affliction's cold storm,
Yet cheerfully smiled on the bosom of Death.
Though the arrows of Anguish assaulted her frame*
And the night like the day brought no soothing repose;
And though fast sinking Life rent each languishing vein,
Not a single complaint, not a murmur arose.
'Cease for me, weeping friends, the SUPREME to invoke;
'I leave the rough pillow of Agony's bed,
'To rest in the Regions of Glory' -- She spoke,
And the unfettered spirit exultingly fled!
And thou, too, ELIZA, the grasp of Disease
Has crushed thy young blossom and wasted thy sweets;
And the Cherub that longed for the mansion of Peace,
From the darksome abode of Affliction retreats.
Yes, the wings of that moment which speeded her flight
To the bosom of LAURA, beheld her conveyed
Where the uncloying scenes of perpetual delight
Can never admit of a pause nor a shade.
There, surely the day of distress has an end;
There, parting and weeping for ever are over;
There, the Winter of Death finds a solace, a friend;
And there buds the green Spring, to be rifled no more.
To ETHELINDE.
1792.
HAIL to the heart, whose generous pride,
Can burst the iron bars of grief,
Can Love's fantastic ills deride,
And from itself procure relief.
If tears Oppression's hand would gild,
Or sighs a feeble respite yield;
Or if ^he woe^ remembered often,
By repe^^tion gre^^ more soft.
Th^^ mig^^ ^re court the weeping muse,
Over (...) sad bosoms to diffuse
Her soothing power -- in melting lay
T^ (...) sing our griefs away.
But ah! how well ( too well) I know
Who weeps, he but indulges woe;
And every briny tear that flows
Binds to the heart its griefs mo^^ ^^ose*
Rise then, my soul, (...) ^^^our rise,
Expand thy wishes far and wide,
Go contemplate the starry skies,
Go emulate thy SEX's PRIDE.
Ah! vain attempt -- on pinions strong
She soa^s beyond the panting wind;
And all enamored of her song,
She leaves thee, wondering muse, behind.
Shame to the heart, whose tranquil beat
Never felt contending passions keen;
Never k^^ew the vict'ries of defeat,
When Reason joy'd over Folly slain.
Ye^ -- while among the stars she shines,
And "visits wo^^ds concealed from sight,"
A humbl^^ theme I choose for mine,
The Dusky Dawn and Misty Night.
I Will drink the sparkling dews of morn,
And watch Apollo's earliest ray;
Or greet the shepherd's mellow horn,
That lulls the closing hours of day:
Or, bending over old Ocean's stream,
Mo^^t the tall Pico's loftiest b^ow,
And, guided by Cylene's beam,
Pause over the distant world below:
Or, hanging over some caver^ dark,
Where troubled waters heave and swell,
List to C^^r^^da's angry bark,
Or howling S^ylla's fearful yell:
Or, mingling wi^h the enthusiast throng,
Who to Melpomene's harp a^^ire,
Mimic CALISTA's melting song,
Or pensive ELLA's weeping lyre:
Then mourning through some forest's gloom,
From ^^umbering (...) wake Echo pale*
And pl^ck the blossoms of the dale,
To deck some lonely (...).
Such be my songs, while Ethelinde,
Smiling, my artless labors views,
Reward -- the best that can a^^end
The flights of CAROLINA's ^^se.
A VERSION of Mrs. BARBAULD's Tenth Hym^.
1793.
OFFSPRING of woe, what mean those sighs
That from thy bursting bosom heave?
What mean those gushings from thine eyes?
What have thou seen to make thee grieve?
Alas! alas! I Have seen the Rose
To the warm Sun its leaves expose;
Elate, it drank his golden ray,
And spread its beauties to the day.
Again I looked -- that very beam
Which opened its dewy blooms at Morn,
Smote it at Noon, and on the st^^
Had only left the ra^^ling thorn!
A stately Tree grew on the plain;
Wide to the win^s its boughs were spread,
Deep in the earth its roots were lain,
And firm its mighty trunk was made.
Again I looked -- the Eastern Blast
Had bid its emerald glories waste,
With greedy tooth, the insatiate Worm*
Had rudely pierced its noble form;
The Axe had lopt its limbs away,
And all foretold a swift decay!
I Have seen the lovely Insect throng
Desporting on the beams of morn,
They danced the bubbling stream along,
On the light plumes of Zephyrs borne;
Their azure wings were star'd with gold,
Their bodies tinged with tyrian hue
Soft d^^n'd -- their numbers were untold.
And quick as lightning's glance they flew.
Again I looked -- the Evening's cool
Had chilled their limbs and checked their flight,
The Breeze had brushed them in the pool,
They died before the mists of night;
The Swallow chose them for her food,
They filled the Pike's voracious maw,
And of so great a multitude,
So gay, so fair -- not one I saw.
Proud of his strength, I Have seen vain Man,
His cheek with youthful beauty glowed,
He walked, he danced, he leapt, he ran,
And quick his vigorous pulses flowed:
Eloquence dwelt upon his tongue;
Science his swelling heart embraced;
The mountain Echo learnt his song,
And every charm his nature graced.
Again I ^ook'd -- on the bare ground^
Stiff and immovable he lay;
Horror and fear prevailed around,
And checked the cheerful sports of day:
His hands -- his feet no motion proved,
No song employed his tuneful breath;
From light, and love, and sense removed,
A prey he fell to ravenous Death!
Oh let me weep! this ravenous Death
Lawless over earth extends his sway;
Creation feels his blighting breath,
Shrinks from his touch and fades away.
Since Shrub, and Beast, and Man in vain
Against the mighty Spoiler strive,
The Sun, and Moon and Starry train
Shall not his ruthless power survive:
They too his baleful grasp shall feel;
Earth from her bound'ries shall retire,
And Sea and Mountain, Rock, and Hill,
And Space and Time shall all expire!
The following Lines were occasioned by Mr. ROBERTSON's refusing to paint for
one Lady, and immediately after taking another Lady's likeness.
1793.
WHEN LAURA appeared, poor APPELLES complained,
That his sight was bedim'd, and his optics much pained;
So his pallet and pencil the artist resigned,
Lest the blaze of her beauty should make him quite blind.
But when fair ANNA entered the prospect was changed,
The paints and the brushes in order were ranged;
The artist resumed his employment again,
Forgetful of labor, and blindness and pain;
And the strokes were so lively that all were assured
What the brunette had injured the fair one had cured.
Let the candid decide which the chaplet should wear,
The charms which destroy, or the charms which repair.
To NATURE.
1793.
YES, Nature! thou art lovely, every scene
Is formed to yield the throbbing heart delight;
Whether thou art bedeck^d in changeful green,
Or shrink'st beneath a shroud of sparkling white*
Whether when Morning mounts her crimson car,
Wakes the young gales, and gilds the eastern main!
Or when gray Evening lights her favorite star,
And shapes fantastic glide along the pla^^
For in thy Gaiety the Lover finds
Some faint resemblance of his darling fair,
And trusts the rivulet or courteous winds
May to her ear his tale impassioned bear;
And when hoar Winter storms along the skies,
And frights old Ocean with the fearful roar,
The Wanderer forlorn, treads the bleak shore,
Mingsing with waves and winds his tears and sighs:
Yet it is a solace to his misery,
The howling whirlwind and the surging sea.
How often, Oh Summer! have thy jocund hours
Flown disregarded over my head?
Alas! I courted not their softening powers,
Since all I loved from me was fled.
Ah! then I hied me to the pebbly shore,
And over the waves would cast a tearful eye,
With the vain hope my CYRILLE to espy.
And press him to my aching heart once more:
The war of ^^shing storms and Ocean's howl,
Were the loved soothers of my anguish'd soul.
Cheered with his love again, thy charms,
O Spring!
Rise with redoubled softness on my view;
I love the breath of Morn, mild Evening's dew,
And all the varying scenes thy reign can bring;
Yet, 'reft of all thou have, ah! I should not repine,
While LOVE and CYRILLE I could claim as mine.
ARRIA's TOMB.
1793.
PRIDE of the peaceful solitary Night,
While now thou cheer'st her solemn gloom;
Through these damp shades a weeping Wanderer light,
And guide my pensive steps, to Arria's tomb:
There will I vent the anguish of my soul,
Bathing my looks in Night's unwholesome dew,
While fierce around my head the shrill gales howl,
And specter pale, the shades of Night pursue:
But see, a spirit fleets before mine eye;
Ah! well I know (...) ^^guish loaded sigh;
It is my Arria's form; yes, dear forlorn!
Thy Georgianna weeps upon thine urn.
Thou feeble ghost, whose tears yet seem to fall
Down a dejected cheek, all cold and pale;
As sad thou glid'st along the moon-gilt wall,
And list'nest to the Night-bird's chilling wall.
Dear weeping lilly, did not once Health's rose
Blossom upon thy cheek with loveliest grace?
Did not once Peace within thy breast repose,
And tranquil Cheerfulness beam through thy face?
Oh, LOVE! what have thou done? thy lawless power
Subdued a heart too generous to deceive;
But, ah! unpitied, it but beat to grieve;
Scorn, cruel Scorn! embittering every hour.
Shut from the world, she bore her griefs alone,
And of life careless, wept her hours away;
While Death, exulting over his precious prey,
Cropped the sweet blossom ere it yet was blown.
Oh, thou hard heart, where PITY never dwelt!
May dire Affliction mark thee for her own;
May thou endure pangs worse than Arria felt,
And no one pity thee, nor heed thy moan;
May pale Remorse on all thy steps attend,
Showing a form thy folly would not save;
May thy sad life be spent without one friend,
And not one tear be shed upon thy grave!
To a CANARY BIRD.
1793.
BEAUTIFUL bird, of saffron plume,
Whose warbling whispers tell the approach of night,
With softened cadence ushering in the gloom,
The solemn gloom devote to calm delight.
Tell me, confined within thy wiry cell,
The little notes thou chantest so serene,
Say, are they plaints thy breast that swell,
And is Captivity thy theme?
Or, severed from thy lovely mate,
Her loss do thou bewail?
And all thy little wrongs relate
In melancholy tale?
Ah, no! so soft, so sweet a strain
Vibrates not like the moan of pain;
Such tones as from thy bosom flow
Never left the bursting heart of woe.
Yet, peaceful, inoffensive guest,
Could freedom make thee still more blessed,
I would unbar thy prison gate,
And let thee go, to seek thy fate.
But ah, I know, unskilled in flight,
Through the dark desert should thou stray,
Thy wings would tire, and ere the mists of night
Some cruel bird would on thee prey.
Or else thy little frame exposed
To the raw blasts, and midnight air;
Hungry, and faint, and uninclos'd,
Thou would, my songster, perish there.
Stay then sweet PAN, and when the morning's light
Steals through the op'nings of thy grated dome,
Do thou thy pleasing hymning powers resume,
Praising the Author of each new delight:
And I, on bended knee most sure,
Humbly my lays with thee will join;
Nor will my martins be less pure
For mounting up to Heaven with thine.
THE BIRTH DAY OF COLUMBIA Addressed to the members of the CINCINNATI of the
state of New York, on the FOURTH of JULY.

1793.
COME round Freedom's sacred shrine,
Flowery garlands let us twine,
And while we our tribute bring
Grateful paeans let us sing;
Sons of Freedom join the lay,
It Is COLUMBIA's natal day.
Banish all the plagues of life,
Fretful Care and restless Strife;
Let the memory of your woes
Sink this day in sweet repose;
Even let Grief itself be gay
On COLUMBIA's natal day.
Late a despot's cruel hand
Sent Oppression through your land;
Piteous plaints and tearful moan
Found not access to his throne;
Or if heard, the poor forlorn
Met ^ut with reproach and scorn.
PAIN, with eager virtue, then
Snatched from TRUTH her diamond pen,
Bade the slaves of tyranny
Spurn their bonds, and dare be free*
Glad they burst their chains away;
'Twas COLUMBIA's natal day.
Vengeance who had slept too long,
Waked to vindicate our wrong,
Led her vet'rans to the field,
Sworn to perish ere to yield;
Weeping Memory yet can tell
How they fought, and how they fell.
Lured by virtuous WASHINGTON,
( Liberty's much favored son,)
Victory gave your sword a sheath,
Binding on your brows a wreath,
Which can never feel decay
While you hail this blissful day.
Ever be its name revered;
Let the shouts of joy be heard,
From where Hampshire's bleak winds blow
Down to Georgia's fervid glow;
Let them all in this agree,
"Hail the day which made us free!"
Bend your eyes toward that shore
Where Bellona's thunders roar,
There your Gallic brethren see
Struggling, bleeding to be free!
Oh! unite your prayers that they
May soon announce their natal day.
O thou POWER! to whom we owe
All the blessings that we know,
Strengthen thou our rising youth,
Teach them Wisdom, Virtue, Truth;
That when we are sunk in clay
They may keep THIS GLORIOUS DAY!
JULY THE FOURTEENTH.
1793.
HARK! hark how the clamours of war
Through Gallia's wide regions resound;
Bellona has mounted her car,
And scatters her terrors around:
Captivity bursts off her chains,
Her shoutings are heard on the heath,
Her vet'rans are crouding the plains,
Resolved upon Freedom or Death.
But see! from her battlements high,
Plumed Victory undaunted alight;
Her standard she waves in the sky,
And urges her sons to the fight.
Their swords all indignant they clash,
They rush round the Bastille's strong walls*
Ah! heard you that horrible crash?
The tower of proud Tyranny falls!
The minions of despotism fly,
Pursued by destruction and wrath,
Fear wings their sad flight, and their cry
Disturbs the deep slumber of Death.
Haste, haste, man's disgrace disappear,
Vile wretches, of nature the blot,
And wherever your hamlets you rear,
May shame and distress be your lot.
But Gallia, all hail! may thy chiefs
A temple to Liberty raise;
And there may their feuds and their griefs
Be lost in its altar's bright blaze.
And when they remember this day,
Bedecked with the laurel and vine.
May anguish and care flee away,
And their voices in anthems combine.
And then may the warblings of songs
Be heard from Columbia's green vales,
While Echo the wild notes prolongs,
And whispers them soft to the gales.
And oh! let the zephyrs so fleet
Bear the sweet swelling tones over the main,
And there, let them fondly repeat
In the ear of each Frenchman the strain.
To Miss MASON, at New-Rochelle.
1793.
ENQUIRING Fancy plumes her wings,
To seek thee on HASPEDOC's shore;
And Friendship true, her tribute brings,
To glad the lonely vacant hour.
And all attentive would she glide
Along thy footsteps; musing slow,
Whether thou climb'st the mountain's side,
Or cheer'st the clovery dell below.
Where art thou now? led by the evening's cool
Stray'st thou along some echoing forest's shade?
Or on the grassy margin of some pool,
Beneath some willow art thou slumbering laid?
Where the swollen throated thresher throws
His warblings on the winding gale,
And the soft scented frail wild rose
Sprinkles its odours in the vale?
Or do thou bend o^ ^^me stupendous cliff,
Whose awful shadow fr^wns along the deep;
And see from far the rough winds sweep,
Through the high surging sound, the scudding skiff?
Or else, where courteous BARTOW's dome
Raises its hospitable head,
Perhaps thou wanderest down the gloom
Of the long alley's verdant shade?
Wherever thou art, the scene I know;
Through all thy favorite paths have trod;
Have marked the gay field's varied glow,
And, pausing gazed upon the flood.
Where yon gay locusts shade the green,
And gently whisper to the breeze;
Where chirps the wren their boughs between,
And flowers and shrubs conspire to please:
There ALFRED often at close of day,
Attun'd his numbers soft and slow,
And sung the silent hours away,
And fed each panting gale with woe:
And I, when high the clear full moon
Had hung her lamp amid night's noon,
Have roam'd along this beauteous glade;
And all regardless of the blast
That whistled round my naked head,
My saddest weeping hours have past
Even here, till many a dewy shower
Had silvered over my fragrant bower
And damped my locks; then quite oppressed,
Late have I sought the couch of rest.
Beauteous ROCHELLE! along thy rocky shore
Full many a bard his tuneful strains shall pour,
And as the numbers float along the stream,
Thy rustic beauties shall compose his theme:
Thy wild romantic islands green,
Thy limpid waves that srlent glide
To meet old Ocean's emerald tide,
Thy shelving banks, thy rude cliffs steep,
Thy nodding forests, dark and deep,
And fruitful meadows spread between.
And though perhaps the gentle poet's name
Be never recorded in the scroll of Fame;
Yet, when he rests beneath the valley's clod,
Thy GENIUS weeping, shall bedeck his fod;
Thy flowers shall blossom sweeter round his grave,
And softlier toward his couch shall creep thy pearly wave.
THE HUDSON.
1793.
NILE's beauteous waves, and TIBER's swelling tide
Have been recorded by the hand of Fame,
And various floods, which through Earth's channels glide,
From some enraptured bard have gained a name;
Even THAMES and WYE have been the Poet's theme,
And to their charms has many an harp been strung,
Whilst Oh! hoar GENIUS of old Hudson's stream,
Thy MIGHTY RIVER never has been sung:
Say, shall a Female string her trembling lyre,
And to thy praise devote the adventurous song?
Fired with the theme, her genius shall aspire,
And the notes sweeten as they float along.
Where rough Ontario's restless waters roar
And hoarsely rave around the rocky shore;
Where their abode tremendous north-winds make,
And reign the tyrants of the surging lake;
There, as the shell-crown'd genii of its caves
Toward proud LAWRENCE urged their noisy waves,
A form majestic from the flood arose;
A coral bandage sparkled over his brows,
A purple mantle over his limbs was spread,
And sportive breezes in his dark locks played:
Towered the east shore his anxious eyes he cast,
And from his ruby lips these accents past:
'O favored land! indulgent Nature yield
'Her choicest sweets to deck thy boundless fields;
'Where in thy verdant glooms the fleet deer play,
'And the hale tenants of the desert stray,
'While the tall evergreens Cyprus, hemlock, firr and pine.
that edge the dale
'In silent majesty nod to each gale:
'Thy riches shall no more remain unknown,
'Thy wide campaign do I pronounce my own;
'And while the strong armed genii of this lake
'Their tributary streams to LAWRENCE take,
'Back from its scource my current All the waters of Lakes George, Champlain
and Ontario empty in the river St. Lawrence, except one small stream, which,
running an opposite course, forms the Hudson.
will I turn,
'And over thy meadows pour my copious urn.'
He said, and waving high his dripping hand:
Bade his clear waters roll toward the land.
Glad they obeyed, and struggling to the shore,
Dashed on its broken rocks with thundering roar:
The rocks in vain oppose their furious course*
From each repulse they rise with tenfold force;
And gathering all their angry powers again,
Gushed over the banks, and fled across the plain.
Soon as the waves had pressed the level me^d,
Full many a pearly footed Naiad fair,
With hasty steps, her limpid fountain led,
To swell the tide, and hail it welcome there*
Their busy hands collect a thousand flowers,
And scatter them along the grassy shores.
There, bending low, the water lillies bloom,
And the blue crocus shed their moist perfume;
There the tall velvet scarlet lark-spur laves
Her pale green stem in the pellucid waves;
There nods the fragile columbine, so fair,
And the mild dewy wild-rose scents the air;
While round the trunk of some majestic pine
The blushing honeysuckle's branches twine:
There too Pomona's richest gifts are found,
Her golden melons press the fruitful ground;
The glossy crimson plumbs there swell their rinds,
And purple grapes dance to autumnal winds;
While all beneath the mandrake's fragrant shade
The strawberry's delicious sweets are laid.
Now by a thousand bubbling streams supplied,
More deep and still the peaceful waters glide,
And slowly wandering through the wide campaign,
Pass the big billows of the grand CHAMPLAIN:
There, when Britannia waged ^nrighteous war,
A fortress St. John's, besieged and taken by the American army under General
Montgomery.
reared her ramparts over the tide;
Till brave MONTGOMERY brought his hosts from far,
And conquering, crushed the scornful Briton's pride.
The openings of the fo^ests green, disclose
TICONDEROGA (long since known to fame:)
There fiercely rushing on the unwary foes,
The gallant ALLEN Colonel Ethen Allen, who took Ticonderoga by surprise.
gained himself a name.
Hence flows our stream, meand'ring near the shore
Of the smooth lake Lake George.
renowned for waters pure,
Which gently wanders over a marble bed, Almost the whole bed of Lake George is
a smooth WHITE rock.

Cooled by pro^^ting rocks, eternal shade.
Amid those airy clifts (stupe^^ous height!)
The howling natives of the desert dwell:
There, fearful Echo all the live long night
Repeats the panther's petrefying yell.
FORT-EDWARD.
But wherefore river creep thy waves so slow?
Or why so mournfully pursue their course,
As though thou here had known some scene of woe,
Whose horrors fain would fright thee to thy source?
Alas! alas! the doleful cause is known;
'Twas here M'CREA, Near Fort-Edward the beautiful Miss M'Crea was cruelly
murdered by Indians, who were sent by General Burgoyne to escort her to her
lover, one of his officers, to whom she was to have been married in a few days.
guided by savage bands,
Fell, (oh sad suff'rer!) by their murderous hands,
And this flood heard her last expiring groan!
This flood, which should have borne the nuptial throng,
Found her warm blood deep tincturing its streams!
These woods, which should have heard her bridal song,
Wildly responded all her hopeless screams!
CRUEL in MERCY, BARBAROUS Burgoyne!
Ah! see an aged sire, with silver hairs,
( Whose goodness trusted much, too much to thine,)
Bathing his mangled daughter with his tears!
Hear a distracted lover's frightful voice*
See, as he bends to kiss the clotted gore
Senseless he sinks! but Death has closed thine eyes, He died in 1792.

And Memory weeps, but will reproach no more.
In Edward's fortress, here a grand retreat
The Britons planned, but ere it was complete
New Albion's vet'rans, with undaunted force,
Stood like a barrier and opposed their course.
Here broader swells the tide, and the strong oar
Is heard to dash the waves: the shady shore
Sounds with the peasant's strokes, and the tall wood
The hand of Commerce bears along the flood;
Unnumber'd herds of cattle graze the plain,
And in the valley waves the yellow grain;
The green maize rustles on the mountain's brow,
And the thick orchard's blossoms blush below:
For the luxuriance of the cultured soil
Amply rewards the hardy rustic's toil.
Now the fair Hudson's widening waters tend
Where SARATOGA's ancient forests bend,
Where GATES, the warlike GATES, Columbia's boast,
Vanquished the proud Burgoyne's astonished host!
Victorious chief! while here thou glad'st our eyes,
For thee, from the full heart a prayer must rise;
Of the poor orphan all his friends removed,
And the sad widow rest of all she loved:
These, while thou liv'st, shall bless the hero who
Rescued Columbia from a cruel foe,
A parent to the orphan'd child restored,
And blessed the widow with her much loved lord,
Revenged the cause of many a soldier slain,
And fixed on British arms a lasting stain!
And when the hand of Death thine eyes shall close,
And chanting angels guard thy soft repose,
Then will they, grateful, over thy cold tomb mourn,
And, weeping, hang a garland on thine urn.
Through many a 'blooming wild,' and woodland green,
The Hudson's sleeping waters winding stray;
Now amongst the hills its silvery waves are seen,
And now through arching willows steal away*
Then bursting on the enamored sigh^ (...) ^^re,
Gladden some happy peasant's rude (...)
And passing youthful TROY's commercial shore,
With the hoarse MOHAWK's roaring surges meet.
Oh, beauteous MOHAWK! 'wilder'd with thy charms,
The chilliest heart sinks into rapturous glows;
While the stern warrior, used to loud alarms,
Starts at the thunderings of thy dread COHOES. Next to the Niagara the
grandest falls on the continent, 70 feet high.

Now more majestic rolls the ample tide,
Tall waving elms its clovery borders shade,
And many a stately dome, in ancient pride,
And hoary grandeur, there exalts its head.
There trace the marks of Culture's sunburnt hand,
The honied buck-wheat's This grain, when in bloom, can be smelt at such a
distance, and so rich is the scent, that it may be said, that, "Many a league,
"Cheered with the grateful smell old HUDSON smiles."

clustering blossoms view,
Dripping rich odours, mark the beard grain bland,
The loaded orchard, and the flax field blue.
ALBANIA's gothic spires now greet the eye;
Time's hand has wiped their burnished tints away,
And the rich fanes which sparkled to the sky,
'Rest of their splendours, mourn in cheerless gray.
There many an ancient structure tottering stands;
Round the damp chambers moldy vapors creep,
And feathery-footed Silence folds her hands,
While the pale genii of the mansion sleep.
Yet thither Trade's full freighted vessels come;
Thither the shepherds mercantile resort:
There Architecture late has raised her dome,
And Agriculture's products fill her port.
The grassy hill, the quivering poplar grove,
The copse of hazle, and the tufted bank,
The long green valley, where the white flocks rove,
The jutting rock, o'erhung with ivy dank;
The tall pines waving on the mountain's brow,
Whose lofty spires catch day's last lingering beam;
The bending willow weeping over the stream,
The brook's soft gurglings, and the garden's glow:
These meet the wandering trav'ller's ardent gaze;
From shore to shore enraptured Fancy strays;
Each parting scene his anxious eyes pursue,
Till HUDSON's city rises to his view:
There, on the borders of the river rise
The azure mountains towering to the skies,
Whose cloudy bluffs, and spiral steeps sublime,
Brave the rude gusts, and mock the strokes of Time.
High on the healing firr tree's topmost bough
The solitary heron builds her nest;
There in security her offspring rest,
Regardless of the storms that rave below.
Wakeful remembrance, on thine ember'd plain
Will pause ESOPUS, Esopus was burnt by the British in 1777. Besides this place
and Hudson there are several towns and villages upon the river, viz. Red-Hook,
Poughkeepsie, New-Windsor, New-^urgh, New-Malborough, Fish-Kill, etc.
and indulge a tear;
Will bid again the scenes of woe appear;
Will bid the mouldering mansion blaze again.
She calls to mind when Britain's lawless bands
Waged impious war with consecrated fanes;
Streach'd against HEAVEN their sanguinary hands,
While fear, nor awe, their barbarous will restrains.
O HUDSON! HUDSON! from thy frighted shore
Thou saw the bursting flame mount to the sky;
Thou heard'st the burning buildings fearful roar;
Thou heard'st the mournful shrieks of Agony.
See, from his couch defenseless Sickness driven!
See bending Age, exhausted, creep along!
Weeping, they turn their hopeless eyes to heaven,
And pitious wailings murmur from their tongue.
Here a distracted widow wrings her hands,
While griefs too keen forbid her tears to flow:
There all aghast a wretched parent stands,
Viewing his beggared babes in speechless woe!
Why did thy hand, O desolating War!
Thy bloody banners over our land unfurl?
Why did thy cruel hirelings come from far,
Murder and fire over every plain to hurl?
So as they glutted their dark souls with death,
Be their attendants shame, remorse and pain:
While each sacked village on the ensanguin'd heath
Shall from its smoking ashes rise again.
Low sunk between the Alleganian hills,
For many a league the sullen waters glide,
And the deep murmur of the crowded tide,
With pleasing awe the wondering voy'ger fills.
On the green summit of yon lofty clift
A peaceful runnel gurgles clear and slow,
Then down the craggy steep side dashing swift,
Tremendous falls in the white surge below.
Here spreads a clovery lawn its verdure far,
Around it mountains vast their forests rear,
And long ere Day has left his burnished car
The dews of Night have shed their odours there.
There hangs a louring rock across the deep;
Hoarse roar the waves its broken base around;
Through its dark caverns noisy whirlwinds sweep,
While Horror startles at the fearful sound.
The shivering sails that cut the fluttering breeze,
Glide through these winding rocks with airy sweep:
Beneath the cooling glooms of waving trees,
And sloping pastures speck'd with fleecy sheep.
WEST-POINT.
Dash ye broad waves, and proudly heave and swell;
Rouse aged Neptune from his amber cave,
And bid the nymphs the pebbly strand who lave,
Round this grand bulwark sound their coral shell:
For, nightly bending over these streams,
Base TREASON plotted murderous schemes;
Then stealing soft to ARNOLD's bed,
Her visions vague around him shed;
And while dark vapors dimmed his eyes
She bade these forms illusive rise:
First ANDRE came; his youthful air
Allured the falling chieftain's eyes;
But when the glittering bribes appear,
A thousand strange ideas rise:
He saw Britannia's marshalled hosts,
Countless, advance toward his posts;
Honor he saw, and Wealth, and Fame,
With every good that wish can frame,
Attend their train; he longed to stretch
Beyond his virtuous brethren's reach;
His heart polluted, vainly sighed
To bound and swell in TITLED pride.
Now fair COLUMBIA's armies come --
His hand has sealed their mournful doom;
And in an unrelenting hour
He yields them up to Albion's power:
Then Murder bloats with horrid pride!
A thousand fall on every side!
And coward Cruelty's base bands
Dip in warm gore their barbarous hands:
Then the broad-sword displays its force,
Drenched to the very hilt in blood!
While the brave warrior, and the frantic horse
Wallow together in the purple flood!
Then rose a NAME; and lo! from far
He hears the hum of chariot wheels;
Divinity' within him feels,
And thunders forth, THE SOVEREIGN LORD OF WAR.
His anxious eyes he strained for more;
But fickle Fancy dropped the scene;
TRUTH's radiant rays around him pour,
And showed the wretch 'twas all a dream!
Fierce bursting from between the sturdy hills,
More high the wealthy river's bosom swells;
Their circles broader now the waves expand,
Howl to the winds, and lash the answering strand;
Then rolling slow, they kiss the flinty mound,
For valiant WAYNE's victorious acts renowned:
'Twas there Bellona reared her standard high,
And bellowing engines poured forth storms of fire;
While smoky columns slow to heaven aspire,
Obscure the sun, and hide the glowing sky:
Ranks rushed on ranks, and the bright blade
Its path through many a bosom made,
While furious men regardless tread
Upon the dying, and the dead!
O what a piteous scene of woes!
The blood in bubbling currents flows;
The fiends of battle shriek aloud,
Destruction hurls his shafts abroad,
And all the rocky caverns round
With sullen groans of Death resound!
But valor swelled in FLEURY's breast;
He sighed to give his vet'rans rest;
And listless of the deadly aim
With which Britannia's volleys came,
He rushed among the awe-struck crowd,
And bore away their banner proud. At the storming of Stony-Point Lieutenant
Fleury struck the British standard with his own hand.

For this brave deed, has raptured Fame
Twined many a chaplet round his brow;
And long as lasts COLUMBIA's name
The fragrant blossoms fair shall blow;
And when the hand of Death, so cold,
Shall wrap him in the valley's mold,
A modest stone shall mark the place;
And there Affection's hand shall 'grave,
"Here FLEURY lies, the warrior brave!"
And all the simple line who trace,
Shall heave a sigh or drop a tear,
And bless the soldier mouldering there!
Soon as the ridgy mountains leave the eye,
Tall mural rocks These rocks rise for many miles nearly perpendicular, some of
them 600 feet.
shoot proud into the air;
In shapes fantastic lift their turrets high,
Fit for the shadowy forms who revel there:
The hardy PINES that on their steep sides grow,
(Whose naked roots from chink to chink extend;
Whose boughs aspiring, towered the dense clouds tend,)
Appear like shrubs to the strained eyes below.
The wandering goat adventures to the brink,
And peeps across the fretted edge with care;
Then from the awful precipice she shrinks,
As though relentless Ruin hovered there.
Yet there, when Night has bid the world be mute,
The s^eepless sailor often clambers high,
And from some shadowy noo^ his sonorous flute
Sends mournful accents to the neighboring sky:
And while the flood reflects the broad moon bright,
Concealed the budding laurel's sweets among,
There the sad lover pours his pensive song,
Filling with mellow sounds the ear of Night.
But now the advancing sight admires
The rising fanes and glittering spires
Of EBORACIA's stately towers,
Which catch the Morning's splendid beam,
And shining over the frothy stream,
Gild with refracted light the long extended shores.
Alas! how late the rude foe revel'd there,
(Their engines bellow mournful over the main,
And every street gleams with the dismal glare,)
Murder, and Want, and Sickness in their train:
Beneath the burning torch of War consumed,
Her walls in smoking ruins lay scattered round;
While horrid fires her HOLY DOMES illum'd,
Whose blazing spires fell thundering to the ground,
Gilding the gloomy bosom of old Night.
Then from the deadly prison's walls arise,
Of Hunger fierce, the agonizing cries,
Filling the listening soul with wild affright!
But now the "crimson toils" of War are over,
Her dreadful clamourings meet the ear no more;
The grassy pastures, lately died with blood,
Now on their bosoms hold some dimpling flood;
And the razed buildings, whose high polished stones
Sunk disregarded amongst half mouldering bones,
From their own ashes, phoenix like, arise,
And grandly lift their turrets towered the skies:
The busy bands of Commerce crowd her ports;
Full in her harbors swells the snowy sail,
The springing breeze, the dancing streamer courts,
And the deep vessel bows before the gale;
While from fair Nassau's isle, Commonly called Long Island.
or Jersey's shore,
The laboring peasant turns his heavy oar;
His broad boat laden with inviting fruits,
Delicious wild fowl, with salubrious roots,
And tasteful pulse; or else he draws the car,
Filled with the tenants of the briny sea,
Or sedgy creek, or wood-edg'd river fair,
And hies him to this busy mart with glee:
Where from the early dawn, a hardy throng
Spread various works the loaded shores along;
Sound the harsh grating saw, or hammer loud,
Or blow the roaring furnace, sable brow'd,
Or ply the heavy hulks, propt up in air,
From smoking cauldrons, with ebullient tar,
Or guide the groaning wheels, and straining steed,
To where the sons of Trade their wealth unlade.
PRIDE of COLUMBIA! EBORACIA fair!
What happy region will with thee compare
For Nature's bounties famed? where swells the shore
With soil so fertile, and with AIR SO PURE?
Two mighty rivers The HUDSON and the EAST-RIVER or SOUND, which meet at the
south-west end of the city.
round thee roll their streams,
From the green bosom of the vasty sea,
Wooing the winds so cool, when Sol's fierce beams
Would singe the verdure of the thirsty lea.
O may the braying trumpet's shrill tongued roar
Be heard among thine echoing wilds no more,
Nor purple blood thy lilied valleys stain,
Nor sounds of death afright the restless main,
Nor panting steeds neigh to the clarion's blast,
Mocking the vengeful sword, and glittering spear;
Nor wounded warriors 'midst the hurtle drear,
Trampled beneath their coursers, sigh their last;
But may thy virtuous sons unrivaled stand,
The boast of Science and their native land;
Led by the hand of Truth, may they attain
The height for which have thousands sighed in vain;
Nor may a wish ambitious ever rise,
Save this, to be more virtuous and more wise;
And by no despot's iron laws confined,
Enjoying the vast freedom of the mind;
But while they throng the domes of Liberty,
May they her sacred precepts never profane;
Nor while they boast themselves 'the virtuous free'
One slave beneath the cruel yoke retain.
May thy fair daughters Wisdom's laws obey,
Each thought ungentle from their breasts repel;
And skilled in pious lore, to all display
It Is not in beauty they alone excel.
And may the GREAT SUPREME, when showering down,
In rich profusion, all the joys of Peace,
Thine offspring for his favorite people own,
And hearts bestow the donor's hand to bless:
Then shall thy 'habitants indeed be blessed:
Regions far distant shall revere thy name,
And nations long of every good possessed,
Style thee UNEQUALLED in the Scroll of Fame.
And thou, O RIVER! whose majestic stream
Has roused a feeble hand to sweep the lyre,
Thy charms some loftier poet shall inspire,
And Clio's self shall patronize the theme:
To hail thee shall admiring realms agree,
Sing to thy praise, and bless our happy lot;
And DANUBE's roaring flood shall be forgot,
And NILE and TIBER, when they speak of THEE*
FINIS.

