A LETTER TO THE NATIONAL CONVENTION OF FRANCE, ON THE DEFECTS in the
CONSTITUTION of 1791, AND THE EXTENT of the Amendments which ought to be
applied.

To which is Added THE CONSPIRACY OF KINGS, A POEM.

BY JOEL BARLOW, AUTHOR of Advice to the Privileged Orders; and the Vision of
Columbus.

NEW YORK: PRINTED BY THOMAS GREENLEAF, FOR J. FELLOWS, NO. 192, WATER-STREET.

[According to Act of Congress.]

A LETTER, etc.
GENTLEMEN,
THE time is at last arrived, when the people of France, by resorting to their
own proper dignity, feel themselves at liberty to exercise their unembarrassed
reason, in establishing an equal government. The present crisis in your
affairs, marked by the assembling of a National Convention, bears nearly the
same relation to the last four years of your history, as your whole revolution
bears to the great accumulated mass of modern improvement. Compared therefore
with all that is past, it is perhaps the most interesting portion of the most
important period that Europe has hitherto seen.

Under this impression, and with the deepest sense of the magnitude of the
subject which engages your attention, I take a liberty which no slight motives
could warrant in a stranger, the liberty of offering a few observations on the
business that lies before you. Could I suppose however that any apology were
necessary for this intrusion, I should not rely upon the one here mentioned.
But my intentions require no apology; I demand to be heard, as a right. Your
cause is that of human nature at large; you are the representatives of mankind;
and though I am not literally one of your constituents, yet I must be bound by
your decrees. My happiness will be seriously affected by your deliberations;
and in them I have an interest, which nothing can destroy. I not only consider
all mankind as forming but one great family, and therefore bound by a natural
sympathy to regard each other's happiness as making part of their own; but I
contemplate the French nation at this moment as standing in the place of the
whole. You have stepped forward with a gigantic stride to an enterprise which
involves the interests of every surrounding nation; and what you began as
justice to yourselves, you are called upon to finish as a duty to the human
race.

I believe no man cherishes a greater veneration, than I have uniformly done,
for the National Assembly who framed that Constitution, which I now presume
your constituents expect you to revise. Perhaps the merits of that body of men
will never be properly appreciated. The greatest part of their exertions were
necessarily spent on objects which cannot be described; and which from their
nature can make no figure in history. The enormous weight of abuses they had to
overturn, the quantity of prejudice with which their functions called them to
contend, as well in their own minds as in those of all the European world, the
open opposition of interests, the secret weapons of corruption, and the
unbridled fury of despairing faction, -- these are subjects which escape our
common observation, when we contemplate the labors of that Assembly. But the
legacy they have left to their country in their deliberative capacity will
remain a lasting monument to their praise; and though while searching out the
defective parts of their work, without losing sight of the difficulties under
which it was formed, we may find more occasion to admire its wisdom, than to
murmur at its faults; yet this consideration ought not to deter us from the
attempt.

The great leading principle, on which their constitution was meant to be
founded, is the equality of rights. This principle being laid down with such
clearness, and asserted with so much dignity in the beginning of the code, it
is strange that men of clear understandings should fail to be charmed with the
beauty of the system which nature must have taught them to build on that
foundation. It shows a disposition to counteract the analogy of nature, to see
them at one moment, impressing this indelible principle on our minds, and with
the next breath declaring, That France shall remain a monarchy, -- that it
shall have a king, hereditary, inviolable, clothed with all the executive, and
much of the legislative power, commander in chief of all the national force by
land and sea, having the initiative of war, and the power of concluding peace;
-- and above all, to hear them declare, that The nation will provide for the
splendor of the throne, granting in their legislative capacity to that throne
more than a million sterling a year, from the national purse, besides the rents
of estates which are said to amount to half as much more.

We must be astonished at the paradoxical organization of the minds of men who
could see no discordance in these ideas. They begin with the open simplicity of
a rational republic, and immediately plunge into all the labyrinths of royalty;
and a great part of the constitutional code is a practical attempt to reconcile
these two discordant theories. It is a perpetual conflict between principle and
precedent, -- between the manly truths of nature, which we all must feel, and
the learned subtilties of statesmen, about which we have been taught to reason.

In reviewing the history of human opinions, it is an unpleasant consideration
to remark how slow the mind has always been in seizing the most interesting
truths; although, when discovered, they appear to have been the most obvious.
This remark is no where verified with more circumstances of regret, than in the
progress of your ideas in France relative to the inutility of the kingly
office. It was not enough that you took your first stand upon the high ground
of natural right; where, enlightened by the sun of reason, you might have seen
the clouds of prejudice roll far beneath your feet -- it was not enough that
you began by considering royalty, with its well-known scourges, as being the
cause of all your evils, -- that the kings of modern Europe are the authors of
war and misery, that their mutual intercourse is a commerce of human slaughter,
-- that public debts and private oppressions, with all the degrading vices that
tarnish the face of nature, had their origin in that species of government
which offers a premium for wickedness, and teaches the few to trample on the
many; -- it was not enough that you saw the means of a regeneration of mankind
in the system of equal rights, and that in a wealthy and powerful nation you
possessed the advantage of reducing that system to immediate practice, as an
example to the world and a consolation to human nature. All these argument,
with a variety of others which your republican orators placed in the strongest
point of light, were insufficient to raise the public mind to a proper view of
the subject.

It seems that some of your own philosophers had previously taught, that
royalty was necessary to a great nation. Montesquieu, among his whimsical
maxims about laws and government, had informed the world, that a limited
monarchy was the best possible system, and that a democracy could never
flourish, but in a small tract of country. How many of your legislators
believed in this doctrine, how many acted from temporising motives, wishing to
banish royalty by slow degrees, and how many were led, by principles less
pardonable than either, it is impossible to determine. Certain it is, that
republican ideas gained no ground upon the monarchical in your constituting
assembly, during the last six months of their deliberations. It is likewise
certain, that the majority of that assembly took much pains to prevent the
people from discovering the cheat of royalty, and to continue their ancient
veneration, at least for a while, in favor of certain principles in government
which reason could not approve.

It is remarkable that all the perfidy of your king, at the time of his flight,
should have had so little effect in opening the eyes of so enlightened a people
as the French. His flight, and the insulting declaration which he left behind
him, were sufficient not only to give the lie to the fiction, with which common
sense has always been put to the blush, and to which your assembly had
attempted to give a sanction, that kings can do no wrong, but they were
sufficient to show, at least to all who would open their eyes, that the
business of government required no such officer. There is no period during your
revolution, if there is any to be found in the history of France, when business
went on with more alacrity and good order, than during the suspension of the
royal functions in the interval from the time that the king was brought back to
the capital in June, until the completion of the constitution in September.
Every thing went right in the kingdom, except within the walls of the assembly.
A majority of that body was determined to make an experiment of a limited
monarchy. The experiment has been made. Its duration has indeed been short,
being less than eleven months; but, although in some respects it has been
almost as fatal to the cause of liberty as any system could have been within
the time, yet in other respects it has done more good than all the reasonings
of all the philosophers of the age could have done in a much longer time: it
has taught them a new doctrine, which no experience can shake, and which reason
must confirm, that kings can do no good. So that, if the question were now to
be agitated by the people of France, as it may be by you in their behalf,
whether they will have a king or not, I should suppose the following would be
the state of the calculation: A certain quantity of evils are to be expected
from the regal office; and these evils are of two classes, certain and
probable. The certain evils are, 1. The million and a half sterling a year
drawn from the people to support the splendor of the throne; 2. A great
variety of enormous salaries paid to ministers at home, to ambassadors abroad,
and to bishops in the church; while the only business of these men and their
salaries is, to support the fiction, that kings can do no wrong. It will always
cost more to support this fiction, than it would to support the whole national
government without it. 3. The worst of all the certain evils is, that the
million and a half will be nearly all spent in bribery and corruption among the
members of the legislature, to increase the power of the throne, and the means
of oppression. If the money, after it is extorted from the people, could be
thrown into the sea, instead of being paid to the king and his satellites, the
evil would be trifling; in that case the wickedness would cease with the first
act of injustice; while in this it multiplies the weapons of destruction
against themselves. It creates a perpetual scrambling for power, rewards
knavery in the higher ranks, encourages falsehood in others, and corrupts the
morals of the whole. This it is that debases and vilifies the general mass of
mankind, and brings upon them the insulting remarks of many men, who even wish
them well, that the people are unfit for liberty.

Among the probable evils resulting from the kingly office, the principal one,
and indeed the only one that needs to be mentioned, is the chance of its being
held by a weak or a wicked man. When the office is hereditary, it is scarcely
to be expected but that this should always be the case. Considering the birth
and education of princes, the chance of finding one with practical common sense
is hardly to be reckoned among possible events; nor is the probability less
strong against their having virtue. The temptations to wickedness arising from
their situation are too powerful to be resisted. The persuasive arts of all
their flatterers, the companions of their youth, the ministers of their
pleasures, and every person with whom they ever converse, are necessarily
employed to induce them to increase their revenue, by oppressing the people,
whom they are taught from their cradle to consider as beasts of burden. And
what must almost insure the triumph of wickedness in their tempers, is the idea
that they act totally and for ever without restraint. This is an allurement to
vice that even men of sense could scarcely resist. Impress it on the mind of
any man that he can do no wrong, and he will soon convince you of your mistake.

Take this general summary of the evils arising from hereditary monarchy, under
any restrictions that can be proposed, and place it on one side of the account,
-- and state, on the other side, the truth which I believe no man of reflection
will hereafter call in question, that kings can do no good, and the friends of
liberty will no longer be in doubt which way you will decide the question
relative to that part of your constitution.

I cannot feel easy in dismissing this part of my subject, without offering
some remarks on that general vague idea which has long been floating about in
the world, that a people under certain circumstances are unfit for liberty. You
know in what insulting language this observation has been perpetually applied
to the French during the course of the revolution. Some have said, that they
were too ignorant to form a government of their own, others, that they were too
poor, others that they were too numerous, and others, that they were too
vicious. I will not descend to the examination of the particular parts of this
charge, nor of the whole as applied to the French, or to any other particular
people; I will only remark on the general observation, as applicable to any
possible nation existing in a state of nature. By a state of nature I mean a
state of peace; where the intention is, as a nation, to live by industry at
home, not by plunder from abroad.

I think Montesquieu has said, that virtue must be the foundation of a
republican government. His book is not now by me, or I would try to discover
what he means by virtue. If he means those moral habits by which men are
disposed to mutual justice and benevolence, which is the common idea of virtue,
it cannot be the foundation of a republican government, or of any government.
These qualities require no restraints: the more general their influence should
be among any people, the less force would be necessary in their government; and
could we suppose a nation in which they should exist in a perfect degree, that
nation would require no government at all. It is the vices, not the virtues of
men which are the objects of restraint, and the foundation of government. The
expression of the general will, operating on the mind of an individual, serves
with him as a substitute for virtue. This general will may always be expressed
by a nation in any possible circumstances; and, if the nation be in a state of
nature, this expression will always be moral virtue, according to their ideas
of the word; and it will always tend to moral virtue, in the most extensive
sense in which we have yet been able to define it.

It has been said, that man differs from man, as much as man from beast; it is
said also to be fit, that the wise and virtuous should make laws for the
ignorant and vicious. It is not to my purpose to call in question the first of
these assertions: but the second, plausible as it is, I must totally deny; at
least in the sense in which it is generally understood. That some men in the
same society should be wiser and better than others, is very natural; and it is
as natural, that the people should choose such to represent them in the
formation of laws. But in this case the laws originate from the people at
large, ignorant and vicious as they are; and the representatives are only the
organs by which their will is declared. This is not the sense in which the
assertion is intended. It is meant, that if kings were always wise and good, or
if a band of nobles were always wise and good, it would be best that they
should de the hereditary legislators. This is the sense in which I deny the
assertion, because it is contrary to the analogy of nature. It being a subject
on which we cannot look for experience, we must reason only from analogy; and
it appears extremely evident to me, that, were a succession of the wisest and
best men that ever have, or ever will be known, to be perpetuated in any
country as independent legislators for the people, the happiness and good
government of the nation would be greatly injured by it. I am confident that
any people, whether virtuous or vicious, wise or ignorant, numerous or few,
rich or poor, are the best judges of their own wants relative to the restraint
of laws, and would always supply those wants better than they could be supplied
by others.

In expressing these ideas on the peace and happiness to be expected from a
free republic, I have been often accused of holding too favorable an opinion
of human nature. But it appears to me, that the question, whether men, on any
given portion of the earth, are able to make their own laws, does not depend in
the least on their moral character. It has no relation to their state of
improvement, or their state of morals. The only previous enquiry is, What is
the object to be aimed at in the government? If it be the good of the whole
community, the whole can best know the means of pursuing it; If it be to exalt
a few men at the expense of all the rest, the decision, perhaps, may take a
different turn.

A republic of beavers or of monkies, I believe, could not be benefited by
receiving their laws from men, any more than men could be in being governed by
them. If the Algerines or the Hindoos were to shake off the yoke of despotism,
and adopt ideas of equal liberty, they would that moment be in a condition to
frame a better government for themselves, than could be framed for them by the
most learned statesman in the world. If the great Mr. Lock, with all his
wisdom and goodness, were to attempt the task, he would probably succeed as ill
as he did in his constitution for the colony of South Carolina.

Colonies have always been teazed and tormented more or less (and probably
always will be as long as colonies shall exist) by the overweening wisdom of
the mother country, in making their laws and constitutions. This is often done
without any wish to tyrannize, and sometimes with the best intentions to
promote the good of the people. The misfortune more frequently lies in the
legislator's not knowing the wants and wishes of the people, than in any wanton
desire to counteract them. The sure and only characteristic of a good law is,
that it be the perfect expression of the will of the nation; its excellence is
precisely in proportion to the universality and freedom of consent. And this
definition remains the same, whatever be the character of the nation, or the
object of the law. Every man, as an individual, has a will of his own, and a
manner of expressing it. In forming these individuals into society, it is
necessary to form their wills into a government; and in doing this, we have
only to find the easiest and clearest mode of expressing their wills in a
national manner. And no possible disadvantages relative to their state of
morals or civilization can render this a difficult task.

I have gone into these arguments, not merely to prove that the French are fit
for liberty, who are certainly at this moment the most enlightened nation in
Europe; but to show that the calumny contained in the contrary assertion need
not be repeated against any other nation, who should make the like exertions,
and whose pretensions, in this respect, might appear more questionable in the
eye of fashionable remark.

But it will be said, I am too late with all these observations on the
necessity of proscribing royalty from your constitution. The cause is already
judged in the minds of the whole people of France; and their wishes will surely
be the rule of your conduct. I suppose that, without being reminded of your
duty by a stranger, one of your first resolutions would be, to fix a national
anathema on every vestige of regal power, and endeavor to wipe out from the
human character the stain which it received, with its veneration for kings and
hereditary claims. But it requires much reflection to be well aware to what
extent this duty should carry you. There are many vices in your constitution,
which, though not apparently connected with the king, had their origin in regal
ideas. To purify the whole code from these vices, and to purge human nature
from their effects, it will be necessary to resort to many principles which
appear not to have struck the minds of the first assembly.

You will permit me to hint at some of the great outlines of what may be
expected from you, under the peculiar advantages with which you meet to form a
glorious republic. Although many of my ideas may be perfectly superfluous,
being the same as will occur to every member of your body, yet it is possible
that some of them may strike the mind in a new point of light, and lead to
reflections which would not rise from any other quarter. Should this be the
case in the smallest degree, it ought to be considered, both by you and me, as
an ample reward for our pains, in writing and in reading this letter.

On considering the subject of government, when the mind is once set loose from
the shackles of royalty, it finds itself it a new world. It rises to a more
extensive view of every circumstance of the social state. Human nature assumes
a new and more elevated shape, and displays many moral features, which, from
having been always disguised, were not known to exist. In this case, it is a
long time before we acquire a habit of tracing effects to their proper causes,
and of applying the easy and simple remedy to those vices of our nature which
society requires us to restrain. This, I apprehend, is the source of by far the
greatest difficulties with which you have to contend. We are so much used, in
government, to the most complicated systems, as being necessary to support
those impositions, without which it has been supposed impossible for men to be
governed, that it is an unusual task to conceive of the simplicity to which the
business of government may be reduced, and to which it must be reduced, if we
would have it answer the purpose of promoting happiness.

After proscribing royalty, with all its appendages, I suppose it will not be
thought necessary in France to support any other errors and superstitions of a
similar complexion; but that undisguised reason in all things will be preferred
to the cloak of imposition. Should this be the case, you will conceive it no
longer necessary to maintain a national church. This establishment is so
manifestly an imposition upon the judgment of mankind, that the constituting
assembly must have considered it in that light. It is one of those monarchical
ideas, which pay us the wretched compliment of supposing that we are not
capable of being governed by our own reason. To suppose that the people of
France are to learn the mode of worshipping God from the decrees of the Council
of Trent, is certainly as absurd as it would be to appeal to such a Council to
learn how to breathe, or to open their eyes. Neither is it true, as is argued
by the advocates of this part of your constitution, that the preference there
given to one mode of worship by the payment of the Catholic priests, from the
national purse, to the exclusion of others, was founded on the idea of the
property supposed to have been possessed by that church, and which by the
assembly was declared to be thenceforward the property of the nation.

The church, in this sense of the word, signifies nothing but a mode of
worship; and to prove that a mode can be a proprietor of lands, requires a
subtilty of logic that I shall not attempt to refute. The fact is, the church
considered as an hierarchy, was always necessary to the support of royalty; and
your assembly, with great consistency of design, wishing to preserve something
of the old fabric, preserved something of this necessary prop. but as the
fabric is now overturned, the prop may be safely taken away. I am confident
that monarchy and hierarchy will be buried in the same grave; and that in
France they will not survive the present year.

I know it is asserted and believed by some well-wishers to society, that
religion would be lost among men, if they were to banish all legal
establishments with regard to the manner of exercising it. I should not be so
perfectly convinced as I am of the absurdity of this opinion, were it not easy
to discover how it came to be introduced. It is an idea, as I believe, purely
political; and it had its origin in the supposed necessity of governing men by
fraud, -- of erecting their credulity into an hierarchy, in order to sustain
the despotism of the state. I hold religion to be a natural propensity of the
mind, as respiration is of the lungs. If this be true, there can be no danger
of its being lost: and I can see no more reason for making laws to regulate the
impression of Deity upon the soul, than there would be, to regulate the action
of light upon the eye, or of air upon the lungs. I should presume therefore,
that, on stripping this subject of all the false covering which unequal
governments have thrown upon it, you will make no national provision for the
support of any class of men, under the mock pretense of maintaining the worship
of God. But you will leave every part of the community to nominate and pay
their own ministers in their own way. The mode of worship which they will thus
maintain, will be the most conducive to good order, because it will be that in
which the people will believe.

Much has been said, since the beginning of your revolution, on the difference
between the business of framing constitutions, and that of ordinary
legislation. Indeed I am afraid that either too much or too little has been
inculcated on this subject; because it appears to me, that the doctrine now
received is not that which the subject would naturally suggest. It teaches us
to consider those laws that are called Constitutions, in a light so sacred, as
to savor too much of the old leaven of veneration for precedent; and every
degree of such veneration is so much taken from the chance of improvement. To
suppose that our predecessors were wiser than ourselves is not an extraordinary
thing, though the opinion may be ill-founded; but to suppose that they can have
left us a better system of political regulations than we can make for
ourselves, is to ascribe to them a degree of discernment to which our own bears
no comparison; it supposes them to have known our condition by prophecy better
than we can know it by experience.

There was not only a degree of arrogance in your first assembly, in supposing
that they had framed a constitution, which for a number of years would require
no amendment; but they betrayed a great degree of weakness in imagining that
the ridiculous barriers with which they fenced it round would be sufficient to
restrain the powerful weight of opinion, and prevent the people from exercising
the irresistible right of innovation, whenever experience should discover the
defects of the system. It is partly to these barriers, as well as to the
inherent vices of the constitution, that we are to attribute the late
insurrections in Paris. If we would trace the causes of popular commotions, we
should always find them to have originated in a previous unjust restraint.

I would not however be understood to mean, that there should be no distinction
between the constitutional code, and other occasional laws. There is room for a
considerable difference, both as to the mode of expressing them, and as to the
formalities proper to be observed in repealing or amending them. I will offer
some remarks on a plan for amendments toward the close of my letter. With
regard to the general complexion of the code, it ought to be as simply
expressed and easy to be understood as possible; for it ought to serve not only
as a guide to the legislative body, but as a political grammar to all the
citizens. The greatest service to be expected from it is, that it should
concentrate the maxims, and form the habits of thinking, for the whole
community. For this purpose, it is not sufficient that it be purified from
every vestige of monarchy, and hierarchy, with all the impositions and
inequalities which have sprung insensibly from these ideas; but it should
contemplate the whole circle of human propensities, and cut off the temptations
and opportunities for degenerating into those evils which have so long
afflicted mankind, and from which we are now but beginning to arise.

After laying down the great fundamental principle that all men are equal in
their rights, it ought to be the invariable object of the social compact to
insure the exercise of that equality, by rendering them as equal in all sorts
of enjoyments, as can possibly be consistent with good order, industry, and the
reward of merit. Every individual ought to be rendered as independent of every
other individual as possible; and at the same time as dependent as possible on
the whole community. On this undeniable maxim, I think the following positions
ought to be founded and guaranteed in the constitutional code:

First, The only basis of representation in the government should be
population; territory and property, though absurdly stated by your first
assembly as making part of the basis of representation, have no interest in it.
Property, in itself, conveys no right to the possessor, but the right of
enjoying it. To say that it has the right of claiming for itself the protection
of society, is absurd; because it is already protected, or it would not be
property. It is the person, not the property, that exercises the will, and is
capable of enjoying happiness; it is therefore the person, for whom government
is instituted, and by whom its functions are performed. The reason why property
has been considered as conveying additional rights to the possessor in matters
of government, is the same as has blinded the understandings of men relative to
the whole order of nature in society. It is one of those appendages of monarchy
and oligarchy, which teaches that the object of government is to increase the
splendor of the few, and the misfortunes of the many. And every step that such
governments take has a tendency to counteract the equality of rights, by
destroying the equality of enjoyments.

Second, If you take population as the only basis of representation in the
departments, the next step will be, to declare every independent man to be an
active citizen. By an independent man, I mean every man whom the laws do not
place under the control of another, by reason of nonage or domesticity. The
laws of France, in my opinion, have always placed the period of majority by
several years too late; that is, later than nature has placed it. This however,
was of little consequence in a political view, as long as the government
remained despotic; but now, when the rights of man are restored, and government
is built on that foundation, it is of consequence to increase as far as
possible the number of active citizens. And for this purpose I should suppose
the period of majority ought to be placed at least as early as the age of
twenty years. To make this change in France would be attended with many
advantages. I would increase the stock of knowledge, and of industry, by
inspiring young men with early ideas of independence, and the necessity of
providing for themselves by some useful employment: it would be a great
inducement to early marriages; and, by that means, increase population, and
encourage purity of morals.

I am likewise fully convinced, that the assembly was wrong in supposing that a
state of domesticity ought to deprive a man of the rights of a freeman. This is
a relick of those ideas which the ancient government has inspired. Where a
servant is absolutely dependent on the caprice of a master for his place, and
consequently for his bread, there is indeed much force in the argument, that he
can have no political will of his own; and will give his suffrage as directed
by the master. But when every man shall be absolutely free to follow any
profession, every kind of useful industry being equally encouraged and
rewarded; and especially when every man shall be well instructed in his duties
and his rights, which will certainly be the consequence of the system you have
now begun, -- such arguments will fall to the ground with the system which they
support. The servant and his master, though not equal in property or in
talents, may be perfectly so in freedom and in virtue. Wherever the servant is
more dependent on the master, than the master on the servant, there is
something wrong in the government. The same remarks I believe may be repeated,
with little variation, in the case of insolvent debtors, another class of men
disfranchised by the first assembly.

Third, The manner in which citizenship may be acquired or lost, is a subject
which ought to be reconsidered by you; as your predecessors have left in it
some room for improvement. Their regulation was indeed a liberal one, compared
with what other governments have done; but not so, when compared with what the
subject required. I am confident that when society shall be placed on the right
footing, the citizens of any one state will consider those of any other state
as their brothers and fellow citizens of the world; and in this case, when
those who are called foreigners come to settle among them, a mere declaration
of their intention of residence will be sufficient to entitle them to all the
rights which the natives possess. I was anxious that the French should set the
example in this species of liberality, as they have done in so many other good
things; and I still believe, that on reviewing the subject, you will do it.

But according to your constitution there are many ways in which the rights of
citizens may be lost, for one of which I can see no reason; it is
naturalization in a foreign country. This is so manifestly illiberal and
unjust, that I am almost sure it will be altered. It is an old feudal idea of
allegiance; and goes upon the supposition that fidelity to one country is
incompatible with our duty to another. When a citizen of one state is
complimented with the freedom of another, it is generally an acknowledgment of
his merit; but your constituting assembly considered it as an object of
punishment. Many of your citizens have been naturalized in America; but the
American governments certainly did not foresee that this act of theirs would
disfranchise those gentlemen at home. You have lately conferred the rights of a
French citizen on George Washington. If he should accept the honor you have
thus done him, and the American constitution were in this respect the same as
your own, he must immediately be turned out of office, and for ever
disfranchised at home.

Fourth, You will doubtless consider the important subject of the frequency of
popular elections, as claiming a farther deliberation. It is an article on
which too much reflection cannot be bestowed. It influences the habits of the
people and the spirit of the government in a variety of ways, that escape our
common observation. I mentioned before, that one of the first objects of
society is to render every individual perfectly dependent on the whole
community. The more completely this object is attained, the more perfect will
be the equality of enjoyments and the happiness of the state. But of all
individuals, those who are selected to be the organs of the people, in making
and in executing the laws, should feel this dependence in the strongest degree.
The easiest and most natural method of effecting this purpose is, to oblige
them to recur frequently to the authors of their official existence, to deposit
their powers, mingle with their fellows, and wait the decision of the same
sovereign will which created them at first, to know whether they are again to
be trusted.

There are doubtless some limits to this frequency of election, beyond which it
would be hurtful to pass; as every subject has a medium between two vicious
extremes. But I know of no office, in any department of state, that need to be
held for more than one year, without a new election. Most men, who give in to
this idea with respect to the legislative, are accustomed to make an exception
with regard to the executive, and particularly with regard to that part which
is called the judiciary. I am aware of all the arguments that are usually
brought in support of these exceptions; but they appear to me of little weight,
in comparison to those in favor of universal annual elections. Power always
was, and always must be, a dangerous thing. I mean, power collected from the
great mass of society, and delegated to a few hands; for it is only in this
sense that it can properly be called power. The physical forces of all the
individuals of a great nation cannot be brought to act at once upon a single
object; and the same may be said of their moral forces. It is necessary
therefore that the exercise of these should always be performed by delegation;
the moral in legislation, the physical in execution. This is the proper
definition of national power; and in this sense it is necessarily dangerous;
because, strictly speaking, it is not exercised by those whose property it is,
and for whose good it is intended to operate. It is in the nature of this kind
of trust to invert in some measure the order of things; it apparently sets the
servant above the master, and disposes him to feel a kind of independence which
ought never to be felt by any citizen, particularly one who is charged with a
public function.

It has ever been the tendency of government to divide the society into two
parties, -- the governors and the governed. The mischiefs arising from this are
almost infinite. It not only disposes each party to view the other with an eye
of jealousy and distrust, which soon rise to acts of secret or open enmity, but
it effectually corrupts the morals of both parties, and destroys the vital
principles of society; it makes government the trade of the few, submission the
drudgery of the many, and falsehood the common artifice of the whole. To
prevent this, I would have no man placed in a position in which he can call
himself governor, for a moment longer than while he performs the duties of his
trust to the satisfaction of his fellow citizens, nor even then, but for a
short period. He should feel at all times as though he were soon to change
places with any one of his neighbors, whom he now sees submissive to his
authority.

But to answer this purpose, the frequent return of elections is not of itself
sufficient. I am fully of the opinion, that with regard to all discretionary
officers, there ought to be an exclusion by rotation. Those functions that are
purely ministerial, such as those of sheriffs, constables, clerks of courts,
registers, etc. perhaps may form exceptions; but legislators, executive
counselors, judges and magistrates of every description, should not only feel
their dependence on the people by an annual election, but should frequently
mingle with them by an exclusion from office. The effect of this would be, not
what is often asserted, that no one would understand government, but the
contrary, that every one would understand it. This would form a prodigious
stimulus to the acquisition of knowledge among all descriptions of men, in all
parts of the country. Every man of ordinary ability would be not only capable
of watching over his own rights, but of exercising any of the functions by
which the public safety is secured. For whatever there is in the art of
government, whether legislative or executive, above the capacity of the
ordinary class of what are called well informed men, is superfluous and
destructive, and ought to be laid aside. The man who is called a politician,
according to the practical sense of the word in modern Europe, exercises an
office infinitely more destructive to society than that of a highwayman. The
same may be said, in general, of the financier; whose art and mystery, on the
funding system of the present century, consist in making calculations to enable
governments to hire mankind to butcher each other, by drawing bills on
posterity for the payment.

I would therefore suggest the propriety of your reviewing the article of
biennial elections, as instituted by your first assembly, and of your making
them annual; and the same term, if not the same manner of election, ought to
extend to all executive officers, whose functions are in any manner
discretionary. I think it would likewise be essential, that no office of this
description should be held by one man, more than two years in any term of four
years. This would send into the departments, and into every part of the empire,
at frequent periods, some thousands of men with practical knowledge of public
business; it would at least be the means of doubling the number of such
well-instructed men; and, by holding out the inducement to others, to qualify
themselves to merit the confidence of their fellow citizens, it would multiply
the number of men of theoretical knowledge, at least ten fold. All these men
will be watchful guardians of the public safety. But these are not all the
advantages of frequent elections. They habituate the people to the business of
election, and enable them to carry it on with order and regularity, like their
daily labor; they habituate the candidates to be gratified with the public
confidence, or to be disappointed in the expectation of obtaining it; so that
their success or disappointment ceases to make that deep impression on their
minds, which it otherwise would do. It is thus that you would cut off an
infinite source of that intrigue and corruption, which are foretold with so
much horror by those who have not well studied the effects of a well organized
popular government. But another method, not less effectual, to prevent the arts
of scrambling for power and places, will be hinted at in the following article.

Fifth, Among the fatal misconceptions of things which monarchy has entailed
upon us, and which are extremely difficult to eradicate from the mind, must be
reckoned that prevalent opinion, that all governments should gratify their
agents with enormous salaries. This idea has usually been more particularly
applied in favor of the executive officers of government and their dependants;
and it had its origin in the antecedent principle, that government divides the
people into two distinct classes, and that the same quantity of business,
coming within the verge of one of these classes, must be paid for at a higher
price than it would be, within that of the other; though it should be performed
by the same man, and required the same exertion of talents. Your constitution
is silent as to the quantity of salary that shall be paid to any particular
officer; it only says, that the nation will provide for the splendor of the
throne (which indeed is a declaration of war against the liberties of the
people) but the authors of that constitution, in their legislative capacity,
after providing for that splendor with a sum sufficient to purchase the
majority of almost any corpse of seven hundred legislators, went on to provide
for the splendor of the ministers. They gave to one, if my memory does not
deceive me, one hundred and fifty thousand livres, and one hundred thousand to
each of the rest. This on an average is about three times more than ought to
have been given, unless the object were to carry on the government by
intriguing for places.

I mention this article, not on the score of economy. That consideration,
however weighty it may appear, is one of the least that can strike the mind on
the subject of public salaries. The evil of paying too much is pregnant with a
thousand mischiefs. It is almost sufficient of itself to defeat all the
advantages to be expected from the institution of an equal government. The
general rule to be adopted in this case (which perhaps is all that can be said
of it in the constitution) appears to me to be this, That so much, and no more,
shall be given for the performance of any public function, as shall be
sufficient to induce such men to undertake it whose abilities are equal to the
task. If this rule were strictly observed, it is rational to conclude, that
there would be no more contention or intrigue among candidates to obtain places
in the government, than there is among manufacturers, to find a market for
their goods. This conclusion becomes more probably just, when we consider that
your intention is to cut off from the servants of the public all hopes of
obtaining the public money by any indirect and fraudulent measures. When there
shall be no more civil list, or livre rouge, no more ministerial patronage in
church or state, no more sale of justice or purchase of oppression, or any kind
of perquisite of office, but the candidate shall be assured, that all the money
he shall receive, will be the simple sum promised by the legislature, that sum
being no more than the work is honestly worth, he will accept or relinquish the
most important trust, as he would an ordinary occupation.

This single circumstance of salaries, being wisely guarded on every side,
would, in the course of its operation, almost change the moral face of
government. It would silence all the clamours against the republican principle,
and answer many of the fashionable calumnies against the character of the human
heart.

There is another questionable opinion now extant, even in republican
countries; which, as it has made some figure in France, and is connected with
the subject of salaries, I will mention in this place. It is supposed to be
necessary, for the energy of government, that its officers should assume a kind
of external pomp and splendor, in order to dazzle the eye, and inspire the
public mind with a veneration for their authority. As this pomp cannot be
supported without some expense, the supposed necessity for assuming it is
always offered as a reason for high salaries; and, allowing the first position
to be true, the consequence is certainly reasonable and just. If we are to be
governed only by deception, it is right that we should pay for this deception.
But the whole argument is wrong; that is, if we allow monarchy and hierarchy to
be wrong; it is a badge of that kind of government which is directly the
reverse of republican principles, or the government of reason. I do not deny,
that this official pomp has in a great measure the effect which is intended
from it; it imposes on the unthinking part of mankind, and has a tendency to
secure their obedience. This effect, however, is not so great as that of
simplicity, and the native dignity of reason would be; but on the moral habits
of society, its operation is more pernicious than at first view we are ready to
imagine. So far as the people are caught by the imposition, it leads them to
wrong ideas of themselves, of their officers, and of the real authority of
laws. This is a fatal deviation from the true design of government; for its
principal object certainly ought to be, to rectify our opinions, and improve
our morals.

For my own part, when I see a man in private life assuming an external
splendor, for the sake of gaining attention, I cannot but feel it an insult
offered to my understanding; because it is saying to me, that I have not
discernment enough to distinguish his merit, without this kind of ecce signum.
And when an officer of government exhibits himself in the foppery of a puppet,
and is drawn by six or eight horses, where two would be really more convenient
to her self, I am grieved at the insult offered to the nation, and at their
stupidity in not perceiving it. For the language of the mummery is simply this,
That the officer cannot rely upon his own personal dignity as a title to
respect, nor the laws be trusted to their own justice, to insure their
execution. It is a full acknowledgment on his part, that the government is bad,
and that he is obliged to dazzle the eyes of the people, to prevent their
discovering the cheat. When a set of judges on the bench take the pains to
shroud their head and shoulders in a fleece of horse-hair, in order to resemble
the bird of wisdom, it raises a strong suspicion, that they mean to palm upon
us the emblem for the reality.

It is essential to the character of a free republic, that every thing should
be reduced to the standard of reason; that men and laws should depend on their
own intrinsic merit, and that no shadow of deception should ever be offered to
the people; as it cannot fail to corrupt them; and pave the way to oppression.
I make these remarks, not that they will form an article proper to enter into
your constitution, but to remove every appearance of argument in favor of high
salaries. And I think the constitution ought to contain a general declaration,
that every public salary should be restricted to a sum not more than sufficient
to reward the officer for his labor; which sum must, of course, be left to be
fixed by the legislature.

Seventh, There appears to me to be an error of doctrine in France, with
respect to the relation which ought to subsist between the representative, and
his immediate constituents. It is said, that when a representative is once
chosen, and sent to the Assembly, he is no longer to be considered as
representing the people of the particular department which sent him, but of the
nation at large; and therefore, during the term for which he is chosen, he is
not accountable to the people who chose him, but is to be controuled, removed
or suspended, only by the National Assembly. This appears to have been
established, in order to get rid of a contrary doctrine, which was found to be
inconvenient; which was, that a delegate should be bound at all times to follow
the instructions of his constituents; as thereby all the advantages to be
expected from discussion and deliberation would be lost. If the first of these
be an error, as I believe it is, it may easily be avoided, without running into
the last. When the delegate receives instructions, which prove to be contrary
to the opinion which he afterward forms, he ought to presume that his
constituents, not having had the advantage of hearing the national discussion,
are not well informed on the subject, and his duty is to vote according to his
conscience. It is to be supposed that, for his own sake, he will explain to
them his motives; but if for this, or any other circumstance, they should be
dissatisfied with his conduct, they have an undoubted right at any time to
recall him, and nominate another in his place. This will tend to maintain a
proper relation between the representative and the people, and a due dependence
of the former upon the latter. Besides, when a man has lost the confidence of
his fellow-citizens of the department, he is no longer their representative;
and when he ceases to be theirs, he cannot in any sense be the representative
of the nation; since it is not pretended that he can derive any authority, but
through his own constituents. This, however, cannot deprive the assembly of its
right to expel or suspend a member for any refractory conduct, which may be
deemed an offense against the state.

Eighth, The article of inviolability, as applied to the members of the
assembly, or to any other officers of the state, is worthy of re-consideration.
But before it be again decided in the affirmative, you ought to take a general
view of that interesting subject of imprisonment for debt. It is a species of
civil cruelty which all modern governments have borrowed from the Roman law,
which considered a debtor as a criminal, and committed the care of his
punishment into the hands of the creditor, lending the public prison as an
instrument of private vengeance. It is a disgrace to the wisdom of a nation,
and can never be allowed in a well regulated state. If no citizen could be
arrested or deprived of his liberty, for debt, there would be no need of making
an exception in favor of the officers of government; and thus you would remove
a distinction which must always appear unjust.

Ninth, You will scarcely think that your duty is discharged, so as to satisfy
your own minds on the establishment of a constitution, from which the friends
of humanity will anticipate a total regeneration of society, until you shall
have given a farther declaration on the subject of criminal law. All men of
reflection are agreed, that punishments in modern times have lost all
proportion to the crimes to which they are annexed, even on that scale of
barbarous justice by which they were introduced. Few, however, have had the
wisdom to discover, or the boldness to declare, the true cause of the evil; and
while we remain ignorant of the cause, it is no wonder that we fail in finding
the remedy. In the glooms of meditation on the miseries of civilized life, I
have been almost led to adopt this conclusion, That society itself is the cause
of all crimes; and, as such, it has no right to punish them at all. But,
without indulging the severity of this unqualified assertion, we way venture to
say, that every punishment is a new crime; though it may not in all cases be so
great as would follow from omitting to punish.

There is a manifest difference between punishment and correction; the latter,
among rational beings, may always be performed by instruction; or at most by
some gentle species of restraint. But punishment, on the part of the public,
arises from no other source but a jealousy of power. It is a confession of the
inability of society, to protect itself against an ignorant or refractory
member. When there are factions in a state, contending for the supreme command,
the pains inflicted by each party are summary; they often precede the crime*
and the factions wreak their vengeance on each other, as a prevention of
expected injuries. Something very similar to this is what perpetually takes
place in every nation, in what is called a state of tranquillity and order. For
government has usually been nothing more than a regulated faction. The party
which governs and the party which reluctantly submits to be governed, maintain
a continual conflict; and out of that conflict proceed the crimes and the
punishments, or, more properly speaking, the punishments and the crimes. When
we see the power of the nation seizing an individual, dragging him to a
tribunal, pronouncing him worthy of death, and then going through the solemn
formalities of execution, it is natural to ask, what is the meaning of all
this? It certainly means, that the nation is in a state of civil war; and even
in that barbarous stage of war, when it is thought necessary to put all
prisoners to death. In deciding the question, whether a particular criminal
should be put to death, I never would ask what is the nature of his offense; it
has nothing to do with the question; I would simply enquire, what is the
condition of the society. If it be in a state of internal peace, I would say it
was wicked and absurd to think of inflicting such punishment. To plead that
there is a necessity for that desperate remedy, proves a want of energy in the
government, or of wisdom in the nation.

When men are in a state of war, with the enemy's bayonets pointed at their
breasts, or when they are in the heat of a revolution, encompassed by treason,
and tormented by corruption, there is an apology for human slaughter; but when
you have established a wise and manly government, founded on the moral sense,
and invigorated by the enlightened reason of the people, let it not be sullied
by that timid vengeance, which belongs only to tyrants and usurpers. I could
wish that your constitution might declare, not merely what it has already
declared, that the penal code shall be reformed, but, that within a certain
period after the return of peace, the punishment of death shall be abolished.
It ought likewise to enjoin it on the legislative body to soften the rigor of
punishments in general, until they shall amount to little more than a tender
paternal correction. Whoever will look into the human heart, and examine the
order of nature in society, must be convinced, that this is the most likely
method of preventing the commission of crimes. But

Tenth, In order to be consistent with yourselves in removing those abuses
which have laid the foundation of all offenses against society, both in crimes
and punishments, you ought to pay a farther attention to the necessity of
public instruction. It is your duty, as a constituting assembly, to establish a
system of government that shall improve the morals of mankind. In raising a
people from slavery to freedom, you have called them to act on a new theater;
and it is a necessary part of your business, to teach them how to perform their
parts. By discovering to a man his rights, you impose upon him a new system of
duties. Every Frenchman, born to liberty, must now claim, among the first of
his rights, the right of being instructed in the manner of preserving them.
This the society has no authority to refuse; and to fail of enjoining it on the
legislative body, as a part of its constant care, would be to counteract the
principles of the revolution, and expose the whole system to be overturned.

From what the constitution has already declared on this head, and from the
disposition of the two last assemblies, I have no doubt but considerable
attention will be paid to it; but I wish in this place to recommend it to a
more particular consideration, as a subject connected with criminal law. It is
certain that no obedience can be rationally expected from any man to a law
which he does not know. It is not only unjust, but absurd and even impossible,
to enforce his obedience. It is therefore but half the business of legislators
to make good laws; an indispensable part of their duty is to see that every
person in the state shall perfectly understand them. The barbarous maxim of
jurisprudence, That ignorance of the law is no excuse to the offender, is an
insolent apology for tyranny, and ought never to disgrace the policy of a
rational government. I think therefore it would do honor to your constitution,
and serve as a stimulus to your legislature and to your magistrates, in the
great duty of instruction, to declare, That knowledge is the foundation of
obedience, and that laws shall have no authority but where they are understood.

Eleventh, Since I am treating of morals, the great object of all politic I
institutions, I cannot avoid bestowing some remarks on the subject of public
lotteries. It is a shocking disgrace to modern governments, that they are
driven to this pitiful piece of knavery, to draw money from the people. But no
circumstance of this kind is so extraordinary, as that this policy should be
continued in France, since the revolution; and that a state lottery should
still be reckoned among the permanent sources of revenue. It has its origin in
deception; and depends for its support, on raising and disappointing the hopes
of individuals, on perpetually agitating the mind with unreasonable desires of
gain, on clouding the understanding with superstitious ideas of chance,
destiny, and fate, on diverting the attention from regular industry, and
promoting a universal spirit of gambling, which carries all sorts of vices into
all classes of people. Whatever way we look into human affairs, we shall ever
find, that the bad organization of society is the cause of more disorders than
could possibly arise from the natural temper of the heart. And what shall we
say of a government, that avowedly steps forward with the insolence of an open
enemy, and creates a new vice, for the sake of loading it with a tax? What
right has such a government to punish our follies? And who can look without
disgust on the impious figure it makes, in holding the scourge in one hand, and
the temptation in the other? You cannot hesitate to declare in your
constitution, that all state lotteries shall be for ever abolished.

Twelfth, As yours is the first nation in the world, that has solemnly
renounced the horrid business of conquest, you ought to proceed one step
farther, and declare, that you will have no more to do with colonies. This is
but a necessary consequence of your former renunciation. For colonies are an
appendage of conquest; and to claim a right to the one would be claiming a
perpetual, or reiterated right to the other. Supposing your colonies were to
declare independence, and set up a government of their own (which your own
principles and the first laws of nature declare they have a right to do) in
that case, the same pretenses which you now have to hold them under your
control, would certainly justify you in reconquering and subjecting them. But
it would be a mere waste of argument, to prove that you have no right to retain
a sovereignty over them; and if I could bring myself to pay so ill a compliment
to your justice, as to suppose that you could wish to violate a right, for the
sake of what is called policy, it would be easy to show, that to maintain
foreign possessions, is in all cases as impolitic, as it is unjust and
oppressive. Policy, in this respect, can have no other object, but the
advantages of trade; and it may be laid down as a universal position, that
whatever solid advantages can flow to the mother country from the trade of her
colonies, would necessarily flow to her, if they were independent states. The
experience of mankind has not yet enabled us even to suppose a case, in which
it would be otherwise. Whatever is free and mutually advantageous in trade,
would be natural, and would be carried on by each party for its own interest:
whatever is unnatural and forced must be secured by means that will probably
lessen the quantity of the whole; but at all events, the cost of maintaining it
will for ever exceed the profits. This is not only found to be true, from the
experience of every nation which has maintained colonies abroad; but the nature
of the subject requires, that it should always be the case. It is a theory, for
the proof of which no experience could have been necessary; and it is to the
pride of kings, and the mistaken rapacity of governments, to the false glare of
extended sovereignty, and the desire of providing predatory places for the
sycophants of courts, that we are to attribute the train of calamities which
has tormented the maritime nations of Europe, in maintaining colonies for the
monopoly of trade. And where are we to look for reason and reformation, but to
France? The English and other governments, to support a consistency of
character, and fill up the measure of their sins, are faithful only to this one
point, that the more they are convinced of the truth, the more obstinate is
their perseverance in error.

I cannot but think it unnecessary, if not impertinent, to enter into farther
arguments to prove, that justice, policy, and the true principles of commerce,
require you to set the example to the world, of declaring your colonies
absolutely free and independent states, and of inviting them to form a
government of their own. The example would soon be followed by other nations;
if not from reason and from choice, at least from the more imperious argument
of necessity.

Thirteenth, I cannot close my letter, without some reflections on the policy
of maintaining any thing like what is called a standing army in time of peace,
which seems to have been the intention of your first Assembly. Such a force
would have many fatal effects on the spirit of a republican government, without
answering any good purpose that can be expected from it. According to your own
principles, you will have no more to do with foreign wars, unless you are
invaded; and it is probable, that the present is the last invasion that will
ever be formed against France. But, be that as it may, a standing military
force is the worst resource that can be found for the defense of a free
republic. In this case, the strength of the army is the weakness of the nation.
If the army be really strong enough to be relied on for defense, it not only
imposes on the people a vast unnecessary expense, but it must be a dangerous
instrument, in the hands of dangerous men; it may furnish the means of civil
wars, and of the destruction of liberty. If, on the contrary* it be not
sufficient for external defense, it will only serve to disappoint the people.
Being taught to believe that they have an army, they will cease to trust in
their own strength, and be deceived in their expectations of safety.

But the greatest objection against a standing army is, the effect it would
have on the political sentiments of the people. Every citizen ought to feel
himself to be a necessary part of the great community, for every purpose to
which the public interest can call him to act; he should feel the habits of a
citizen and the energies of a soldier, without being exclusively destined to
the functions of either. His physical and moral powers should be kept in equal
vigor; as the disuse of the former would be very soon followed by the decay of
the later. If it be wrong to trust the legislative power of the state for a
number of years, or for life, to a small number of men; it is certainly more
preposterous to do the same thing with regard to military power. Where the
wisdom resides, there ought the strength to reside, in the great body of the
people; and neither the one nor the other ought ever to be delegated, but for
short periods of time, and under severe restrictions. This is the way to
preserve a temperate and manly use of both; and thus, by trusting only to
themselves, the people will be sure of a perpetual defense against the open
force, and the secret intrigues of all possible enemies at home and abroad.

Fourteenth, After tracing the outlines of your constitution, according to your
present ideas, and proclaiming it in the most solemn manner, as the foundation
of law and right, it will still be vain to think of restraining the people from
making alterations and amendments, as often as experience shall induce them to
change their opinions. The point you have to aim at in this, is to agree upon a
method in which amendments can be made, without any of those extraordinary
exertions, which would occasion unnecessary insurrections. The more easy and
expeditious this method shall appear, the less likely it will be to provoke
disorders, and the better it will answer the purpose, provided it always refers
the subject to the real wishes of the people. I would propose, therefore (on
the presumption that your legislative body shall be chosen only for one year at
a time) that every annual National Assembly shall have power to propose, and
the next succeeding one to adopt and ratify, any amendments that they shall
think proper in the constitutional code. But it should always be done under
this restriction, that the articles to be proposed by any one Assembly, should
be agreed to, and published to the people in every department, within the first
six months of the sessions of that Assembly. This would give time to the people
to discuss the subject fully, and to form their opinions, previous to the time
of electing their members to the next Assembly. The members of the new
Assembly, when they should come together, would thus be competent to declare
the wishes of the people on the amendments proposed, and would act upon them as
they should think proper. The same power of proposing and adopting would be
continued from year to year with perfect safety to the constitution, and with
the probability of improvement.

Thus, gentlemen, I have given a hasty sketch of some leading ideas, that lay
with weight upon my mind, on a subject of much importance to the interests of a
considerable portion of the human race. If they should be thought of no value,
they will of course occupy but little of your attention, and therefore can do
no injury. If I have said any thing from which a useful reflection shall be
drawn, I shall feel myself happy in having rendered some service to the most
glorious cause that ever engaged the attention of mankind.

JOEL BARLOW.

THE CONSPIRACY OF KINGS.

A POEM.

THE CONSPIRACY OF KINGS. A POEM.
ETERNAL Truth, thy trump undaunted lend,
People and priests and courts and kings, attend;
While, borne on western gales from that far shore
Where Justice reigns, and tyrants tread no more,
The unwonted voice, that no dissuasion awes,
That fears no frown, and seeks no blind applause,
Shall tell the bliss that Freedom sheds abroad,
The rights of nature and the gift of God.
Think not, ye knaves, whom meanness styles the Great,
Drones of the Church and harpies of the State, --
Ye, whose cursed sires, for blood and plunder famed,
Sultans or kings or czars or emp'rors named,
Taught the deluded world their claims to own,
And raise the crested reptiles to a throne, --
Ye who pretend to your dark host was given
The lamp of life, the mystic keys of heaven;
Whose impious arts with magic spells began
When shades of ignorance veiled the race of man;
Who change, from age to age, the sly deceit,
As Science beams, and Virtue learns the cheat;
Tyrants of double powers, the soul that blind,
To rob, to scourge, and brutalize mankind, --
Think not I come to croak with omen'd yell
The dire damnations of your future hell,
To bend a bigot or reform a knave,
By opening all the scenes beyond the grave.
I know your crusted souls: while one defies
In skeptic scorn the vengeance of the skies,
The other boasts, -- I ken thee, Power divine,
"But fear thee not; the avenging bolt is mine."
No! it is the present world that prompts the song,
The world we see, the world that feels the wrong,
The world of men, whose arguments ye know,
Of men, long curbed to servitude and woe,
Men, roused from sloth, by indignation stung,
Their strong hands loosed, and found their fearles tongue;
Whose voice of fire, whose deep-descending steel
Shall speak to souls, and teach dull nerves to feel.
Think not (ah no! the weak delusion shun,
Burke leads you wrong, the world is not his own)
Indulge not once the thought, the vapory dream,
The fool's repast, the madman's threadbare theme,
That nations, rising in the light of truth,
Strong with new life and pure regenerate youth,
Will shrink from toils so splendidly begun,
Their bliss abandon and their glory shun,
Betray the trust by Heaven's own hand consigned,
The great concentred stake, the interest of mankind.
Ye speak of kings combined, some league that draws
Europe's whole force, to save your sinking cause;
Of fancied hosts by myriads that advance
To crush the untried power of newborn France.
Misguided men! these idle tales despise;
Let one bright ray of reason strike your eyes;
Show me your kings, the sceptred horde parade, --
See their pomp vanish! see your visions fade!
Indignant Man resumes the shaft he gave,
Disarms the tyrant, and unbinds the slave,
Displays the unclad skeletons of kings, Ossa vides regum vacuis exhausta
medullis. Juvenal, Sat. 8.

Specter of power, and serpents without stings.
And shall mankind, shall France, whose giant might
Rent the dark veil, and dragged them forth to light,
Heed now their threats in dying anguish tossed?
And She who felled the monster, fear the ghost?
Bid young Alcides, in his grasp who takes,
And gripes with naked hand the twisting snakes,
Their force exhausted, bid him prostrate fall,
And dread their shadows trembling on the wall.
But grant to kings and courts their ancient play,
Recall their splendor and revive their sway;
Can all your cant and all your cries persuade
One power to join you in your wild crusade?
In vain ye search to earth's remotest end;
No court can aid you, and no king defend.
Not the mad knave that S -- scepter stole,
Nor she, whose thunder shakes the northern pole;
Nor Frederick's widowed sword, that scorns to tell
On whose weak brow his crown reluctant fell.
Not the tri-sceptred prince, of Austrian mould,
The ape of wisdom and the slave of gold,
Theresa's son, who, with a feeble grace,
Just mimics all the vices of his race;
For him no charm can foreign strife afford,
Too mean to spend his wealth, too wise to trust his sword.
Peep over the Pyrenees, -- but you will disdain
To break the dream that sooths the Monk of Spain.
He counts his beads, and spends his holy zeal
To raise once more the inquisitorial wheel,
Prepares the faggot and the flame renews,
To roast the French, as once the Moors and Jews;
White able hands the busy task divide,
His Queen to dandle, and his State to guide.
Ye ask great Pit to join your desperate work, --
See how his annual aid confounds the Turk!
Like a war-elephant his bulk he shows,
And treads down friends, when frightened by his foes.
Where then, forsaken villains, will ye turn?
Of France the outcast and of earth the scorn;
What new-made charm can dissipate your fears?
Can Burke's mad foam, or Calonne's house of Peers? M. de Calonne, at an
immense labor, and by the aid of his friends in England, has framed a
constitution for France, after the English model; the chief ornament of which
is that "Corinthian capital of polished society," a House of Peers. It is said
that, after debates and altercations which lasted six months, he has persuaded
the emigrant princes to agree to it. It only remains now for him and them to
try on this new livery upon the French nation.

Can Artois' sword, that erst near Calpe's wall,
Where Crillon fought and Elliot was to fall,
Burned with the fire of fame, but harmless burned,
For sheathed the sword remained, and in its sheath returned? Among the
disadvantages attending the lives of Princes, must he reckoned the singular
difficulties with which they have to struggle in acquiring a military
reputation. A Duke of Cumberland, in order to become an Alexander, had to ride
all the way to Culloden, and back again to London. Louis the fourteenth was
obliged to submit to the fatigue of being carried on board of a splendid barge,
and rowed across the Rhine, about the same time that the French army crossed
it; and all this for the simple privilege of being placed above the Macedonian
in the temple of Fame; and of causing this achievement to be celebrated, as
more glorious than the passing of the Granicus: as may be seen on that modest
monument in the Place Vendome in Paris.

The Count d'Artois has purchased, at a still dearer rate, the fame of being
styled "le digne rejeton du grand Henri," and of being destined to command all
the armies of Europe in re-establishing the Monarchy of France. This champion
of Christendom set out, at the age of twenty-five, and traveled by land with a
princely equipage, from Paris to Gibraltar; where he arrived just in time to
see, at a convenient distance, Elliot's famous bonfire of the floating
batteries. He then returned, covered with glory, by the way of Madrid; and
arrived at Versailles, amidst the caresses of the court and the applauses of
all Europe. The accomplishment of this arduous enterprise has deservedly placed
him, in point of military fame, at the head of all the present branches of the
illustrious house of Bourbon.



Oh Burke, degenerate slave! with grief and shame
The muse indignant must repeat thy name.
Strange man, declare, -- since, at creation's birth,
From crumbling chaos sprang this heaven and earth,
Since wrecks and outcast relics still remain,
Whirled ceaseless round confusion's dreary reign,
Declare, from all these fragments, whence you stole
That genius wild, that monstrous mass of soul;
Where spreads the widest waste of all extremes,
Full darkness frowns, and heaven's own splendor beams;
Truth, Error, Falsehood, Rhetoric's raging tide,
And Pomp and Meanness, Prejudice and Pride,
Strain to an endless clang thy voice of fire,
Thy thoughts bewilder and thy audience tire.
Like Phoebus' son, we see thee wing thy way,
Snatch the loose reins, and mount the car of day,
To earth now plunging plough thy wasting course,
The great sublime of weakness and of force.
But while the world's keen eye, with generous glance,
Thy faults could pardon and thy worth enhance,
When foes were hushed, when justice dared commend,
And even fond freedom claimed thee as a friend,
Why in a gulf of baseness sink forlorn,
And change pure praise for infamy and scorn?
And did thou hope, by thy infuriate quill
To rouse mankind the blood of realms to spill?
Then to restore, on death devoted plains,
Their scourge to tyrants, and to man his chains?
To swell their souls with thy own bigot rage,
And blot the glories of so bright an age?
First stretch thy arm, and, with less impious might,
Wipe out the stars, and quench the solar light:
" For heaven and earth," the voice of God ordains,
"Shall pass and perish, but my word remains."
The eternal Word, which gave, in spite of thee,
Reason to man, that bids the man be free.
Thou could not hope: 'twas Heaven's returning grace,
In kind compassion to our injured race,
Which stripped that soul, ere it should flee from hence,
Of the last garb of decency or sense,
Left thee its own soul horrors to display,
In all the blackness of its native day,
To sink at last, from earth's glad surface hurled,
The sordid sovereign of the lettered world.
In some sad hour, ere death's dim terrors spread,
Ere seas of dark oblivion whelm thy head,
Reflect, lost man, -- If those, thy kindred knaves,
Over the broad Rhine whose flag rebellious waves,
Once draw the sword; its burning point shall bring
To thy quick nerves a never ending string;
The blood they shed thy weight of woe shall swell,
And their grim ghosts for ever with thee dwell.
Learn hence, ye tyrants, ere ye learn too late,
Of all your crast the inevitable fate.
The hour is come, the world's unclosing eyes
Discern with rapture where its wisdom lies;
From western heavens the inverted Orient springs,
The morn of man, the dreadful night of kings.
Dim, like the day-struck owl, ye grope in light,
No arm for combat, no resource in flight;
If on your guards your lingering hopes repose,
Your guards are men, and men you have made your foes;
If to your rocky ramparts ye repair,
De Launay was the last governor of the Bastile. His wellknown exit, serving as
a warning to others, saved the lives of many commanders of fortresses in
different parts of France during the revolution. It may probably have the same
salutary effect in other countries.
De Launay's fate can tell your fortune there.
No turn, no shift, no courtly arts avail,
Each mask is broken, all illusions fail;
Driven to your last retreat of shame and fear,
One counsel waits you, one relief is near:
By worth internal, rise to self-wrought fame,
Your equal rank, your human kindred claim;
It Is Reason's choice, it is Wisdom's final plan,
To drop the monarch and assume the man.
Hail man, exalted title! first and best,
On God's own image by his hand impressed;
To which at last the reasoning race is driven,
And seeks anew what first it gained from Heaven.
O Man, my brother, how the cordial flame
Of all endearments kindles at the name!
In every clime, thy visage greets my eyes,
In every tongue, thy kindred accents rise;
The thought expanding swells my heart with glee,
It finds a friend, and loves itself in thee.
Say then, fraternal family divine,
Whom mutual wants and mutual aids combine,
Say from what source the dire delusion rose,
That souls like ours were ever made for foes;
Why earth's maternal bosom, where we tread,
To rear our mansions and receive our bread,
Should blush so often for the race she bore,
So long be-drench'd with floods of filial gore;
Why to small realms for ever rest confined
Our great affections, meant for all mankind?
Though climes divide us, shall the stream or sea
That forms a barrier 'twixt my friend and me,
Inspire the wish his peaceful state to mar,
And meet his falchion in the ranks of war?
Not seas, nor climes, nor wild ambition's sire
In nations minds, could ever the wish inspire;
Where equal rights each sober voice should guide,
No blood would stain them, and no war divide.
It Is dark deception, it is the glare of state,
Man sunk in titles, lost in Small and Great;
It Is Rank, Distinction, all the hell that springs
From those prolific monsters, Courts and Kings.
These are the vampires nursed on nature's spoils;
For these with pangs the starving peasant toils,
For these the earth's broad surface teems with grain,
Theirs the dread labors of the devious main;
And when the wasted world but dares refuse
The gifts oppressive and extorted dues,
They bid wild slaughter spread the gory plains,
The lifeblood gushing from a thousand veins,
Erect their thrones amid the sanguine flood,
And dip their purple in the nation's blood.
The gazing crowd, of glittering State afraid,
Adore the power their coward meanness made;
In war's short intervals, while regal shows
Still blind their reason and insult their woes.
What strange events for proud processions call!
See kingdoms crowding to a birth-night ball!
See the long pomp in gorgeous glare displayed,
The tinsel'd guards, the squadron'd horse parade;
See herald's gay, with emblems on their vest,
In tissu'd robes, tall, beauteous pages dressed;
Amid superior ranks of splendid slaves,
Lords, Dukes and Princes, titulary knaves,
Confusedly shine their crosses, gems and stars,
Sceptres and globes and crowns and spoils of wars.
On gilded orbs see thundering chariots rolled,
Steeds, snorting fire, and champing bits of gold,
Prance to the trumpet's voice, while each assumes
A loftier gait, and lifts his neck of plumes.
High on a moving throne, and near the van,
The tyrant rides, the chosen scourge of man;
Clarions and flutes and drums his way prepare,
And shouting millions rend the troubled air;
Millions, whose ceaseless toils the pomp sustain,
Whose hour of stupid joy repays an age of pain.
Of these no more. From orders, slaves and kings,
To thee, O Man! my heart rebounding springs.
Behold the ascending bliss that waits your call,
Heaven's own bequest, the heritage of all.
Awake to wisdom, seize the proffered prize;
From shade to light, from grief to glory rise.
Freedom at last, with Reason in her train,
Extends over earth her everlasting reign;
See Gallia's sons, so late the tyrant's sport,
Machines in war and sycophants at court,
Start into men, expand their well-taught mind,
Lords of themselves and leaders of mankind.
On equal rights their base of empire lies,
On walls of wisdom see the structure rise;
Wide over the gazing world it towers sublime,
A modeled form for each surrounding clime.
To useful toils they bend their noblest aim,
Make patriot views and moral views the same,
Renounce the wish of war, bid conquest cease,
Invite all men to happiness and peace,
To faith and justice rear the youthful race,
With strength exalt them and with science grace,
'Till truth's blessed banners, over the regions hurled,
Shake tyrants from their thrones, and cheer the waking world.
In northern climes, where feudal shades of late
Chilled every heart and palsied every State,
Behold, illumined by the instructive age,
That great phenomenon, a sceptred sage.
There Stanislaus unfolds his prudent plan,
Tears the strong bandage from the eyes of man,
Points the progressive march, and shapes the way
That leads a realm from darkness into day.
And deign, for once, to turn a transient eye
To that wide world that skirts the western sky;
Hail the mild morning, where the dawn began,
The full fruition of the hopes of man;
Where sage experience seals the sacred cause,
And that rare union, Liberty and Laws,
Speaks to the reasoning race, "To freedom rise,
Like them be equal, and like them be wise."
FINIS.

