ORATION UPON THE MORAL AND POLITICAL EVIL OF SLAVERY.

DELIVERED AT A PUBLIC MEETING OF THE MARYLAND SOCIETY, FOR PROMOTING THE
ABOLITION of SLAVERY, And the RELIEF of FREE NEGROES, and others unlawfully
held in BONDAGE.

BALTIMORE, July 4th, 1791.

By GEORGE BUCHANAN, M. D. Member of the American Philosophical Society.

BALTIMORE: Printed by PHILIP EDWARDS. M, DCC, XCIII.

At a special Meeting of the " MARYLAND SOCIETY for promoting the Abolition of
Slavery, and the Relief of free Negroes and others unlawfully held in Bondage,"
held at Baltimore, July 4th, 1791 -- "UNANIMOUSLY RESOLVED,

THAT the President present the Thanks of this Society to Dr. George Buchanan,
for the excellent ORATION by him delivered this Day -- and at the same Time
request a Copy thereof in the Name and for the Use of the Society."

Extract from the Minutes JOSEPH TOWNSEND, Secretary.
President, SAMUEL STERETT,
Vice President, ALEXr. McKIM.

TO THE HONORABLE THOMAS JEFFERSON, Esquire. SECRETARY of STATE,
WHOSE Patriotism, since the American Revolution, has been uniformly marked, by
a sincere, steady and active Attachment to the Interest of his Country; and
whose literary Abilities have distinguished him amongst the first of Statesmen
and Philosophers -- THIS ORATION IS respectfully inscribed, as a humble
Testimony of the highest Regard and Esteem, by

THE AUTHOR.

ORATION.
CITIZENS and FELLOW MEMBERS,
SUMMONED by your voice, I appear before you with diffidence, the arduous task
you have imposed upon me, would have been better executed by some one of
greater abilities and information, and one more versed in public speaking.

However, my feeble exertions shall not be wanting to promote the intentions of
so laudable an institution; and while I endeavor to fulfill the purport of this
meeting, I shall hope not to fail in proving its utility.

Too much cannot be offered against the unnatural custom that pervades the
greatest part of the world, of dragging the human race into slavery and
bondage, nor of exposing the ignominy of such barbarity.

Let an impartial view of man be taken, so far as it respects his existence,
and in the chain of thought, the white, swarthy and black, will be all linked
together, and at once point out their equality. God has created mankind after
his own image, and granted to them liberty and independence; and if varieties
may be found in their structure and color, these are only to be attributed to
the nature of their diet and habits, as also of the soil and climate they may
inhabit, and serve as flimsy pretexts for enslaving them.

In the first rudiments of society, when simplicity characterised the conduct
of man, slavery was unknown, every one equally enjoyed that peace and
tranquillity at home, to which he was naturally born: But this equality existed
but for a time; as yet, no laws, no government was established to check the
ambitious, or to curb the crafty; hence seizures were made upon the best
property by the strong and robust, and finally subjected the weak and indigent
to poverty and want.

Here then arose a difference in the circumstances of men, and the poor and
weak were obliged to submit themselves to the control of the rich and powerful;
but although the authority exercised was at first mild, and ensured to the
bondsmen almost the same privileges with their masters, yet the idea of power
soon crept in upon the mind, and at length lenity was converted into rigidity,
and the gall of servitude became insupportable; the oppressed, soon found,
that, that liberty, which they had just given up, was an inalienable privilege
of man, and sought means to regain it; this they effected, -- but not until a
time when ignorance began to decline, when improvements were made in the arts,
commerce and governments, and when men could seek protection from law, or by
industry could ward off the bitterness of poverty, and ensure to themselves an
independence.

Happy circumstance! To feel oneself emancipated from the chains of slavery,
must awaken every delicate sensation of the soul, and transport the gloomy mind
into a region of bliss; for what is life, without an enjoyment of those
privileges which have been given us by nature? It is a burden, which, if not
awed by Divine Providence, would be speedily cast off, by all who sweat under
the yoke of slavish servitude, and know no alternative but an unceasing
submission to the goads of a brutal master.

Ages have revolved since this happy condition of human affairs, and although
mankind have been gradually verging from a state of simplicity to a more social
refinement, yet the governments of these primitive times, laid open an apology
for licentiousness; and we find, by pursuing the history of man, that slavery
was again introduced, and stained the annals of all the powers of Europe.

The idea of possessing man, as property, was too lucrative to be totally
eradicated; it diffused itself into Egypt and Cyprus, which became the first
and most noted markets for the sale and purchase of slaves, and soon became the
cause of rapine and bloodshed in Greece and Rome: There it was an established
custom to subject to slavery, all the captives in time of war; and not only the
Emperors but (...) Nobility, were in possession of thousands -- to them they
served as instruments of diversion and authority.

To give an idea only of the amphitheatrical entertainments, so repugnant to
humanity, would make the most obdurate heart feel with keen sensibility. For
who can hear, with patience, of voracious animals being turned loose among
human beings, to give sport to the rich and great, when, upon reflection, he
may be assured, that the merciless jaw knew no restraint, but precipitately
charged upon its prey whom it left, without remorse, either massacred or maimed.

Such was the practice among the ancients, and to charge the moderns with like
enormities, would by many be deemed criminal.

But I fear not to accuse them -- the prosecution of the present barbarous and
iniquitous slave trade, affords us too many instances of cruelties exercised
against the harmless Africans. A trade, which, after it was abolished in Europe
by the general introduction of Christianity, was again renewed about the
fourteenth century, by the mercenary Portuguese, and now prosecuted by the
Spaniards, French and British, in defiance of every principle of justice,
humanity and religion.

Ye moderns, will you not blush at degenerating into ancient barbarity, and at
wearing the garb of Christians, when you pursue the practices of savages?

Hasten to reform and put an end to this unnatural and destructive trade -- Do
you not know, that thousands of your fellow-mortals are annually entombed by
it? and that it proves ruinous to your governments? You go to Africa to
purchase slaves for foreign markets, and lose the advantages of all the proper
articles of commerce, which that rich country affords. You bury your seamen
upon the pestiferous shores; and, shocking to humanity! you make monsters of
all you engage in the traffic.

Who are more brutal than the Captains of vessels in the slave trade? Not even
the tawny savage of the American wilds, who thirsts after the blood of the
Christian, and carries off his scalp, the trophy of splendid victory!

They even countenance the practice of the ancients, in seeing a sturdy mastiff
tear in pieces some poor wretch of their hateful cargoes, or in viewing their
wreaths and tortures, when smarting under the lash of a seasoned cat A whip
with nine tails.
.

It is time to abolish these enormities, and to stay such repeated insults from
being offered to Divine Providence: Some dreadful curse from Heaven may be the
effect of them, and the innocent be made to suffer for the guilty.

What! will you not consider that the Africans are men? that they have human
souls to be saved? that they are born free and independent? A violation of
which prerogatives is an infringement upon the laws of God.

But, are these the only crimes you are guilty of in pursuing the trade? No --
you stir up the harmless Africans to war, and stain their fields with blood;
you keep a constant hostile ferment in their territories, in order to procure
captives for your uses; some you purchase with a few trifling articles, and
waft to distant shores to be made the instruments of grandeur, pride and luxury.

You commit the crime also of kidnapping others, whom you forcibly drag from
their beloved country, from the bosom of their dearest relatives; so leave a
wife without a husband, a sister without a brother, and a helpless infant to
bemoan the loss of its indulgent parent.

Could you but see the agonizing pangs of these distressed mortals, in the hour
of their captivity, when deprived of every thing that is dear to them, it would
make even the heathenish heart to melt with sorrow; like a noble Senator of
old, death is their choice in preference to lingering out their lives in
ignominious slavery -- and often do we see them meet it with a smile.

The horrors of the grave intimidate not even the delicate females; too many
melancholy instances are recorded of their plunging into the deep, and carrying
with them a tender infant at the breast; even in my own recollection, suicide
has been committed in various forms by these unhappy wretches, under the blind
infatuation of revisiting the land of their nativity.

Possessed of Christian sentiments, they fail not to exercise them when an
opportunity offers. Things pleasing rejoice them, and melancholy circumstances
pall their appetites for amusements. -- They brook no insults, and are equally
prone to forgiveness as to resentment; they have gratitude also, and will even
expose their own lives, to wipe off the obligation of past favors; nor do they
want any of the refinements in taste, so much the boast of those who call
themselves Christians.

The talent for music, both vocal and instrumental, appears natural to them:
Neither is their genius for literature to be despised; many instances are
recorded of men of eminence amongst them: Witness, Ignatius Sancho, whose
letters are admired by all men of taste -- Phillis Wheatley, who distinguished
herself as a poetess -- The physician of New-Orleans -- The Virginia calculator
-- Banneker, the Maryland astronomer, and many others whom it would be needless
to mention. These are sufficient to show, that the Africans, whom you despise,
whom you more inhumanly treat than brutes, and whom you unlawfully subject to
slavery, with the tyrannizing hands of Despots, are equally capable of
improvements with yourselves.

This you may think a (...) assertion, but it is (...) made without reflection,
nor (...) of the testimony of many, who have taken pains in (...).

Because you see (...) comparison to their number, who make any exertions of
abilities at all, you are ready to enjoy the common opinion, that they are an
inferior set of beings, and destined by nature to the cruelties and hardships
you impose upon them.

But, be cautious how long you hold such sentiments; the time may come, when
you will be obliged to abandon them -- consider the pitiable situation of these
most distressed beings; deprived of their liberty and reduced to slavery;
consider also, that they toil not for themselves, from the rising of the Sun to
its going down, and you will readily conceive the cause of their inaction.

What time, or what incitement has a slave to become wise? there is no great
art in hilling corn, or in running a furrow; and to do this, they know, they
are doomed, whether they seek into the mysteries of science, or remain ignorant
as they are.

To deprive a man of his liberty, has a tendency to rob his soul of every
spring to virtuous actions; and were slaves to become fiends, the wonder could
not be great. Nothing more assimilates a man to a beast, says the learned
Montesque, than being among freemen, himself a slave; for slavery clogs the
mind, perverts the moral faculty, and reduces the conduct of man to the
standard of brutes.

What right then have you to expect greater things from these poor mortals? You
would not blame a brute for committing ravages upon his prey, nor ought you to
censure a slave, for making attempts to regain his liberty even at the risque
of life itself.

Ye mercenary Portuguese, ye ambitious French, and ye deceitful Britons, I
again call upon you to take these things into your consideration; it is time, a
remorse of conscience had seized upon you; it is time, you were apprised of
your danger: Behold the thousands that are annually lost to your governments in
the prosecution of an unlawful and an iniquitous trade.

View the depredations that you commit upon a nation, born equally free with
yourselves; consider the abyss of misery into which you plunge your
fellow-mortals, and reflect upon the horrid crimes you are hourly committing
under the bright sunshine of revealed religion. -- Will you not then find
yourselves (...) precipice, and protected from ruin, only because you (...)
wicked to be lost?

What (...), or what State can have the hope of existing, which professes a
trade, that proves a sinking fund to her coffers, and to her subjects, that
tramples the human species under foot, with as much indifference as the dirt,
and fills the world with misery and woe?

Let not a blind hardiness in opinion any longer biass your judgments, and
prevent you from acting like Christians.

View the Empires amongst the ancients; behold Egypt in the time of Secostris,
Greece in the time of Cyrus, and Rome in the reign of Augustus; view them all,
powerful as enemies, patterns of virtue and science, bold and intrepid in war,
free and independent; and now see them sacrificed at the shrine of luxury, and
dwindled into insignificance. When in power, they usurped the authority of God,
they stretched out their arms to encompass their enemies, and bound their
captives in iron chains of slavery.

Vengeance was then inflicted, their spoils became the instruments of pride,
luxury and dissipation, and finally proved the cause of their present downfall.

Then look back at home; view your degeneracy from the times of Louis the 14th
and Charles the 2d. and if a universal blush don't prevail, it will argue a
hardness of heart, tempered by a constant action of wickedness upon the smooth
anvil of religion.

For such are the effects of subjecting man to slavery, that it destroys every
humane principle, vitiates the mind, instills ideas of unlawful cruelties, and
eventually subverts the springs of government.

What a distressing scene is here before us, America, I start at your
situation! The idea of these direful effects of slavery demand your most
serious attention. -- What! shall a people, who flew to arms with the valor of
Roman Citizens, when encroachments were made upon their liberties, by the
invasion of foreign powers, now basely descend to cherish the seed and
propagate the growth of that evil, which they boldly fought to eradicate. To
the eternal infamy of our country, this will be handed down to posterity,
written with the blood of African innocence.

If your forefathers have been degenerate enough to introduce slavery into your
country, to contaminate the minds of her citizens, you ought to have virtue to
extirpate it.

Emancipated from the shackles of despotism, you know no superior; free and
independent, you stand equally respected among your foes, and your allies. --
Renowned in history, for your valor, and for your wisdom, your way is left
open to the highest eminence of human perfection.

But while with pleasing hopes you may anticipate such an event, the echo of
expiring freedom cannot fail to assail the ears, and pierce the heart with keen
reproach.

In the first struggles for American freedom, in the enthusiastic ardour for
attaining liberty and independence, one of the most noble sentiments that ever
adorned the human breast, was loudly proclaimed in all her councils --

Deeply penetrated with a sense of Equality, they held it as a fixed principle,
"that all men are by nature and of right ought to be free, that they are
created equal and endowed by their Creator with certain inalienable rights,
amongst which are life, liberty and the pursuit of happiness."

Nevertheless, when the blessings of peace were showered upon them, when they
had obtained these rights which they had so boldly contended for, then they
became apostates to their principles, and rivetted the fetters of slavery upon
the unfortunate Africans.

Deceitful men! who could have suggested, that American patriotism would at
this day countenance a conduct so inconsistent; that while America boasts of
being a land of freedom, and an asylum for the oppressed of Europe, she should
at the same time foster an abominable nursery for slaves, to check the shoots
of her glorious liberty?

Deaf to the clamours of criticism, she feels no remorse, and blindly pursues
the object of her destruction; she encourages the propagation of vice, and
suffers her youth to be reared in the habits of cruelty.

Not even the sobs and groans of injured innocence, which reek from every
State, can excite her pity, nor human (...) bend her heart to sympathy.

Cruel and oppressive she wantonly abuses the Rights of Man, and willingly
sacrifices her liberty at the altar of slavery: What an opportunity is here
given for triumph among her enemies? Will they not exclaim, that upon this very
day, while the Americans celebrate the anniversary of Freedom and Independence,
abject slavery exists in all her States but one. Massachusetts


How degenerately base to merit the rebuke. Fellow-countrymen, let the heart of
humanity awake and direct your (...) reflect that slavery gains root among you;
look back upon the curses which it has heaped upon your ancestors, and
unanimously combine to drive the fiend Monster from your territories; it is
inconsistent with the principles of your government, with the education of your
youth, and highly derogatory to the true spirit of Christianity.

In despotic governments, says Montesque, where they are already in a state of
political slavery, civil slavery is more tolerable than in other governments;
for there the minds of masters and servants are equally degenerate and act in
unison. -- But in America, this cannot be the case; here the pure forms of
Republicanism are established, and hold forth to the world an enjoyment of
Freedom and Independence.

Her citizens have thrown off the load of oppression, under which they formerly
labored; and elated with their signal victory, have become oppressors in their
turn.

They have slaves, over whom they carry the iron rod of subjection, and fail
not to exercise it with cruelty; hence their situations become insupportable,
misery inhabits their cabins, and persecution pursues them in the field.

I would wish to be partial to my country, and carry a hand of lenity; it is
more pleasing to celebrate than to detract, but whoever takes a view of the
situation of its slaves, will find it even worse than this description.

Naked and starved, they often fall victims to the inclemencies of the weather,
and inhumanly beaten; sacrifices to the turbulent tempers of their cruel
masters.

Unfortunate Africans! born in freedom, and subjected to slavery! How long will
you remain the spoils of despotism, and the harbingers of human calamities?
Cannot your distresses awaken the heart of sensibility, and excite her pity?
Cannot your unlawful treatment call forth the voice of humanity to plead your
cause?

Americans! step forward; you have already diffused a spirit of Liberty
throughout the world; you have set examples of heroism; and now let me entreat
you to pave the way to the exercise of humanity: An opportunity is offered to
raise yourselves to the first eminence among mankind.

Rouse then from your lethargy, and let not such torpid indifference prevail in
your councils. -- Slavery, the most implacable enemy to your country, is
harbored amongst you; it makes a rapid progress and threatens you with
destruction. --

Already has it disturbed the limpid streams of liberty, it has polluted the
minds of your youth, sown the seeds of despotism, and without a speedy check to
her ravages, will sink you into a pit of infamy, where you shall be robbed of
all the honors you have before acquired.

Let it be viewed either morally or politically, and no one argument can be
adduced in its favor.

The savage mind may perhaps become reconciled to it, but the heart of a
Christian must recoil at the idea. -- He sees it forbidden in Holy Writ, and
his conscience dictates to him, that it is wrong.

"He that steals a Man," says Exodus, "and sells him, or if he be found in
his hand, he shall surely be put to death."

Oh my countrymen! are there any of you, who can con over this elegant passage
of Scripture, without trembling; or can you stand before the great Author of
your existence, with an arm uplifted to subject his creatures to slavery,
without dreading an execution of this divine threat.

"The nation, to whom they shall be in bondage, will I judge, said God" -- and
what that judgment may be, is beyond the suggestion of mortals. We may be
hurled amidst the elements of woe to expiate the guilt, for he who holds men
in slavery lives in sin.

In a civilized country, where Religion is tolerated in all its purity, it must
be the fault of ignorance, or a stubborn indifference to Christianity, to rebel
against such divine sentiments; and considering slavery in a political view, it
must appear equally as destructive to our terrestial happiness, as it endangers
our enjoyment of heavenly bliss.

For who is there, unless innured to savage cruelties, that can hear of the
inhuman punishments daily inflicted upon the unfortunate Blacks, without
feeling for their situations?

Can a man who calls himself a Christian, coolly and deliberately tie up, thumb
screw, torture with pincers, and beat unmercifully a poor slave, for perhaps a
trifling neglect of duty? Or can any one be an eye witness to such enormities,
without at the same time being deeply persuaded of its guilt?

I fear these questions may be answered in the affirmative, but I hope, by none
of this respectable audience; for such men must be monsters not of the regular
order of nature, and equally prone to murder, as to less cruelties.

But independent of these effects, which the existence of slavery in any
country has over the moral faculty of man, it is highly injurious to its
internal economy; it debars the progress of agriculture, and gives origin to
sloth and luxury.

View the fertile fields of Great Britain, where the hand of freedom conducts
the plowshare, then look back upon your own, and see how mean will be the
comparison.

Your laborers are slaves, and they have no inducement, no incentive to be
industrious; they are clothed and victualled, whether lazy or hard-working;
and from the calculations that have been made, one freeman is worth almost two
slaves in the field, which makes it in many instances cheaper to have
hirelings; for they are excited to industry by the hopes of reputation and
future employment, and are careful of their apparel and their instruments of
husbandry, where they must provide them for themselves, whereas, the others
have little or no temptation to attend to any of these circumstances.

But this, the prejudiced mind is scarce able to scan, the pride of holding men
as property, is too flattering to yield to the dictates of reason, and blindly
pushes on man to his destruction.

What a pity is it, that darkness should so obscure us, that America with all
her transcending glory, should be stigmatized with the infamous reproach of
oppression, and her citizens be called Tyrants.

Fellow-countrymen, let the hand of persecution be no longer raised against
you. -- Act virtuously; do unto all men as you would they should do unto you,
and exterminate the pest of slavery from your land.

Then will the tongues of slander be silenced, the shafts of criticism blunted,
and America enter upon a new theater of glory.

But unless these things shall be done, unless the calamitous situation of the
slaves shall at least be alleviated, what is America to expect? Can she think
that such repeated insults to Divine Authority will pass off with impunity? Or
can she suppose, that men, who are naturally born free, shall forever sweat
under the yoke of ignominious slavery, without making one effort to regain
their liberty?

No, my countrymen, these things are not to be expected. -- Heaven will not
overlook such enormities! She is bound to punish impenitent sinners, and her
wrath is to be dreaded by all! Moreover, the number of slaves, that are
harbored amongst you, holds forth an alarm; in many parts of the continent
they exceed the whites, and are capable of ransacking the country.

What then, if the fire of Liberty shall be kindled amongst them? What, if some
enthusiast in their cause shall beat to arms, and call them to the standard of
freedom? Would they not fly in crowds, until their numbers became tremendous,
and threaten the country with devastation and ruin? -- It would not be the
feeble efforts of an undisciplined people, that could quell their fury.

Lead on by the hopes of freedom, and animated by the aspiring voice of their
leader, they would soon find, that "a day, an hour of virtuous liberty, was
worth a whole eternity in bondage."

Hark! Methinks I hear the work begun, the Blacks have sought for Allies, and
found them in the wilderness; they have called the rusty savages to their
assistance, and are preparing to take revenge of their haughty masters. This
was thrown out as a conjecture of what possibly might happen, and the
insurrections in St. Domingo tend to prove the danger, to be more considerable
than has generally been supposed, and sufficient to alarm the inhabitants of
these States.


A revenge, which they consider as justly merited; for being no longer able to
endure their unnatural and unlawful bondage, they are determined to seek
Liberty or Death.

Why then is there not some step taken to ward off the dreadful catastrophe?

Fellow countrymen, will you stand and see your aged parents, your loving
wives, your dutiful children butchered by the merciless hand of an enthusiast,
when you have it in your power to prevent it?

In this enlightened period, when the Rights of Man is the topic of political
controversy, and slavery is considered not only unnatural but unlawful, why do
you not step forward and complete the glorious work you have begun, and extend
a merciful hand to the unfortunate Blacks? Why do you not form some wise plan
to liberate them, and abolish slavery in your country?

If it should be deemed injudicious or impolitic to effect it at once, let it
be done gradually; let the children for one or two generations be liberated at
a certain age, and in less than half a century will the plague be totally
rooted out from amongst you -- then will you begin to see your consequence --
thousands of good citizens will be added to your number, and your arms will
become invincible: Gratitude will induce them to become your friends; for the
PROMISE alone of freedom to a slave ensures his loyalty; witness their conduct
in the second Punic war which the Senate of Rome carried on against Hannibal;
not a man disgraced himself, but all with an intrepidity peculiar to veterans,
met their foes, fought and conquered.

Witness also the valor of a few Blacks in South Carolina, who under the
promise of freedom, joined the great and the good Colonel JOHN LAURENS; and in
a sudden surprised the British, and distinguished themselves as heroes.

I remember it was said, they were foremost in the ranks, and nobly contended
for their promised reward.

At this critical juncture when savage cruelties threaten to invade your
peaceful territories, and murder your citizens, what great advantage might be
derived from giving freedom to the Africans at once. Would they not all become
your Allies; would they not turn out hardy warriors for the wilderness, to
drive the blood-thirsty savage to his den, and teach him it were better to live
peceably at home, than to come under the scourge of such newly liberated levies.

Americans arouse -- It is time to hear the cause of the wretched sons of
Africa, enslaved in your country; they plead not guilty to every charge of
crime, and unmeritedly endure the sufferings you impose upon them.

Yet, like haughty Despots, or corrupt Judges, you forbid a trial. Justice
however to yourselves and humanity toward your fellow mortals, loudly demand
it of you, and you ought not to hesitate in obeying their sacred mandates.

A few years may be sufficient to make you repent of your unrelenting
indifference, and give a stab to all your boasted honors; then may you,
pitiable citizens, be taught wisdom, when it will be too late; then may you cry
out, Abba Father, but mercy will not be found, where mercy was refused.

Let all the social feelings of the soul, let honor, philanthropy, pity,
humanity, and justice, unite with policy to effect their emancipation.

For eternal will be the disgrace, of keeping them much longer in the iron
fetters of slavery, but immortal the honor of accomplishing their FREEDOM.

To the SOCIETY.
SUCH were the sentiments, my friends, that first induced you to form
yourselves into this Society.

For seeing human nature debased in the most vile manner, and seeing also that
your country deeply suffered from the iniquitous custom of holding man in
slavery, you have justly concluded, "that at this particular crisis, when
Europe and America appear to pay some attention to this evil, the united
endeavors of a few, might greatly influence the public opinion, and produce
from the transient sentiment of the times, effects, extensive, lasting and
useful." -- But however great have been your exertions; however much they have
been guided by the precepts of humanity and religion, your public reward has
been censure and criticism; but let not such airy weapons damp your ardour for
doing good; your just reward is in Heaven, not on earth.

Yours is the business of mercy and compassion, not of oppression You forcibly
rescue from the hands of no man his property, but by your examples and precepts
you promote the Abolition of Slavery, and give relief to free Negroes, and
others, unlawfully held in bondage.

You have shown an anxiety to extend a portion of that freedom to others, which
GOD in his Providence has extended unto you, and a release from that thraldom
to which yourselves and your country were so lately tyrannically doomed, and
from which you have been but recently delivered. You have evinced to the world
your inclination to remove as much as possible the sorrows of those who have
lived in undeserved bondage, and that your hearts are expanded with kindness
toward men of all colors, conditions and nations; and if you did not interest
yourselves in their behalf, how long might their situations remain hard and
distressing.

Numbers might passively remain for life in abject slavery from an ignorance of
the mode of acquiring their emancipation, notwithstanding they may be justly
entitled to their freedom by birth and by law.

If the hand of persecution is now raised against you, for relieving your
fellow mortals from the distresses of unlawful slavery, and restoring them to
liberty, it is to be hoped it will not be of long duration; the principles of
your institution will be daily made more known, and others will begin to think
as you do; they will find upon reflection, that they have no just power or
authority to hold men in slavery, and seeing that your actiosn are charitable
and disinterested, will cordially inlist under your banners, and aid your
benevolent exertions.

Already have you reason to suppose, that your good examples have been
influencial; you humbly began with a few, and you now see your numbers hourly
increasing.

It may be the effusions of a youthful fancy, solicitous of aggrandizing your
merit, but I fear not to say, that the operations of similar institutions will
date one of the most splendid aeras of American greatness.

Go on then, my friends, pursue the dictates of an unsullied conscience, and
cease not until you have finished your work -- but let prudence guide you in
all your undertakings, and let not an enthusiastic heat predominate over
reason. Your cause is a just one, consistent with law and equity, and must
finally be advocated by all men of Humanity and Religion.

"For, it is Liberty alone which gives the flower
"Of fleeting life its luster and perfume,
"And we are weeds without it."
TASK.
FINIS.

