The IMPORTANCE of a RELIGIOUS EDUCATION ILLUSTRATED and ENFORCED. A SERMON:
DELIVERED AT WORCESTER, OCTOBER 31, 1793, OCCASIONED BY THE EXECUTION OF SAMUEL
FROST, ON THAT DAY, FOR THE MURDER OF CAPTAIN ELISHA ALLEN, OF PRINCETON, ON
THE 16th DAY OF JULY, 1793.

BY AARON BANCROFT, A. M. PASTOR of the SECOND CHURCH in WORCESTER.

PRINTED AT WORCESTER, MASSACHUSETTS, BY ISAIAH THOMAS. SOLD AT THE WORCESTER
BOOKSTORE. MDCCXCIII.

MR. BANCROFT's SERMON. OCCASIONED BY THE EXECUTION OF SAMUEL FROST, FOR MURDER.
I. SAMUEL, iii.13. "HIS SONS MADE THEMSELVES VILE, AND HE RESTRAINED THEM NOT."


ELI, the chief of his tribe and priest of the temple in Shiloh, was himself a
pious and good man. He seriously performed the duties of his office, and
discovered a solicitude to promote the interest of religion. In his own life he
set a good example, and gave the best advice to those who assembled around the
altar of the Lord; but he failed in the government of his family. He trained
not his sons to walk in his steps; and to obey the commands of their God. He
gave greater latitude of indulgence to their passions and desires, than is
consistent with the rules of virtue. He did not, with becoming zeal and
authority, correct the commencement of their evil practices, but connived at
their impiety, and they became sons of Belial. The confidence and the power
reposed in them, as the attendants of the altar, they abused to the vilest
purposes. Instead of leading in the devotions of the people, instead of pure
examples and amiable manners* to persuade their countrymen to walk in the paths
of religion, they used the influence of their station, to corrupt their minds
and allure them to the paths of folly and vice. At a late period, Eli warned
his sons of their danger, and admonished them to reform their practices. "He
said unto them, Why do ye such things? For I hear of your evil doings by all
this people. Nay, my sons; for it is no good report that I hear; ye make the
Lord's people to transgress. If one man sin against another, the judge shall
judge him; but, if a man sin against the Lord, Who shall entreat for him?" But
alas! the authority of the parent was lost, the habit of sin was established,
admonition and counsel were ineffectual. The father himself suffered for his
early neglect in the education of his children. His declining years were
rendered joyless by the knowledge of their malpractices, and the prophet of the
Lord was commissioned to carry to him the predictions of the signal destruction
of his sons, and of the translation of the priesthood from his family. A
similar message was delivered by the youthful Samuel: "I have told him, that I
will judge his house, for the iniquity which he knows; because his sons made
themselves vile and he restrained them not." When Eli heard this divine
denunciation, he murmured not, but in grief he acquiesced. "It is the Lord; let
him do what seems him good." This afflicted man filled up the full measure of
his days, he attained to ninety and eight years, his eyes failed through age,
his limbs were almost incapable of motion; but he still felt anxiety for the
interests of his country. The Israelites were at war. His sons were gone forth
to battle, and the ark of God was conveyed to the field of action. Impatient to
hear from the camp, he sat by the wayside. Tidings were brought of the defeat
of the army, and the city was in an uproar. The tumult reached the ears of the
aged priest, and with deep anxiety he it daired the cause. The messenger
approached him and said: "I am he that came out of the army, and I fled today
out of the army. And he said, What is there done, my son? And the messenger
said, Israel is fled before the Philistines, and there has been also a great
slaughter among the people, and thy two sons, Hophni and Phinehas, are dead,
and the ark of God is taken." A train of horrid ideas crowded upon the mind of
the enfeebled priest. -- The slaughter of the people -- the accomplishment of
the prophecy against his own house -- and the capture of the ark. The shock was
more than he could bear. He fell backward from his seat, and by the fall he
parted with his life and his troubles.

The words before us I have chosen, as a suitable theme for a discourse, on the
present solemn and painful occasion. I have chosen them with a view to
illustrate the importance, and enforce the duty, of a religious education.

The duties of parents toward their children is one of the most sacred trusts,
which the Governor of the world has imparted to man. Throughout the animal
creation God has implanted those instincts, which direct all classes to the
care of their progeny, and lead them in the most effectual manner, to aid their
progress to the maturity of their natures. But man, possessing a nobler
capacity, is in this, as in all other important concerns, left to the voluntary
and free exercise of his powers; and his children are dependent upon his
affection, wisdom and providence.

In whatever view we contemplate the education of our children, we shall all be
deeply impressed with a sense of its importance. If we attend to the influence
that moral principles and early habits of sobriety may have, in the present
world, upon maturer years and future practices, this consideration alone is
sufficient to inspire us with the highest solicitude, to give the tender mind a
virtuous direction, and to establish those moral principles, which, under all
the conditions of human life, are the best security for good conduct. How great
are the temptations, to which youth are exposed! How many fall victims to the
deceitful allurements of vice! How many destroy their health by intemperance,
and render their lives useless by dissipation! How many, whose declining years
are imbittered by reflections on their youthful folly and extravagance! Shall
we not all then feel compassion and concern for those, who are soon to enter on
this dangerous period, and whose worldly prosperity, or present misery, greatly
depends on the bias that shall at first be given to the mind, and the courses
that in early life may be adopted?

Nor shall we think the business of education less important, if we attend to
its influence on society. Wise men in every age, have subscribed to the truth
of Solomon's maxim: "Righteousness exalts a nation, but sin is the reproach
of any people." The moral virtues are of the highest importance to the interest
of civil society. We are told that they are more especially necessary to the
support of a government like ours. In the same degree, therefore, that early
impressions of virtue, and good moral principles, are salutary to individuals
are they important to the community. The prospects of the next generation, the
success of those liberal measures in government and religion, which we have
adopted, and in which every good man feels himself interested, depend in a
great degree on the general practices of the youth of the present day. We
cannot then do our country more essential service, than, in our several
stations, to use our best endeavors to form the minds of our children to moral
goodness, and to train them to the love and practice of those virtues, which
will make them valuable and useful members of society.

Or, should we extend our views to the future and everlasting happiness of the
objects of our present attention, we shall still, in a greater degree, be
concerned for their good education. It is easier to prevent than to cure habits
of vice. If they, who convert sinners from the error of their ways, have the
satisfaction to reflect, that they have delivered the souls of their fellow
beings from death, they cannot feel less satisfaction, who, by good instruction
and example, secure youth from vice and thereby prevent them from feeling the
present and future evils of sin. Of the future practices of men we cannot,
indeed, have an absolute certainty; but the good education of the child, and
the virtuous habits of the youth, afford the greatest possible security for the
religious improvement of the man.

All the motives, that can have influence to persuade men to perform that
branch of parental duty under consideration, may with their full force be
presented to our minds. With us there are no envious distinctions of orders.
None are born to hereditary rights. The path to eminence and to the honourary
distinctions of society is open to every individual; and all descriptions of
men possess the means to give their children such education, as may qualify
them to be useful and distinguished members of the community. Our ancestors, in
the first settlement of this country, were sensible of the importance of
education, and were early attentive to the best means to secure it. Their
situation inspired them with liberal and sublime ideas on the subject, and they
adopted a plan, from which we enjoy the most extensive advantages. Removed from
the means of instruction and improvement, which they enjoyed in their mother
country, and forming a world by themselves, they felt the inconveniences of
their situation, and foresaw that, without peculiar exertions, the succeeding
generation would but little differ from the tribes of savages with which they
must associate. They therefore established a method of general education by
legislative authority. They made it the duty of every incorporation, which
possessed the ability, to establish schools at the common expense, open as much
to the children of the poor as to those of the rich. The method has been
preserved to the present day: And New England, I believe, is now the only
country on the globe, where the education of children is so much the care of
government, as to oblige the wealthy, in proportion to their property, to bear
the expense of schools, of which all may reap an equal advantage.

The general utility of this plan has been fully realized. The great body of
the community, at the present day, discover a laudable spirit to carry into
effect the free intentions of the legislature. The opportunities, to qualify
youth for the active business of society, are great; and we have only to lament
the inattention and negligence of individuals to avail themselves of the means
put within their reach, to prepare their children to sustain, with honor and
emolument, the various offices of society.

But among us, Can there be those, who are so far lost to parental feelings, as
not to wish to fit their children for stations, that are not menial and
servile? Look into society. Who are the men, that fill with the greatest
dignity and luster the various offices of government? -- Who rise to the most
distinguished eminence in the several learned professions? -- Who manage with
the greatest success the means to acquire property? -- Are they generally
those, who enter into life with peculiar advantages of family, or with
prospects of large patrimonial estates? Or, Are they men, who were early taught
to depend on the energies of their own minds, and were educated under the
persuasion, that their characters and stations in society were suspended on
their own exertions? The answer to these questions will tend to extinguish in
the wealthy and eminent the pride and vanity of family, and to raise the poor
and the humble from meanness and despondency. It will point parental solicitude
to its proper objects, and teach us all, that a good education, that habits of
sobriety and useful application, are the best inheritance we can transmit to
our children.

But, on this occasion, I wish to direct your attention more particularly to a
religious education. Religion adds worth to all other accomplishments. Without
it the highest seize in literature, the most polished forms of address,
and all the arts of business, lay no foundation for confidence -- give no
security for amiable and good conduct. Religion alone refines the dispositions
of men, ennobles their views, establishes unchangeable principles of good
conduct, and furnishes the most influential motives to perform all social, all
benevolent and honorable offices. Religion is as much superior to worldly
accomplishments, as the immortal soul is superior to the corruptible body --
as everlasting happiness is preferable to the momentary distinctions of wealth
and grandeur. It is a sense of the superintendence of Deity, "whose eyes
survey, and whose eylids try the children of men;" it is the belief of our
accountability at the bar of God; it is a realizing view of the final issue of
human actions, that can restrain the undue influence of the passions of men,
and furnish us with power to resist the various temptations of the world.

How unhappy then the condition of those, who were led to profane the name of
God, before they attained to an age to form any worthy apprehensions of the
perfection and majesty of Deity! Who were induced to make a jest of the
solemnities of religion, before they had understanding to comprehend its
duties, or to feel the force of its obligations! What shall check the corrupt
indulgence of their passions? -- What shall restrain them from the greatest
enormities? -- Will they not adopt the language of the practical atheists of
old, " Who is the Lord that we should fear him, and what profit shall we have,
if we pray unto him?"

Early impressions are deep; they are influential. We are all sensible of the
influence of principles, that were implanted in our minds before reason had
attained its strength. We are all sensible with what difficulty we conquer the
influence of opinions and persuasions that, through false methods of education,
were impressed upon our infant minds. We may be fully convinced of their
superstitious origin; and yet with all the strength of sound reason and mature
judgment, we cannot wholly eradicate their influence. What salutary effects
then, may not be expected from early impressions of piety, and right moral
principles of action, which will receive increasing strength and support from
the decisions of a sound judgment, the dictates of an enlightened conscience,
and from every habit of just reflection? There is a prospect, that some youth,
who have been favored with a religious education, may be led astray by the
ardour of their dispositions, or by the enticements of their lewd and corrupt
companions. Yet they sin with fear and trembling. They shudder at every sudden
alarm, as though the avenging minister of heaven was approaching to arrest them
in their progress of impiety, and punish their folly and sin. Or should they
even form a habit of sin, unexpected occurrences of divine Providence may
awaken them to a keen sense of their guilt, call up the feelings of more
innocent days, and render them alive to all the feelings of religion and
virtue. But where the mind has never been impressed with a sense of religion,
where moral principles have never been implanted, conscience, by an early
acquaintance with sin, will be silenced before its voice has been distinctly
heard, and the most abandoned state of vice will probably be the consequence.
Look among those, whose first impressions were made amidst scenes of vice, and
who received their education under examples of sin, whose first essays of
reason and activity were amidst scenes of corruption and profligacy, and you
will find degrees of youthful depravity, at which you must be astonished; and
the recovery of youth, of this character, from the habits of sin, is extremely
difficult and altogether improbable.

The parent would be justly accounted savage and inhuman, who should abandon
his child in its infant state, or make no provision for its support and comfort
in the period of childhood and youth. He would be thought unworthy the name of
a father, and a disgrace to his species, who should turn his son into the
world, at the age of manhood, without any acquaintance with the active business
of life, and destitute of all means to obtain an honest and reputable support.
What then must be the character of the man, who is inattentive to the religious
and virtuous education of his children; who takes no pains to teach them worthy
apprehensions of the being and government of God; who neglects to impress their
minds with a reverence of the divine character; and to lead them to a realizing
view of the obligations and immortal concerns of religion? The man, who belives
in the existence of a God, who supposes that his child possesses a capacity
above the brute that perishes, and yet neglects, to lead him to a right
knowledge of the great truths and duties of religion, must be dead to the true
affection of a parent, lost to the most ingenuous feelings of humanity, and
altogether destitute of a becoming solicitude for the welfare and happiness of
the "fruit of his body." Does not such neglect shock all our feelings of
tenderness and sympathy? -- Is it not inconsistent with every dictate of
reason, and the grossest violation of the precepts of our religion?

The direction of heaven to the children of Israel was, "These words, which I
command thee this day, shall be in thine heart, and thou shall teach them
diligently unto thy children, and shall (...) of them when thou sit in
(...) house, and when thou walk by the way, and when thou lie down, and
when thou risest up." The Divine Being makes honorable mention of the piety of
Abraham, in the religious education of his children -- "I know him that he will
command his children and his household after him, and they shall keep the way
of the Lord; to do justice and judgment, that the Lord may bring upon Abraham
that which he has spoken of him."

The (...) dispensation lays the most sacred (...) upon all parents to educate
their children in the principles, and to train them up in the virtues, of their
religion. In the public exercises of the Sabbath, it provides the most
effectual means to (...) them in the discharge of their duty. The public
exercises of our religion are happily calculated, to impress the minds of
children and youth with a lively apprehension of the presence and
superintendency of Deity, with a sense of their accountableness to him for all
the actions of the present life, and to establish in their minds, on a
religious foundation, the great principles of morality. Every man of reflection
must then (...) a painful regret, that so many among us are falling off (...)
habitual attendance upon public worship, which has, heretofore, characterized
the people of this country, and which has the most favorable influence on the
dearest interests of the present and future world.

The limits of a public discourse forbid the attempt to describe the best
methods of religious education, or to point out the most effectual means to
instill moral principles into the tender mind, and to form in youth early habits
of virtue. In general we may observe, that the authority of the parent ought
not to be exercised with such severity, as to damp the ardor of emulation, and
beget a weak and servile dependence. Children should be led to place confidence
in their own exertions. Their active powers should be invigorated to manly and
noble pursuits, by lively representations of the advantages that may result to
themselves. In religion, unreasonable restraints should not be imposed; for
these have a tendency to prejudice young minds against religious duty. Offices
of piety, and the general practices of virtue, ought not to be described in a
gloomy and forbidding aspect; lest aversion be excited in the unexperienced
mind. Deity should ever be described to children, as a benevolent and merciful
father, as well as a just and righteous judge, that his service may appear easy
and pleasant. Youth should be led to hate vice on account of its odious nature
and baneful effects, and to prize religious seize, as qualifications
necessary to secure them peace of mind, real dignity of character, substantial
and lasting happiness. Permit me to add, that instruction must always be
enforced by example. Principle will generally be understood, as illustrated by
practice.

The story, of which our text is a part, opens to our contemplation an instance
of the fatal effects attendant on the neglect of parents to restrain the
vicious propensities of their children, and to give a virtuous direction to
their active powers.

The sons of Eli made themselves vile in the sight of God. They broke loose
from all the restraints of religion, and "gave themselves up to work iniquity
with greediness." Their guilt was, in a degree, imputed to their father,
because he did not, with the earnestness and authority of a parent, check their
vicious dispositions, and restrain their violent practices. In that period of
human life, which needs all the consolation of religion, all the soothing
attention of filial piety, to enable a man to support its infirmities and
pains, he doubtless felt all that remorse, which an ingenuous mind feels upon
the consciousness of criminal neglect, in one of the most sacred and important
duties of man. He saw his sons fall from the dignity and purity of their
natures. He saw them the disgrace of the sacerdotal order, and beheld them the
agents of sin, in the wilful and base corruption of those who presented
themselves for the sincere worship of the Deity. He felt the severe and just
reprimand of his God, and was humbled by the divine declaration, that the
priesthood, in his age, the most distinguished honor of his country, should
forever be removed from his family.

And have we not now before us a striking instance of the fatal effects of the
neglect of early education and good example? We behold a human man being,
apparently devoid of social affection and a sense of moral obligation. He has
committed crimes of the most heinous nature, and is now with ignominy to lose
his life, as a pest of society; and yet he discovers little or no compunction
of mind, little commotion on account of the dreadful scenes before him. Has the
Author of human nature denied him those powers and affections, which men in
common possess? All who are particularly acquainted with him, testify that he
possesses intellectual faculties to distinguish right from wrong, to comprehend
the nature of moral duty, and understand the force of moral obligation. He
certainly possesses some qualities that are manly and noble. Many of the
causes, that more frequently are the introduction to the crime which he has
committed, had no operation upon him. He never mixed in those scenes of
intemperance and dissipation, which frequently corrupt the moral powers of men,
and prepare the way for sins of a crimson die. In his depravity, the
temptations of ambition and avarice had no influence; yet in a country, where
all men enjoy those advantages for moral and religious improvement, of which we
have made general mention, we behold him a savage, possessed of the most
malignant and revengeful passions. To what cause shall we attribute his
dissocial, his cruel and malignant disposition? For an answer to our question
we are led to the early period of his existence.

To open the graves of the dead, and to expose to public view the faults of
those who have passed off the stage of action, is an unpleasant task.
Unnecessarily to wound the feelings of the living by the relation of the crimes
of their deceased relations, is cruel and inhuman. But, if the ashes of the
dead can be made to read lectures of wisdom and virtue to the living; if we
can, in such a manner, place the neglects and faults of the deceased before the
eyes of the living, as to guard them against those mistakes and dangers, by
which others fell, propriety may countenance the action.

From the best information I can obtain, I am constrained to say, that the
father of this unhappy man was greatly deficient in the example he set before
his household, and in the instruction he gave to his children. The disposition
of this man, when ^^^ing and tender, was not softened by those paternal
attentions, which harmonize the soul, and form it to virtue. He did not receive
those instructions and admonitions, which, as the powers Of reason expand,
impress the mind with a sense of the Supreme Being, beget attention to the
serious truths of religion, and give conscience a power over the passions and
inferior desires. In the daily intercourses of the family, he saw not that
example of love and condescension, of tenderness and humanity, which enforces
good instruction, softens the passions of resentment and revenge, and
insensibly forms the disposition to mildness, sympathy and humanity. But the
example set before him was impious, cruel, and barbarous. In this school the
son was but too ready to learn. All the rough, malignant, and revengeful
passions, acquired strength, and obtained an habitual control of the mind. Amid
their violent demands, the still voice of conscience is not heard. The most
sacred restraints of religion are disregarded. He takes the life of man without
emotions of sympathy, sorrow, or compunction. And, in a situation that, we
should suppose, must overwhelm the human soul with distress and horror, we see
him insensible and stupid. Is it not highly probable, that his present
insensibility arises from the want of early education?

Shall not his condition inspire every parent present with the highest
solicitude, faithfully to perform those important duties, which are incumbent
upon them toward their children? To this, every consideration that can enter
the human mind, urges with irresistible force. Can there be sorrow, like the
sorrow of the parent, who sees his child in the situation of this man? But, if
he be convinced by his own reflections, that this situation must be imputed to
his own neglect, How pungent must be the remorse of his conscience! What parent
could see his son fallen from virtue and usefulness, numbered with infamous
transgressors, and brought to an untimely and ignominious end? But, to see
the^^ ruin, and to feel himself to be the guilty cause, must occasion
insupportable distress and anguish. What answer would the parent give to the
upbraidings of his son? From the morning of my being, I have been taught to
look up to you for example and direction; and from you I learned to profane the
name of my God, and to disregard all the restraints of religion. In the days of
my innocence, I looked up to your example, and by it I was led into the paths
of intemperance and vice. You took no care, by persuasion and parental
authority, to correct the irregular sallies of passion, and to restrain me in
the commencement of my vicious course. You took no pains to lead me to the
knowledge of the character and government of God, and to impress upon my mind
the infinite concerns of immortality. And now I have made myself vile. I have
forfeited my present existence to an injured community, and am about to die the
death of a malefactor. Yet, O horror of soul! I have not a heart to exercise
godly sorrow for my sins, and, with the feelings of piety, to implore the mercy
of God, through the Savior of the world.

Should this man carry his views forward to the final consequences of
impenitent transgression, and realize the account he himself must render at the
bar of God, I am unable to paint the remorse and anguish that must fill his
soul.

The youth, here present, will suffer the word of exhortation, to guard their
minds against the temptations of sin.

All your ingenuous feelings, I doubt not, are engaged on this occasion. With
pity and compassion you behold the man, who is about to suffer the pains of
death. With becoming detestation and abhorrence, you contemplate the action
which brought him to this untimely end. Were you thought capable of his crime,
you would exclaim, Are we dogs, that we should do this thing? We believe you
incapable of the crime of murder: The human mind does not pass, at once, to the
more heinous deeds of sin. The advance is gradual. At present, you are in more
danger from the lighter shades of vice, which are less noticed, but which are
often the introduction to great sins. "Abstain from the appearance of evil."
Cherish the ingenuous feelings of innocence, and strive to maintain a
"conscience void of offense." If you once allow any sin, however small, to gain
an habitual influence over your minds, the fear of shame will be lessened, the
force of conscience diminished, and the restraints of virtue weakened; and, in
time, you may be led to commit the most atrocious sins with unblushing
impudence.

The path of honor and distinction in this world lies before you, to animate
your minds to virtuous pursuits; and immortal glory and felicity are prepared
by the Son of God to reward your piety and goodness. Reverence then yourselves,
and aspire to the true dignity of your natures. Avoid those scenes of
intemperance and licentiousness, which inflame the passions, corrupt the best
powers of the human mind, and are frequently the occasion of gross and habitual
sins.

Restrain the passion of anger, and never let loose the spirit of revenge;
lest, in the satisfaction of supposed injuries, you should be led into deeds of
injustice, cruelty, and irreparable mischief.

Be ready to forgive the offenses of your fellow men, as you hope that God will
forgive your offenses. Strive to implant the principles of Christianity in your
breasts, and adorn your lives with benevolent and amiable virtues. Consider,
that God is present with you; and, may his dread fall upon you, and a sense of
his excellency make you suitably afraid. Consider that he is your father and
friend, and offer him the first fruits of your lives. By a life of piety and
virtue, secure your own peace and happiness, and reward your parents for all
their care and anxiety on your account.

It remains for me to address myself to the victim of justice.

You, SAMUEL FROST, are now to close your probation. As it respects you, the
last sands are dropping from the glass of life, and the solemnities of the
invisible world will soon open to your view. You have committed injuries in
society, for which you can make no reparation. You have been guilty of a crime,
On Saturday, the 23d of September, 1783, he killed his father, and was
acquitted by a jury of trial on the supposition of insanity.
which a distinguished heathen nation esteemed so unnatural, as to render a
name for it unnecessary. When your life was given you, you repented not of your
evil deed; but hardening yourself in wickedness, cherishing the revengeful
passions, and the malicious disposition of your soul, you, with peculiar
circumstances of cruelty, committed murder. A crime capital in all civilized
governments; a crime, which we are directed by the divine law to punish with
death. "He that sheddeth man's blood, by man shall his blood be shed." But
government is not induced to take away your life by those feelings of
resentment and revenge, which induced you to take away the life of man. You are
to be taken away from among the living, because you have made yourself vile,
and are become unworthy longer to be a member of the community. Your life and
liberty are dangerous to the peace of society, dangerous to the lives and
liberties of your fellow citizens. You are not on earth, punished as a sinner
against God; nor do your sufferings, from the decisions of human judicatures,
cancel your offenses committed against Heaven. "Be not deceived; God is not
mocked." At the tribunal of heaven you must account for every action of your
life. Your sins, with all their aggravations, are known to God. He can never be
deceived, flattered, or diverted from his just and wise purposes. All his
creatures are in his power, and he disposes of them, as to him it seems best.
By his Son Jesus Christ he has declared, that " murderers shall not enter into
the kingdom of heaven, but shall have their part in the lake that burns with
fire and brimstone, which is the second death."

Upon the Christian scheme of salvation, repentance is absolutely necessary to
pardon. Be not then insensible, stupid, and hardened, while the realities of
eternity are in immediate prospect before you. Through Jesus Christ, God is
gracious and merciful to all penitent sinners. "He would not that any should
perish, but that all should repent and live." He is more ready to grant his
assistance and his mercy to all, who with contrition and sincerity ask them,
than the tender mother is to grant support to the infant of her breast, or the
affectionate father to give bread to his dutiful son.

Turn you then, you to the Lord, O sinner; for, Why will you die? The voice of
the Savior of the world once proclaimed the joyful assurance of salvation to a
malefactor on the cross: And the really contrite sinner will not be spurned
from the arms of divine mercy, though the act of genuine repentance should not
be accomplished till the last moments of the probationary existence. Improve
then the remaining minutes of life. Humble yourself before God. Pour out your
soul in sincere expressions of penitence, in fervent petitions for mercy, and
commit yourself to God, through the one Mediator, Jesus Christ.

It is the duty of ministers of the gospel, to explain the conditions of
salvation through Jesus Christ, and to define the rule of the final judgment as
it is contained in the scriptures; but the application of this rule to
individuals, they leave with God. At the disposal of the all wise, the just,
and merciful God, we leave you. He knows the secrets of the heart, and can duly
estimate the merit and demerit of every principle of human action. He is
disposed to make every just allowance for defects of constitution, errors of
education, and every unfavourable circumstance attending human practices. "He
is the Judge of all the earth, and will do right."

And we will now unitedly address the divine throne through Jesus our Lord, for
your penitence, pardon and everlasting happiness.

AMEN.

