AN ESSAY ON THE NATURAL EQUALITY OF MEN; ON THE RIGHTS THAT RESULT FROM IT,
AND ON THE DUTIES WHICH IT IMPOSES: To which a SILVER MEDAL was adjudged by the
TEYLERIAN SOCIETY at HAARLEM, APRIL 1793.

CORRECTED and ENLARGED BY WILLIAM LAWRENCE BROWN, D. D. PROFESSOR OF MORAL
PHILOSOPHY, AND THE LAW OF NATURE, AND OF ECCLESIASTICAL HISTORY; AND MINISTER
OF THE ENGLISH CHURCH AT UTRECHT.

Aliquid semper ad communem utilitatem afferendum.

CICERO. THE FIRST AMERICAN EDITION.

PHILADELPHIA: PRINTED FOR JOHN ORMROD, by WILLIAM W. WOODWARD, AT FRANKLIN'S
HEAD, NO. 41, CHESNUT-STREET. 1793.

PREFACE.
WHOEVER has attentively considered the series of questions proposed for public
discussion by the Teylerian Society, will acknowledge that they have usually
had the peculiar advantage of uniting curious investigation with general
utility. But, of all the questions proposed by this, or by any literary society
whatever, none appears either of greater consequence in itself, or from the
complexion of the times, more likely to excite attention, than that which is
now offered by this respectable body, as the subject of competition for the
literary honor which they annually confer. It directly leads to examine the
principal foundations of civil society, to unfold the chief obligations of all
social duties, to establish the important advantages of subordination, on the
one hand, and, on the other, to guard against the dreadful and odious
consequences both of despotism and of anarchy. Such are the momentous
considerations necessarily connected with the proper discussion of this
question; the proposal of which does equal honor to the discernment and public
spirit of the worthy directors of the Teylerian institution. Happy may the
person account himself, and justly will he be entitled to the thanks of his
fellow men, who shall be enabled to treat this subject in any manner adequate
to its real consequence and dignity. Far, indeed, is the writer of this Essay
from presuming to lay claim to this praise, but he feels his heart impressed by
the importance of the subject, and animated with a warm desire of contributing
to the public good that portion which his small abilities may permit. Ever
since he was capable of any rational reflection, he has found his soul actuated
by the sacred flame of Liberty, by an abhorrence of oppression, and by that
love of justice which dictates an equal enjoyment of all the rights of human
nature. The grand principle of the natural equality of men, if rightly
understood, is the only basis on which universal justice, order, and freedom,
can be firmly built, and permanently secured. The view exhibited in this Essay,
so far from loosening the bands of society, or weakening that subordination,
without which no government can subsist, will draw more closely every social
tie, and more strongly confirm the obligations of legal obedience, and the
rights of legal authority.

The writer is sufficiently aware that the principles which he attempts to
unfold, will not be agreeable either to the wild enthusiasts for liberty, or to
the servile and tyrannical abettors of arbitrary power. That moderation, which
flows from the love and the perception of truth (which commonly lies between
two extremes) is seldom acceptable to the multitude, who, incapable of
distinguishing the use from the abuse of things, are generally as extravagant
and impetuous in the maintenance of right, as in the abetment of wrong. It is
only the few, who have shaken off the shackles of prejudice, dispelled the
clouds of passion, and burst from the dungeon in which they confine the soul,
that can view and relish objects as they appear in the pure and steady light in
which nature exhibits them. The eyes of the rest of mankind are either too weak
to sustain its luster, or, if they have beheld it for some time, become so much
dazzled as to lose sight of the objects which it is designed to unfold to them,
and are thus deprived of that direction in conduct which it ought to afford. Of
the truth of this assertion, the times in which we live furnish abundant and
melancholy examples.

Since the generality of mankind, then, will ever be in extremes, and the wiser
few, if they keep themselves free from the contagion of popular prejudice and
passion, will, from this very circumstance, seldom acquire any great influence
over the general conduct; it may be asked, of what use can such writings be,
which the multitude will either not read, or not apply to profit, and the more
intelligent do not require? To this question the answer is obvious: -- that the
progress of truth is sure, though slow; that, if every person of discernment
and moderation would consider it as his duty to communicate, as far as his
sphere may extend, the light he himself has acquired, a great deal of good
might at last be accomplished; and that to contribute any portion, however
small, to the common benefit, is both a sufficient motive and a sufficient
reward to a benevolent and generous mind. The human soul is formed for truth
and virtue. Error, prejudice, and depravity, are unnatural states. Superstition
and bigotry, popular frenzy, or despotic oppression, never can be destined by
the Supreme Director of the world to hold a perpetual reign, because they
counteract his wise and benevolent designs. The passions, and the consequent
agitations which they excite, as they are violent, can never be lasting, and,
from their very violence itself, tend, by a species of fermentation, to throw
off the dregs of ignorance and folly, which obstruct the improvement of our
species. These convulsions may be compared to tempests and hurricanes which
overcast the sky with a temporary gloom, and often occasion the most dreadful
calamities; but, in the end, refine the atmosphere, and preserve its salubrity.
It is more natural to suppose that the progress of the world is toward
improvement and perfection, than, as gloomy but contracted minds are apt to
fancy, toward degeneracy and ruin. Even the final destruction of this globe,
which Scripture teaches us to expect, will only serve to introduce a more
perfect and glorious scene. The times in which we live, though agitated with
violent convulsions, and marked by striking events, are peculiarly favorable
to rational inquiry and to substantial improvement. On the public affairs of
the world, it has often been said, that the speculations of philosophers in
their closets have but little influence. But such an opinion can be adopted by
those only who are as great strangers to experience as they are to speculation.
The conduct of men is commonly directed by their opinions. Their opinions are
formed by their principles; their principles, by the instruction which they
receive, by the books which they read, by the company which they frequent.
Hence it is easy to see how far the public opinions and conduct must, in a
literary age, be affected by the writings that appear in it. If these are
dictated by soundness of judgment, and benignity of heart, they cannot fail of
producing much benefit.

The time, therefore, and pains employed in speculations such as are suggested
by the important question I now propose to discuss, cannot be misspent, if the
subject is treated with any tolerable degree of accuracy and precision. Even
those who fail of success may still claim the honor of a laudable attempt; and
from men of such judgment and candor as characterise those to whom I have the
honor of addressing this discourse, are sure of obtaining it. Without
detaining the attention of my candid readers any longer from the immediate
consideration of the question now before them, I shall directly proceed to
examine it. As it stands proposed by the Society, it divides itself into three
parts: I. In what respects may men be said to be equal? II. What are the rights
resulting from this equality? III. What are the duties which it imposes?


AN ESSAY, etc.

BOOK I.

AN ESSAY, etc. BOOK I. In what Sense may all MEN be said to be EQUAL?
CHAPTER I. Of NATURAL DIVERSITIES among MEN.
THAT all men are, by nature, equal, is an opinion so generally received among
those who are accustomed to any degree of philosophical reflection, that to
call it in question might appear absurd, and to prove it superfluous. Yet, this
opinion, like many general maxims which obtain a currency in the world, however
true it may be, in its proper sense, is not. I am inclined to believe, of the
greatest part, sufficiently founded according to the acceptance of those who
admit it. If it is understood in any sense, exclusive of all natural
superiority and distinction among men, it will be found to contradict universal
experience. At whatever period of human life, in whatever state or condition of
society, we contemplate our species, we shall find that nature has
distinguished individuals from each other, by peculiar and appropriate
qualities, almost as remarkably, in some instances, as she has distinguished
the human race from the inferior creatures. Those philosophers, who, in order
to exalt themselves, attempt to degrade their species, and display their
eloquence by defending the most irrational paradoxes, are eager to persuade us
that, as human nature, in its original state, is on a level with the brutes, so
individuals among mankind derive every difference of corporeal and mental
perfection that characterizes them, wholly from the opportunities of
improvement which they have enjoyed, or from the happy situations in which they
have been placed. Contradicting universal experience, they strive to refer the
judgments which it establishes, to the class of popular prejudices; and,
pretending to lead us to the true knowledge of human nature, exhibit to our
view a state of brutish ignorance, and of savage ferocity, which has never
existed but in their own imaginations. They carry us back to a period of which
there are no monuments, and in which they consider man not as a social, but as
a solitary animal, actuated by mere animal instincts, destitute of ideas, a
mere quadruped grazing along with the brutes, and as little distinguished from
the rest of his species by individual qualities, as his species from the other
inhabitants of the forest. In order to establish this theory, so disgraceful to
human nature, they produce certain relations of travelers, concerning Pongos,
and Enjokos, and Ourang-Outangs, whom they conclude to be primitive men, whose
conduct and mode of life can alone furnish us with just representations of our
original condition See Rousseau, sur l'origin et les fondemens de (...) galite
parmi les hommes. Note 10th. This fiction appears to be copied from ancient
writers. -- See Lucretius, ^. v. verse 923. Horace, sermon. lib. 1. Sat. 3, verse
98. Cicero pro Sexti^^ c. 42. De inventione, lib. 1. c. 2. Lactant. div. inst.
lib. ^. c. 10. Hobbes de civ^, c. viii. section 1.
. So easy is it, when a favorite opinion is to be maintained, or a paradox
established, to adopt, as principles, judgments destitute of all evidence, and
to reject principles sanctioned by universal consent. So apt are the enemies of
system, to run into systems of their own, whose sole recommendation is
singularity, while ingenious sophistry is their only support.

Those writers seem not to have reflected, that, if man was originally a brute,
he must ever have continued so; and that that instinct, which solely they allow
to him in that situation, if it is unerring within its prescribed compass,
never can, by any improvement, be carried one step beyond its primitive limits.
That capacity of perfection, which they grant to him, as his only distinction
above the inferior animals, implies, in its very nature, more elevated and
extensive powers, than any of these can possess. To deny this, is to assert,
that a building may be erected without a foundation, an elegant and beautiful
form exhibited without original materials, an effect produced without a cause.
These writers seem to overlook the whole analogy of nature, in which every
species is distinguished from every other, by properties common to all of the
same class, while all the individuals of each species are characterized by
their peculiar qualities. It would be equally absurd to think of forming a man
out of a brute, as to imagine that a fish may be transformed into a quadruped.

Those, however, who seek not fame, but wisdom, not brilliancy, but truth,
will, in all their enquities concerning human nature, take the human species,
as they find it exhibited, in its various forms, by daily observation, by the
incorrupted records of History, and by the authentic relations of travelers.
Beyond these sources of information they will not pretend to go in quest of
states of human nature, which are only to be found in the pictures of poets, or
in the hypotheses of philosophers equally fanciful; and they will consider it
as no less ridiculous for any one to philosophise on man with an Ourang-Outang
before him, than it would be for a person, attempting to determine the
qualities of gold, to reject an undoubted piece of that metal, and begin his
experiments with a piece of pinchbeck. For, as a statue, however elegantly
finished, still contains the rude mass of marble, on which so much symetry and
beauty has been superinduced; so, man, in the most civilized state of society,
still retains the original principles of his nature on which all the various
modifications he has undergone, have been ingrafted. It is the business of the
philosopher to discover these amidst all the adventitious circumstances with
which they may be connected, or the various shapes and colorings which they
may have assumed. No human pursuit, no human institution, no human enjoyment,
no human corruption itself, but may be ultimately referred to some original
principle of our nature; and without these original principles, it is
impossible to account for the power of education, of habit, and of example. If,
laying aside all regard to imaginary states of human nature, in which none of
the principles, which now so powerfully influence our species, are supposed to
have unfolded themselves, we fix our attention on mankind as they are exhibited
to us in history, and by daily observation, there is one important fact, which
must occur to every one endowed with the smallest reflection. This fact, on
which I mean chiefly to found my reasonings on the whole of this subject, is,
that, however similar the species may be in general, an infinite diversity of
abilities, talents, and character, obtains among the individuals that compose
it.

This diversity is evident with regard both to the body, and to the mind. In
some, we behold great bodily strength and dexterity, and a peculiar aptitude
for mechanical operations, and for rapid and powerful movements. In others, the
powers of imagination conspicuously unfold themselves; while judgment,
acuteness, penetration, and sagacity, in the conduct of life, distinguish
another class of men. An uncommon clearness and energy of intellect, and an
aptitude for the abstract sciences, raise others above the common level. Some
have an astonishing faculty of persuasion, of address, and management in moving
the affections, and influencing the conduct of their fellow men.

Nor is this diversity less remarkable in the moral qualities of men, than in
their corporeal and intellectual powers. Some have a wonderful command of their
own passions, and can preserve their moderation and composure of soul amidst
the greatest provocations, and the most trying calamities; others are deprived
of all self government by the slightest adversity, or by the smallest
opposition. Some natures are extremely sympathetic, and easily moved by the
distresses of their fellow men; while others discover an astonishing
insensibility with regard not only to the afflictions of other persons, but
even to their own. Benevolence, and all the gentle and amiable qualities which
accompany it, peculiarly distinguish some characters, while fortitude and
magnanimity, and all the stern and awful virtues, are the leading features of
some elevated spirits. Not to mention the characteristical marks of ambition,
avarice, voluptuousness, indolence, or vanity, which diversify such a number of
individuals, it is certain that the moral complexion of men is as various as
their corporeal constitution, or their mental faculties, and perhaps is greatly
influenced by both.

Nor can it be alleged, that these distinctions of character are entirely
derived from the present state of society, and from different opportunities of
cultivation; and by no means referable to any original bent of nature. This
conclusion will not be authorized either by the inductions of reason, or by
experience. For, in the first place, it is hard to be conceived how any
combination of circumstances, or any influence of education and habit, can
produce any power or propensity, of which the original seeds have not been
dropped into the constitution by the hand of the Creator. All that situation
and opportunity can effectuate, is to furnish these inherent powers and
propensities, with the means of unfolding themselves, of increasing in vigor,
and of acquiring maturity. If they are entirely wanting, they will never be
implanted by any effort of human skill, or be brought into action, by any
favorable combination of circumstances. If they exist in any degree, however
small, opportunity, exercise and cultivation, will advance them to a pitch of
strength so greatly above their primitive condition, as will have the
appearance of a real creation. If we attend to the fact itself, it must be
evident that children and savages, who have received no instruction, show
varieties of character, as well as men who have enjoyed all the advantages of
polished society, and who move in its different spheres. Although a proneness
to imitation is universally predominant in childhood, yet the manner of
imitating, and the objects to which it is directed are infinitely diversified.
As soon as the faculties begin to unfold, all the passions and propensities
that belong to human nature imperceptibly arise, and, according as the one or
the other of these is most prevalent, characteristical features distinguish the
infant. The objects that engage the attention of the savage, and the desires
that animate his pursuits, are indeed few, in comparison of those that exist in
more polished states of society. Yet, as these concentrate his whole soul, so
they excite its energies the more powerfully within their limited compass, and
conspire the more speedily to form his character. In the savage state, the
genuine impulses and propensities of nature are freely allowed to appear, and,
collected in one point, exert themselves with the greater vigor, and give to
each individual that peculiar complexion which results from the peculiar
strength of his native powers See Robertson's History of America, and Raynal's
Histoire Philosophique et Politic passim.
. The multiplicity of objects which attract attention, and ^imulate activity in
more polished periods of society, prevent a character from being so speedily
formed: while the uniform institutions of civilized life, mould all the members
of the community to mutual resemblance, and contribute to efface those
prominent and characteristical features, which the hand of nature has
impressed. I mean not to assert that those diversities of talents and character
are wholly to be ascribed to the unassisted powers of nature, but only that
they prevail in the joint proportion of these powers, and of the circumstances
that call them into exercise. As the fire will soon be extinguished, if not
constantly fed by combustibles, and as these combustibles, however multiplied,
will not produce flame, and light, and heat, unless they are kindled; so the
human faculties, if never called into action by corresponding situations, will
remain torpid and inefficacious; and the most favorable concurrence of
circumstances will not produce genius, dexterity, sagacity, and virtue, if the
original seeds of all these qualities are totally wanting. Be this as it may,
it is incontrovertible that there is, among the various individuals that
compose the human species, an almost infinite diversity of abilities, temper,
and character.

From this circumstance a natural inequality must necessarily arise. Those
talents and dispositions, which are the most amiable and respectable, directly
point out their possessors as the objects of love and esteem. Wherever such
qualities appear it is as impossible for the human mind, unless it be most
deplorably depraved, to withhold its admiration and affection, as it would be
for any natural cause not to produce its effect when placed in circumstances
adapted to its operation. Every display of genius, of sagacity, of penetration,
and prudence, is calculated to excite the admiration of the beholders, to
afford them pleasure, and if beneficently directed, to demand their gratitude.
Fortitude, magnanimity and generosity, command veneration, and excite esteem.
Gentleness, moderation, kindness, and compassion, appearing as the
distinguishing features in any character, cannot fail to attract the love and
complacency of all to whom they are known. Even corporeal strength and
dexterity procure a certain degree of respect to their possessors, on account
of their utility in life both to others and to themselves.

It is equally certain, that respect, esteem, veneration and love, ensure to
those who are the objects of them, a very high degree of influence over the
rest of mankind. Such will be listened to, imitated, and obeyed, by all who are
capable of estimating the qualities above mentioned according to their real
merit; the luster which they shed around their possessors dazzles those whose
souls are less discerning and elevated; and even the stupid and the base are
constrained to pay an involuntary homage. That such qualities are the only
original sources of power and influence, is evident from the conduct of all who
aspire at acquiring consideration and authority. If they want the reality, they
affect the appearance of them, and, even when power alone reduces their fellow
men under their subjection, they endeavor also, if not stupefied by the habits
of tyranny, to engage their esteem, and to captivate their benevolence,
sensible that dominion, to which these give no support, can never be sure and
lasting. I am far from asserting that all power and distinction are founded on
this natural basis. Lamentable experience proves the contrary. But, that
respectable and amiable qualities are the primitive sources of authority and
pre-eminence; and, when freely allowed to exert themselves, cannot fail to
obtain them, will be as generally acknowledged as it is certain in fact Hence
it is easy to account for monarchies having been almost every where the
primitive form of government. As no society could subsist without some
directing power, and, as rude and savage men were incapable of extending their
views to those more complicated systems which observation and experience alone
can suggest and establish, it was natural for them to pitch on the simplest
form, which was dictated rather by sentiment, than by reason, and to yield that
voluntary obedience to a chief, which their admiration of his superior
qualities inspired. This simple form lasted as long as the chief continued to
display these virtues, and to apply them in such a manner as to conciliate
general benevolence. But, as soon as oppression rendered him an object of
hatred, or weakness, an object of contempt, the evils experienced pointed out
the necessity of securing the public welfare on a firmer basis than the
capricious pleasure of an individual; and the habits of society suggested more
complicated systems of government, better adapted to the grand objects of
political union. Among boys at school, one distinguished by his courage, his
sagacity, or his art, commonly assumes the lead, and governs the juvenile
community, with a sway as despotic as that of any eastern monarch. The case is
nearly the same in all voluntary associations.
.

Nature herself, then, has evidently established unambiguous distinctions among
men, and produced a very remarkable inequality among the individuals of our
species. We may freely assert, that, if any mortal conspicuously excelled the
rest of mankind in every possible talent and quality, whether corporeal,
intellectual, or moral, which distinguishes the species in general, and had
every possible opportunity of displaying this perfection in all its luster, he
would be raised, by nature herself, as much above the rest of his fellow men as
they are above the inferior animals, and be as clearly designed to lead and
govern them. Or, if all the abovementioned qualities were the peculiar
attributes of any given number of men, these would be marked out, by Divine
Providence, as a glorious aristocracy or senate, to preside over the community
to which they belonged. For they would be possessed of every qualification to
discern, of every disposition to pursue, and, from the willing homage and
obedience of the rest of mankind, of every power to secure, the public good.
Or, lastly, if any human being were invested with such strength and agility of
body, with such compass of understanding, and with such complete mastery of his
own passions, as fully to provide himself with every thing necessary for his
subsistence, or conducive to his convenience and comfort, and as neither to be
exposed to the injuries of others, nor to be tempted to injure them, nor to be
affected by their misfortunes; such a mortal would be perfectly independent of
the rest of mankind; and as he needed nothing from them, so he would, in no
respect whatever, be their debtor.

But such characters as those above described have never yet existed in the
world, and indeed never can exist. Such an assemblage of perfection is not
human, but divine.

CHAPTER II. Of the DISTRIBUTION of HUMAN ABILITIES and TALENTS.
IF we consider the various talents and modes of excellence of which the human
species is capable, we shall acknowledge that neither all these, nor any
considerable number of them, have ever been found united in any one individual;
nay, that the highest degrees of many of them are incompatible with each other.
For, when distinguished honors, or extensive reputation, are acquired by
illustrious qualities, we are not thence to infer that the persons, to whom
these distinctions are allotted, surpass the rest of mankind in every quality
belonging to the species; but only that they have attained superiority in such,
as being more uncommon, are, on that account, more admired. Those mechanical
arts and inferior virtues, without which human society could not subsist,
attract no admiration, because they are daily exhibited. Yet the most
illustrious of mankind stand more in need of the benefits which these afford,
than their distinguished abilities can confer on the humble possessors of the
former. As those endowed with the qualities most necessary in human life, but
of inferior estimation, especially such as are displayed in mechanical labor
and art, cannot, from their occupations themselves, aspire at the sublimer and
more elegant abilities which distinguish others; these, on the other hand, must
remain destitute of the more useful ones. That leisure, meditation, and study,
without which the faculties of the mind cannot be perfected, necessarily
prevent that full exercise of the corporeal members, which ensures their
highest vigor and agility. A fancy uncommonly lively and bright is adverse to
the patient and accurate researches of philosophy, and to the just application
of the intellect, in the discovery and developement of truth, and the
improvement of science. That minute attention to calculation, that arithmetical
exactness, and that constant observance of the unvarying routine of business,
which are necessary to mercantile and oeconomical pursuits, but which present
no imagery to the mind, are inauspicious to the more elegant enjoyments of
taste, and to the cultivation of the fine arts. The stern and awful virtues
seldom associate with the gentle and amiable, and, claiming respect and
veneration, seem to disdain complacency and love. Even some corporeal
perfections appear repugnant to others. The most robust conformation of the
members, and the strength it produces, are not easily united with great
agility, and with delicate refinement in the organs of sense. In a word, it
appears to be the intention of nature, that, although the human faculties are
various, and capable of being carried to amazing heights of excellence; yet
this should seldom be accomplished, unless when uncommon culture and
improvement are bestowed on some particular faculty, or at least, on a few
faculties which have a peculiar native strength.

Variety of talents is, therefore, more applicable to the species than to
individuals. The seeds of each (as we have above observed) are, perhaps, cast
into every individual constitution, but the soil is differently adapted to
them, and that particular power to which it is favorable, springs up, and, if
properly cultivated, comes to maturity, spreads around its branches, and bears
abundant fruit. It may be objected, that it seems very preposterous to suppose
the creator implanting in any constitution the principles of powers, which were
never designed to come to maturity. But, let it be considered that, as the
different improvements of men depend on various occurrences, and, as mentioned
above, the characteristical qualities of each individual will be in the united
degree of their primitive strength, and of the opportunities of culture; it was
necessary that the seeds of each should be dropped into every human frame, so
that, when favorable circumstances concurred, that power which they were best
calculated to improve might spring up and flourish, and thus as much human
excellence might, on the whole, be produced as the human condition would admit.
This was, moreover, necessary in order to constitute that general similarity
which characterises the species, and unites them together in the bonds of a
common nature.

Be this as it may, it is undoubted that those who aim at distinction, or even
at moderate degrees of excellence in a great variety of objects, generally
exhibit a ridiculous figure; after having wasted their time, exhausted their
powers, and superinduced on their minds habits of inconstancy and fickleness.
Even the greatest genuises, when they leave that particular track, in which
indulgent nature had provided them with unfading laurels, and endeavor to
invade the province, and and snatch the rewards of others, while they present,
on the one hand, the most astonishing instances of the strength of the human
mind, afford, on the other, no less convincing proofs of its weakness and
vanity This might be illustrated by many examples of a foolish affectation of
universality of genius.
. Hence the necessity of each individual devoting himself to some favorite and
useful pursuit, to which every other should be subservient, and of applying to
the diligent discharge of the duties of that department in which he can produce
the greatest benefit to mankind, and acquire the greatest honor to himself.

From what has been said in this and the preceding chapter, it appears, in the
first place, That nature herself has established clear and certain distinctions
among men, in the various qualities allotted to each individual, and in the
various opportunities furnished them in the course of life for their
improvement. These opportunities may occur, though in inferior degrees, in the
rudest as well as in the most polished states of society. It is evident,
secondly, That these distinctions comprehend not the perfection of all the
human powers, but the singular excellence of one, or of a few of them,
conspicuous in individuals.

CHAPTER III. Of the MUTUAL DEPENDENCE of MANKIND.
FROM the two facts established in the conclusion of the last chapter, duly
considered, it appears to me that the just notion of the natural equality of
all mankind, as far as relates to their mutual duties, is to be derived; and
that, however paradoxical it may seem, an equality the most exact and perfect,
in respect of every moral and social obligation, springs from inequality itself.

Human nature is evidently endowed with a variety of appetites and desires,
adapted to the various objects which are capable of supplying its wants, or of
furnishing it with pleasures. The body stands in need of constant support,
which is not to be procured without considerable art and labor. This art and
labor must be greatly increased, if not only the necessaries, but also the
conveniences and elegancies of life are desired, and the refinements of sense
considered as objects of pursuit. The senses are not only inlets of pleasures
merely corporeal, but of others also of a more refined and delicate kind, of
which the mind under the influence of fancy, is the chief percipient. Hence
they open a very extensive field of human enjoyment, and claim the whole
compass of nature to administer materials for the fine arts. The mind of man is
eagerly desirous of knowledge, and wishes to discover the relations, the causes
and the effects, of the various objects that are presented to it. Not only
corporeal wants and appetites, the senses of beauty, of harmony, and of
magnificence, and the love of knowledge, subject man to necessities, which must
be supplied, or offer to him pleasures which he cannot but desire; he is also
actuated by various affections, some selfish and some benevolent, which serve
as constant spurs to action, and impel him into various tracks, according to
the different complexions of their objects.

Such is the nature of man; and from what has been said above, as well as from
other considerations on which I shall slightly touch, it is evident, that each
individual is insufficient, not only for his own perfection, but even for the
supply of his most urgent necessities. The other animals are by nature provided
with defense and covering, with subsistence and shelter. They soon attain the
full vigor and the complete exercise of their powers, and, without instruction
or succor, can apply them with certainty to their respective ends. But man, as
he enters into the world naked, defenseless, and unprovided with subsistence,
so, without the assistance and cooperation of his species, he must ever remain
in the most abject and comfortless condition. The inclemency of the seasons,
the sterility of the earth, the ferocity of savage animals, his natural
imbecility, oppose to his comfortable existence so many and so powerful
obstacles, as he could never expect of himself to surmount. He is assailed by
evils which he cannot repel, subject to wants which he cannot supply, and
surrounded by objects which he cannot, by his own strength, convert to his use.
Destined for society, he is immediately thrown on its care, and bound by his
own weakness, to contribute to its strength. Designed to form the most intimate
union with his fellow men, he is constituted miserable and destitute without
them; but, constrained by this circumstance, to join his efforts to theirs, he
derives the most astonishing acquired power from his natural imbecility.
Furnished with capacities greatly superior to instinct, he at first exercises
them in a manner greatly below it; and formed for infinite improvement, he
proceeds from the smallest beginnings; but can neither begin nor proceed
without the cooperation of his fellow men.

What multiplication of ingenuity, what combination of industry, what
concurrence of different abilities, are requisite not only to carry to
perfection, but even to invent and exercise, with any tolerable degree of
dexterity, those mechanical arts and employments, which exalt the citizen above
the savage, which sweeten and embellish social life, which furnish all that
variety of convenience and pleasure we daily behold and enjoy, and which, from
the most helpless of the animal creation, render man the lord of the world.
Will the forest be felled and molded into furniture, the quarry be dug and
polished into materials for building, the marsh drained and converted into
arable land, the overflowing river confined to its proper channel, the inferior
creatures constrained to succor human weakness by their superior strength, or
their spoils be manufactured into clothing; will the superfluities of one
country supply the deficiencies of another, and navigation unite the most
distant regions by the mutual and permanent ties of beneficial commerce; will
all this, and much more, which I forbear to enumerate, be accomplished without
the united and justly regulated efforts of the human species, and the equal
application of the talents of each to the common interest See Smith's Wealth of
Nations, Book 1.
? Will the secret springs of nature be explored, and the laws, which she
observes through all her different provinces, be investigated unless time and
opportunity are furnished to the acute and the ingenious, by means of a
commodious subsistence provided for them, by the labor and industry of those
whose faculties are less refined and exalted?

Thus it appears that, as each individual is totally insufficient for his own
happiness, so he must depend, in a great measure, on the assistance of others
for its attainment; and that however much any one may contribute to the benefit
of his fellow men, by the excellence and splendor of his abilities, whether
nutural or acquired, he derives from them as much as he can bestow, and
frequently much more than he gives.

If the union of all, then, be necessary for the sustenance, the convenience
and the happiness of each individual, and each individual can, in his turn,
contribute considerably to the common welfare, it follows, as a necessary
consequence of this determination of nature, that order and subordination must
be introduced, by which the different members of the community may have their
proper tasks allotted to them, the talents of each be directed to their proper
objects, injustice and violence be restrained, and as great a sum of common
felicity be produced, as the condition of humanity will permit. Hence, new
channels are cut out for abilities, namely, those which are exercised in
offices of power and authority. As reason, however, loudly dictates the
institution of these for the common good of the human race; so she requires
that they fall to the lot of those who are qualified to discharge them. When
this actually takes place, the order of nature is observed, and all its happy
consequences ensue. When this order is overturned, and the different
departments of society, but especially those of the highest dignity and use,
are committed to such as are incapable of discharging the duties of them, all
the dismal effects of folly, injustice, and confusion, are spread through the
whole of the social frame, and the evils of that inequality, which the
corruption and blindness of mankind have introduced, are severely felt. When
the talents and merits of men are allowed their free course, are permitted a
fair field for their exercise, and are not deprived of those rewards which are
by nature annexed to them, there never can be any ground to complain of
inequality among men. For, however unequal their abilities and opportunities
may be in themselves, the most perfect equality exists in the distribution of
the rewards and advantages annexed to each by the constitution of nature. The
good effects of universal industry, and the proper application of the powers of
every individual, so as to produce the greatest good upon the whole, are then
felt through all the social body. Every person possesses that degree of wealth,
of consideration, and of honor, to which he is entitled by his honest
industry, or by his services to the public. The active and noble minded exert
all their powers for the common welfare, in the most efficacious and
illustrious manner. The indolent and selfish are constrained, by the indigence
and contempt into which they must otherwise fall, to contribute their share to
it. But, when power and riches are employed to frustrate virtue of the respect
which is its due, abilities, of the distinction and influence which they justly
claim, and honest industry, of its natural fruits, a most shocking inequality
takes place, which can only subsist in conjunction with the most odious
tyranny. In proportion as this oppression prevails, which throws the principal
advantages of society into the hands of a few, by no means the most respectable
of its members, and renders it a patrimony and inheritance, of which they may
dispose at pleasure, society is corrupted and miserable. In proportion as that
equality is maintained, which the Creator has established, and which consists,
not in all the members of the social body being placed on a level, but in
mutual dependence and parity of obligation among all, amidst a variety of
distinctions, conditions, and ranks, society is happy, free, and flourishing,
securing to each individual the full enjoyment of all his natural advantages,
ensuring to the public the complete product of the efforts of all well directed
and justly combined; uniting all the members of the social body by the ties of
mutual interest and benevolence, and preserving as much liberty as is
consistent with civil union.

In such a happy state of things, whatever forms of subordination may exist, as
there is a mutual dependence among all the parts of the social body; so there
is not the smallest ground for pride and insolence, on the one hand, or for
degradation and debasement of sentiment, on the other. Are any exalted above
others by the superiority of their mental powers, they are inferior to them in
other qualities, which are absolutely necessary to the support and convenience
of life. If one excels in useful qualities, another is distinguished by
agreeable and shining ones; and, as pleasure without utility, is pernicious, so
utility, without pleasure, becomes languid and insipid. If one is exalted to
power, or illustrious by fame, those who faithfully discharge the duties of an
humble and obscure station, enable him to fulfill the duties of his more
conspicuous one, and contribute to his exaltation, by occupying those parts of
the general system, without which the higher orders could not subsist, and by
paying him that deference and respect to which his merit is entitled. If one is
eminent by his wisdom and sagacity, by his genius and wit, by his knowledge and
erudition; another is no less distinguished by his activity and strength, by
his skill and dexterity, by his industry and labor. If one is venerable by his
elevation of soul, by his generosity, public spirit, and intrepidity; another
is amiable by his gentleness and complaisance, by his patience, modesty, and
meekness; and, if the former qualities are the ornaments, the latter are the
great sweetners, of life, while both, operating in conjunction, supply mutual
defects, and impart mutual strength and imbellishment. If those who fill the
higher stations in a becoming manner, confer the greatest benefits on their
fellow men, they are equally indebted to them for their support. If the latter
stand in need of the judgment and penetration of the former; in order to devise
the best plans of prosecuting the public good, and of maintaining the general
safety; these, again, stand in need of their resolution and diligence to carry
their plans into execution. If some contribute to the instruction and
improvement of their fellow men, by teaching and illustrating the grand
principles of virtue, on which the welfare of society is principally founded,
those who enjoy the benefit of their instructions, turn them to their profit,
by practicing toward them the virtues which they inculcate. If one class of
men maintain good order and peace, and another exercise all the elegant and
useful arts of social life, there are others who secure these enjoyments and
advantages against external invasion, and offer their blood as their
contribution to the common interest.

As, in the human body, therefore, the welfare of the whole depends upon that
of each individual member, and that again is necessarily affected by whatever
affects the whole system; and there is thus a mutual dependence and sympathy
among all the parts; so, in society, every individual having a particular
portion of talents, and, if properly placed, a particular station, conformable
to this, allotted to him, becomes necessary to the welfare of the whole
community, and as he affects, is likewise affected by, its prosperity or
detriment. All are united by mutual dependence and support: Break but one link
of the chain, and the rest are of no use, or, at least, are deprived of much
advantage and comfort, which is enjoyed when the social series is complete.

Nor ought it to be alleged, that many of those wants, which cannot be
supplied but in society, are not the wants of nature, but are merely
adventitious, and generated in that society, the necessity of which they are
produced to prove. We readily grant that, in refined and highly polished states
of civilized life, where luxury has universally diffused its effeminating
influence, many wants and desires are generated, which are not only not
agreeable to nature, but repugnant to human perfection and felicity. Let it
however be observed, that this pernicious tendency to human happiness begins by
loosening those ties which knit men most firmly together. It is selfish, not
social, enjoyments which are most adverse to him an perfection, and man begins
to injure his own happiness, by separating it from the general good. It is
undoubted that all the original powers of human nature are carried to the
highest perfection in society, and droop and languish in solitude. That state,
surely, which is most perfective of every human faculty, is the most natural,
and it is only by the strangest perversion of terms and ideas that the contrary
can be asserted. But the perfection of the social state cannot be attained,
without the mutual dependence of mankind, in that extensive sense in which I
have exhibited it. That dependence is, therefore, founded in the constitution
of nature itself.

CHAPTER IV. FINAL CAUSES of the VARIETY of HUMAN TALENTS.
IT is evidently the intention of Divine Providence in bestowing upon different
persons different powers and abilities, to point them out for different
stations and circumstances, to assign to them different duties and tasks, and
thus to promote most effectually the welfare of the human species. By this
scheme, it is unquestionable, many more advantages are obtained, with regard to
the best interests of mankind, than could have been secured by dispensing the
same portion of ability and virtue, that distinguishes our species, on any
other plan whatever. For every particular talent is thus cultivated with
greater success, when it occupies the constant and habitual attention of its
possessor, than it could have been if he had been overloaded with a
multiplicity of employments, or distracted by the exercise of various
abilities. A greater sum of excellence is thus produced in the species, and, of
consequence, its perfection and happiness is more effectually promoted. By this
plan of distribution, moreover, opportunities are afforded for the exercise of
many virtues, which could not have otherwise existed. Thus, were all equally
wise and learned, no opportunity could be afforded for displaying either a
communicative or a docile disposition. Were all equally rich, or equally
powerful, neither generosity nor gratitude could be excited; and, as there
could be no demand for succor and protection, on the one hand, so, on the
other, there would be no occasion for condescension and sympathy. Finally,
mankind by being rendered absolutely necessary to each other, are constrained
to maintain a mutual intercourse of good offices; and society is thus united by
the firmest and most lasting bonds.

In fact, this diversity of talents and virtues appears to be the chief
circumstance which qualifies men for a social and political existence. Were all
endowed with the same definite portion of powers, of whatever kind, to what
purpose would men associate, since they would derive little more from their
union than they individually possessed? An accumulation of mere strength would
be the only effect of combined powers, in the same manner that six horses can
draw a greater weight, and to a greater distance, than two. This diversity of
abilities, by rendering mankind mutually dependent from their detached
weakness, becomes the strongest motive to association, the most powerful bond
of society, and its greatest excellence and perfection, when it is properly
arranged. Without this, and on the supposition that the same specific qualities
were, as in the brutes, allotted to each individual, a more perfect equality
would indeed be established among all the members of the species; but it would
be an equality useless for every purpose of association, and would serve rather
to separate than to unite them. This circumstance I am inclined to think, has
not hitherto been sufficiently considered, at least not in the light in which I
have represented it. In this light, those pleas of superior wisdom, or of
superior power, which Aristotle*, and some late writers, who appear not very
favorable to the cause of equal freedom, have urged as the foundations of the
dominion of one part of mankind over the rest, are destitute of all force. For,
if these pleas should be admitted, even in their utmost extent, they will
furnish no ground for independent dominion and superiority, unless it can be
proved, at the same time, that the possessors of these qualities are equally
endowed with every other which is necessary or conducive to human felicity.
Should the wisdom and the strength (as is commonly the case) be found
indifferent subjects, it will remain to be decided to which the superiority is
to be assigned, and what particular degree of each of these qualities is
necessary to constitute a rightful claim. Art and ingenuity may likewise
suppose themselves entitled to some portion of dominion, since it is undoubted
that their influence is very considerable in the affairs of life. In this
manner, every thing is thrown into confusion, and no clear notion of right is
any where left. But, by the view we have taken of the subject, (which will, I
flatter myself, be found to be the true one) every man acquires a clear and
definite claim according to the portion he contributes to the general welfare,
a most salutary equality is still left among mankind, and the community is knit
together by ties which cannot be dissolved, without the destruction of general
and particular happiness. In a word, the slightest contemplation of human
nature convinces us that man is designed by his Creator for society, and, as
this was his destination, he is so constituted as to be impelled toward it by
all his propensities and powers, and linked to it by all his wants and
enjoyments, with whatever abilities he may be endowed, or in whatever station
he may be placed.

CHAPTER V. The just Notion of the NATURAL EQUALITY of MEN is placed in
EQUALITY of OBLIGATION. -- The proper TENDENCY of this DOCTRINE.
FROM what has been already said, it will now sufficiently appear, that the
most perfect equality of obligation, of benefits received and returned,
subsists among all the members of society, of whatever denomination or degree,
who faithfully discharge their duties; that that dependence, which the proud
and the powerful are fain to limit to one sphere and station, runs through all
alike, and that independence, at which all aspire, is no where to be found
among men. For although any human being should be possessed of every imaginable
perfection and advantage; yet while he lives in society, and abundantly
satisfies all his social propensities, from which the sublimest pleasures of
human nature are derived, he receives from mankind such an ample portion of
happiness, that he is bound to compensate it by every return, which the utmost
exertion of his abilities can enable him to make. From his elevated superiority
he is thus obliged to descend to the equality of a citizen, and of a man.

In the eye of reason, therefore, and of the Universal Parent, every honest
station of life is equally honorable, since they are all but parts of the
great social body which his wisdom has planned, and his power preserves. In
this view, no human creature is more or less worthy than another, but in as far
as he discharges or neglects the part allotted to him, and augments or
diminishes the sum of general felicity; or as he occupies a place which he is
incapable of filling, deprives others of their just station, snatches, from
them the rewards to which they are entitled, or prevents them from performing
the duties of the station in which they are placed, and of the sphere in which
they move.

The principles above established are widely different from those which pride
and tyranny embrace and inculcate. If men are endowed with superior abilities,
or raised to an exalted station, they will not easily admit that, between them
and their inferiors, the dependence and the obligation are reciprocal. Unless
they are distinguished by peculiar generosity of sentiment, they will consider
it as no very pleasing doctrine that, between the sovereign and the subject,
the magistrate and the people, the great and the mean, the rich and the poor,
the acute and the dull, the learned and the ignorant, there is no difference
but in the possession of different powers, and in the discharge of different
offices peculiar to each capacity, and useful to all; and that, if the first
have a just demand on the second for submission and obedience, for honor and
respect, for convenience and ease, the second have as just a claim on them for
protection and defense, for the administration of justice, and the preservation
of equal liberty, for the supply of their wants and the relief of their
distresses, for instruction and good example. Pride and tyranny would place, on
the one side, all honor and respect, and nothing but disregard and contempt,
on the other; here, all oppression and violence, and there, all patience and
submission; here, all convenience and pleasure, and there, all labor and
indigence; here, (...) have the smallest assistance to be considered as an
eternal obligation, and there, the greatest services to pass for indispensible
duties. With such sentiments, it is no wonder that the mutual dependence and
obligation of men should be rejected as a dangerous and odious doctrine,
equally subversive of public order, and of private right. Those who think and
act in this manner, either making no returns for the benefits they receive from
society, or possessing no capacity to make them, are eager to represent every
notion of mutual obligation and equality among men, as imaginary and
presumptuous, and to oblige the world to look on them as its established lords.
But such opinions can never retain their influence, when knowledge has begun to
make any progress, and mankind to understand their own nature and dignity. The
bodies of men can never be enslaved, when their minds are free; and the most
diligent care of all despots, of whatever rank or denomination, ever has been,
and ever must be, to keep mankind in ignorance. As soon as knowledge diffuses
her light over the dungeon in which they are inchained, the doors are thrown
open, and their chains fall off. In fact, pride and tyranny, by destroying that
mutual obligation, and that just equality which we have now established, sap
the very pillars which support greatness and display splendor. For, if there
is no mutual obligation, no parity of right, then power, on the one hand, and
weakness on the other, are the only bonds of social or civil union. It is easy
to see where, in such circumstances, the greatest power will be found; whether
in the hands of the poor, the mean, the illiterate; or in those of the rich,
the great, the learned, and the ingenious. But if the grand principle of
equality of obligation, and of mutual dependence, is adopted in opinion, as it
is established in nature, if stations and offices are neither unjustly usurped,
nor their duties perfidiously and weakly performed, the obligation to obedience
and submission is as strong on inferiors, as that of justice and disinterested
zeal for the public good is on rulers and magistrates; and the honor obtained
by distinguished abilities is equally due to their possessors, as the fruits of
their honest labor are due to the lower orders of the community. This
principle places the fabric of society on a firm and lasting foundation, and
all the parts of the building, however different in point of splendor and
ornament, are so closely connected, and so necessary to the whole, that none of
them can be removed or defaced, without injuring the beauty or the solidity of
the structure. This equally balances all the parts and members of the social
body, makes pre-eminence itself emerge from common interest, and again
depresses that separate independence which pre-eminence would assume, by
referring it to that collective power from which it is wholly derived. A
constant balance, and reaction of obligation and duty, is thus maintained
through all the departments of society, similar to what we observe in nature.
As exhalations and vapors from the ocean and the lower parts of the earth,
resting on the tops of mountains, form the springs whence are derived the
rivers that water and fertilize the different regions of the globe, and return
at last into the ocean, and thus a constant circulation is maintained; so the
more elevated sphere of society derive their political existence and energy
from the general mass, and, if properly filled, diffuse through the whole
social body a salutary influence, which again serves to maintain their dignity
and splendor. The individuals that occupy these spheres, detached from
society, and considered merely as individuals of the human race, are entitled
to no distinction or superiority, but what arises from corporeal or mental
qualities, which are the distinctions of nature. But, viewed in their
connection with the political body, they claim their pre-eminence and power, on
the same principle by which society is held together, namely, that the general
good must limit the pretensions of individuals.

This is that equality of mankind, which has been so often asserted, but is
seldom well understood -- an equality which the proud and tyrannical disdain,
because it opposes their selfishness or indolence -- an equality which
turbulent and designing men are fain to abuse as an engine for overturning
regularity and government, and for introducing that anarchy in the midst of
which they themselves are to rise. It is an equality which implies
subordination -- an equality of wants, with a diversity of means of supplying
them -- an equality of obligation, with different modes of discharging it. It
is an equality which, by rendering all equally necessary, makes all, who
faithfully discharge their duties, equally honorable in the sight of God; but,
by requiring higher and lower stations, and various distinctions and spheres,
establishes different degrees of respectability and honor among men. It is an
equality which degrades none but the tyrant, the ruffian, the thief, the
voluptuary, and the sluggard; and exalts all, but these, to the ennobling
dignity of constituent members of the grand community of mankind, and of fellow
laborers with God in advancing the felicity of his moral and intellectual
creation.

Not less absurd, than pernicious, therefore, is that levelling notion, which
confounds all distinctions and ranks, annihilates subordination, and destroys
that just equality which is founded in nature, and in human happiness. While
this frantic opinion is directly contrary to the appointment of God in the
establishment of society, and horribly destructive in its consequences, it
commonly tends, like every other extravagant and vicious passion, to frustrate
its own gratification. Taking licentiousness for liberty, it becomes the
greatest promoter of despotism. For, as nothing has brought religion more into
disrepute, than bigotry, fanaticism, and hypocrisy, which have so often assumed
that venerable and sacred name; and as nothing has brought so much disgrace on
philosophy, both in ancient and modern times, as the profligate lives of
pretended philosophers; so licentiousness, appearing under the disguise of
liberty, has a direct tendency to render it either odious or contemptible. The
tyrannical oppressors of their fellow men, and their servile abettors, eagerly
lay hold of the horrid excesses which licentiousness produces, and at which
they secretly rejoice, as infidels delight in the corruptions of religion;
paint them with the deepest colors of an inflamed imagination; and ascribe
them with triumph to those principles of true liberty, to which they are so
repugnant in their origin, and so pernicious in their consequences. The
ignorant multitude, incapable of distinguishing appearances from realities,
hastily admit both the assertion and its inference, and seek refuge from
arnarchy in the chains of despotism. The wise, however and the good, will
equally guard against the wild declamation of the demagogue, and the crafty
insinuations of the tyrant, will hold fast those eternal principles of equity
which God has impressed on their souls, and, if they cannot evince their truth,
or inculcate their practice, on mankind, will deplore the blindness and the
corruption of their species, and pray that the Father of light may at last
unfold a day of knowledge and serenity, when the benignant voice of truth shall
neither be stifled by the mandate of tyranny, nor drowned by the acclamations
of tumult, when the power of oppression shall be extinguished together with the
desire of it; when freedom shall be established on the basis of subordination,
and secured by obedience to law; when men shall be attached to justice by the
permanent blessings of security and peace.

CHAPTER VI. Some Circumstances of EQUALITY not yet considered.
HAVING, in the preceding Chapters, explained the chief foundation on which it
may be asserted that all men are equal, in as far as relates to every social
and civil duty, I shall now briefly point out several other respects in which
the equality of mankind is farther evident.

I. All men are endowed with the same frame of body, and with the same general
constitution of mind. Notwithstanding the diversities, which obtain among
individuals, in point of higher or lower degrees of excellence in any of the
original faculties of our nature, all the species, excepting some uncommon and
monstrous instances, is characterised by the same members and organs of body,
and by the same faculties, propensities, and affections of soul. Does the
richest, the most powerful, the most beautiful, the most ingenious among the
sons of men, feel less the sense of hunger and thirst, of cold and pain, than
those of contrary descriptions; or are these last less distinguished than the
former, by the general construction and organs of the human frame; Do not the
rich and the poor, the obscure and the elevated, come into the world in the
same state of imbecility and wretchedness? Is the infant of opulent parents
possessed of greater vigor, or does he require less the assistance of those on
whose care he is immediately cast, than the infant of the peasant or the
beggar? Can he already discern and provide his food, use his limbs, defend
himself from danger, and, by his hereditary independence, vindicate the true
superiority of his condition? So far is any of these from being the case, that,
if there is any difference, in these respects, between him and the infant of
meaner rank, it is all in favor of the latter. This, from the strong and
healthy constitution of his parents, brings along with him a frame naturally
vigorous and robust, and requiring only the most ordinary care for its
nourishment, its preservation, and its final maturity. The other often inherits
from those who begat him a sickly and slender constitution, which the utmost
attention and assiduity can hardly preserve from extinction in the moment of
birth, and afterward more frequently debilitate than strengthen.

Again, the same natural principles, propensities, and affections, operate on
all mankind with different degrees of force, according to their different
situations. All men, of whatever rank or condition, are strongly actuated by a
principle of self-preservation, by the love of liberty, by the desire of
pleasure, and an aversion to pain, by the love of society, and a dislike of
solitude, by the parental, conjugal, and filial attachments, by a sense of
honor, by resentment of injuries, and by a certain affection for their
country. None are destitute of some perception of beauty, order, and
magnificence in the works of nature or art, and none, but such as are
monstrously corrupted, are insensible to the eternal distinctions of right and
wrong, of virtue and vice, of truth and error, in human judgments and actions.
Even the most stupid, ignorant and perverse of the human species differ, in
this respect, from the brutes, that, as they remember the past, and anticipate
the future, so they are capable of forming and pursuing some plan of life, of
conceiving some system of happiness which they desire to attain, or some image
of misery which they endeavor to avoid. No human being, therefore, enjoys or
suffers like the inferior animals, according to the blind impulses of appetite,
or the unanticipated impressions of sense, but has some previous deliberation
and choice, with regard to the objects of desire and aversion. Every mortal
also feels that, by the birthright of human nature, he is entitled to certain
rights, of which he cannot be deprived without ceasing to be a man, or without
envying the condition of the inferior creatures. These are the common features
of humanity which characterise all the species, and establish among them so
many points of equality.

II. All men are equal in being equally exposed to vicissitudes, and to death.
To attempt any proof of these facts would be nugatory and ridiculous. But the
consequences to be deduced from them, with respect to the light in which the
different orders and descriptions of men ought to view each other, are not so
evident, or at least possess not that influence over the heart, to which they
are in reason entitled. For, if the most exalted of mankind must, as well as
the lowest, submit to the stroke of death, and moulder the prey of worms in the
grave, if this event equally hangs over his head every moment, and, when it
happens, must strip him of every external distinction; can any pretensions be
more absurd than those of pride, which are solely founded on a pre-eminence so
transient and uncertain? For any one, therefore, to value himself on such
transitory distinctions, is as ridiculous, as it would be for a traveller to
imagine himself proprietor of every field through which he passed.

Besides, the stations which discriminate the different orders of society, are
by no means permanently attached to any number of individuals that may now
enjoy them, or to their descendants. They are subject to many vicissitudes, and
have a constant tendency to change. As the parts of material nature are in
perpetual fluctuation, and are sometimes altered by secret and silent decays,
sometimes by violent convulsions, by tempests, hurricanes, inundations,
earthquakes and volcanos, so the various orders of society are exposed to
constant changes, partly by sudden and violent agitations, partly by those
secret, but certain causes, which are continually operating the exaltation or
the depression of men. Foreign wars or domestic commotions, signal calamities
or uncommon prosperity, illustrious virtues or flagrant vices, produce the most
wonderful alterations in human fortunes. Leaving the public transactions of our
own times, which furnish most striking proofs of this fact, what numberless
instances crowd into the mind while it revolves the events of ancient or modern
history!

Fortuna saevo laeta negotio et
Ludum insolentem ludere pertinax
Transmutat incertos honores,
Nunc mihi nunc alii benigna For fortune ever changing dame
Indulges her malicious joy,
And constant plays her haughty game,
Proud of her office to destroy;
Today to me her bounty flows,
And now on others she the bliss bestows.
FRANCIS'S Translation.
.
HOR. Od. l. iii. 29. There is, besides, in every station a certain tendency to
change, and the same causes that produced the elevation of the higher orders of
men, are imperceptibly operating also in favor of others placed in inferior
conditions. As a projectile, when it has reached its highest point of
elevation, begins immediately to descend, and continues its course downwards
with an accelerated velocity; so there appears to be a certain point of
exaltation, beyond which human grandeur cannot proceed, and which, by being the
termination of splendor, becomes the beginning of decline, and of final
precipitation. On the other hand, as the seed of a tree, from the moment it is
dropped into the ground, is continually expanding, and receiving from the earth
new additions to its growth, till it mingle its branches with the clouds, and
cover the soil with its shade; in lik manner, among the lower orders of men,
there are evident principles of increase and amelioration of their condition,
which fail not to operate successfully when they are favored by opportunities.

For, what are the vices which are aptest to infect elevated and and affluent
circumstances; and what the virtues which an humble and hard lot most easily
engenders and cherishes? In the former, we often behold pride, which excites
indignation and hatred, and, consequently, combinations to repress it. We
behold luxury and extravagance, which waste rapidly the most splendid fortunes,
and incapacitate for exertion and activity. We behold carelessness and
inattention, which allow people's affairs to run into disorder, and occasion
irreparable confusion at last. We often behold extortion, oppression, and
flagrant abuse of power, in order to retrieve broken circumstances, which
hasten the ruin they are employed to prevent, and produce indelible disgrace.

In an humble and severe lot, we frequently see humility and modesty, which
never fail to conciliate complacency. We see patience and frugality, of which
the former renders the hardest condition tolerable, and the latter draws ease
from penury. We see industry, and a successful exertion of abilities, which
first make men useful and indispensibly necessary even to their superiors; then
bring them into notice and regard; and, lastly, raise them to trust and
affluence. Thus, while those who are placed in the highest stations, supposing
they have no exertions to make, because they have reached the pinnacle of human
greatness, are verging toward decline and obscurity, those who move in an
inferior sphere, urged by their necessities, or stimulated by their ambition,
are making constant efforts to rise, watching every favorable opportunity of
success, and silently climbing the steep from which the former are descending.
Where are now those illustrious families that occupy such a remarkable place in
ancient history? They are not surely all extinct; their descendants, doubtless,
exist somewhere upon the earth. But they are confounded with the general mass
of mankind, while others have arisen to shine in the sphere from which they
have departed. It is thus that Divine Providence, which has, for the wisest
reasons, established, an inequality of stations and talents among men, has by
allowing their virtues and vices to operate their natural effects of alternate
depression and exaltation, restored the balance, which disappears from the view
of superficial observers.

III. If we justly estimate the advantages and inconveniences of every
condition of life, we shall find that they nearly balance each other, that the
sum of happiness, shared among the human species, is divided in pretty
equitable portions; and that equality of enjoyment is another ground, on which
the different ranks of society, if not the individuals that are placed in them,
are on a level. The grand difference, in this respect, consists in what is
appropriated to no station or fortune, but is equally open to them all --
internal disposition and character; which it is unquestionable, may be
displayed in their greatest excellence, and enjoyed in their highest
perfection, in the lowest, as well as in the most elevated, sphere. As the
different regions of the globe, however removed from the Equator, or the Poles,
enjoy equal measures of light and darkness, though distributed in different
manners; so the different orders of society possess equal portions of felicity,
and are exposed to equal pains, though the modes of enjoyment and suffering be
diversified. If the honors of an exalted station are greater than those of an
humble one, its duties are also more difficult, if its virtues are more
splendid, its temptations are more enticing, and its vices more conspicuous; if
its enjoyments are more refined, its sufferings are more acute, and its
afflictions more durable. Is it supposed that the burden of labor is heavier
than that of indolence, or the pains of indigence greater than those of
sensuality? Consider that health often smiles, on the cheek of poverty, while
disease deforms the face of opulence. Do any imagine that the solicitude of
providing daily subsistence is greater than that which attends the improvement,
or the security, of an extensive estate -- that the real wants of nature afford
more anxiety and care, than the imaginary demands of extravagance -- that the
evils which are really felt, are greater than those which distempered fancy
creates? -- let such consider the discontent, the uneasiness, the dejection,
the wayward humors, and the sullen gloom, that so often haunt the great and
the wealthy, and acknowledge that sleep visits the couch of straw, and flies
from the bed of down.

Do any imagine that it is more difficult to pursue, with constancy and
firmness, the rugged and thorny paths of the humble vale of life, than to
maintain the elevated posts of dignity and honor, in the midst of intrigue, of
competition, of clamor, and of all the uncertainty of favor? Let them reflect
on the solicitudes and the terrors of the public governor, when unsuccessful
issues attend his administration, when the tide of popular approbation begins
to ebb, when his enemies spread discontent through the land, represent him to
the people as the author of their calamities, and rouse them to sacrifice him
as the victim of their fury. The storm often bursts on the palace, when it
passes inoffensively over the cottage!

IV. All men are equal in having some peculiar duty to discharge, some peculiar
advantages for the exhibition of corresponding virtues, some peculiar
temptations to corresponding vices, and in being placed in a course of
probation for a future and final state. If the duties of each station are
properly discharged, its virtues proportionably displayed, and its temptations
surmounted, it is difficult to say whether the greatest praise is due to the
superior or inferior ranks of society. If the duties or the virtues of either
are neglected, or its temptations allowed to prevail, the blame is equal on
both sides, although the punishments are frequently distributed very unequally
under human governments. That all men are at present placed in a preparatory
state for a future existence, both natural and revealed religion concur in
evincing. It is no less evident, from the external principles by which the
divine government is administered, that the characters which men have acquired
in the present period of being, will be the only measures of their future fate,
and that all those distinctions, which are wholly external, will then disappear
forever! If any regard is then paid to the different stations which men have
occupied here below, it will only be in order to determine how far they have
discharged the duties of them, and what degree of merit, or demerit, is to be
assigned to each individual, according to the talents he possessed, and the
opportunities he enjoyed for the practice of every virtue. Here all men are
placed on the most perfect equality, have the same hopes, the same fears, the
same pleas to urge, the same titles to produce, or rather are levelled by the
same incapacity of all merit, but what is derived from the clemency of the
Great Judge, operating through the plan of salvation he has established. With
his eyes turned to this scene, with any adequate impression of this awful
consummation on his heart, (and mad must he be to whose mind such thoughts are
never present!) can any one deny the equality of mankind, nor perceive the
empty titles, and tinsel splendors and idle pageants of this transitory period,
swimming before his sight, and finally disappearing, like the dreams which
occupy his fancy in sleep, but fade and are forgotten when he opens his eyes,
and again enjoys the reality of things.

AN ESSAY, etc.

BOOK II.

AN ESSAY, etc. BOOK II. What are the RIGHTS resulting from the Natural
EQUALITY of MEN?
CHAPTER I. Of the MANNER in which we acquire our NOTION of RIGHTS.
IN the discussion of moral and metaphysical subjects, hardly any thing has
occasioned greater obscurity, and, of consequence, more violent disputes, than
the ambiguity of terms, and the vague and indeterminate ideas annexed to them
by different parties. Of this no word can afford a more striking instance than
the term right, especially when applied to denote a moral capacity to act, to
possess, or to demand, in certain circumstances. Of this the notion will be
found to be as various, as the philosophical or religious systems which men
have adopted, the professions which they have embraced, the stations which they
occupy, or the company they frequent. Although people may agree in some general
and indefinite notions of right, yet, in the peculiar ideas they entertain with
regard to its application to all the particular objects of human action and
pursuit, it will be found that their conceptions are not reducible to any
determinate standard. We are not, on this account, however, to imagine that the
rights of men are indefinable, or that there are not general classes to which
they may be reduced. For, although the private rights of individuals must vary
according to their different circumstances and relations, there are still
certain and permanent principles on which they are founded, and from which they
must be deduced, in order to distinguish them from those powers which fraud
secretly obtains, or violence openly usurps. Unless this were the case, laws
and obligations would be unmeaning words, and power the only arbiters of right
and wrong.

Without entering at present into any abstruse and refined speculations
concerning the foundation of moral obligation, I shall only observe, that we
seem, in general, to denominate that right which has a tendency to promote the
universal happiness of mankind, or that of the individual himself, when it is
not repugnant to the more extensive interest, whether of the whole species, or
of the smaller communities into which the species is divided. To these two
general heads, namely, tendency to general, and tendency to particular
happiness, when properly limited, it will be found that every thing just, and
honorable, and praiseworthy, in human sentiments and conduct is ultimately
referable. Whoever does, or possesses, or demands, what is conducive to the
common good, or to his own interest in consistency with this, that he should
do, or possess, or demand, we say he has a right to do, to possess or to
demand, it.

It is evident, that the only notions we can form to ourselves of happiness
must be derived from those original principles of our nature, by which certain
objects are constituted the means of satisfaction and pleasure, and others the
causes of uneasiness and pain. The former become, on that account, desirable,
and the latter, disagreeable and odious. By implanting these desires and
aversions in the soul of man, the Creator evidently intended that they should
be indulged within the limits he has prescribed to them, and, in order to
discover these limits, has superadded the noble faculty of reason. Accordingly,
there seems annexed to every natural desire and propensity of the heart, a
certain feeling of a right to its indulgence. The original propensities and
desires spring up spontaneously in the soul, and impel it to action. In
children, these are the first stimulants to motion and activity, and, as they
are still undirected by the higher principles of our nature, and by the
improvements of experience, constitute their only notions of right. As the
inferior animals are immediately carried by nature toward those objects which
are adapted to satisfy their instinctive principles; so men, in the first
period of their existence, greedily desire and seize whatever their appetites
or passions point out to them as agreeable, and consider it as an injury to
withhold from them the indulgence; but such is the beautiful order established
in the human constitution, that many of these propensities limit and balance
each other, so that the immoderate indulgence of one prevents that satisfaction
of others, which is also a necessary ingredient of happiness. Different pains
and inconveniences, soon experienced from imbridled propensities, suggest the
necessity of moderation and self-command. The pleasures and the advantages of
society attach men to their species, and point out, at the same time, the
necessity of regulating their conduct in such a manner as to prevent their
desires and pursuits from encroaching on the equally natural desires and
pursuits of others.

Reason, recollecting the past, and anticipating the future, establishes such
rules of action and enjoyment as unite the perfection and happiness of the
individual with the general interest of the species, and convert the harmonious
movements of the whole social body into the most efficacious means of promoting
the happiness of all its members of whatever rank or degree. The moral faculty,
surveying such a beautiful and salutary arrangement, sanctions it with its
approbation, and decrees that every human being is bound to act and to enjoy in
conformity to the principles of this system. The various relations and
circumstances of men being considered and defined, general maxims are formed,
which are denominated the laws of nature. As the human constitution is the work
of the supreme Creator, whatever is, by just inference, deducible from this
constitution, as a rule of conduct to man, is as justly held to be a divine
law, as if the Omnipotent Legislator had proclaimed it with the most audible
voice. From these general laws, various rights are deduced competent to men,
whether as inherent in their common nature, or as belonging to those peculiar
relations in which they are placed, by the necessary arrangements of society.

In this manner, the notions of the different rights of men are acquired.

CHAPTER II. The two grand DIVISIONS of RIGHTS which flow from the Natural
EQUALITY of MANKIND.
FROM the short deduction contained in the preceding chapter, joined to what
has been established in the first book, it is evident that there are certain
natural rights, which cannot be infringed, without overturning the foundations
of human society, and that there are others which belong only to certain
descriptions of men, in consequence of that social order which is necessary for
the general felicity. The former are to be considered as the original
conditions of the social compact; the latter, as the means by which it is to be
executed; and both flow from that idea, of equality of obligation which we have
above illustrated.

In the first place, there are certain principles so strongly interwoven with
the human frame, so intimately blended with its essence, so efficient of all
that can be called human, that the violation of them cannot be regarded in any
other light than in that of a degradation, nay, an entire extinction of the
distinctive attributes of the human character. Of consequence, every man
stipulates, by entering into society with his species, that the enjoyments
grounded on these principles, or, in other words, the rights which attach to
them, as the gifts of God to his rational creatures, shall be maintained to him
inviolate; and reserves to himself the privilege of defending them at all
hazards, whenever it is attempted to wrest them from him. For, as every human
being is a constituent member of the social body, he is, while he discharges
the duties incident to his peculiar capacity, entitled, equally with every
other, to the grand prerogatives of human nature, which civil society is
intended to maintain and improve. He is as necessary, as the most distinguished
of mankind, to the general perfection and felicity, and he contributes to it
that portion which his abilities enable him to furnish. The rights, therefore,
which are indispensibly necessary to the preservation and happiness of each
individual, in whatever rank or situation he may be placed, must equally belong
to all, and can never suffer the smallest diminution from any claims or
prerogatives attached to the distinctions of fortune, of rank, or of talents.
They are the necessary appendages of that equality, which subsists among all
men amidst the diversities which society and civilisation have introduced.

I shall first briefly enumerate and explain the inherent and original rights
of human nature, which equally belong to all men without exception; and,
secondly, those adventitious rights, which belong only to particular
descriptions of men, as characterised, whether by particular talents, or by
particular situations in civil life, but equally to all to whom these
descriptions are applicable.

CHAPTER III. Of the ORIGINAL and INHERENT RIGHTS of HUMAN NATURE.
I. EVERY innocent member of society has a perfect right to life, and to the
integrity of his body. No principle is more deeply engraved in the constitution
of all animals, than that of self-preservation. Every living creature has an
abhorrence of dissolution, and a strong aversion from pain, which is a
stimulant still more powerful than the love of pleasure; because the removal of
evil is the first step toward enjoyment. Nothing excites the detestation of
mankind more than an unprovoked attempt on life, or even violent assault, when
no more is intended than to wound, or to mutilate. Besides, no man can be
useful to society, but in as far as his life is preserved and secured, and
bodily health and vigor are necessary to discharge the most important social
duties. The right to these is sacred and inviolable, and, whenever they are
unjustly assaulted, every man is entitled to defend them even by the slaughter
of the aggressor, when every other means of security is removed. In this right
is evidently included that of the preservation of chastity when attacked.

II. Every man has a perfect right to the full fruits of his own honest
ingenuity and labor. The Creator, by bestowing on every person a certain
portion of corporeal or mental ability, plainly intended that it should be
exercised. To this exercise man are impelled by the stimulants of pleasure, and
of pain. Reason, which enables mankind to anticipate futurity, suggests, from
the recollection of former wants, the necessity of providing for them when they
shall again recur. The natural productions, which may be rendered subservient
to the use of man, necessarily become the property of the first occupier,
because, if they were appropriated to none, they would be useless to all; at
least; such of them as could afford no present use would remain neglected and
unimproved. For no man will bestow labor and time on that from which he is to
receive no profit. Men are strongly affected by a tender solicitude for their
offspring and near connections, to whom they wish to impart a share of their
superfluities during life, and, at death, to transmit their entire possessions.
They are inflamed with a thirst of honor and applause, and eager to obtain
them by the display of useful, of elegant, or of sublime, talents. Besides,
while men mutually supply each other with what they want, for an equivalent,
society is more closely cemented by a constant interchange of the various
products of industry, of art, and of wealth; and, by the different conditions
of men in point of fortune, opportunity is, as above observed, afforded for the
exercise of many virtues, which could not otherwise exist. Man's double
capacity, as an individual, and as a member of society, is thus best preserved,
and his selfish, as well as his social, propensities are gratified. In fact,
the same means that enable him most amply to indulge the former, also qualify
him for satisfying most effectually the latter. By the exercise and cultivation
of all his faculties, and by the improvement of the opportunities he enjoys, he
best promotes his own private happiness, and, in the same manner, he
contributes most to the public good. As the perfection and solidity of all the
parts of a building produce the solidity and perfection of the whole; so, in
human society, the prosperity of all its members in their different relations
and circumstances, produces the sum of general happiness. Notwithstanding
therefore, the Utopian system of a community of goods, which some political
projectors, fixing their eyes on partial views of advantage and inconvenience,
have endeavored to recommend, and some smaller societies have exemplified, it
is undoubted that both public and private happiness require that the right of
property should be sacredly maintained.

This right implies not only that possessions, (...) lawfully acquired, should
remain the inviolate property of their possessors, but also that every honest
and fair mean of acquiring should be equally open to all who are placed in the
same circumstances. It requires that a fair field be granted for the exercise
of every useful and ornamental talent, and that its natural rewards be not with
held from it. Partial and narrow systems of policy, whereby the interest of a
few is only consulted, frequently cramp genius, and restrain industry, to the
great prejudice of the common good.

These, however, with whatever pretexts they may be colored, are justly to be
accounted violations of the sacred right of property, which regards not only
what men already honestly possess, but also, what they may honestly obtain. The
powers of their bodies, and the faculties of their minds, are the only property
which men receive from nature. The exercise of these on the various natural
productions, introduced the adventitious rights to these objects, and
inheritance and contracts transferred them from their original proprietors to
their successors. But the foundation of all property is the common right to the
earth and its productions, which God has granted to mankind, together with the
peculiar appropriation which every one made of some portion of these to
himself, by the use of his mental and corporeal powers. It is absurd,
therefore, that adventitious rights should be sacred, while the primary means
of acquiring these rights may be wantonly circumscribed.

III. All men have an equal right to a fair and honest character, till it has
been proved that they have justly forfeited it. The love of character is deeply
implanted in the human breast, and as it can only be extinguished with the
extinction of integrity; so it is strong in proportion to the strength of
virtuous and elevated sentiments. The loss of reputation, wounding one of the
most lively feelings of the human heart, is one of the greatest calamities in
life. With the loss of character many other evils are unavoidably connected,
which, while they destroy the private happiness of the individual, also
frustrate his public utility. The success of a person in the world, whether in
the improvement of his fortune, or in the exercise of his abilities, depends
greatly on the opinion which is entertained of his integrity. His usefulness to
society depends chiefly on the confidence which his fellow men can repose in
him. When any man's honesty is questioned, his talents, far from being objects
of complacency, are converted into sources of terror, and mankind naturally
combine in order to deprive them of those opportunities of exertion, which seem
to threaten their own safety.

Fame, or distinguished consideration and respect, belong only to eminent
abilities, virtues or stations. But the character of honesty belongs equally to
all who faithfully discharge every social and civil obligation. Those who, in
every situation and circumstance, whether of exaltation or of obscurity, carry
along with them purity of heart and integrity of conduct, meet on the equal
footing of good men, and are equally entitled to all the enjoyment, advantage,
and consideration, which that character justly claims, and cannot fail to
possess, if not clouded by misrepresentation, or stained by calumny. The most
illustrious abilities, or the most exalted station, give not, of themselves, a
better title to a fair and spotless character, than the most moderate parts, or
the most humble circumstances. This right, till it is lost by vicious action,
extends to all conditions and ranks without exception.

CHAPTER IV. THE SAME SUBJECT CONTINUED.
IV. EVERY man has a perfect right to liberty, or to act in whatever manner he
pleases, provided he offers no injury to others, and violates no law enacted by
the public authority of the civil society to which he belongs. As soon as we
form the notion of a rational agent, freedom immediately enters into the
conception, and all happiness and all virtue rest on its foundation. For, as
virtue consists in the proper use of all our faculties, or in that conduct
which is suited to the human nature and condition; so happiness consists in the
possession of those enjoyments, of which nature has rendered us capable, and
which the right use of reason enables us to obtain. But how can he, who is
deprived of the power of regulating his own actions, and of determining and
directing his pursuits, either exert his faculties in such a manner as is best
adapted to their ends, or pursue those enjoyments, with the greatest vigor, to
which he has assigned the highest value; how can he, who is subjected to the
arbitrary will of another, contribute his portion to the common order and
felicity; which results from the combined efforts of all directed to this
glorious and comprehensive end -- from the combined exertions of knowledge,
wisdom, skill, ingenuity, dexterity, art, labor, resolution, and vigor,
shared among all the members of the social body? Suppress the just exertion of
any of these separate portions, just so much is cut off from the general
perfection and happiness, and, while individuals are oppressed, the public
suffers. Subject them to the arbitrary will of one, or of a few, all the light,
and invention, and energy, which result from the free, but well regulated,
efforts of all acting in harmonious concert are gone -- all that variety of
talent, of design, of pursuit, and of operation, which embellish, and improve,
and strengthen, human society, is extinguished -- and the whole social mass,
subordinated to one feeble and impotent will, ever influenced by narrow and
contracted views, or by cloudy passions, either pines in a passive lethargy,
or, if it is called into action by extraordinary stimulants, exhausts its
strength by its efforts, while their produce is wholly drawn off by the
privileged part; similar to those aged trunks on which we behold a few of the
higher branches retaining their sap and verdure, while the tree itself is
rotten, and sinking speedily to dust. Thus the preservation of liberty is
necessary to the attainment of public, as well as of private, felicity; nor can
it ever be supposed that any human being, whose judgment is found, and who has
not been corrupted by long habits of servitude, would either explicitly or
tacitly relinquish what is necessary to every enjoyment of human nature, and
without which, society itself is his greatest curse. In short, liberty and
human nature are inseparable; to destroy the former, is to annihilate the
latter -- is to annihilate every notion of duty, and virtue, and happiness,
beyond what is merely sensual and brutish.

It is no wonder then, that the love of freedom should be strong and vigorous
in the breast, in proportion to the elevation of sentiment, the sense of
honor, the regard for virtue, with which each individual is endowed, and that,
by every generous and feeling soul, slavery should be deemed the greatest of
human evils. Base, indeed, and corrupted, and broken by habits of servile
subjection, must that man be, who can consider himself as the property of his
fellow creature, and feels no indignation at the tyrant who reduces him to this
despicable condition, and who, degrading the rational creation of God, which he
has first debased in his own soul, outrages heaven while he domineers upon
earth. Few of mankind are so degenerate as to have lost all sense of liberty,
and of the native dignity of man. For although they may submit in silence to a
despot, yet they abhor him in their hearts: and, when they can do it with
safety, would lay hold of the first opportunity of shaking off the yoke. The
named of master and slave annihilate all claims of duty* all voluntary
offerings of affection, and exhibit man to man in a state of hostility, where
power is the only right, and terror the only obligation From these
considerations it may be established as a certain truth, that arbitrary
governments, in whatever hands they may be placed, can never effectually secure
the happiness of mankind. With whatever wisdom and goodness a prince may be
endowed, it is impossible, from the narrowness of the human mind, that his
views can extend to every department of civil society; and he will be
unavoidably exposed to imposition from some quarter or other. His
administration, of consequence, can never be marked with that extensive
beneficence, which results from forms of government which are calculated to
collect into one point the wisdom, ingenuity, and vigor, which are diffused
through the whole social body. Besides, as it is the intention of civil society
to promote the happiness of all its members, it is impossible that its ends can
be obtained, when the sense of freedom, which is so essential an ingredient of
human felicity, is either completely extinguished, or deprived of its
enjoyments.
.

Notwithstanding this aversion to servitude, and this love of freedom, so
strongly implanted in the human breast, it must be confessed, that there is in
mankind both an astonishing propensity to tyrannize, and a wonderful facility
in submitting to enormous power. The freedom which men claim to themselves,
they are not willing to grant to others, and the principle which inspires the
wish of independence, produces the exercise of oppression. The love of
pre-eminence and power rejects competition and equality; fond attachment to
one's own opinions stimulates men to prescribe them as rules to others;
possession constantly aims at enlarging its bounds: elevation and authority
have a perpetual tendency upwards, and, in their ascent, depress those parts
through which they move -- the generality of mankind, long accustomed to admire
splendor and wealth, or eminent talents, readily submit to their dominion; and
voluntary homage often begins the subjection, which is at last exacted as a
right. Habits of servitude debilitate the sense of freedom, and the rigours of
oppression are frequently necessary to rouse it. It is thus that the love of
independence stimulates to encroach on the rights of others, and that such
encroachment is so frequently successful.

On this account, all civil liberty is limited by these two conditions,
abstinence from injury to others, and submission to the laws enacted by the
authority of political society. Whoever injures others is not a free man, but a
tyrant, and, if he is free, others are slaves Hence the propriety of the
inscription TIBERIAS on the prisons of Genoa. See Rousseau -- Contrat Social --
and Howard on Prisons.
. As it is the grand design of civil society to secure men from that injustice
and violence which would soon subject all to the most powerful, it is necessary
that the public authority should circumscribe the actions of each individual.
While all are equally subject to this authority, and the collective power of
the whole community is centered in this point, it follows as a necessary
consequence of that equality, which consists in the relation that all equally
bear to the social body, that the actions of each should be directed and
limited by this relation. No member is subject to another, considered as a
member, but every member is subject to the whole in its collective capacity,
and, when this capacity is transferred to any part, or to any number of parts
of the social body, these deriving their pre-eminence and authority from the
whole society, have a right to govern all its members, while in every instance
in which they appear as members themselves, and act, not in a public, but in a
private, capacity, they are equally subject to the common will, expressed by
public laws, with all the other members of the community. In civil society, it
is this alone that maintains that equality which subsists among all its
different members, notwithstanding the diversities which fortune, rank, or
talents, have introduced. For, as these only diversify the manner in which each
is to contribute his portion to the public good; so, when all are equally
subject to common laws, all are levelled by this common subjection, and every
one is restricted to that line of conduct, which is necessary for the
preservation and welfare of the political system. Unlimited freedom is
unattainable not only in civil society, but in every species of association
whatever, because the actions of every individual of the society are limited by
the actions of all the rest, and by the general design and conditions of
association itself. The grand design of every social union is to obtain the
cooperation of all its members for the common good. It is hence incumbent on
every one of them, so to regulate his conduct, as to contribute to the end
proposed. Nay, perfect liberty, if, by that term, we understand the
unrestrained indulgence of every desire and propensity, is as inconsistent with
the rational constitution of each individual, as it is with the principles of
civil union. For there is an order established by nature among all our desires
and passions; and reason is given both to discover and to maintain it. As the
violator of civil order ceases to be a citizen, and becomes a public enemy, so
he who violates the order of the moral and rational nature ceases to be a man,
degenerates into a brute, and is the destroyer of his own happiness. As a man,
he only is free, who, delivered from the yoke of passion, freely follows the
dictates of his nobler faculties, and indulges every natural propensity in
consistency with mental order. In like manner, civil society is free, when
delivered from arbitrary power, in whatever shape it may exist, all its members
are placed under the empire and dominion of laws, enforcing the grand
principles of political union, and equally binding on the legislators
themselves as on the people. If any are raised above law, or enjoy privileges
and prerogatives, which have no relation to the public good, and are
burdensome to the community, in proportion as they are advantageous, to the
possessors of them, the principles of civil union are opposed, political
equality is subverted, and oppression, more or less grievous according to the
degree of such inequality, is introduced.

As the limitation of law is inseparable from the liberty to which every
citizen has an incontestible right; so this right implies that, in every
instance, neither contrary to law, nor injurious to others, every innocent
person, who has reached the years of maturity, and has not voluntarily
subjected his actions to the control of others, should enjoy the power of
acting as he pleases. Persons of sound judgment, and of generous sentiments,
will, in the use of this freedom, consult not only their own pleasure and
advantage, but also, the felicity of all to whom their influence may extend.
Their pursuits will be characterized by a dignity and beneficence, which will
point them out as the ornaments of society, and the objects of general
admiration and gratitude. Such will find their most delightful enjoyments in
their own highest improvement, and in their most extensive utility to others.
Men of inferior capacity, or of a meaner turn of mind, will chiefly devote
themselves to sensual pleasures, and to selfish pursuits; and thus withold
from the public a great deal of benefit which they might otherwise contribute.
On this account, however, they are not to be deprived of their liberty, as long
as they remain within the bounds of that innocence which, however deficient in
a moral and religious light, is sufficient for the maintenance of public peace,
and of civil and political order. They are not amenable to human, but to divine
justice; and must be called to account, not in the present, but in a future,
world. Argument, persuasion, and example, may be employed; and every good man
will use them to the utmost of his power, in order to diffuse virtue and
happiness among his species. But to use violence for this purpose, is both to
disappoint the end, and to exhibit an instance of that folly which is
reprobated in others. Men may be constrained to be harmless and just, but not
to be virtuous and happy!

In the right of liberty is included the free use of private judgment in every
thing relative to the regulation of conduct, and especially to religion, as
well as the free communication of sentiment within the bounds above stated. It
is vain to think of enjoying liberty of action, if the opinions by which action
is to be directed are not also free. In fact, the right of private judgment
cannot be alienated or wrested from any human being by any power on earth. The
mind of man, constituted free by its Creator, will ever remain so, in spite of
every endeavor to enslave it. Ignorance may darken, prejudice restrain, or
corruption pervert, its powers; still the opinions which it really embraces,
are such, as appear to it the best, according to the light which it enjoys. But
to conceive any mortal adopting an opinion, for which he perceives no ground,
is the most glaring contradiction -- is to suppose him admitting and rejecting
at once the same propositions. With regard to religion, in particular, the
right of private judgment, and the freedom of conscience, are to be maintained,
as necessarily connected with the equality of all men, above established. For,
although religion ever has been, and ever must be, the strongest bond of
society, yet the strength of this bond depends on the united evidence of the
religious opinions which are adopted, and on the sincerity with which they are
embraced. It is only when religious opinions are both true in themselves, and
ingenuously professed, that they can exert any auspicious influence on the
actions of men.

Now, to perceive truth is the operation of the understanding. To embrace it
with becoming zeal, and to obey its dictates with undeviating constancy, is the
operation of the heart. The understanding may be enlightened by reason, the
heart may be affected by persuasion, and, in order that either may be produced,
perfect freedom is necessary. To convince or to persuade by violence, is the
greatest of absurdities, is a manifest impossibility; and when there is neither
conviction nor persuasion, where can religion subsist? Place it where it can
only reside -- in the understanding and the heart; it eludes all constraint.
Remove it from this habitation, it loses its salutary influence.

As religion, therefore, must, from its very nature, be free, no man can have
any right to dictate to the conscience of another. All men are equally entitled
to serve God, and all are equally bound to serve him in spirit and in truth. No
man can serve him with another's spirit; and no man can discern truth with
another's understanding. To subject religion to constraint, is, of consequence,
to destroy its essence, and to annihilate its salutary tendency. Enthusiasm and
bigotry, whose character it is to erect their own opinions as standards for all
the world, and to violate the rights of conscience, never fail, if they are
successful, to give birth to hypocrisy, as the heir to their usurped dominion.
Hence it is easy to account for the small influence which religious opinions
have on the conduct of their professors, while pure and undefiled religion
ought naturally to produce the most salutary effects not only in rendering men
wise unto (...), but in forming them to the practice of every (...) and civil
virtue. Religion is either believed to be something very different from what it
is, to consist merely in forms and ceremonies, in which case it has either no
effect at all on moral conduct, or a very pernicious one -- or men are
constrained to profess what they do not believe; by which their hearts are
corrupted, and their actions and sentiments are at constant variance. The glory
of God is thus promoted by defacing his image on the human soul, and by
transforming his reasonable service into childish pageantry and insignificant
pomp. Besides, if any set of men assume to themselves the power of prescribing
to others in religious matters, others may, with as good a title, do the same
whenever they obtain the power. True religion may thus be suppressed and
destroyed, without its professors having any plea for its defense which is not
equally competent to the most absurd superstition. While men thus domineer in
religious matters, according as they possess the power, all religious
improvement is precluded; the wisest and most pious of men may be obliged to
submit, in obsequious silence, to the most ignorant and impious; and
superstition, in all its hideous forms, is put on the same footing, and enjoys
the same advantages for its maintenance and propagation, with divine revelation
itself. This right of freedom of judgment carries along with it that of free
communication of sentiment, within the limitations above laid down. As there is
in man a strong natural propensity to communicate his feelings and sentiments
to others, so the faculty by which he is chiefly enabled to communicate them is
one of the most powerful bonds of society, and one of the chief instruments of
its improvement. By suppressing this freedom of communication, the natural
equality of men is destroyed. Those from whom it is wrested are degraded from
the condition of members of the community, and, being stripped of this
privilege, may be prevented from contributing that portion to the public good
which it might enable them to afford. How much the improvement and felicity of
mankind depend on the free diffusion of knowledge, is too evident to require
any proof. Nor is it less certain that ignorance and prejudice, ever delighting
in darkness, because their Laponian eyes are too weak to endure the light, are
extremely desirous of excluding it from whatever quarter it may shine. They
endeavor, therefore, violently to extinguish the lamp of reason, and to
silence the voice of truth. If they succeed, all the evils of barbarism are
perpetuated; if the precious right of free communication of opinion is
maintained, private as well as public happiness is the result.

But, if men embrace and profess opinions with regard to religion, morals, or
politics, the most grossly false and erroneous, are such systems to be
tolerated, and not rather proscribed as effrontive to God, and pernicious to
men? The first inquiry must be, whether such opinions tend to overturn the
principles of civil society, and to disturb its order and peace. If any are so
foolish, or so wicked, as to entertain sentiments subversive of those
fundamental truths on which the mutual obligations of men, and the practice of
all virtue, and civil society itself, are founded; such may be justly
constrained to abstain from the propagation of them, or to remove from the
society of which they are members; or, if they obstinately refuse to comply
with a requisition which self-preservation dictates, may be justly punished in
order to deter others from imitating their example. But as such fundamental
truths are few, and universally acknowledged, so they ought not to be
unnecessarily multiplied in order to suppress the exercise of private judgment,
or connected with other points in which diversity of opinion, far from being
pernicious, conduces to enlarge the bounds of human knowledge, by pouring in
new light from various inquiry and intelligence. Besides, as no sincere
professor of any system of religion or morals really believes it impious and
pernicious, but, on the contrary, entertains the highest opinion of its
excellence, such ought rather to be convinced by argument, than destroyed by
persecution, and, while he abstains from actions injurious to others, it is
unjust to treat him with severity and violence. It is undeniable that bigotry,
and superstition, and enthusiasm, whether religious or civil, have often
produced the most direful calamities in the world. But it is to be observed,
that this has entirely proceeded from the principle against which I am now
contending, namely, the right of any man to dictate to the conscience of
another. For if, on the most important of all subjects, men supported their
cause by argument and persuasion only, superstition, bigotry, and error, would
soon be driven from the field, and true religion and pure morality obtain a
decisive victory in every part of the world. But while different sects and
parties mutually represent each other as the enemies of God and man, and
connect, with every speculative opinion, the most important consequences to the
temporal, as well as the eternal, interests of mankind, rancour, and hatred,
and malevolence, soon burst into the flames of the most virulent animosity,
persecution appears in her most hideous forms, and the cause of God, and the
interests of mankind, are assumed as pretexts for indulging the most serocious
passions of the human breast! If, on the one hand, therefore, professions
evidently subversive of the fundamental principles of society have no claim to
toleration; so, on the other, the greatest caution is to be used not to class,
under this head, opinions which have no connection with the interests of civil
society, but regard only theological or philosophical speculation. I mean not
that erroneous opinions are always free from blame, because it is an undoubted
fact that error is not always the result of weakness of judgment, but more
frequently still of pride, of obstinacy, or of negligence. But as no man is
master of another's conscience, so no man can claim to himself the judgment of
this point with regard to another, but in as far as opinion is manifested by
action. To his own master he stands or falls, who art thou that judge
another?

The right of liberty, which I have illustrated at considerable length, because
it is not generally understood, includes, first, personal liberty; secondly,
liberty of action; thirdly, liberty of conscience; fourthly, liberty of
communication of sentiment.

To all these modifications of liberty within the limitations above stated,
every member of society has an equal right; nor can any discrimination of rank,
of fortune, or of abilities, entitle any one to any privilege in these
respects, which is not equally due to every human being who is possessed of a
sound mind, has reached the years of maturity, and has not voluntarily
subjected himself to the control of another.

CHAPTER V. That it is the INTEREST of GOVERNMENTS to preserve INVIOLATE the
RIGHT of LIBERTY, as above explained.
IT is a false notion to suppose that governments are most firmly established
when the liberty of the subject, or of the citizen, is destroyed. It will, in
fact, be found, on mature consideration, that it is as much the interest of
governors, as of the governed, that this grand right be religiously observed in
all its branches. It is true that no government can subsist in the midst of
licentiousness. But, licentiousness and despotism are only different names for
the same thing. Licentiousness is a contempt of law, and right, and justice --
is the dominion of passion, and caprice, and violence. And, what other
definition can be given of despotism? In the midst of that anarchy which
licentiousness introduces, those who have acquired the greatest influence over
the multitude lead them at their pleasure, and usurp the most despotic power
over the rest of the community. This power continues as long as the favor that
produced it, and then gives place to another dominion, equally capricious and
cruel. Society is thus agitated with unceasing convulsions, till it sink under
absolute power, or a happy combination of circumstances establish the equal and
impartial government of law, and of authority founded on its basis.

Despotism produces similar effects, though in an inverted course. It levels
all to exalt one, or a few; and, acknowledging no title but force, tramples
under foot every claim of right which is opposed to its dominion. But, as all
power, when separated from justice, must fall before superior power contending
with it; and as slaves, whenever they have the courage to resist, and the
sagacity to combine against, their master, must inevitably crush him; so, every
despot shares all the terror he inspires, and joins trembling with his
commands. Knowing himself the enemy of mankind, he can place no confidence in
their affection* and make no appeal to their justice. When his power begins to
totter, the (...) that restrains them is removed, and the interest that engaged
them in his favor passes over to the quarter where it can be better promoted.
While flattery is endeavoring to lull him to security, treachery is
machinating his destruction; and he is often overwhelmed before he has time to
prepare either for resistance or for escape It is wonderful how nearly
despotism, and pure democracy, approach each other. They are both the
government of the mob, at least on many occasions. In pure democracy this is
sufficiently evident. Despotism can only he maintained by the army; and, when
the army is numerous, it can depose the sovereign at pleasure. The Roman
emperors were successively elected, dethroned* and butchered, by the Pretorian
guards. The Turkish Sultan is at the mercy of the Janissaries -- See Gibbon's
History of the Decline and Fall of the Roman Empire, vol. i. chap. viii. p.
309. 8vo edition.
.

To this situation, dismal even in its greatest pre-eminence and splendour, all
abuses of power insensibly lead. Smaller violations of right are easily borne,
because they are not generally or severely felt. This success tempts to greater
oppression, while the lust, and the advantages of power, stimulate to extend
its limits, and to ensure its duration. Oppression, at last, becomes necessary
to its own support, and the fear of redress suggests the accumulation of
injustice. Abuses grow intolerable; violent resistance appears the only means
of relief; and the moment which advances oppression to its completion, becomes
the period of its overthrow. For, when the bodies of men are neither
effeminated by luxury, nor enfeebled by climate, nor their minds brutified by
ignorance, they cannot fail, sooner or later, to shake off the yoke of tyranny,
and to break her scepter in pieces. As in such circumstances, however, their
lethargic passiveness is dispelled by extraordinary stimulants, and the furious
passions of resentment and revenge are violently roused, the most atrocious
acts of cruelty are exercised toward their oppressors, or those whom they
conceive to have been joined with them in the odious combination against their
species; and the vindication of violated right is thus often accompanied with
the most flagrant injustice. In this manner human society, which should be the
safeguard of human happiness, so frequently exhibits alternate scenes of
rigorous despotism, and of furious anarchy; of injustice in the maintenance of
usurped power, and of violence in the subversion of it; of gross abuses in the
administration of governments, and of lamentable calamities in the reformation
of them. The only stable government is that which is sounded on equal liberty,
limited by law, administered with moderation, supported by the combined
interests of the whole political body, and displayed in the glorious effects of
internal order and external security -- of improving industry, civilization,
and virtue.

CHAPTER VI. Of RIGHTS peculiar to certain STATIONS and ABILITIES.
BESIDES those rights, equally belonging to all, which have been above
illustrated, there are others, which, although they are founded on the
distinctions of rank and fortune, or on the general subordination which civil
society requires, are nevertheless deducible from that notion of equality
established in the first part of this Essay.

I. Those who are placed in the higher stations, and invested with offices of
government and command, as they owe the discharge of these important functions
to the public, are entitled, from this very consideration, to the obedience of
those who are subjected to their authority. As members of the social body they
are bound to promote its interest by the most effectual means in their power.
The peculiar direction of this utility is determined by their offices
themselves. This line cannot be pursued without the legal obedience and
submission of the rest of the community. Hence that equality of obligation
which binds the former to the just and zealous discharge of their functions,
binds also the latter to a ready and cheerful subjection to their authority.

II. When the necessary balance of the political body, or that encouragement of
merit which tends so powerfully to promote its highest interest, have raised a
certain class of men to certain honors and privileges; these are, by that
equality itself which subsists among all in their common relation to the public
good, entitled to the advantages and respect which are annexed to their
station, which the public welware requires should be maintained in becoming
splendor and dignity.

When, by political constitutions, peculiar marks of distinction are assigned
to eminent talents and virtues, those who display them have a just claim on the
public to the distinction which is their reward, and on every member of the
community for the regard which that distinction requires. Views of public
interest suggest such distinctions as incentives to merit, in order to extract
from all the members of the social body the greatest possible sum of exertion,
and to diffuse its influence over the whole. It is just, therefore, that those
who contribute in the most distinguished degree to the common welfare should
enjoy a proportionable share of honor and advantage, adapted to the peculiar
manner in which their utility has been displayed. To deprive them of this would
be to destroy their relation to the community, and that equality which consists
in the common obligation of all to contribute to its benefit, and to receive a
proportionate return.

III. When riches, acquired by honest industry, or enjoyed in virtue of those
laws which perpetuate property, whatever be its value and extent, enable their
possessors to relieve want, to sooth affliction, to diffuse around them a
spirit of improvement, to encourage industry, and to make their superfluity
circulate through the general mass of the community, they confer on the opulent
a just title to consideration and influence, in proportion to the superior
benefits they bestow on all who are placed within the sphere of their action.
It would be as unjust to deny them this consideration, as it would be to
withold from a day-laborer his hire, or from a good man the esteem which is
his due.

IV. The same considerations give to the inferior ranks of society, and to the
community in general, an equal right to demand that all delegated power and
authority, as all civil power undoubtedly is, be employed solely for the ends
for which it was conferred, and that all honorary distinctions be neither
bestowed on the undeserving, nor perverted to the purposes of pride, of
insolence, and of oppression. The community at large has a right to demand that
the legislative power be constantly directed by views of general utility, and
not by partial systems which injure and distress the whole by throwing all
advantages on one side of the political body; that the executive power never
exceed its legal bounds, and, by an impartial administration of justice,
maintain all in the equal enjoyment of their rights; that rank be supported
with dignity, and tempered with the affability and condescension becoming every
citizen; that wealth be not abused to introduce and foment profligacy of
manners, or to abet injustice; and that talents be not perverted to disseminate
opinions and principles subversive of virtue, and pernicious to society.

V. All men have an equal, though imperfect, right to those offices of humanity
which, while they cost the performers of them little trouble, are the
sweeteners of social intercourse; and to the compassion and relief, of others,
proportioned to their condition and circumstances, when they are overpowered by
distress and calamity. This right, it is true, cannot be so defined as to admit
of any individual's claiming a determined portion of the good offices of any of
his fellow men; nay, the fulfillment of its obligations must from its very
nature, be left to every one's judgment and feelings. But, as men associate for
their mutual benefit and comfort, as humanity is interwoven with the human
constitution, and as compassion with distress is one of the strongest feelings
of our nature, it is undoubted that, to every situation which is calculated to
call these feelings into action, a certain right is annexed to expect and
require them, and a general obligation lies on all to advance the happiness of
their fellow men by every mean in their power. As the ordinary offices of
civility must vary according to the different conditions and ranks of men; so
the compassion which is due to their distress, and the relief which it prompts
to afford, must be greatly affected by the same considerations. For, as a loss
which would ruin a man in narrow circumstances, would not at all affect a
person of affluent fortune; so, on the other hand, there are situations which
would appear to one in obscure station highly eligible, which would overwhelm
those of a more elevated condition with inexpressible dejection and anguish.
What would seem to one person a singular benefit, would, to another in
different circumstances, either be no benefit at all, or interpreted into a
cruel affront. All then have an equal right to offices of humanity and
kindness; but the degree and manner of these offices must be determined by the
circumstances and rank of the persons toward whom they are exercised. This
proportion is required by equality itself.

CHAPTER VII. GENERAL INFERENCES from the WHOLE of this BOOK.
I HAVE now endeavored to enumerate, and establish, as concisely as possible,
the different rights that flow from the natural equality of men, considered in
its proper light. Some of these are so essentially necessary to human
happiness, that they cannot be violated without overturning the first
principles of society. They are the fundamental articles of the social compact,
for the maintenance of which mankind, if not explicitly, yet tacitly, and by
the institution of civil society itself, have stipulated to relinquish some
portion of their natural liberty, and to commit, to a certain number of its
members, the concentrated power of the community for the benefit of all. Civil
society annihilates not the natural rights of men, but fences, secures, and
improves them. By circumscribing them by the limits which the political union
requires, it condenses, as it were, their essence, and gives it greater
strength and solidity.

Others of these rights flow, indeed, from the same principles; but, as they
cannot be so precisely ascertained as to establish an exact and definite claim
in every particular case, they may admit of a less rigorous observance, without
wounding the vitals of human association. If those of the former class
constitute the foundations of the social fabric, those of the latter indicate
the means of its consolidation and highest improvement. When all these rights
are maintained, according to their respective importance, as far as the human
condition will admit, society is flourishing and happy, under whatever form of
political administration it may be placed. There are, it is true, certain forms
of government, which, as their constitution itself threatens even the most
important of them with destruction, are, therefore, essentially bad. But, there
are others which, maintaining the grand prerogatives of human nature, have a
direct tendency to advance social happiness, though in different degrees. Under
such governments mankind may always consider it as a fortunate circumstance to
be placed. That government is the best in which all the inherent rights of
human nature are inviolably secured, legal authority is maintained, and
restricted to its objects, the power of the state is employed to promote the
general happiness; and inequality itself tends to preserve equality of law, and
parity of obligation, among all the members of the community.

AN ESSAY, etc.

BOOK III.

AN ESSAY, etc. BOOK III. What are the DUTIES resulting from the EQUALITY of
MANKIND?
CHAPTER I. PRELIMINARY OBSERVATIONS.
THE division of my subject, on which I now enter, opens a field comprehending
every social and civil duty, because every duty of this class supposes
reciprocal obligations founded on the terms of equality, on which men
associate. Nay, as in order to discharge the duties we owe to our fellow men,
and fellow citizens, it is necessary to restrain our selfish passions within
just bounds; and, as the Divine authority sanctions every human obligation, and
religion is the firmest bond of society, the duties of piety, as well as those
of self-command and moderation, might be inculcated on the same principles.
Hence, a complete treatise of practical morality might be produced. But, as
this Essay has already swelled beyond the bounds which I at first proposed to
it, I shall confine myself to the consideration of these duties which directly
flow from the principles of equality already established, and from the rights
which they confirm. The duties now to be illustrated will, therefore,
correspond to the two grand divisions of rights explained in the preceding Book
Chapter II. III. IV. VI.
.

CHAPTER II. All MEN, equally bound to RESPECT the PRIMITIVE RIGHTS of HUMAN
NATURE.
AS the inherent rights of human nature are the fundamental articles of the
social compact, for the maintenance and preservation of which civil society is
constituted, every violation of these is not only an atrocious injury to the
individual who suffers it, but is a direct attack on society itself. No
pre-eminence or prerogative whatever can give a title to deprive an innocent
member of the community of those rights, without which his existence is either
precarious or miserable; and every attempt to infringe them is, on the part of
the aggressor, a renunciation of his social advantages, because these
advantages are inseparably connected with the observance of the rights now
under consideration. It is to substitute force in the place of right, and, of
consequence, to acknowledge that superior power is entitled to make him submit
in his turn. This principle, carried in every instance as far as it will go,
tears asunder every social and civil tie, tramples under foot every dictate of
justice, and introduces a state of unceasing hostility and violence.

Indeed, so essential are some of those rights to the very existence of
society, that they are fenced and secured by the strongest civil sanctions.
Life and property cannot be directly attacked without exposing the aggressor to
the severest penalties. But in what a variety of indirect ways may injuries of
this nature be offered, without any risk of human punishment? Life is destroyed
not only by the dagger, or by the bowl, but by withholding the means of its
support. Life is not so desirable on its own account, as on account of the
enjoyments which it furnishes. Property is withdrawn from its lawful possessor,
not only by robbery, or by theft, but also by every species of unfair commerce.
Every deceitful practice, therefore, whereby advantage is taken, under whatever
color, of the ignorance or of the necessity of men, to deprive them of their
property without an equivalent, is a violation of the right of property, and
every oppressive act which cuts off or diminishes the means of a comfortable
subsistence, is an attack upon life itself. To reduce men to the dismal
necessity of dragging out existence in misery and contempt, to make them curse
the day of their birth, and sigh for that of their dissolution, to render the
tenderest of nature's ties an aggravation of distress; what is this but to
spare life in order to perpetuate torment? And to this dismal condition how
great a portion of the human race is reduced -- a condition more abject than
that of the brute creation, which nature has provided with the necessary supply
of their wants, and given them desires for nothing more! Shall any rights
whatever, derived wholly from political institutions, founded, for the most
part, in barbarous ignorance and tyrannic oppression, be opposed to those clear
and permanent rights which the Creator has conferred on all men equally, by the
gift of life itself, and by the natural faculties of providing for its supply!
Shall he who cultivates the soil be deprived of an adequate share of the fruits
which his industry produces, and pine in want, while the labor of his hands
feeds luxurious idleness? Shall the right of property be established only for
those who contribute nothing to the general stock, but consume and waste what
the industry of others has provided, and shall that property which nature has
bestowed on her children, in the faculties of their minds and of their bodies,
be considered as a mark of degradation, and a badge of slavery?

How contrary are such sentiments, and the conduct they produce, to that just
notion of equality above established, which represents every human being as a
constituent member of the social body, and in his peculiar station, equally
necessary, with every other, to the common welfare; which exhibits man to man
as children of one common parent, as brethren connected no less by one common
interest, than by one common origin, and discriminated, by different
distinctions of occupation and place, merely that the general good may be more
effectually advanced. For, although such views of society may, by some whose
policy is but half wisdom, be classed among the theories of moralists, or the
visions of divines, they are the only representations that can stand the test
of reason, or bear the eye of inquiry.

Equally incumbent, on all men, is the duty to respect the right which every
innocent individual has to character and liberty. But, how little is this duty
regarded? Civil laws cannot do so much for the security of the rights, to which
it relates, as for those of life and property; because it is not so easy to
define, in every case, their exact extent, and much more is, on that account,
left to the discretion and virtue of individuals. That degree of character
which is assaulted by open and direct calumny, may, indeed, be always exactly
ascertained, and every infraction of it become the subject of legal
animadversion. This is also the case with regard to personal liberty. But, in
how many instances may a character be ruined, without its being in the power of
the injured person to find any legal redress; and how much may one's just
liberty be circumscribed and infringed without any ground of legal complaint?
The daily conduct of mankind toward one another, in these respects, is the
strongest evidence both of the necessity of a civil government, and of its
insufficiency for the security of human happiness. It manifests the malevolent
propensities by which mankind are often actuated, and, of consequence, the
necessity of coercive power; and, since these evil propensities burst out on so
many quarters, notwithstanding the authority of laws, this evinces the great
utility of philosophical and religious instruction, which applies to the
understanding and the heart, and, by purifying the source of action, renders
conduct more conformable to human nature, and more conducive to human felicity.

Do unto others as you wish them to do unto you, is a maxim that answers every
case in which we can have any intercourse with our fellow men. It is founded on
the equality of human nature, amidst all the diversities of condition and
circumstances. It takes, as the rule of conduct, the feelings of every
individual, supposing his condition were exchanged with that of the person
toward whom he acts. It could never, therefore, be a just standard, if the
same duties were not equally incumbent on all in the same circumstances. Now,
with respect to reputation and liberty, which every human being so warmly
cherishes, and so eagerly pursues, this rule ought to have peculiar efficacy.
Yet, in these respects, it is most shamefully and frequently violated. It is
astonishing to observe the general aversion to reproach and censure, and the
general propensity to reproach and censure others; the high opinion which most
people entertain of themselves, and wish the world to entertain of them, and
their inclination to think ill of others, and to undervalue and diminish their
good qualities. It is natural to suppose, that, as the experience of distress
renders men prone to compassion Haud ignara mali miseris succurrere disco.
, so the love of character, and aversion from disgrace, which operate so
powerfully in every human breast, would render men delicate in inflicting, on
others, those pains which are so grievous to themselves, and in depriving them
of those satisfactions which they account so delicious. But these sensations
act, under the impulse of selfishness in a contrary manner. Men think that the
reputation of others stands in the way of their own, and that their excellence
cannot be exhibited unless those interposing eminences be thrown down, and the
public eye wholly fixed on themselves* While (...) are thus employed in
levelling each other, no real pre-eminence remains to any, and nothing is
displayed, to every judicious eye, but one wide extent of malignity and
corruption. Every one wishes his opinion of his neighbor to be believed; and
his wish is granted. But the fulfillment of this wish equally wounds the
characters of all. The blemishes he discovers in another, or imputes to him,
are acknowledged; those which another lays to his charge meet with the same
credit. Thus every one by endeavoring to exalt himself at another's expense,
only points out the means of his own depression, and, by setting the example,
provokes the rest of mankind to use them. Such however, is the fascination of
self-love, that the generality of men suppose themselves very little obnoxious
to censure; and, while they are indulging the most vicious passions of the
human heart, envy or revenge, they flatter themselves with the vain notion that
their turpitude is unobserved. As often as I reflect on the prevalence of
detraction, of obloquy, and of slander, I find it difficult to determine
whether it proceeds more from weakness or from malignity; whether it is more an
object of contempt or of detestation. What can be more malignant than to
delight in the destruction of one of the dearest of human enjoyments? What more
foolish and ridiculous than for a person to assault others, and to suppose that
the attack will not be returned?

The same absurdity and injustice is conspicuous in the mutual conduct of men
with regard to liberty. How few are ready on every occasion to grant to others
the same freedom which they take to themselves! Such is the spirit of
domination universally diffused, that what Pope limits only to one sex, is
equally applicable to both -- the love of pleasure, and the love of power.
Indeed, the one necessarily draws after it the other. The love of pleasure
produces the desire of the means of obtaining it, and of extending influence
and power as far as possible. For why are men tyrants, but because they wish
freely to indulge their inclinations, unrestrained by justice, unlimited by
moderation? While self-love, therefore, is the predominant principle of the
human heart, tyranny will not be confined to thrones and dominions, to
principalities and powers, but spread through every sphere and condition of
life. It is not so much the inclination as the power that is wanting; and the
temper, which is overbearing and unjust in private life, would be a Nero if
seated on a throne. Let us only consider the fond attachment which most men
have to their own opinions and mode of life, their eager desire to impose them
on others, their impatience of contradiction, their propensity to square the
actions of other men by their own rule, their lust of homage and precedence,
their eagerness to rise above others, and to indulge their ambition in every
little manner which their sphere presents to them, their resentment of affronts
and injuries, apparent as well as real, their self-conceit and aversion from
amendment -- we behold the seeds of tyranny lurking in almost every human
breast; and shall cease to wonder that, when great power is possessed, it
should be so frequently abused. How seldom is the freedom of speech and action
enjoyed even in the freest states of civil society! Let any one recollect what
passes before his eyes every day; let him consider how often he is obliged to
regulate his words, not so much by the internal sentiments of his own heart, as
by the opinions and prejudices of those with whom he associates, and his
actions, not so much by the immutable rules of duty, as by the fictitious
standards of the world, and he will confess that none can enjoy the true
freedom of a man, but he who has the fortitude to sacrifice to this exalted
privilege, his most valuable temporal interests, and his chief social
pleasures. Prejudices born of ignorance, or of pride, are nourished by
education, strengthened by interest, or supported by that self-love which is
humbled by the exposition of them. Custom and fashion have established
arbitrary rules and forms, which, however contrary to reason, it is considered
as unlawful, at least, as highly ridiculous, to infringe. The man who presumes
to think, to speak, or to act, differently from the generality, even in matters
of singular importance to the common good, is looked upon as an unsocial savage
being, who, separating himself from his species, is entitled to no share of
their regard and affection. It is well, if he is not exposed to the severest
effects of resentment and hatred.

Wealth and external dignity, although they cannot of themselves introduce one
ray of light into the understanding, or implant one virtue in the heart, assume
the privilege of dictating in matters of taste, of politics, of science, of
morality, and of religion, and of bearing down all who subscribe not to their
arbitrary decrees. The respect due to rank, and the influence which fortune
justly claims, every man of sense and of integrity will readily acknowledge and
bestow. But that a man's judgment should be measured by his title, or his
merit, weighed by his gold; that fortune and rank should not only possess their
rightful precedence, but also usurp the honor which is equally due to genius
and learning, to wisdom and virtue; that a sensible and honest man should not
dare to express his sentiments, because they are repugnant to those of another
decorated with the badges of distinction, or possessed of a large estate; is
such a perversion of nature, such an infraction of liberty, as mankind could
never be brought to endure but by those habits of servility which luxurious
effeminacy has introduced. It will be answered, that this freedom, every man
who chooses to use it, may enjoy. But at what expense? at the expense of
incurring the keenest displeasure of the exalted person whom he disobliges, and
of feeling his power employed to ruin him and his nearest connections.

But, why complain of the exorbitant and tyrannical pretensions of rank and
fortune, when genius, which has already secured fame, frequently exhibits the
same dogmatical and oppressive spirit? How often have those, whose literary
character has already attracted the greatest consideration and respect, usurped
a dictatorial power both in conversation and writing, contradicted without
argument, keenly resented the smallest difference of opinion, even when their
sentiments were manifestly absurd, shared out their approbation by the measure
of flattery they received, and inflicted censure, not according to personal or
literary merit, but according to the prejudice or disgust by which they were
influenced. In reading the lives of some distinguished geniuses, I have found
my indignation as much fired by their pride and insolence, and by the tame
submission with which they were borne, as by the oppression of civil despots,
and the servility of the rest of mankind. In fact, genius and reputation give
as little title to domineer as fortune and rank. For, whatever mental
superiority a man may display, he is inferior to others in many qualities,
equally necessary to the common good as the talents he possesses. Brilliant
powers are frequently counter-balanced by contemptible weaknesses, and great
virtues by shameful vices. In proof of this assertion, I might instance the
lives of some of the greatest literary characters.

As individuals are actuated by a tyrannical spirit, so nations claim to
themselves the prerogative of reducing to slavery others inhabiting a different
climate, or distinguished by a different color of countenance. Aristotle, in
that very book where he establishes the grand principles of a free government
Politic. lib. 1 mo.
, is not ashamed to assert, that the Greeks were destined, by nature, to rule
the other nations of the earth; and founds this right on their superior genius
and civilization. Had that philosopher foreseen the present state of his own
country, and that of those nations whom he considered as appointed to continue
barbarians to the end of time, he would have acknowledged the futility of his
argument. But the nations of Europe, who have exchanged barbarism for
refinement, have adopted the same principle, and suppose that superiority of
art and policy carries along with it the right of oppressing those whose state
is still rude and uncultivated. The principles established in this Essay
sufficiently evince that no pre-eminence of sagacity, wisdom, ingenuity, or
strength can entitle any human being, or any society of men, to deprive others
of the inherent and unalienable rights of human nature.

But, since principles directly contrary to these influence the generality of
mankind, the present state of society is perfectly conformable. As few men have
the courage to sacrifice their interest, their pleasure, or their fame, to
their regard for truth and justice, the great concern is, to speak and act, not
as reason and virtue dictate, but as interested views, in conforming to the
opinions, humors, and manners of others, may require. For, how is the favor
of the greater part of men to be caught, but by adulation and servile respect?
and what so efficacious for incurring their displeasure, as that manly and
generous conduct and conversation, which indicate less solicitude to secure
favor than to enjoy self-esteem, a greater love of mankind than respect for
individuals? Hence, most men have an opinion for every company they frequent,
and change their sentiments oftener than their dress. The art of pleasing,
reduced into system, and practiced by every one who assumes the character of
politeness, has given the same shape and coloring to the manners of all; and
those prominent features, which characterise and distinguish, are rubbed off by
the file of civility and fashion. Politeness is making constant demands --
propriety imposing new laws -- men are always the slaves of custom, and seldom
follow the bent of their own genius and temper. Society is a species of stage,
on which the actors appear in their turns, and play their parts. The real
character remains behind the scenes. The great contest is, who shall act with
the most powerful effect on the spectators, and produce the completest
illusion. He is, therefore, most applauded, and bears the highest price, who
appears least himself, and personates most successfully the assumed character.
Should an uncivilized son of nature be introduced into our European circles, he
would, at first, conclude that humanity and benevolence had there fixed their
abode. But, as soon as he was informed that all this was but scenery and stage
effect, he would be uncertain whether most to admire the skill with which the
representation was conducted, or to detest the duplicity which could so
completely assume the appearance of qualities, of which the reality was wanting
See Rousseau, Discourse fur les Sciences et les Arts, p. 12.
.

By these different infractions of the original rights of man above mentioned,
society is reduced to its present unhappy condition, in which the Hobbesian
state of nature appears in the midst of civilisation and refinement. The
interests, the pursuits, and the passions of men constantly acting in
opposition, inspire, in the midst of unceasing competition, unremitting caution
and solicitous jealousy. The specious mask of civility and complaisance is
often assumed to conceal the most hostile designs. The language of nature is
unknown, and the warm expressions of affection either fall to the ground
destitute of all meaning, or are perverted to convey an ironical conception of
contempt and dislike Fugere pudor, verumque fidesque;
In quorum subiere locum, fraudesque, dolique,
Insidiacque, et vis, et amor sceleratus habendi.
OVID. Metam. l. 1. v. 120.
.

How different would be the face of society, if the just equality of mankind
were duly considered, and the inherent rights of human nature respected as they
ought! But this consummation, devoutly to be wished, will only take place, when
men shall believe and practice Christianity, and do the will of their heavenly
Father on earth, as it is done in Heaven.

CHAPTER III. The DUTIES of those who are placed in the INFERIOR STATIONS of
LIFE, or endowed with INFERIOR CAPACITIES and POWERS.
IF the distribution of abilities illustrated in the first Book Chap. 2.
, and a diversity of ranks in society, be best calculated to promote the
happiness, not only of the social body in general, but of every individual that
composes it, how iniquitous and unreasonable is it to oppose this plan, and to
complain of its arrangement, because it coincides not with the suggestions of
ambition and caprice? When men despise those talents and that rank in life
which divine providence has allotted them, and aspire at others for which they
were never designed by nature, they aim at subverting that equality of
obligation which assigns particular duties to particular abilities and
situations, and requires them to be answered by others of a different order.
For, if every man is at liberty to desert the post assigned him, and to invade
another's province, how shall the inferior stations be filled, which are not
less necessary to the general welfare than the more eminent? If, in the
circumstances in which any given number of men can be placed, there be
unavoidable hardships and inconveniences, why should these rather be supported
by such as have never been accustomed to them, and are therefore totally
unqualified for their duties, than by those whom education, and habit, have
best adapted to such situations? Yet, unless these inconveniences be endured,
these difficulties encountered by some, the stations in question must be
deserted, and a void left in the order of society equally pernicious to public
and to private interest.

Still, men complain of their situation, and eagerly aspire to others more
exalted! But, is there any real foundation for this discontent, for this
restless desire of change? Is it, as people pretend, that their present
condition is more painful, more adverse to virtue, more inauspicious to the
development and exercise of their powers, than those which they so fondly
desire? Or is it that men are better acquainted with the difficulties and
temptations of their present situation, than with those of any other, have
fondly magnified their own abilities, and ignorantly placed all excellence in
the discharge of the duties of superior stations? If we examine the case with
impartial attention, we shall find no reason to hesitate in determining the
question.

Men readily grant the complaints of those who are placed above them to be ill
founded, and ascribe their dissatisfaction to their folly. They hastily presume
that, if they were fixed in their situation, they would easily surmount its
difficulties, resist its temptations, and fully discharge its duties. Their
inferiors pronounce the same judgment with regard to them and their
circumstances, and, if they envy, they are envied in their turn. A convincing
proof this, that, in every condition, there are advantages as well as
difficulties; that, though none is exempted from inconvenience, none is
absolutely insupportable; and that discontent with a present station, and
impatient desire of a higher, proceed from mistaken notions of both.

I beg that it may be considered that I am, at present, speaking only of the
different ranks and situations of human society, as they are diversified for
the common happiness of mankind; and not of those singular conditions of
distress and misery, which fall to the lot of individuals. In these, patience
and fortitude may be recommended as duties and as consolations; but contentment
can hardly be required.

But, in surveying the different stations of life, although men grant that
there are difficulties and hardships in all of them, they still believe that
these diminish in proportion to the degree of elevation; and fall, with the
greatest weight, on those who occupy the lowest places. They fondly imagine,
that, if they could ascend to a considerable height, they should there find
some agreeable spot, where, unmolested and composed, they might survey the
steep which they had climbed, and enjoy the delightful prospect opened around
them. But, they reflect not on the difficulty of the ascent, on the giddiness
of the situation, or, if they should chance to slip, on the severity of the
fall. The pressure of corporeal wants, the burden of daily labor, and the
humiliation of contempt, constitute the primary pains of a poor and ignoble
condition. It is further deprived of the enjoyments which result from the
cultivation of reason, and of the other nobler faculties of the soul, and is
constrained to toil amidst the darkness of ignorance. If those, to whose share
it falls, feel for the miseries of others, they are destitute of the means of
relieving them, and must suffer the pangs of compassion, without the divine
satisfaction of beneficence. Pressed with their own distresses, feeling for
those in similar, or in still more afflicting circumstances, and observing the
superfluity of the sons of fortune, they are apt to envy their prosperity, to
murmur at the Divine dispensations, and to practice violence or fraud, in order
to obtain what their situation has denied them.

They consider not, however, that the pleasures of life depend not so much on
the externals of condition as on the dispositions of the possessor; that what
seems calculated to satisfy, and to limit, desire, serves often to inflame and
extend it; that the enjoyments which are in men's power are not those which
they really taste; and that to wish and to pursue is the unceasing employment
of man upon ^arth. He who ascends a mountain, and beholds the view unfolding
around him, is fired with greater curiosity to reach the summit, whence the
utmost bounds of the prospect can be descried. In like manner, no moderare
exaltation in the scale of society can satisfy men, whose ambition is kindled,
and whose activity engaged. Every step becomes only a help to rise higher; and
desire continues importunate even after its objects are all exhausted.
Alexander is the true emblem of ambition, which is restless while any thing
remains above it; and, when it has reached the summit of its desires, weeps
that the progress is finished!

Ye who envy fortune and rank, not so much for the sensual pleasures, or the
indulgences of vanity and pride which they afford, as for the sublime and
elegant enjoyments which they seem to offer, in the improvement of knowledge,
the cultivation of genius, and the exercise of the noblest virtues of human
nature -- say if the engagements of public business, the contentions of
ambition, the interruptions of company, the endless exactions of ceremony, the
allurements of pleasure, can afford much leisure for the improvement of the
mind, and the cultivation of elegant studies; or that, when the reputation of
wisdom, of learning, or of wit, is acquired without judgment, application, or
parts, and flattery amply supplies every deficiency, there is any incitement to
such noble and pleasing pursuits? In a low and indigent station, are there
greater temptations to discontent and envy, than when success inflames
ambition, and ambition spurns every inferior degree? Are the motives stronger
to cultivate honesty, and to observe the dictates of justice, when the severity
of punishment hangs over the head of the offender, than when concealment is
promised by interest, inquiry removed by intrigue, or impunity secured by
power? Is there less sympathy with the distress, or less sincere joy on the
prosperity of others, when men are reminded of their sufferings by the
experience of their own, and depend for subsistence on their bounty and good
opinion -- than when luxury removes even the aspect of want, and opulence
secures independence? Is there less piety and devotion, less reverence for God,
when men literally implore him for daily bread, and depend for its supply on
the continuance of health, and on the fertility of the seasons, than when,
having much goods laid up for many years, they eat, drink, and are merry Luke,
xii. 19.
, and the immoderate draughts of plenty render them forgetful of the bountiful
hand that bestows it?

Supposing, after all, that the advantages of cultivation and virtue are fully
improved by those in the higher stations, in what do these exceed the same
advantages of the inferior, so as to render them objects of envy, or causes of
discontent? -- Has not every member of Christian society sufficient opportunity
of acquiring the sublimest and most useful branches of human knowledge -- the
origin, the duties, and the destination of man -- the relation in which he
stands to his Creator and to his fellow men -- the divine nature and
perfections -- the gracious plan of salvation the Deity has published to guilty
mortals, by the mouth of his own Son, and by his inspired Apostles -- the
glorious prospects opened to his penitent and amended children beyond the
grave, and the gracious means he has instituted for their perfection and
felicity? Do not the heavens, the ocean and the earth, unfold their magnificent
and numberless beauties to the eye of the peasant, as well as to that of the
monarch; nay, do they not disclose to the former many ravishing scenes, which
the latter can seldom behold? Are not many even of the most striking and
admirable displays of art, which riches have produced, and continue to support,
equally enjoyed by the meanest passenger, as by the proprietor himself? It is a
gross mistake to suppose, that to provide for one's family by assiduous and
honest labor, is less meritorious than to supply the poor out of an opulent
fortune; that patience is less commendable than generosity, resignation than
munificence, meekness, than moderation, contentment than condescension; that
society is less benefited by being furnished with the necessaries of life, than
by being adorned with the refinements of art, and by the productions of genius;
that the public welfare is less promoted by dutiful submission to lawful
authority, by an in offensive, regular, and serviceable conduct, than by the
enaction of salutary laws, by the judgment and punishment of offenders, and by
a zealous and disinterested discharge of public trust. God accepts no less the
artless devotion of the grateful, though uninstructed, heart, than the copious
and swelling praises of the enlightened understanding. The coarser and brawny
muscles are as necessary to the perfection of the body, as the organs of the
most delicate texture.

It is thus evident, that real happiness and virtue are not limited to any
station, but are equally open to all. If there is any exception to this
conclusion, it must be in favor of the middling spheres of life -- in which
neither power and opulence tempt to oppression and dissoluteness of manners,
nor poverty and ignorance lead to fraud and violence; in which neither pride
hardens the soul, nor servility debases it; in which the best enjoyments of
life are offered, and its greatest enticements to corruption excluded.

From all that has been said on this subject, it clearly appears, that as it is
the duty, it is equally the interest of all who are placed in the inferior
ranks of life, to discharge, with diligence and assiduity the humble offices of
their station, to cultivate contentment with their lot, and to suppress the
emotions of envy toward those who are more exalted.

It may indeed be objected, that the desire of rising is one of the most
powerful motives to the honest and active discharge of every social duty, that
one great point of equality among men consists in the opportunity which all
ought to enjoy of exercising their useful or elegant abilities, and that, if
every one is to rest satisfied with the condition in which his birth or his
circumstances have placed him, exertion must be discouraged, and the general
welfare be deprived of the benefit which results from honest and generous
ambition. We have, moreover, shown above, that frequent exchange of ranks and
conditions seems to compose a part of the divine administration of human
affairs. If those, therefore, whose situation is at present ignoble and
depressed, are to consider it as a duty never to aspire higher, one of the
strongest checks is removed from pride, namely, the uncertainty of its
elevation, while dejection and poverty are deprived of one of their most
powerful consolations -- the expectation of more prosperous days.

It ought, however, to be considered, that the doctrine above inculcated tends
not to preclude laudable ambition and industry, but only to suppress, on the
one hand, discontent, avarice, and envy, and to remove every pretext for
indulging these passions under the specious colorings of more elevated and
generous motives; and, on the other, to comfort and strengthen those who are
apt to view their inferior stations with an undiscerning eye, which beholds
affliction where happiness may be found, and degradation where true dignity may
reside. Nay, if our limits admitted of it, it might easily be shown, that the
faithful discharge of the duties of an inferior station, and that contented and
cheerful mind which partakes of its greatest enjoyments, are the surest and
safest means of advancement. I shall satisfy myself, however, with pointing
out, in the following Chapter, some important cautions with respect to the
improvement of our condition.

CHAPTER IV. CAUTIONS to be observed in the PURSUIT of a HIGHER and more
FLOURISHING CONDITION.
I. THE desire of improving one's circumstances ought never to lead to
encroachment on the rights of others, whether natural or acquired. By the
violation of the former, the fundamental principles of society are subverted;
and, by that of the latter, the order necessary to its existence, is destroyed.
Whoever, therefore, pretends to maintain any of the natural rights of man, by
overturning that subordination and just order, which is the soul and the life
of society, defeats the very purpose which he has in view, and exhibits either
egregious folly or egregious wickedness. In either case, he becomes a dangerous
enemy to the public interest, who is to be restrained and punished, to prevent
him both from injuring others by his practice, and corrupting them by his
example. Such, however, is the intemperance of human passions, even those of
the most generous kind, when they are strongly excited, that the ardor of
liberty, and indignation at oppression, often hurry men to pursue a conduct
directly repugnant to the principles of equity and beneficence which they
profess -- to oppress others when they are contending for freedom; to be most
iniquitous in defense of justice; and, with a view to promote the welfare of
society, to overturn its foundations. Let the times in which we live, declare,
in many instances, the truth of this assertion.

II. The duties of the station, which people already occupy, ought to limit
their endeavors after advancement. The cooperation of every individual for the
public good, must first display its energy in the sphere in which he moves, and
be thence transmitted to the other parts of the social body. By neglecting the
duties of his present station, a person withholds the portion he is appointed
to contribute to the general welfare, and, by encroaching on the province of
others, may clog their exertion and frustrate their utility. To arrive at a
more agreeable or more honorable station, the faithful discharge of the duties
of a present one ought always to be the first means employed. When these are
fulfilled, every fair and honest exertion is not only lawful, but even highly
laudable, as the greatest activity of the parts then advances more effectually
the prosperity of the whole. By embracing the opportunities which occur, and by
exercising the talents with which men are endowed, they manifest their
gratitude to Providence, and they improve its gift to the greatest advantage.

III. The duties of any station to which men aspire, and their own ability to
discharge them, ought to be considered before they attempt to obtain it. For,
to occupy a station for which one has no capacity, or with the duties of which
he is totally unacquainted, is both to expose his own folly, and to injure
society, by betraying a trust which is committed to him. Hence, it is of the
utmost consequence to acquire a complete knowledge of our own talents and
qualities, which the generality of mankind are so apt to magnify, both to their
own disgrace, and to the detriment of others. Inability to discharge the duties
of any station, resulting whether from narrowness of understanding, from
unhappiness of temper, or from infirmity of body, should be deemed an express
declaration of the Divine will against the acquirement of it, and, of
consequence, a boundary not to be passed.

IV. Men's exertions to improve their condition should be influenced by the
consideration of the enlargement, or the contraction, of their utility. From
the light in which every man appears as a member of human society, to whose
benefit he is bound to contribute in the most ample manner possible, it is
plain that it can never be lawful for any one to change his present situation
for another, in which his utility must be impaired. This is to prefer private
to public interest, to pervert the quality of member, to demand more than is
compensated, and to lose all that dignity and real enjoyment which result from
the most extensive beneficence.

If, in the station desired, men may be equally useful, as in that which they
occupy, private interest may be allowed its full force. If, together with
advancement, opportunities of utility increase, every private and public
consideration happily unites in stimulating to the pursuit of it, and every
generous heart will wish and applaud the success.

Thus, the rights of others, the duties of a present station, the talents
requisite for a higher, and the more extensive utility, are the limits within
which men ought to confine their exertions for the improvement of their
circumstances. Thus, justice, diligence, ability, and public spirit, should be
the constant attendants in the path of advancement, and the chief forwarders of
the progress.

But, how little are these considerations regarded! When interest or pleasure
are constituted the sole springs of action, every duty that has no tendency to
advance their ends is neglected, and offices, instituted for the benefit of
mankind, are shamefully perverted to their prejudice. When the project is
formed of rising to preferment without regard to merit, birth, interest, or
party-attachments, are the only valid grounds of pretension. To the most
selfish considerations the most important interests of society are sacrificed.
Before children can discover either inclination or capacity, offices are
designed for them, and kept constantly in view; nor were this to be censured,
if proper care were taken to give them a suitable education, and their
destination changed, when their temper and talents were perceived to be
incompatible with it. But these things are seldom much considered. Whatever be
the genius or improvements of the person in question, he must move in the
particular sphere which has been chosen for him. The public welfare is treated
as a chimera, which it is the business of a man well skilled in the ways of the
world to use as a color to varnish the most interested designs, but which none,
but an enthusiastic or vulgar mind, can think of adopting as a real object of
pursuit. When the public welfare, however, is obstructed, private happiness
cannot long be enjoyed. For, as one chief cause of the disorder and corruption,
which so often lay waste civil society, is the little attention which is shown
to adapt men's condition to their abilities and tempers; so the misery of
individuals frequently springs from the same source. Men moving in a sphere for
which they were never designed by nature, soon grow disgusted with their lot,
and, finding the duties of their station irksome and oppressive, either neglect
them altogether, to their own irretrievable disgrace, or continue to discharge
them, in such a manner as is equally painful to themselves, and detrimental to
others. Thus, Divine Providence takes vengeance on mankind for infringing its
appointments, by allowing them to be bewildered in their errors, and the
victims of their own infatuation.

CHAPTER V. The DUTIES of those placed in the HIGHER RANKS of LIFE, and endowed
with DISTINGUISHED ABILITIES.
IT is certainly no easy matter for a person not to consider himself as greatly
superior to the rest of his species, when every one of those who surround him
pretends that his honor and dignity, his pleasure and service, are the only
objects which occupy himself, and ought to occupy every other; when every one
applauds, with servile adulation, his most insignificant sayings, and most
ridiculous actions, and adores him as the source of wisdom, and the center of
power. When a person has so many occasions of beholding his fellow men in a
contemptible light, it must require angelic moderation to abstain from treating
them accordingly; to neglect those advantages which his circumstances and their
servility put into his hands for gratifying his own passions and caprice, at
the expense of their most valuable interests.

When, therefore, I consider this state of things, far from being surprised at
the pride, and impatience of contradiction, which often characterise the higher
ranks of life, or any species of distinction and eminence, I am more disposed
to admire the condescension and humanity which they so frequently exhibit. For,
these vices, though more observable in the higher spheres, because they are
displayed in a more conspicuous point of view, are by no means confined to
these, but pervade every rank, every situation and profession of life. Hardly
any seize so low, any circumstances so circumscribed, as not to afford
scope for self-sufficiency and ostentation. Who will not seem great, if he is
as highly exalted as his ideas of greatness reach, and compares himself only
with his inferiors: if he estimates his own knowledge by another's ignorance,
his own wisdom by another's folly, his own power by another's impotence, his
own wealth by another's poverty, his own virtue by another's depravity? On what
other foundation, than on this partial mode of comparison, are built the pride
and arrogance of even the most exalted of mankind? But, if we abandon this
magical glass, which transforms the cottage into a palace, and the infant into
a man, and contemplate objects in the true light of nature, we shall find, that
the great dispute only is, who shall be esteemed the least ignorant, the least
foolish, the least weak, the least indigent, the least corrupted; that pride
and insolence, which subvert the parity of obligation subsisting among all,
should be banished from every human breast, and that those who move in the
highest and most illustrious spheres, having the best opportunities of
enlarging their minds, ought to regulate their opinions by their own knowledge,
not by the ignorance of their inferiors, to acquire real dignity, by divesting
themselves of passions, which are born of ignorance, and nourished by delusion;
and, by moderation, equity, affability, and condescension, to conciliate
benevolence, ensure respect, make the rays of virtue eclipse the splendors of
fortune, and establish a throne which she neither can erect nor overturn.

Would men, divesting themselves, for a moment, of the prejudices which birth,
education, or luxurious habits, have fixed in their minds, survey, with the eye
of reason, the construction of society, the principles on which it rests, and
the ends which it pursues, and then contemplate the nature and perfections of
the universal parent -- what a different light would be thrown on their
condition and circumstances, and how different a prospect be disclosed to them,
from that which they have been accustomed to behold through the mists of
ignorance, or the twilight of self-deception! Would it be possible for them to
suppose that the Deity lavishes his bounty on individuals capriciously elected,
merely for their pleasure and profit, and not with any view to the universal
benefit; that he has bestowed on one authority and power, in order that he may
encroach on the liberties, invade the properties, and overawe the consciences
of his brethren, and not that he may protect innocence, restrain oppression,
and maintain inviolate the interests of justice, of religion, and of truth;
that, on another, he has conferred wealth and superfluity, only to furnish him
with the means of indulging in luxury, or of wallowing in intemperance, and not
to open to him a treasure for the supply of indigence, the relief of distress,
the encouragement of industry, and the reward of merit; that he has adorned a
third with sagacity and genius, that he may find an agreeable amusement for
himself, gratify his passion for admiration, mislead the judgments, and corrupt
the hearts of his fellow men, not that he may enlighten, and improve, and lead
them to happiness, through the path of virtue? Can any man of a sound mind, who
allows himself a moment's reflection, impute such a scheme to infinite goodness
and wisdom, or consider it in any other light than in that of the most
atrocious rebellion against the Divine government? -- A person, raised to a
high office, placed in exalted rank, or adorned by distinguished abilities, is
established on an eminence that his views of the general good may be more
extensive and correct, and that he may apply, to its advancement, the powers he
possesses with the greater advantage and success. As on an eminence therefore,
the eye is diverted from proximate to remoter objects; so, in an exalted
station, the narrow concerns of self should be less regarded than the grand and
magnificent range which the public welfare presents to the mind.

Nor does this view of things diminish, in the smallest degree, the advantages
resulting from eminent rank, fortune, or abilities; on the contrary, it greatly
enhances them. For, if we exclude the opportunities which these afford of
widely diffusing beneficent influence, and, with the imitation of the divine
perfections, of sharing in some measure the divine felicity; what else remains
but the meanest gratifications of human nature, but an augmentation of misery
with an augmentation of vice, and a total degradation of all that distinguishes
man from the brutes? If the rich enjoy not the pleasure of munificence, of
clothing the naked, of feeding the hungry, of supporting the falling family, of
rearing the orphan, of sweetening the cup of shame-faced uncomplaining poverty,
without ruffling the veil that hides her from public view; if the powerful are
denied the satisfaction of protecting innocence, of restraining oppression, of
drawing modest merit from its retirement, and, by the just reward of honor, of
rendering it conspicuous and exemplary, of defending substantial virtue against
faction and intrigue, and of promoting the public good by noble and useful
undertakings; if the wise, the ingenious, and the learned, are denied the
enjoyment of comforting affliction, of instructing ignorance, of directing
perplexity, of correcting prejudice, and of reclaiming vice; what remains but
the more copious indulgence of sensuality -- but the gratifications of the most
ruthless passions that convulse the breast which they occupy -- and the
indulgence of the most contemptible, though frequently the most pernicious,
vanity, displayed by attempting to subvert the grand principles of morality,
and to poison the divine consolations of religion? Is there in these any thing
which a man of judgment would value, desire, and pursue, as primary objects?
Were such a person informed, on his first setting out in life, that such would
be all the enjoyment he should reap from the fondest objects of his pursuit --
would he consider the purchase as a sufficient recompense for his toil and
anxiety, his frequent mortifications, and assiduous study? I assert not that
the man, who devotes wholly to selfish purposes the advantages he possesses,
has no pleasure, no enjoyment. The sensualist, the miser, the vain, the
ambitious, the proud, have each their particular gratifications. But these
gratifications are unmanly and base, and fall infinitely short of the delights
of a faithful discharge of duty, and of the sublime enjoyments of beneficence.
Nor can it be alleged that enjoyments being matters of taste, it is impossible
to ascertain their comparative values; because every man will be partial to his
own, and, while the generous extol the joys of beneficence, the selfish will
ever find their happiness in those which center in themselves. For, in order to
compare the different sources of felicity, it is necessary to taste them; and
this can only be done by men of an exalted and capacious soul, who can relish
in the highest degree both the pleasures which attach to self, and those which
result from benevolence. By feeding the hungry, does any man spoil his own
appetite? By relieving the distressed, does he diminish his own relish of easy
circumstances? By maintaining peace and order in society, does he contract his
imagination, or diminish its powers? By comforting the afflicted, by
instructing the ignorant, or by advising the perplexed, does he render his
conception less clear, his judgment less solid, or his memory less tenacious?
On the other hand, it is certain that a contracted selfishness weakens and
extinguishes the benevolent affections, and excludes the pleasures they confer.
The man who seeks in wealth only the means of indulging his sensuality, and
promoting his convenience, who aspire at power, only to gratify his pride and
ambition, or who pursues knowledge only for his own amusement or vanity -- such
a man can have but little relish of the joys that spring up and flourish in a
social and benevolent heart Hence Aristotle very justly asserts, in several
places of his Ethical writings, that the good man is the only proper judge of
happiness.
.

What is it that, in all the actions, and all the characters, whether presented
by daily observation, recorded in history, or figured by imagination, excites
admiration, and engages esteem? Is it merely extent of capacity, superiority of
station, or largeness of fortune; or is it liberality of sentiment, and
kindness of heart* Place the faithful friend, the affectionate parent, the
indulgent master, the generous patron, the incorrupt magistrate, the genuine
patriot, in the most disadvantageous circumstances; let him be sunk in poverty,
overwhelmed with disgrace, tortured with pain, he will still preserve his
dignity, and command our respect! Nay, the less he enjoys of the advantages,
and the more he suffers of the evils, of life, the more glorious will he
appear! But no favorable concurrence of circumstances, neither the gifts of
nature, the accomplishments of arts, nor the splendors of fortune will ever be
able to bribe our esteem in behalf, I say, not of the sensualist, the villain,
or the tyrant, but even of the unsocial solitary mortal, who, though he offers
no positive injury to his species, yet withholds his endeavors for their
happiness! Nay, if such a supposition be not impious, remove goodness from all
the other divine attributes, and suppose the Supreme Being unconcerned for the
happiness of his creation, and say whether his nature would then appear as
amiable, adorable, and transcendently excellent, as it now appears to every
reflecting mind. And if goodness constitute the supreme glory of the divine
nature, that which gives to every other perfection its true beauty and light,
and completes the real character of Deity -- is it possible that any human
excellence or advantage should compensate for the absence of this primary
virtue?

If the true excellence of human nature, thus, consists in benignity, if this
necessarily attracts the regard of the selfish themselves, how comes it to pass
that so many, who have the noblest opportunities of gratifying a disposition so
beatific and glorious, can be reconciled to a contrary conduct -- to
sensuality, oppression, and perversion of the finest abilities? The weakness,
the blindness, and the corruption of human nature, are the only satisfactory
causes that can be alleged.

But, even in actions the most apparently selfish and grovelling, a discerning
eye will be able to discover some faint gleams of generosity which illumine and
recommend them. Sensuality is clothed with the specious coloring of sociality,
of pleasure communicated as well as received, of jocularity and mirth, of
freedom, and contempt of servile restraint. Oppression and tyranny are
presented to the mind under the appearance of dignity, of a high sense of
honor, a noble ambition, attachment to party, nay, even of a love of justice.
Without these fictitious images, the sensualist would appear to himself as the
most contemptible, and the oppressor as the most odious, of mankind.

But, why multiply arguments in a matter where a moment's feeling is more
decisive than an age of reasoning? Had you ever a faithful friend, into whose
bosom you poured all the secrets of your heart -- a parent, whose burden of
years you lightened, whose tottering limbs you supported -- a child, whose
assiduous duty, whose budding virtues, sweetened all your cares of the present,
and brightened all your hopes of the future -- did ever the sympathetic gush
start in your eye at the sight of misery -- did ever your hands stretch forth
the unexpected relief, and dispel the gloom that hangs on the brow of woe, as
the sun, bursting through the clouds, renews the face of nature -- did you ever
discharge an important trust with dignity, disinterestedness, and honor, and
spread peace and joy among your fellow men, while the ear when it heard you
blessed you, and the eye when it saw you gave witness to you Job. xxix. 11.
-- say what delight these recollections afford -- would you exchange them for
a lifetime of the most refined sensuality -- for Peruvian treasures -- or
Asiatic power?

It appears, then, that the dignity of human nature consists not in the
greatness of men's abilities, wealth, or dominion, but in expansion, and
benignity of soul; that the former are only means of promoting the purposes of
the latter, and signs that their possessors are particularly called, by Divine
appointment, to generous and elevated action; that one, who possesses all ^^^se
advantages, may be more contemptible than those, who, though devoid of them,
have the heart which could apply them to their properends; and that one firm
purpose of doing good will adorn a character more than the accutest
understanding, the most opulent fortune, or the most exalted rank,
unaccompanied with a virtuous disposition. Hence, to be filled with pride and
contempt of those below us, on account of our talents, or external
circumstances, without any regard to the right application of them, is both to
act unjustly, by acting inconsistently with the character of members of the
community, and usurping the rights which belong to it alone, and to overturn
the basis on which true superiority must ever rest. It is to content ourselves
with the shadow, without the substance, of greatness; and, while God and men
unite in calling us to a pre-eminence and happiness which neither time, nor
fortune, nor death, can remove, to descend to the most contemptible of all
conditions, by perverting the most splendid powers, and the richest
opportunities -- to embrace the hideous form of misery while celestial felicity
courts us -- to change a fertile field into a barren heath -- to dwell in a
dungeon while we may walk in the most resplendent day. In a word, it is the
duty of those who are raised to the higher stations of life, possessed of the
gifts of fortune, or endowed with superior abilities -- to maintain justice,
order and peace, in society; to study and pursue the public good; to relieve
distress, to encourage industry, to reward merit, to exercise condescension and
affability toward their inferiors; to cultivate and extend useful and elegant
knowledge; to establish, and inculcate, the grand principles of morality and
religion, to enlighten, humanise, and improve mankind, and to lead them to
virtue and happiness.

Those who employ in this manner the opportunities and talents with which they
are furnished by Divine Providence, are entitled to the highest veneration of
mankind. It is, then, that nobility, illustrious station, or distinguished
parts, appear in their full splendour, and exhibit their possessors as a species
of divinities upon earth, who, bearing the resemblance of God as far as human
nature will permit, share also his felicity, and claim the homage of the world.
Let them be displayed as the instruments of beneficence, they will reign with
an irresistible and permanent dominion, which neither envy, nor malice, nor
faction, nor tumult, will be able to overturn; for it is founded in the hearts
of men who, feeling, and rejoicing in, its blissful influences, must cease to
love themselves, before they can wish to withdraw their respect and obedience.

But, when riches are only the fund of a sordid avarice, or the fountain of
licentiousness and profligacy; when wisdom is perverted into craft, and
abilities transformed into the ministers of cabal and intrigue, of deception
and ignoble policy, establish, uphold, or extend, civil or religious despotism;
when resplendent genius is employed in rebellion against God, and in the
corruption of men, by propagating irreligion and immorality; when pre-eminence
and authority are, in civil life, used as the instruments of pride, injustice,
oppression, and cruelty, or supreme power, impelled by insatiable ambition,
deluges the earth with blood, and spreads devastation and misery through the
habitations of men -- reason easily penetrates the false glitter that surrounds
them, and perceives their deformity and blackness. She declares their luster to
resemble that of those noxious vapors, which, rising from the earth, are
kindled into a flash in the sky; and terminate in noise and destruction; while
those who apply their talents, their riches, or power, to the beneficent ends
for which they are destined, are like that glorious luminary in the heavens,
which shines with a constant and salutary light.

Thou proud insolent mortal! who look down from thy lofty station on thy
brethren of men, and imaginest them only formed to bring their gifts to thy
altar, and to bend before thee with servile homage, know that thy elevation
only renders thee more conspicuously contemptible! Consider that, should those,
whom thou so insolently despisest, adopt thy principles, and burst the bands of
social union by which alone they are made thy dependents, the power is theirs,
and thine only the shadow and the phantom. Should they only withdraw their
support without inflicting any positive evil, thou would precipitately sink
into a degradation lower than that of the meanest laborer. Less inured to want,
thou would be less able to provide for its supply, and have less reason to
expect it from the benignity of others. Consider that, even in thy present
elevation, thou art really more dependent than the most ignoble of the sons of
men. If he is least dependent who stands least in need of others, he is surely
most dependent who stands most in need of them. With our rank, our necessities,
our demands, our cares, increase. The links by which we are joined to our
fellow men are multiplied, and the very circumstance which enlarges our
influence diminishes our internal strength. He, therefore, who has the greatest
number of dependents, has only the greatest number of those to whom he is
indebted for consideration and power. The more lofty and spacious the edifice
is, with the greater precipitation, if its pillars are sapped, does it rush
into ruin. Learn then to seek thy importance and dignity, where only thou will
find them, by discharging every duty which thy station requires, and by
diffusing, by thy affability and beneficence, happiness among mankind.
Relinquishing the phantoms of pride enjoy the substantial pre-eminence of
virtue.

But ye! who employ your distinguished abilities, or exalted power, for the
purposes for which Providence has bestowed them, fear not that any portion of
that respect, obedience, and honor, to which you are entitled, will be
withdrawn. Goodness, moving in an elevated sphere, and guided by distinguished
wisdom, shines with such an amiable luster, possesses such a commanding
influence, and is so irresistably attractive, that she reigns over the hearts
of men, and is often constrained to blush at the homage she receives, because
it approaches adoration. Power may intimidate, splendor may dazzle, genius may
surprise and delight, but goodness alone can captivate the heart!

CHAPTER VI. DUTIES common to ALL with regard to the USE of their OPPORTUNITIES
and TALENTS.
WHOEVER attentively examines the human constitution will discover in it
several inconsistencies not so easily accounted for. Thus, mankind have a
strong propensity to society, and are miserable without it; yet in society they
are prone to indulge the most unsocial dispositions. Nature constantly draws
them to their species, and points out their sweetest enjoyments, as solely
derivable from this source; yet the selfish part of our frame, counteracting
this dictate of nature, corrupts the grand streams of happiness, by turning
them into its own channel, and, instead of allowing the individual to act as a
member of the social body, and to receive from this capacity his highest
dignity and enjoyment, endeavors to render society subservient to the
individual. There is in all men a wonderful fondness of independence, and a no
less surprising desire of the service and respect of others. This is, in fact,
to join the greatest contradictions, to force into union things absolutely
incompatible; for independence can only be secured, by an entire separation
from mankind, by relinquishing every claim to their good offices and regards,
by renouncing every social enjoyment, and by deriving happiness from the stores
of self. As soon as man enters into the social circle, and shares its
beneficial influences, he relinquishes his separate existence, and, forming a
part of a system, is limited by the relations which he bears to the other
parts, and to the whole, becomes bound to contribute to their support and
perfection, according to the support and benefit which he receives from them,
and is required to exert a beneficial activity proportioned to the influence he
possesses. Whoever withholds from the general good any portion of useful
effort he is able to bestow, is unfaithful to the conditions, on which he
enjoys the benefits of society, and violates that equality of obligation which
subsists among all mankind. He also frustrates, as far as lies in his power,
that plan of Divine wisdom, whereby the general felicity is intended. For it is
certain that the Universal Parent has distributed among men such a portion of
abilities and powers, as, duly cultivated and improved, would render the
condition of all comfortable, in every respect, and happy. In the present state
of society, some are, indeed, overburthened with labor, and enjoy but a small
degree of convenience; while others loiter in indolence, and consume the fruits
of industry. This, however, could never be the case, did every one cultivate
with diligence his peculiar talents, and discharge the duties of his peculiar
station. It is the neglect of this alone that makes it necessary to overload
some, in order to support that part of the common burden, from which others
have treacherously withdrawn themselves.

Hence the principle of equality, above illustrated, requires not only that all
men should religiously regard the rights of others, but that they should exert
themselves, to the utmost of their ability, for the common benefit. Whoever
rejects this requisition descends below the rank of a member of society, and,
instead of rising, as is foolishly supposed, above the rest of mankind, by a
life of idleness and dissipation, degrades himself to the condition of a
beggar, who lives on the labor of others, without making any just return for
it. For, however strange it may sound, it is undoubted, that society has a
right to the best exertion of all its members, of the highest as well as of the
lowest, of the most opulent as well as of the poorest, for the common good.

The question is not, what advantage every individual is content to reap from
his own powers and opportunities, but what degree of general utility he can
effectuate. These powers have not been bestowed on him, by their divine author,
solely for his own use, but chiefly for the benefit of the human race, to whose
happiness he is destined to contribute. This proper exercise of the powers of
every individual all the other members of society have a right to demand, on
fair and equal terms. The equivalent every individual obtains by the advantages
and comforts which he receives from social life, and still more by that
superfluity which enables any one to live in sloth. He is a debtor to the grand
community of mankind, and his creditors can call him to repay.

It is true that, since it is so difficult to determine the extent of every
one's capacity, and the exact measure of the social advantages he enjoys, no
precise claim can be established in every particular case. But, the general
obligation remains equally strong on all, and none can wilfully violate it
without incurring the blame of his own mind, and the displeasure of the author
of his existence. The principle, therefore, on which some ancient legislators
prohibited any citizen, of whatever condition or rank, from living in idleness,
was perfectly just in itself, although the execution of any law grounded upon
it must ever be extremely difficult, and might occasion greater inconveniences
than those which it should be intended to obviate.

As indolence, and the neglect of opportunities of utility, are highly unjust,
so they are extremely contemptible. For, what character can be more the object
of contempt, than that of a person who, though endowed with active powers, and
furnished with ample opportunities of benefiting that particular society to
which he belongs, and from which he receives constant defense and protection,
yet lives on the labor either of his predecessors or contemporaries, without
testifying any approbation of their industry, by which he subsists, or making
any efforts to imitate their laudable example? What can degrade a man more in
his own eyes, than the consideration that he has done nothing to benefit his
friends, to oblige his neighbors, to educate and establish his children, or to
promote the interest and honor of his country; that he has buried his talents,
defeated the end of Providence in bestowing them, and that, when he is cut off
by death, the world will be delivered from an unnecessary burden, from a putrid
excrescence?

On the other hand, what can convey, to any person, a higher idea of his own
worth and importance, than the reflection that, though but an individual
endowed with one class of abilities, yet, by their improvement, he not only
enlarges his own enjoyments, but diffuses around him the most joyous
influences, and promotes the welfare of the whole human race; that, though
retired from public view, he appears in the useful productions of his
application and genius; that, though infirm in body, he renders, by his
inventions, the labor of the strong and hardy both more easy to themselves,
and more beneficial to others; and that, though devoid of public authority, he
strengthens the political union, and advances public order by the just
principles which he establishes and elucidates; that, taking another view of
the case, though ignorant and illiterate, yet he contributes, by his toil and
dexterity, to the instruction and improvement of mankind, while he provides
sustenance and leisure for those who are endowed with genius and learning, or
placed in those stations where plans of general welfare can be best conceived,
and proposed with the greatest prospects of success? In fine, it is an exalting
consideration, that, however obscure a person is in himself, he is an
instrument in the hand of Providence for communicating to mankind, not only the
necessaries of life, but also its highest ornaments and delights, and even of
raising their views above this terrestrial abode, and directing them to a state
of endless felicity, the certainty of which cannot fail to produce the most
salutary effects on every part of their conduct. No person is so mean and
insignificant, as not to affect some part of the community. In a grand piece of
machinery, the smaller wheels and pins, though less observable, are not on that
account less necessary than others to the just motion an ^ffect of the whole.
In like manner, the conduct of the inferior members of society not only affects
their own happiness, or that of their immediate connections, but diffuses its
influence, though in a less perceptible manner than that of the higher ranks,
through the whole social body. Nay, I may assert that, as these compose the
greater part of the community, their useful industry is still more requisite to
the general happiness, and that the meanest labourer, who diligently and
honestly exerts himself in his sphere, is entitled to share, with the most
exalted of the sons of men, the glorious appellation of the friend of mankind,
and of the approved of God! Should any whom fortune depressed, or insolence
laughs to scorn, but whose soul, rising above his situation, feels the
intrinsic dignity of man, and laments the narrowness of his terrestrial sphere,
cast his eye on these pages, let him be comforted and strengthened by the
reflections above mentioned. There is something in the idea that exalts the
mind, that kindles the desire of usefulness, that rouses activity, and puts
every faculty in motion. When we consider it, we seem desirous of breaking the
inglorious chains of indolence, and pant for some worthy object, some important
pursuit, to exercise the generous energies of the soul!

If the consideration of the importance of the meanest member of society should
prove a strong argument to useful diligence, how much greater force must this
argument acquire with regard to those whom fortune and rank particularly
distinguish* Their influence, either good or bad, is very extensive. First
communicated to numerous connections and dependents, it is conveyed through
them to other contiguous relations, till it reach at last the extremities of
the social system. Were this influence always of a beneficial nature, society
would feel its salutary effects through all its frame, and, instead of that
distempered and deformed face which it so frequently wears, would assume the
most healthy and smiling aspect. The face of nature, long hid in fog, or
ravaged by tempests, receives not a more delightful transformation from the
returning sun, than society would receive from those benignant lights which
thus illumined and invigorated it.

In what light, then, must those persons appear, who, because their external
circumstances free them from the necessity of laboring for their subsistence,
imagine themselves exempted from every species of useful exertion; who, because
they are provided with the abundant supply of every corporeal want, think
themselves under no obligation to improve their minds, or to engage in any
pursuit conducive to the common welfare; who either yawn away their time in the
most lethargic indolence, or devote it to the most insignificant, frivolous, or
vicious enjoyments; who waste ingenuity in mere ostentation, degrade reason to
purvey for appetite, and make recreation their study, and amusement their
business -- in a word, whose whole life is either a blank, or a perversion of
existnece. The phantom of pleasure, like an ignis fatuus, instantly disappears,
when they think they can seize it. The same insipid round is run over a
thousand times. The senses are jaded, the appetites cloyed. Tired at last with
the tedious pursuit, those votaries of pleasure, like the top that has long
been lashed, dose in the arms of indolence. When they wake at times from their
insensibility, their minds are haunted with all the chimeras, all the monsters
of vapor and spleen, which often drive them to burst, by death, the ponderous
fetters with which they are loaded.

I will not assert, that all who live in this manner are sensible of the
criminality of their conduct, and perceive that, however averse from injustice,
breach of trust, and cruelty in their dealings with particular persons, they
yet involve themselves, by this negative vice, this neglect of the due
improvement of their talents and opportunities in these crimes with respect to
their species in general. No; I am convinced that, if they clearly perceived
the tendency of their conduct, many of them, at least, would review it with
sorrow and disgust. Ignorance, and wrong habits contracted in early life, more
than any vicious disposition, are the causes of a course of action so
disgraceful and unhappy to themselves, and so detrimental to society.

This reflection, however, if it diminish their criminality, augments the folly
of neglecting to cultivate those rational faculties, which would afford them
just notions of their duty, and disclose an elevated region of pursuit and
happiness. For, if they rightly apprehended the relation in which all the
members of society stand to each other, they would perceive that it is not only
the rapacious invader, or the secret purloiner, of property, who must be
reputed injurious, but also the indolent and the dissipated, who deprives his
fellow men of any benefit which he is called to bestow. They would see that
they are under obligations not only to abstain from positive violations of
justice, but also to discharge many duties of distinguished utility to mankind.
To these they would acknowledge themselves particularly called by the
appointment of Heaven. Relieved from the necessity of providing for their
corporeal wants, their minds are furnished with greater freedom for the
exercise of its nobler powers, and with a more extensive range for the
discovery and prosecution of schemes of public good. And as those clouds that
obscure their understanding began to remove, an hundred untasted springs of
felicity would open on their hearts. For, if every person of fortune and rank
employed his most active endeavors to excite and maintain a spirit of industry
and virtue among his dependents, his neighbors, and fellow-citizens, he would
find his time and attention so happily engaged, that he would survey with
contempt his former pleasures; he would seem to breathe a purer air, and to
live in a region of perpetual sunshine, while the vapors of low ambition and
of sensual indulgence rolled below his feet!

Man can only be happy in as far as his powers are duly exercised; and those
powers, which are the most elevated and capacious, afford the greatest sum of
felicity. The same means, therefore, which render any man most highly
beneficial to others, also increase the sum of his own enjoyments, and superadd
to them that most delightful of all satisfactions -- the consciousness of
having discharged, to the utmost of his power, his duty as a member of the
community, and fulfilled the intention of his Creator in sending him into the
world. The neglect of the due improvement of any power, or of any opportunity
of honorable action, detracts just so much from personal enjoyment. As want of
circulation corrupts the air, and stagnation the water, so, indolence
superinduces a torpor on the mind, which unfits it even for the more refined
pleasures of sense, and deprives it of that great sweetener of every enjoyment,
the reflection that it is the produce of our own exertions, and the natural
recompense of merit. With regard to distinction, acquired by successful
exertions of abilities, it is certain, that the same obligation which demanded
the first display of them, requires their continuance while any benefit can
thence result to mankind, and their possessors are able to confer it. He who
has already exerted powers, by which the aggregate of common good has been
increased, has pledged himself to a course of distinguished utility, and, if he
relaxes or ceases his efforts, while his faculties are still vigorous, is more
culpable than if he had never entered on the honorable career; because practice
procures facility, and success should animate to fresh enterprise. If selfish
ambition should, as is in this case most probable, be the sole motive to
action, let it be considered, that it is perhaps more difficult to preserve
than to purchase reputation and homage. The ensigns of honor attract the public
eye; elevation places men in a more conspicuous light, where every defect, as
well as every virtue, is more clearly discerned, and more nicely scrutinized.
If those, therefore, who are thus distinguished, are not able to support their
situation with dignity, their disgrace will, from the disappointed expectations
of mankind, be more humiliating, and the contempt which they incur more
general. Envy will magnify every fault, annihilate every virtue, and lash them
with the laurels which she has torn from their brows. Happy for themselves, and
happy for the world, whose interests are always hurt by the degradation of
merit, if they had never risen above the vulgar level!

CHAPTER VII. CONCLUSION.
THE view of society, and of the principles on which it is founded, disclosed
in this Essay, evinces the obligation of all its members, of whatever rank or
description, to contribute their most active and honest endeavors for the
common good. Indeed this obligation is sufficiently inculcated on the lower
classes, by the necessity of laboring for their daily subsistence, and by the
dreadful consequences which idleness produces to them and their families. With
regard to these, it is, therefore, less necessary to unfold the full force of
this obligation, than with respect to those whose easy circumstances, seeming
to render them independent of their fellow men, seem also to exempt them from
every debt beyond the limits of strict justice. This independence we have shown
to be purely imaginary, and utterly incompatible with the principles of social
union. The chain of dependence runs equally through all the orders of society,
and binds every individual in these orders. While it excludes the extravagant
claims of self-love, and subjects men to more generous and salutary principles,
it establishes at the same time a system which, if universally observed, would
fully secure the most essential interests of each individual, by settling them
on the broad and immovable basis of general welfare. For, did the rich employ
their wealth to supply the wants of the poor; the poor, their labor to
administer to the ease and convenience of the rich; the great, their power and
authority to protect the weak and defenseless; the wise, the ingenious, and the
learned, their abilities to instruct and counsel the ignorant and illiterate;
did every one, in short, impart to his fellow men a portion of the fruits of
his talents and advantages; it is impossible that any should repine at
another's possessing what was employed for his own benefit, nay, was made more
subservient to his use, than if he himself were the proprietor. For no
individual could so perfectly cultivate all the different talents, necessary
for his support and welfare, which are distributed among the species, and,
while some particular one is allotted to each, are all carried to the highest
improvement of which they are susceptible.

Thus, the principles of equality which we have established, at the same time
that they repress the insolence of pride, the outrages of oppression, and the
dissipation of sensuality, confirm, nevertheless, the necessity of
subordination, and the just demands of lawful authority. They maintain
inviolate every natural and every civil distinction, draw more closely every
social tie, and unite all in one harmonious and justly proportioned system,
which brings men together on the even ground of the inherent rights of human
nature, of reciprocal obligation, and of a common relation to the community.
Yet, for the maintenance of this equality itself, they separate them into
different classes, and invest them with different capacities and offices. Thus
are the poor and the mean reconciled to their circumstances, or comforted under
them -- the opulent and the powerful are excited to beneficence and
condescension; the ingenious and acute are directed to the best use of their
abilities; and all are linked together by the powerful ties of common
interests, and of reciprocal duty. Happy those, whose souls are capable of
rising to such enlarged views of things, and are animated by them to a conduct
worthy of human nature, worthy of Christianity, which represents men to each
other as children of one parent, as members of one family, as journeying
together through the checkered scenes of this transitory world, toward a
region where; all the distinctions of poverty and riches, of obscurity and
splendour, of power and meanness, shall cease, every inequality disappear; where
virtue alone shall be exalted, and vice degraded forever!

It must, indeed, be acknowledged, that this theory is too pure and exalted to
admit of a complete conformity of practice. But man is qualified for endless
improvements in knowledge and virtue, and the happiness which he attains will
exactly correspond to the degrees of his progress. In every art and science
there is an ideal model, which can never be reached even by the most exact and
beautiful execution. What Cicero observes with regard to a perfect orator, that
he had never seen any speaker that could come up to his notions of eloquence,
is not limited to that art, but is equally applicable to every other. It is,
however, to be observed, that even the excellence which is attained, is wholly
referable to the perfect standard previously existing in the artists mind. In
proportion, therefore, as clear and elevated ideas of excellence are
entertained in religion, in morality, and in politics, and action is directed
by these, human conduct and happiness will be improved and exalted. If, on the
other hand, low and grovelling standards are adopted, and principles are
regulated by established practice, not practice reformed by the genuine
principles of nature, mankind will continue to tread in the old and muddy path,
and the progress of the world will be marked with degeneracy and degradation.

It is the constant objection of those, who are either averse from improvement,
or too indolent and too timid to begin or advance it, that the perfection aimed
at is too high for human nature. They thus employ the existence of abuses and
errors as a reason for perpetuating them. But, if the same reasoning had always
been considered as just, mankind would, at this day, dwell in caves, feed upon
acorns, fall down before the works of their own hands, and be bound in the
heavy chain of Heathen ignorance and superstition. The institutions and
refinements of civil society must appear to a savage as extravagant and
impracticable, as the finest theory of moral sentiment and action appears to
those whose souls are immersed in sensuality, or fettered by self-interest. The
question is not, what is the present practice of mankind, but what they are
qualified ultimately to attain; not how far any theory is conformable to the
present state of things, but how far it is founded in nature, adapted to the
human faculties, and conducive to human felicity.

If the principles illustrated in this Essay should be devoid of every other
recommendation, they have at least, that which is no inconsiderable one, of
being conformable to the doctrines of Christianity Romans, xii. 3.4.5.6.7. 1st
Cor. xii.
. For, although some philosophers, who have pretended great zeal for the rights
and the happiness of mankind, have manifested, at the same time, a strange
antipathy to every kind of religion, and particularly to the Christian, it will
be found, by every impartial inquirer, that the religion of Jesus Christ
inculcates and sanctions every principle on which public and private happiness
can be built. It is true that Christianity has frequently been most shamefully
corrupted, and, in that corrupted form, produced the most dreadful calamities.
But, to explode Christianity on this account, is just as sensible as to forbid
mankind the use of water, air, or fire, because these elements have often been
the vehicles of destruction. Whoever attempts to erect any system of policy to
the exclusion of religion, betrays great ignorance of human nature, and great
indifference for human happiness. Man is a religious creature, and is drawn to
his Creator by all the prin^^^^es of his constitution -- by the sense of his
^^becility, by conscience, by gratitude and admiration, and by his reason when
duly improved. The grand requisite, then, is to procure for him a religion
pure, simple, beneficent, and consolotary. This will be found only in the
religion of Jesus Christ, as it is exhibited in the sacred writings. Here the
most perfect standard of duty is erected, in order to engage man to an endless
progress in virtue; a sufficient remedy is provided for his deviations from it,
when accompanied with penitence; the most glorious rewards are offered to his
persevering endeavors; and the strongest succors are provided for his
weakness. Such a religion powerfully strengthens every social and civil
obligation, and prepares men for heaven, by rendering them useful on earth.

CONTENTS.
BOOK I. In what Sense may all Men be said to be Equal? Page. 11 CHAPTER I. Of
Natural Diversities among Men, Page. ib. CHAPTER II. Of the Distribution of
Human Abilities and Talents Page 25 CHAPTER III. Of the Mutual Dependence of
Mankind, Page 30 CHAPTER IV. Final Causes of the Variety of Human Talents, Page
42 CHAPTER V. The just Notion of the Natural Equality of Men is placed in
Equality of Obligation. -- The proper Tendency of this Doctrine, Page 46
CHAPTER VI. Some Circumstances of Equality not yet considered Page 55
BOOK II. What are the Rights resulting from the Natural Equality of Men? Page
69 CHAPTER I. Of the Manner in which we acquire our Notion of Rights, Page. ib.
CHAPTER II. The two Grand Divisions of Rights which flow from the Natural
Equality of Mankind, Page 75 CHAPTER III. Of the Original and Inherent Rights
of Human Nature, Page ^8 CHAPTER IV. The same Subject continued, Page 85
CHAPTER V. That it is the Interest of Government to preserve inviolate the
Rights of Liberty, as above explained, Page 103 CHAPTER VI. Of Rights peculiar
to certain Stations and Abilities, Page 107 CHAPTER VII. General inferences
from the whole of this Book, Page 113
BOOK III. What are the Duties resulting from the Equality of Mankind? Page 119
CHAPTER I. Preliminary Observations, Page. ib. CHAPTER II. All Men equally
bound to Respect the Primitive Rights of Human Nature, Page 121 CHAPTER III.
The Duties of those who are placed in the Inferior Stations of Life, or endowed
with Inferior Capacities and Powers, Page 137 CHAPTER IV. Cautions to be
observed in the Pursuit of a Higher and more Flourishing Condition, Page 148
CHAPTER V. The Duties of those placed in the Higher Ranks of Life, and endowed
with Distinguished Abilities, Page 154 CHAPTER VI. Duties common to all, with
regard to the Use of their Opportunities and Talents, Page 171 CHAPTER VII.
Conclusion. Page 185

JOHN ORMROD, At FRANKLIN'S HEAD, in CHESTNUT three Down below SECOND-STREET,
HAS FOR SALE, A Collection of Valuable BOOKS, ON VARIOUS SUBJECTS, AMONG WHICH
ARE,
Johnson's British Poets, 75 vols. Hume's England with Smollet's Continuation,
13 vol. Justamond's History of the East and West Jndies, 8 vols. 8vo.
Goldsmith's History of England, 3 vols. 8vo. Travels of Anacharsis the younger,
Translated from the French, in seven vols. 8vo. and an eighth in 4to.
containing Maps, Plans, Views, and Coins, illustrative of the Geography and
Antiquities of Ancient Greece. Elegant Extracts in prose and verse. (...)
Ecclesiastical History, 6 vols. 8vo. Gibbon's Roman Empire, 12 vols. 8vo. The
History of FRANCE, from the first establishment of that monarchy brought down
to, and including a Complete Narrative of the late Revolution, 3 vols. 8vo. --
etc. etc. etc. Likewise, a Variety of STATIONARY.

