AN AUTHENTIC ACCOUNT OF THE CONVERSION AND EXPERIENCE OF A NEGRO.

TO WHICH IS ADDED, A Faithful Narrative OF THE Wonderful Dealings OF GOD,
TOWARD POLLY DAVIS, Of NEW-GRANTHAM, in the State of NEW HAMPSHIRE.

Taken from her own Mouth, and the Testimony of several Witnesses, of
established and approved Veracity, who were present with her through the Scenes
of Distress, and that sudden and surprising Recovery, contained in the
following Account; taken as above, on the 12th day of September, in the Year of
our LORD JESUS CHRIST, 1792.

BY THE REV. MR. BUROUGHS, OF HANOVER, AND THE REV. MR. EASTERBROOKS, OF
NEW-GRANTHAM.

WINDSOR: PRINTED BY ALDEN SPOONER. M DCC XCIII.

AN Authentic Account, etc.
SOME years ago an English Gentleman, by a particular providence, had occasion
to be in North America, where, among other adventures, the following
circumstance occurred to him, which is related in his own words.

"Every day's observation convinces me that the children of God are made so by
his own especial grace and power, and that all means, whether more or less, are
equally effectual with him, whenever he is pleased to employ them for
conversion.

"In one of my excursions, while I was in the province of New York, I was
walking by myself over a considerable plantation, amused with its husbandry,
and comparing it with that of my own country, till I came within a little
distance of a middle-aged negro, who was tilling the ground. I felt a strong
inclination, unusual with me, to converse with him. After asking him some
little questions about his work, which he answered very sensibly, I wished him
to tell me, whether his state of slavery was not disagreeable to him, and
whether he would not gladly exchange it for his liberty. "Massah, (said he,
looking seriously upon me) I have wife and children; my massah takes care of
them, and I have no care to provide any thing; I have a good massah, who teach
me to read; and I read good book, that make me happy." I am glad, replied I, to
hear you say so; and pray what is the good book you read? "The Bible, massah,
God's own good book." Do you understand friend, as well as read this book? for
many can read the words well; who cannot get hold of the true and good sense.
"O massah, says he, I read the book much before I understand; but at last I
felt pain in my heart; I found things in the book that cut me to pieces." Aye,
said I, what things were they? "Why massah, I found that I had bad heart,
massah, a very bad heart indeed: I felt pain, that God would destroy me,
because I was wicked, and done nothing as I should do. God was holy, and I was
very vile and naughty; so I could have nothing from him but fire and brimstone
in hell." In short, he entered into a full account of his convictions of sin,
which were indeed as deep and piercing as any I had ever heard of; and what
scriptures came to his mind, which he had read, that both probed him to the
bottom of his sinful heart, and were made the means of light and comfort to his
soul. I then enquired of him, what ministry or means he made use of, and found
that his master was a Quaker, a plain sort of man, who had taught his slaves to
read, but who had not, however, ever conversed with this negro upon the state
of his soul. I asked him how he got comfort under all this trial? "O massah,
says he, it was Christ gave me comfort by his dear word. He bade me come unto
him, and he would give me rest, for I was very weary and heavy laden. And here
he went through a line of the most precious texts in the bible, showing me, by
his artless comment upon them as he went a long, what great things God had done
in the course of some years for his soul. Being rather more acquainted with
doctrinal truths, and the analogy of the bible, than he had been, or in his
situation could easily be; I had a mind to try how far a simple untutored
experience, greaciously given without the usual means, could carry a man from
some speculative errors; and therefore asked him several questions about the
merit of works, the justification of a sinner, the power of grace, and the
like. I own I was as much astonished at, as I admired, the sweet spirit and
simplicity of his answers, with the heavenly wisdom that God had put into the
mind of this negro. His discourse, flowing merely from the richness of grace,
with a tenderness and expression for "beyond the reach of art," perfectly
charmed me. On the other hand, my entering into all his feelings, together with
an account to him, which he had never heard before, that thus and thus the Lord
in his mercy dealt with all his children, and had dealt with me, drew streams
of joyful tears down his black face, that we looked upon each-other, and talked
with that inexpressible glow of christian affection, that made me more than
ever believe, what I have often too thoughtlessly professed to believe, the
communion of saints. I shall never forget how the poor excellent creature
seemed to hang upon my lips, and to eat my very words, when I enlarged upon the
love of Christ to poor sinners, the free bounty and tender mercy of God, the
frequent and delightful sense he gives of his presence, the faith he bestows in
his promises, the victories this faith is enabled to get over trials and
temptations, the joy and peace in believing, the hope in life and death, and
the glorious expectation of immortality. To have taken off his eager,
delighted, animated, air and manner, would have been a masterly-piece for a
Reynolds. -- He had never heard such a discourse, nor found the opportunity of
hearing it before. He seemed like a man who had been thrown into a new world,
and at length had found company. Though my conversation lasted, at least, two
or three hours, I scarce ever enjoyed the happy swiftness of time so sweetly in
all my life. We knew not how to part. He would accompany me as far as he might;
and I felt, for my part, such a delight in the artless, savory, solid,
unaffected experience of this dear soul, that I could have been glad to see him
often then, or to see his like at any time now. But my situation rendered this
impossible. I therefore took an affectionate adieu, with an ardor equal to the
warmest and the most ancient friendship, telling him, that neither the color
of his body, nor the condition of his present life, could prevent him from
being my dear brother in out dear Savior; and that, though we must part now,
never to see each other again any more in this world, I had no doubt of our
having another joyful meeting in our Father's home, where we should live
together, and love one another through out along and a happy eternity. "Amen.
Amen, my dear massah; God bless you, and poor me too, for ever and ever." If I
had been an angel from heaven, he could not have received me with more evident
delight than he did; nor could I have considered him with a more sympathetic
regard, if he had been a long known christian of the good old sort, grown up
into my affections in the course of many years." IT is written in the
scriptures, and fulfilled in the experience of real christians, They shall be
all taught of God, ^xi. vi. ^5. The teaching of God the Spirit, by the word,
was mo^^ ^^ident in the ease of this poor Negro. The word of God was (...)
instructions of his regeneration, James i. 12* By this, as he (...) himself, he
was brought to feel pain in his heart -- to fear (...) would destroy him -- to
see the badness of his heart -- (...) see the (...) of all his actions; -- in
short, to become a true penit^^^. (...) it so from the word of God that he
derived comfort. The (...) of rest to the weary and heavy laden, was precious
to his soul; it was "Christ who gave him comfort by his dear word;" and thus
being made happy by reading "God (...) good book," his mind was reconciled to
his station, and he lived (...) in the lowest state of servitude. Reader, this
Negro was a Christian; a Bible: Christian. He had not indeed the outward form
of godliness, but he hold the power. -- How is it with you? You were born in a
christian country -- have read the Bible -- have heard the gospel; but, what
have you felt? You have the form, but where (...) the power? -- Let conscience
answer the important question!

On the whole, let us observe, the honor that God puts on the use of his holy
word; let us be thankful that we have it in our own mother tongue; and let us
read, and recommend the reading of it, with increasing diligence.




A Faithful Narrative, etc.
WITH regard to her temper of mind, her views of supernatural objects, and her
apprehensions with regard to the state of her soul toward God, she related as
follows:

From my youth up to my first awakening, I lived without God in the world, in a
stupefied forgetfulness of the obligations I had ever been under to him and of
the solemn account I must one day render unto him of the deeds done in the
body, and of all my views and aims; till it pleased a sovereign God two years
ago last July, to lend his Spirit to convince me of my sins, and lay open to my
view the awful danger that was impending over me. At which time my sins were
set in order before me, in such dreadful arra^^ and the enmity of my heart, and
my native opposition to God, arising to my view, produced such distress and
agony of soul, as to overpower all (...) of bodily pain, though I had for some
time before been exercised with severe distress in body, and was at this time
reduced to such a state of weakness, accompanied with continual wrecking pain,
that my life was almost despaired of from day to day.

It appears to me astonishing upon every recollection th^^ the agony of my mind
did not dissolve the (...) of my nature, and how I could subsist under the
(...) and agony of such a wounded spirit. It seems to me now, that had it
continued much longer, it must unavoidably have overpowered the remains of life
in me, and put a period to my existence on earth. But after having remained for
several days (...) this anguish of spirit, and dreadful bondage of soul, I
found relief in a manner most unexpected.

After I had said myself down on my bed, my mind was led to a most delightful
and realizing view of the entire safety of trusting in the Divine Power and
Mercy; that there was such a fullness in God, of that which I needed for relief
and comfort, that my heart within me was constrained to rejoice, and could not
but roll my burden upon the Lord. At this time the words of the Psalmist, in
which he says, Thou have brought my feet up out of the miry clay," etc. were to
my soul sweeter than honey or the honey comb; and also the 16th Hymn of the
third book of Doctor WATTS" Hymns, was to my soul like a feast of fat things,
and of wine upon the ^ees. For some considerable time after this, I enjoyed,
almost without any intermission, a most sweet and refreshing sense of the
beauty and glory of divine objects. But not understanding the treachery of my
own heart, and the deceitfulness of sin, I was allured away by degrees, into a
forgetfulness of God, and from a close walk with him, through an apprehension
that I might innocently indulge myself in joining with young people in what is
usually termed civil merriment; and which I was induced to do more especially
and principally that I might not become an (...) ridicule among them. But
before (...) was a (...) the danger I had incurred by turning in such a manner
to vanity, I found that my heart was sensibly alienated from God, and my whole
soul was overwhelmed in guilt and darkness, and during (...) of my persisting
to join with young company in what is termed civil recreation and merriment,
(...) felt those lashes and stings of conscience, which before this I had ever
been an utter stranger to. In (...) state of sensible guilt and darkness, I
continued like one forsaken of God, and shut out from his presence, till the
first day of last July, when I was seized with convulsions, which came upon me
with such violence that it appeared to myself and others, that my animal frame
must yield to the force of the disorder, and my life soon come to a period.

She continued in this situation till the night of the eleventh of July, when
she was suddenly seized with a most violent cramp in her stomach, which was
accompanied with such agony and distress that it appeared impossible for her to
live from one hour to another. In this situation she continued till the
following night, when the cramp in her stomach increased to such a degree, that
the constant wreck and agony of body constrained her to a continual rolling and
tumbling on her bed, during which time, she remained speechless, but appeared
to have her senses; for when any spoke, she would take them by the hand and
intimate that she understood what they said. All hopes of life were now at an
end in the view of the family, and neighbors, who had come together at the
house on this occasion. But after having continued in this extremity of
distress, till about midnight, she appeared to be more easy; upon which the
neighbors retired to their several homes. But soon after this she was suddenly
seized again, and supposed by the family to be dead; and accordingly the
neighbors were called together to the house, with the tidings that POLLY was
dead.

Upon the arrival of the nearest neighbor, he observed that she lay stretched
out on her back, with her eyes about half open, and the sight of her eyes
turned up into her head -- She appeared at first sight to be entirely lifeless;
but upon trial, he found for once, some motion in her pulse. -- After lying in
this posture for an hour or more, she suddenly fetched a long sigh, and opened
her eyes, and related as

I have seen hell naked before my eyes, and fully expected to plunge into it.
The sight was dismal beyond all description. It was a region of most dismal
darkness and smoke. In the midst of these doleful shades appeared to my view a
person whom I knew; and after having had sight of him, he appeared to sink down
into the darkness and smoke of the horrible pit. I heard the groans of the
damned spirits, which indicated that agony and distress which is beyond all
utterance or conception. In the utmost extremity of danger, and when I appeared
to myself to be ready to plunge into the dismal gulf of darkness and misery, my
Savior took me by the hand, and told me to follow him. Upon which he led me
through a place resembling the most dismal miry clay; and from thence through a
hideous wilderness; after passing which, every object which opened to my view,
appeared to be clothed with an inexpressible beauty. My Savior addressed me,
and said, he had brought my feet out of the miry clay, and had set them upon a
rock; and he himself appeared to be the rock upon which I stood. I was admitted
into the heavenly world, where the Lord looked upon me, and smiled, and told me
I must return and warn a wicked world for a season: but should, in a short
time, return again. He told me I should be much more sick than I had been, but
should wholly recover, and be well for a season. I saw thousands of the
heavenly host clothed in that beauty which cannot be uttered; and heard those
songs of praise, the melody of which is beyond the power of language to
describe.

Upon her having declared to the bystanders these discoveries, she remained
for the space of three days and three nights without food or sleep: during the
whole of which time she was almost incessantly employed in praying and praising
GOD, and warning others to prepare for death. After this she gradually
recovered to such a degree of health, as to be able to walk about the house;
and, at times, to walk abroad. In this space she frequently said that she
should be much sicker than ever she bad been; but should certainly recover to a
better state of health than she had enjoyed for four years past. She frequently
pointed out the week in which she should be taken sick, and reduced to such a
state of extreme weakness and distress; and accordingly, on Friday of the same
week she had mentioned (which was the 27th of July) she was suddenly seized
with a most violent cramp convulsion, which was soon accompanied with a profuse
discharge of blood from her stomach; in which situation she continued till the
18th of August; during which time she was reduced apparently to the last
extremity, and all visible prospect of the possibility of her living was now at
an end.

For the space of sixteen days she was not known to turn herself in the bed
except once. From Monday night to the Saturday night following, she remained
entirely without food or drink, except for once she took down a little water,
and upon her having for once swallowed a morsel of food, her stomach
immediately rejected it. She was so weak that it was with dissiculty, and very
seldom, she could make any one understand her by whispering in their ear. On
Saturday she was though it to be dying; but as she had all along intimated to those
about her that she should certainly recover, so she now continued to intimate
the same by signs, to the bystanders. -- In this situation she continued till
about eight o'clock in the evening, at which time, to the surprise of the by
standers, she spoke out in plain and audible words, and said, "Stand by, and
let me get up." Immediately upon which she sprang up from her bed, and walked
the room with an astonishing nimbleness and alacrity, praising GOD'S and
calling on the by standers to join with her to praise that blessed Savior, who
had appeared for her in that wonderful manner. But they stood like persons over
whelmed in astonishment, to see the wonders of GOD'S power displayed in such a
manner, in restoring one to health and strength in a moment, who had been
reduced to so low a state by extreme sickness.

Upon this recovery, she related that she faw one standing in white, who said
to her, "If you will get up, you shall be able to walk; and you must go up to
SCOTT'S;" (which was one mile distant from her house) and accordingly, that
evening she rode to Capt. Scott's, and tarried some hours, and returned home;
and having retired to bed, a little after daylight, she arose early on the
morning, and before sunrise, was on her way to meeting at Cornish, to the
distance of five miles, from whence she returned home on the same day.

From the time of her recovery, she has enjoyed, hitherto, a much better state
of health, than for four years past; and is now as well as is usual for a
female of a delicate constitution; and remains an evident monument of the
Divine power and goodness.

The above mentioned POLLY DAVIS, requests that her most affectionate love may
be presented to every reader; and asks leave to testify, That a senso of GOD'S
love in the heart, is better than wine; and that all things which can be
desired, are not to be compared to it. Under a sense of this, she asks liberty
to call upon every reader to come and taste that the LORD is gracious; and that
her fellow youth, in special, would remember him in their early days, and
regard his glory as their governing object. She does entreat them, in special,
to forsake the vanities of the world, and pride of life. And if they would walk
with GOD, so as to enjoy the light of his countenance, and have comfort in
their soul, they do sacredly abstain from, and forever abandon, that kind of
foolish talking, and jesting, and that recreation and merriment, which
generally passes, even amongst many professors of Religion, for civil and
innocent. -- She certainly knows by what she has found upon trial, that these
things, in their operation, will be like wormwood and gall to the soul.

Under a sense that we are called with an high and holy calling, she
affectionately entreats every one to consider, what manner of persons we ought
to be, in all holy conversation and godliness; looking for, and hastening unto,
the day of GOD, that we may be found of him in peace at his appearing, and
finally be received into his eternal kingdom.

FINIS.

