A SHORT ACCOUNT OF THE MALIGNANT FEVER, LATELY PREVALENT IN PHILADELPHIA: WITH
A STATEMENT OF THE PROCEEDINGS THAT TOOK PLACE ON THE SUBJECT IN DIFFERENT
PARTS OF THE UNITED STATES.

BY MATTHEW CAREY.

PHILADELPHIA: PRINTED BY THE AUTHOR. November 14, 1^93. [Copy right secured
according to act of congress.]

To the American Philosophical Society.
GENTLEMEN,
WITH due deference, I presume to dedicate to you the following pages, in which
I have endeavored to give as faithful an account as possible, of the dreadful
calamity we have just experienced.

I am, gentlemen, With esteem, Your obedt. humble servant, MATTHEW CAREY.

PREFACE.
THE favorable reception given to the imperfect account of the fever which I
lately published, and the particular desire of some of my friends, have induced
me to undertake a more satisfactory history of it, in order to collect
together, while facts are recent, as many of the most interesting occurrences
as I could, for the information of the public.

I have not attempted any embellishment or ornament of style; but have alone
aimed at telling plain truths in plain language. For the desultory plan of some
part of the pamphlet, I have to offer the following apology; many of the
circumstances and reflections toward the conclusion, which would have come with
more propriety in the beginning, did not occur, until some of the first half
sheets were not only written, but printed. I had no choice, therefore, but
either to omit them, or place them somewhat out of order.

Most of the facts mentioned have fallen under my own observation. Those of a
different description I have been assiduous to collect from every person of
credibility, possessed of information.

Desirous of having this account correct and complete, I have printed off but a
small number of copies of the present edition: and shall esteem myself most
particularly obliged to any person who will be so kind to point out errors, to
be corrected in, or suggest facts, to be added to, a new edition, which I
propose to put to press very soon, and which will, I hope, be found still more
ample than the present one.

A BRIEF ACCOUNT, etc.
BEFORE I enter on the consideration of this disorder, it may not be improper
to offer a few introductory remarks on the situation of Philadelphia previous
to its commencement, which will reflect light on some of the circumstances
mentioned in the course of the narrative.

The manufactures, trade, and commerce of Philadelphia had, for a considerable
time, been improving and extending with great rapidity. From the period of the
adoption of the federal government, at which time we were at the lowest ebb of
distress, our situation had progressively become more and more prosperous.
Confidence, formerly banished, was universally restored. Property of every
kind, rose to, and in some instances beyond, its real value* and a few
revolving years exhibited the interesting spectacle of a young country, with a
new form of government, emerging from a state approaching very near to anarchy,
and acquiring all the stability and nerve of the best-toned and oldest nations.

In this prosperity, which revived the hopes of four millions of people,
Philadelphia participated in an eminent degree. New houses, in almost every
street, built in a very neat, elegant style, adorned, at the same time that
they enlarged the city. Its population was extending fast. House rent had risen
to a most extravagant height; it was in many cases double, and in some treble
what it had been a year or two before; and, as is generally the case, when a
city is thriving, it went far beyond the real increase of trade. The number of
applicants for houses, exceeding the number of houses to be let, one bid over
another; and affairs were in such a situation, that many people, though they
had a tolerable run of business, could hardly do more than clear their rents,
and were, literally, toiling for their landlords alone The distress arising
from this sour, was perhaps the only exception to the general observation of
the flourishing situation of Philadelphia.
. Luxury, the usual, and perhaps inevitable concomitant of prosperity, was
gaining ground in a manner very alarming to those who considered how far the
virtue, the liberty, and the happiness of a nation depend on their temperance
and sober manners. Men had been for some time in the habit of regulating their
expenses by prospects formed in sanguine hours, when every probability was
caught at as a certainty, not by their actual profits, or income. The number of
coaches, coachees, chairs, etc. lately set up by men in the middle rank of
life, is hardly credible. And although there had been a very great increase of
hackney chairs, yet it was hardly ever possible to procure one on a Sunday,
unless it was engaged two or three days before. Extravagance, in various
shapes, was gradually eradicating the plain and wholesome habits of the city.
And although it were presumption to attempt to scan the decrees of heaven, yet
few, I believe, will pretend to deny, that something was wanting to humble the
pride of a city, which was running on in full career, to the goal of
prodigality and dissipation.

However, from November 1792, to the end of last June, the difficulties of
Philadelphia were extreme. The establishment of the bank of Pennsylvania, in
embryo for the most part of that time, had arrested in the other banks such a
quantity of the circulating specie, as embarrassed almost every kind of
business; to this was added the distress arising from the very numerous
failures in England, which had extremely harrassed several of our capital
merchants. During this period, many men experienced as great difficulties as
were ever known in this city It is with great pleasure, I embrace this
opportunity of declaring, that the very liberal conduct of the bank of the
united states, at this trying season, was the means of saving many a deserving
and industrious man from ruin.
. But the opening, in July, of the bank of Pennsylvania, conducted on the most
liberal principles, placed business on its former favorable footing. Every man
looked forward to this fall as likely to produce a vast extension of trade. But
how fleeting are all human views! how uncertain all plans founded on earthly
appearances! All these flattering prospects vanished like the baseless fabric
of a vision.

In July, arrived the unfortunate fugitives from Cape Francois. And on this
occasion, the liberality of Philadelphia was displayed in a most respectable
point of light. Nearly 12,000 dollars were in a few days collected for their
relief. Little, alas! did many of the contributors, then in easy circumstances,
imagine, that a few weeks would leave their wives and children dependent on the
public charity, as has since unfortunately happened. An awful instance of the
rapid and warning vicissitudes of affairs on this transitory stage.

At this time, the destroying scourge crept in among us, and nipped in the bud
the fairest blossoms that imagination could form. And, oh! what dreadful
contrast has since taken place! Many of our first commercial houses are totally
dissolved, by the death of the parties, and their affairs are necessarily left
in so deranged a state that the losses and distresses which must take place,
are beyond estimation. The protests of notes for a few weeks past, have been
beyond all former example; for most of the principal merchants having left the
city, and been totally unable, from the stagnation of business, and diversion
of all their expected resources, to make any provision for payment, many of
their notes have been protested, as they became due. The bank of the united
states, passed, on the 15th of October, a resolve, empowering their cashier to
renew all discounted notes, when the same drawers and indorsers were offered,
and declaring that no notes should be protested, when the indorsers bound
themselves in writing, to be acountable in the same manner as in cases of
protest.

Besides what we have already suffered, we are menaced with another evil, which
probably at any other period, would not very materially injure the city; but if
it comes in addition to our present distress, will operate against us a very
long time. I mean the removal of congress. The meeting of this body is fixed
for the first Monday in December; and it is not improbable that attempts will
be made to prevent their next session being held here. Appeals will be made to
their fears. Already the New York papers announce, that as congress cannot
meet, agreeably to their adjournment, with any probability of safety in
Philadelphia, under its present calamitous visitation, there can be no doubt of
their adjourning to sit in New York, where the air is perfectly salubrious, the
markets plentiful, and every convenience ready for their accommodation
Columbian Gazetteer, October 17, 1793.
. If, at the time of their meeting, any trace of the disorder remains, the
Philadelphians will not urge their stay here. But if it be, as there is every
probability, absolutely extinguished, we place too much reliance on their
justice to suspect that they will add to the stroke we have felt.

For these prefatory observations I hope I shall be pardoned. I now proceed to
the melancholy subject I have undertaken.

The malignant fever, which has committed such ravages in Philadelphia, made
its appearance here, about the end of July. Dr. Hodge's child, probably the
first victim, was taken ill on the 26th or 27th of July, and died on the 6th or
7th of August. A Mr. Moore This man had been walking along the wharves, where
the coffee lay, and at which the Sans Culottes was moored, in the morning; and
on his return home, was so extremely ill, as to be obliged to go to bed, from
which he never rose again.
, in Mr. Denny's lodging house, in Water street, was seized on Friday, the 2d
of August, and died on Sunday, the fourth. Mrs. Parkinson, who lodged in the
same house, caught the disorder, on the 3d of August, and died on the 7th.

On the origin of the disorder, there prevails a very great diversity of
opinion. Dr. Hutchinson maintained that it was not imported, and stated, in a
letter which he wrote on the subject to Captain Falconer, the health officer of
the port of Philadelphia, that the general opinion was, that the disorder
originated from some damaged coffee, or other putrified vegetable and animal
matters. To this opinion, though he did not give it absolutely as his own, he
seemed strongly to incline; and mentioned, that at a wharf, a little above
Arch-street, there was not only a quantity of damaged coffee The stench of this
coffee was so excessively offensive, that the people in the neighborhood could
hardly bear to remain in the back part of their houses.
, extremely offensive, but also some putrid animal and vegetable substances.
The doctor rested his opinion, that the disorder was not imported, on two
circumstances, which prove to be mistaken, viz. that no foreigners or sailors
were infected on the 27th of August, the time of writing, and that it had not
been found in lodging houses. This opinion was so far from being just, that the
second place in which it is known to have made its appearance, was a lodging
house, and some of the earliest patients were French lads.

Dr. Rush is of the same opinion with dr. Hutchinson, and says he has in his
possession sufficient documents to prove that the disorder is not an imported
one, but of native growth. As he has not yet communicated his proofs to the
public, it is impossible to decide on them.

That it is an imported disorder, is the opinion of most of the inhabitants of
Philadelphia. However, there is much diversity of sentiment, as to the time and
manner of its introduction. I shall state some of the various reports current,
and let the reader judge for himself.

Some assert, that it was brought by Il Constante, commanded by Coulon, which
arrived here from Ragusa, and Martinico, about the beginning of May. This is
very unlikely, as the lower part of the city, where she lay, was free until the
disorder spread there from the upper part.

Another opinion is, that it was introduced by the Mary, captain Rush, which
arrived here on the 7th of August, with some of the French emigrants from the
cape. But the existence of the disorder previous to her arrival, sets aside
this opinion at once.

Others again say that a vessel from Tobago* which arrived here in July, lost
nearly all her hands with a malignant fever. In the river, she shipped fresh
hands, many of whom died. From her they believe the disorder spread. With
respect to this report, I cannot aver any thing.

The most probable and general opinion is, that the privateer Sans Culottes,
with her prize, the Flora, which arrived here the 22d of July, introduced the
fever. The privateer was in a foul, dirty condition -- her hold very small --
and perhaps as ill calculated for the accommodation of the great number of
people that were on board, as any vessel that ever crossed the ocean. All her
silth was emptied at a wharf between Arch and Race-street. A dead body, sewed
up in canvass, lay on board the Flora, for some time, and was seen by mr.
Lemaigre and other gentlemen. Several respectable inhabitants of Water-street
declare, that sundry dead bodies were privately landed in the night, from the
privateer and her prize.

Before I dismiss this part of the subject, it may not be amiss to mention,
that many believe we have had two disorders in the city, introduced about the
same time, the yellow fever, from the West Indies, and a species of pestilence
from Marseilles.

The mortality began about that part of Water-street, where the Sans Culottes
lay. For some time it was entirely confined to that place and its
neighborhood. Almost every death which occurred in the early stage of the
disorder could be without difficulty traced to that street. By degrees, it
spread, owing to the want of precaution, and to communication with the
infected. It is said, and generally believed, that the beds and bedding of
those who died of the disorder, at first, before the alarm went abroad, were
sold, and spread it among the buyers.

Several persons were swept away before any great alarm was excited. The first
deaths that attracted public notice, and struck terror among the citizens, were
those of Peter Aston, on the 19th, of Mrs. Lemaigre, on the 20th, and of Thomas
Miller, on the 25th of August. About this time began the removals from the
city, which were for some weeks so general, that almost every hour in the day,
carts, wagons, coachees, and chairs, were to be seen transporting families and
furniture to the country in every direction. Business then became extremely
dull. Mechanics and artists were unemployed; and the streets wore the
appearance of gloom and melancholy.

The first official notice taken of the disorder, was on the 22d of August, on
which day, the mayor of Philadelphia, Matthew Clarkson, ^sq. wrote to the city
commissioners, and after acquainting them with the state of the city, gave them
the most peremptory orders, to have the streets properly cleansed and purified
by the scavengers, and all the filth immediately hawled away. These orders were
repeated on the 27th, and similar ones given to the clerks of the market. The
29th the governor of the state, in his address to the legislature, acquainted
them, that a contagious disorder existed in the city; and that he had taken
every proper measure to ascertain the origin, nature, and extent of it. He
likewise assured them that the health officer and physician of the port, would
take every precaution to allay and remove the public inquietude.

The 26th of the same month, the college of physicians had a meeting, at which
they took into consideration the nature of the disorder, and the means of
prevention and of cure. They published an address to the citizens, signed by
the president and secretary, recommending to avoid all unnecessary intercourse
with the infected; to place marks on the doors or windows where they were; to
pay great attention to cleanliness and airing the rooms of the sick; to provide
a large and airy hospital in the neighborhood of the city for their reception;
to put a stop to the tolling of the bells; to bury those who died of the
disorder in carriages and as privately as possible; to keep the streets and
wharves clean; to avoid all fatigue of body and mind, and standing or sitting
in the sun, or in the open air; to accommodate the dress to the weather, and to
exceed rather in warm than in cool clothing; and to avoid intemperance, but to
use fermented liquors, such as wine, beer, and cider, with moderation. They
likewise declared their opinion, that fires in the streets were very dangerous,
if not ineffectual means of stopping the progress of the fever, and that they
placed more dependence on the burning of gunpowder. The benefits of vinegar and
camphor, they added, were confined chiefly to infected rooms, and could not be
too often used on handkerchiefs, or in smelling bottles, by persons who
attended the sick.

In consequence of this address, the bells were immediately stopped from
tolling, which was a measure very expedient; as they had before been kept
pretty constantly going the whole day, so as to terrify those in health, and
drive the sick, as far as the influence of imagination could produce that
effect, to their graves. An idea had gone abroad, that the burning of fires in
the streets, would have a tendency to purify the air, and arrest the progress
of the disorder. The people had, therefore, almost every night large fires
lighted at the corners of the streets. The 29th, the mayor published a
proclamation, forbidding this practice. As a substitute, many had recourse to
the firing of guns, which they imagined was a certain preventative of the
disorder. This was carried so far, and attended with such danger, that it was
forbidden by the mayor's order, of the 4th of September.

The number of the infected daily increasing, and the existence of an order
against the admission of persons laboring under infectious diseases into the
alms house, precluding them from a refuge there At this period, the number of
paupers in the alms house was between three and four hundred; and the managers,
apprehensive of spreading the disorder among them, enforced the abovementioned
order, which had been entered into along time before. They, however, supplied
beds and bedding, and all the money in their treasury, for their relief, out of
that house.
, some temporary place was requisite, and thre^ of the guardians of the poor
took possession of the circus, in which mr. Ricketts had lately exhibited his
equestrian feats, being the only place that could be procured for the purpose.
Thither they sent seven persons afflicted with the malignant fever, where they
lay in the open air for some time, and without proper assistance High wages
were offered for nurses for these poor people -- but none could be procured.
. Of these, one crawled out on the commons, where he died at a distance from
any house. Two died in the circus, one of whom was seasonably removed; the
other lay in a state of putrefaction for above forty eight hours, owing to the
difficulty of procuring any person to remove him. On this occasion occurred an
instance of courage in a servant girl, of which at that time few men were
capable. The carter, who finally undertook to remove the corpse, having no
assistant, and being unable alone to put it into the coffin, was on the point
of relinquishing his design, and quitting the place. The girl perceived him,
and understanding the difficulty he labored under, offered her services,
provided he would not inform the family with whom she lived. She accordingly
helped him to put the body into the coffin, which was by that time crawling
with maggots, and in such a state as to be ready to fall in pieces. It gives me
pleasure to add, that she still lives, notwithstanding her very hazardous
exploit.

The inhabitants of the neighborhood of the circus took the alarm, and
theatened to burn or destroy it, unless the sick were removed; and it is
believed they would have actually carried their threats into execution, had a
compliance been delayed a day longer.

The 29th, seven of the guardians of the poor had a conference with some of the
city magistrates on the subject of the fever, at which it was agreed to be
indispensably necessary that a suitable house, as an hospital, should be
provided near the city for the reception of the infected poor.

In consequence, the same day, the guardians of the poor resolved to use their
utmost exertions to procure such a house out of town, and as near thereto, as
might be practicable, consistent with the safety of the inhabitants, for the
poor who were or might be afflicted with contagious disorders, and be destitute
of the means of providing necessary assistance otherwise; to engage physicians,
nurses, attendants, and all necessaries for their relief in that house; to
appoint proper persons in each district, to enquire after such poor as might be
afflicted; to administer assistance to them in their own houses, and, if
necessary, to remove them to the hospital. They reserved to themselves, at the
same time, the liberty of calling on the mayor for such sums as might be
necessary to carry their resolves into effect.

Conformably to these resolves, a committee of the guardians was appointed to
make enquiry for a suitable place; and after strict examination, they judged
that a building adjacent to Bushhill, the mansion house of William Hamilton,
esquire. was the best calculated for the purpose. And that gentleman being absent,
and having no agent in the city, and the great urgency of the case admitting no
delay, eight of the guardians, accompanied by Hilary Baker, esquire. one of the
city aldermen, with the concurrence of the governor, proceeded to the building
they had fixed upon; and meeting with some opposition from a tenant who
occupied it, they took possession of the mansion house itself, to which, on the
same evening, the 31st of August, they sent the four patients who remained at
the circus.

Shortly after this, the guardians of the poor for the city, except James
Wilson, Jacob Tomkins, jun. and William Sansom, ceased the performance of their
duties, nearly the whole of them having removed out of the city. Before this
virtual vacation of office, they passed a resolve against the admission of any
paupers whatever into the almshouse during the prevalence of the disorder. The
cause of entering into this order, was, that some paupers, who had been
admitted previous thereto, with a certificate from the physicians, of their
being free from the infection, had nevertheless died of it. The whole care of
the poor of the city, the providing for Bush-hill, sending the sick there, and
burying the dead, devolved, therefore, on the above three guardians. It must
give the reader great sorrow to hear, that two of them, James Wilson, and Jacob
Tomkins, excellent and indefatigable young men, whose services were at that
time of very great importance, fell sacrifices in the cause of humanity. The
other, William Sansom, was likewise, in the execution of his dangerous office,
seized with the disorder, and on the brink of the grave, but was so fortunate
as to escape.

The consternation of the people of Philadelphia at this period was carried
beyond all bounds. Dismay and affright were visible in the countenance of
almost every person. Most people who could by any means make it convenient,
fled from the city. Of those who remained, many shut themselves up in their
houses, and were afraid to walk the streets. The consumption of gunpowder and
nitre in houses as a preventative, was inconceivable. Many were almost
incessantly purifying, scowering, and whitewashing their rooms. Those who
ventured abroad, had handkerchiefs or sponges impregnated with vinegar or
camphor, at their noses, or else smelling bottles with the thieves' vinegar.
Others carried pieces of tar in their hands, or pockets, or camphor bags tied
round their necks. The corpses of the most respectable citizens, even of those
who did not die of the epidemic, were carried to the grave, on the shafts of a
chair, the horse driven by a negro, unattended by a friend or relation, and
without any sort of ceremony. People shifted their course at the sight of a
hearse coming toward them. Many never walked on the foot path, but went into
the middle of the streets, to avoid being infected in passing by houses wherein
people had died. Acquaintances and friends avoided each other in the streets,
and only signified their regard by a cold nod. The old custom of shaking hands
fell into such general disuse, that many were affronted at even the offer of
the hand. A person with a crape, or any appearance of mourning, was shunned
like a viper. And many valued themselves highly on the skill and address with
which they got to windward of every person they met. Indeed it is not probable
that London, at the last stage of the plague, exhibited stronger marks of
terror, than were to be seen in Philadelphia, from the 24th or 25th of August
till pretty late in September. When people summoned up resolution to walk
abroad, and take the air, the sick cart conveying patients to the hospital, or
the hearse carrying the dead to the grave, which were traveling almost the
whole day, soon damped their spirits, and plunged them again into despondency.

While affairs were in this deplorable state, and the people at the lowest ebb
of despair, we cannot be astonished at the frightful scenes that were acted,
which seemed to indicate a total dissolution of the bonds of society in the
nearest and dearest connexions. Who, without horror, can reflect on a husband
deserting his wife, united to him perhaps for twenty years, in the last agony
-- a wife unfeelingly abandoning her husband on his death bed -- parents
forsaking their only children without remorse -- children ungratefully flying
from their parents, and resigning them to chance, without an enquiry after
their health or safety -- masters hurrying off their faithful servants to
Bushhill, even on suspicion of the fever, and that at a time, when, like
Tartarus, it was open to every visitant, but never returned any -- servants
abandoning tender and humane masters, who only wanted a little care to restore
them to health and usefulness -- who, I say, can even now think of these things
without horror? Yet such were daily exhibited in every quarter of our city.

These desertions produced scenes of distress and misery, of which few
parallels are to be met with, and which nothing could palliate, but the
extraordinary public panic, and the great law of self preservation, the
dominion of which extends over the whole animated world. Many men of affluent
fortunes, who have given employment and sustenance to hundreds every day in the
year, have been abandoned to the care of a negro, after their wives, children,
friends, clerks, and servants had fled away, and left them to their fate. In
many cases, no money could procure proper attendance. With the poor, the case
was, as might be expected, infinitely worse than with the rich. Many of these
have perished, without a human being to hand them a drink of water, to
administer medicines, or to perform any charitable office for them. Various
instances have occurred of dead bodies found lying in the streets, of persons
who had no house or habitation, and could procure no shelter.

A woman, whose husband had just died of the fever, was seized with the pains
of labor, and had nobody to assist her, as the women in the neighborhood were
afraid to go into the house. She lay for a considerable time in a degree of
anguish that will not bear description. At length, she struggled to reach the
window, and cried out for assistance. Two men, passing by, went up stairs; but
they came at too late a stage. -- She was striving with death -- and actually
in a few minutes expired in their arms.

A woman, whose husband and two children lay dead in the room with her, was in
the same situation, without a midwife, or any other person to aid her. Her
cries at the window brought up one of the carters employed by the committee for
the relief of the sick. With his assistance, she was delivered of a child,
which died in a few minutes, as did the mother, who was utterly exhausted by
her labor, by the disorder, and by the dreadful spectacle before her. And thus
lay in one room, no less than five dead bodies, an entire family, carried off
in an hour or two. Many instances have occurred, of respectable women, who, in
their lying-in, have been obliged to depend on servant women for assistance --
and some have had none but their husbands. Some of the midwives were dead --
and others had left the city.

A servant girl, belonging to a family in this city, in which the fever had
prevailed, was apprehensive of danger, and resolved to remove to a relation's
house, in the country. She was, however, taken sick on the road, and returned
to town, where she could find no person to receive her. One of the guardians of
the poor provided a cart, and took her to the alms house, into which she was
refused admittance. She was brought back, and the guardian offered five dollars
to provide her a single night's lodging, but in vain. And in fine, after every
effort made to provide her shelter, she absolutely expired in the cart.

To relate all the frightful cases of this nature that occurred, would fill a
volume. Let these few suffice. But I must observe, that most of them happened
in the first stage of the public panic. Afterward, when the citizens recovered
a little from their fright, they became rare.

Great as was the calamity of Philadelphia, it was magnified in the most
extraordinary manner. The hundred tongues of rumor were never more
successfully employed, than on this melancholy occasion. The terror of the
inhabitants of all the neighboring states was excited by a succession of
letters from Philadelphia, distributed by every mail, which told tales of woe,
whereof hardly a single circumstance was true, but which were every where
received with implicit faith. The distresses of the city, and the fatality of
the disorder, were exaggerated as it were to see how far credulity could be
carried. The plague of London was, according to rumor, hardly more fatal than
our yellow fever. Our citizens died so fast, that there was hardly enough of
people to bury them. Ten, or fifteen, or more were said to be cast into one
hole together, ^ike so many dead beasts The following extract appeared in a
Norfolk paper about the middle of September: Extract of a letter from
Philadelphia, to a gentleman in Norfolk, Sept. 9.
Half the inhabitants of this city have already fled to different parts, on
account of the pestilential disorder that prevails here. The few citizens who
remained in this place, die in abundance, so fast that they drag them away,
like dead beasts, and putten, or fifteen, or more in a hole together. All the
stores are shut up. I am afraid this city will be ruined: for nobody will come
near it hereafter. I am this day removing my family from this fatal place.





. One man, who could find his feelings easy enough, to be facetious on the
subject, acquainted his correspondent, that the only business carrying on, was
grave digging, or rather pit digging From a New York paper of October 2.
Extract of a letter from a gentleman in Philadelphia, dated Sept 23.
The papers must have amply informed you of the melancholy situation of this
city for five or six weeks past. Grave-digging has been the only business
carrying on; and indeed I may say of late, pit-digging, where people are
interred indiscriminately in three tiers of coffins. From the most accurate
observations I can make upon matters, I think I speak within bounds, when I
say, eighteen hundred persons have perished (I do not say all of the yellow
fever) since its first appearance.



. And at a time when the deaths did not exceed from forty to fifty daily, many
men had the modesty to write, and others, throughout the continent, the
credulity to believe, that we buried from one hundred to one hundred and fifty
From the Maryland Journal, of Sept. 27th. Extract of a letter from
Philadelphia, dated Sept. 20th.
The disorder seems to be much the same in this place, as when I last wrote
you: about 1500 have fallen victims to it. Last Sunday, Monday, and Tuesday,
there were not less than 350 died with this severe disorder!!! As I informed
you before, this is the most distressed place I ever beheld. Whole families go
in the disorder, in the course of twelve hours. For your own sakes, use all
possible means to keep it out of Baltimore.


Extract of a letter from Philadelphia, of the same date:
The malignant fever which prevails here, is still increasing. Report says,
that above one hundred have been buried per day for some time past. It is now
thought to be more infectious than ever. I think you ought to be very careful
with respect to admitting persons from Philadelphia into your town.



. Thousands were swept off in three or four weeks From a Chestertown paper, of
Sept. 10. Extract of a letter from a respectable young mechanic, in
Philadelphia, to his friend in this town, dated the 5th inst.
It is now a very mortal time in this city. The yellow fever has killed some
thousands of the inhabitants. Eight thousand mechanics, besides other people,
have left the town. Every master in the city, of our branch of business, is
gone. The "some thousands" that were killed at that time did not amount to
three hundred. The authentic information in this letter, was circulated in
every state in the union, by the news paper^.



. And the nature and danger of the disorder, were as much misrepresented, as
the number of the dead. It was said, in defiance of every day's experience, to
be as inevitable by all exposed to the contagion, as the stroke of fate.

The effects produced by these letters, were such as might be reasonably
expected. The consternation spread though the several states like wildfire.
The first public act that took place on the subject, as far as I can learn, was
at Chestertown, in Maryland. At this place, a meeting was held on the 10th of
September, at which several resolves were entered into, which, after specifying
that the disorder had extended to Trenton, Princeton, Woodbridge, and
Elizabeth-town, on the post road to New York, directed, that notice should be
sent to the owners of the stages not to allow them to pass through the town,
while there should be reason to expect danger therefrom; that a committee of
health and inspection should be appointed, to provide for the relief of such
poor inhabitants as might take the disorder, and likewise for such strangers as
might be infected with it. They at the same appointed seven persons as this
committee, with power to call a general meeting in particular specified cases.
In consequence of these resolves, the Eastern shore line of stages was stopped in
the course of a few days afterward.

The alarm in New York was first officially announced by a letter from the
mayor to the practicing physicians, dated Sept. 11, in which he requests them
to report to him in writing the names of all such persons as had arrived, or
should arrive from Philadelphia, or any other place, by land or water, and were
or should be sick; that such as should be deemed subjects of infectious
diseases, might be removed out of the city. He notified them, that the
corporation had taken measures to provide a proper place for an hospital, for
such persons as might unhappily become subjects of the fever in New York. In
this letter the mayor declared his opinion clearly, that the intercourse with
Philadelphia, could not be lawfully interrupted by any power in the state. The
12th appeared a proclamation from governor Clinton, which, referring to the act
to prevent the bringing in, and spreading of infectious disorders, prohibited,
in the terms of that act, all vessels from Philadelphia, to approach nearer to
the city of New York, then Bedlow's island, about two miles distant, till duly
discharged. The silence of this proclamation, respecting passengers by land,
seemed to imply that the governor's opinion on the subject, was the same as
that of the mayor.

The same day, at a meeting of the citizens, the necessity of taking some
precautions was unanimously agreed upon, and a committee of seven appointed to
report a plan to a meeting to be held next day. Their report, which was
unanimously agreed to, the 13th, recommended to hire two physicians, to assist
the physician of the port in his examinations of vessels; to check, as much as
possible, the intercourse by stages; to acquaint the proprietors of the
southern stages, that it was the earnest wish of the inhabitants, that their
carriages and boats should not pass during the prevalence of the disorder in
Philadelphia; and to request the practitioners of physic to report, without
fail, every case of fever, to which they might be called, occurring in any
persons that had or might arrive from Philadelphia, or have intercourse with
them. Not satisfied with these measures, the corporation, on the 17th, came to
a resolution to stop all intercourse between the two cities; and for this
purpose guards were placed at the different landings, with orders to send back
every person coming from Philadelphia; and if any were discovered to have
arrived after that date, they were to be directly sent back. All persons taking
in lodgers, were called upon to give information of all people of the above
description, under pain of being prosecuted according to law. All good citizens
were required to give information to the mayor, or any member of the committee,
of any breach in the premises.

All these strict precautions being eluded by the fears and the vigilance of
the fugitives from Philadelphia, on the 23d there was a meeting held, of
delegates from the several wards of the city, in order to adopt more effectual
measures. At this meeting, it was resolved to establish a night watch of not
less than ten citizens in each ward, to guard against such as might escape them
by day. Not yet eased of their fears, they next day published an address, in
which they mentioned, that notwithstanding their utmost vigilance, many persons
had been clandestinely landed upon the shores of New York island. They
therefore again called upon their fellow citizens to be cautious how they
received strangers into their houses; not to fail to report all such to the
mayor immediately upon their arrival; to remember the importance of the
occasion; and to consider what reply they should make to the just resentment of
their fellow citizens, whose lives they might expose by a criminal neglect, or
infidelity. They likewise declared their expectation, that those who kept the
different ferries on the shores of New Jersey and Staten island, would pay such
attention to their address, as not to transport any person but to the public
landings, and that in the day time, between sun and sun. The 30th they
published a lengthy address, recapitulating the various precautions they had
taken -- the nature of the disorder -- and the numbers who had died out of
Philadelphia, without communicating it to any one. They at the same time
resolved, that goods, bedding, and clothing, packed up in Philadelphia, should,
previous to their being brought into New York, be unpacked and exposed to the
open air in some well-ventilated place, for at least 48 hours; that all linen
or cotton clothes, or bedding, which had been used, should be well washed in
several waters; and afterward, that the whole, both such as had been, and such
as had not been used, should be hung up in a close room, and well smoked with
the fumes of brimstone for one day, and after that again exposed for at least
twenty four hours to the open air; and that the boxes, trunks, or chests, in
which they had been packed, should be cleaned and aired in the same manner;
after which, being repacked, and such evidence given of their purification, as
the committee should require, permission might be had to bring them into the
city.

The 11th of October, they likewise resolved, that they would consider and
publish to the world, as enemies to the welfare of the city, and the lives of
its inhabitants, all those who should be so selfish and hardy, as to attempt to
introtroduce any goods, wares, merchandise, bedding, baggage, etc. imported
from, or packed up in Philadelphia, contrary to the rules prescribed by that
body, who were, they said, deputed to express the will of their fellow
citizens. They recommended to the inhabitants to withstand any temptation of
profit, which might attend the purchase of goods in Philadelphia, as no
emolument to an individual, they added, could warrant the hazard to which such
conduct might expose the city. Besides all these resolves, they published daily
statements of the health of the city, to allay the fears of their f^low
citizens.

I did not choose to interrupt this account of the proceedings of the committee
of health, to mention, in order of time, that the clergy of New York had a
meeting, on the 16th of September, and unanimously agreed to set apart Friday,
the 20th, as a day of humiliation, fasting, and prayer to Almighty God, for the
preservation of their city, from the fever, and for the comfort and support of
their brethren in Philadelphia, in the season of their distress. The Dutch
synod of New York had a meeting the first week in October, at which they agreed
that those churches under their care, which had not yet observed a day of fast
and prayer, should devote the second Wednesday in November to that purpose.

The inhabitants of Trenton and Lamberton associated on the 13th of Sept. and
on the 1^th passed several resolutions to guard themselves against the
contagion. They resolved that a total stop should be put to the landing of all
persons from Philadelphia, at any ferry or place from Lamberton to Howell's
ferry, four miles above Trenton; that the intercourse by water should be
prohibited between Lamberton, or the head of tide water, and Philadelphia; and
that all boats from Philadelphia, should be prevented from landing either goods
or passengers any where between Bordentown and the head of tide water; that no
person whatever should be permi^ted to come from Philadelphia, or Kensington,
while the fever continued; that all persons who should go from within the
limits of the association, to either of those places, should be prevented from
returning during the continuance of the fever; and finally, that their standing
committee should enquire whether any persons, not inhabitants, who had lately
come from places infected, and were therefore likely to be infected themselves,
were within the limits of the association, and if so, that they should be
obliged instantly to leave the said limits. The people of Jersey observed the
1st of October, as a day of fast and prayer, for the same purpose as those of
New York.

The 12th of September, the governor of Maryland published a proclamation,
subjecting all vessels from Philadelphia to the performance of a quarantine,
not exceeding forty days, or as much less as might be judged safe by the health
officers. It further ordered, that all persons going to Baltimore, to Havre de
Grace, to the head of Elk, or, by any other route, making their way into that
state from Philadelphia, or any other place known to be infected with the
malignant fever, should be subject to be examined, and prevented from
proceeding, by persons to be appointed for that purpose, and who were to take
the advice and opinion of the medical faculty in every case, in order that
private affairs and pursuits might not be unnecessarily impeded. This
proclamation appointed two health officers for Baltimore.

The people of Baltimore met the 13th of September, and resolved that none of
their citizens should receive into their houses any persons coming from
Philadelphia, or other infected place, without producing a certificate from the
health officer, or officer of patrol; and that any person who violated that
resolve, should be held up to public view, as a proper object for the
resentment of the town. The 14th, a party of militia was dispatched to take
possession of a pass on the Philadelphia road, about two miles from Baltimore,
to prevent the entrance of any passengers from Philadelphia without license.
Dr. Worthington, the health officer stationed at this pass, was directed to
refuse permission to persons afflicted with any malignant complaint, or who had
not been absent from Philadelphia, or other infected place, at least seven
days. The western shore line of Philadelphia stages was stopped about the 18th
or 19th.

The 30th, the committee of health resolved that no inhabitant of Baltimore,
who should visit persons from Philadelphia, while performing quarantine, should
be permitted to enter the town, until the time of quarantine was expired, and
until it was certainly known that the persons he had visited were free from the
infection; and that thenceforward no goods capable of conveying infection, that
had been landed or packed up in Philadelphia, or other infected place, should
be permitted to enter the town -- nor should any baggage of travelers be
admitted, until it had been exposed to the open air such length of time as the
health officer might direct.

The 25th of September, the inhabitants of Havre de Grace, resolved that no
person should be allowed to cross the Susquehannah river at that place, who did
not bring a certificate of his not having lately come from Philadelphia, or any
other infected place; and that the citizens of Havre would embody themselves to
prevent any one from crossing without such a certificate.

At Hagerstown, on the 3d of October, it was resolved, that no citizen should
receive into his house any person coming from Philadelphia, supposed to be
infected with the malignant fever, until he or she produced a certificate from
a health officer; that should any citizen contravene the above resolution, he
should be cut off from all society with his fellow citizens; that the clothing
sent to the troops then in that town, should not be received there, nor
suffered to come within seven miles thereof; that if any person from
Philadelphia, or other infected place, should arrive there, he should be
required instantly to depart, and in case of refusal or neglect, be compelled
to go without delay; that no merchant, or other person, should be permitted to
bring into the town, or open therein, any goods brought from Philadelphia, or
other infected place, until permitted by the committee; and that the citizens
of ^he town, and its vicinity, should enrol themselves as a guard, and patrole
such road and passes as the committee should direct.

The governor of Virginia, on the 17th of September, issued a proclamation,
ordering all vessels from Philadelphia, the Grenades, and the island of Tobago,
to perform a quarantine of twenty days, at the anchorage ground, off Craney
island, near the mouth of Elizabeth river.

The corporation of Alexandria stationed a look-out boat, to prevent all
vessels bound to that port, from approaching nearer than one mile, until after
examination by the health officer.

The people of Winchester placed guards at every avenue of the town leading
from the Patomac, to stop all suspected persons, packages, etc. coming from
Philadelphia till the health officers should inspect them, and either forbid or
allow them to pass.

The legislature of Massachusetts happened to be actually in session, at the
time the alarm spread; and they accordingly passed an express act for guarding
against the impending danger. This act directed that the selectmen in the
different towns should be authorized to stop and examine any persons, baggage,
merchandise, or effects, coming, or supposed to be coming into the towns
respectively, from Philadelphia, or other place infected, or supposed to be
infected; and should it appear to them, or to any officers whom they should
appoint, that any danger of infection was to be apprehended from such persons,
effects, baggage, or merchandise, ^^ey were authorized to detain or remove the
same to such place as they might see proper, in order that they might be
purified from infection; or to place any persons so coming, in such places, and
under such regulations as they might judge necessary for the public safety. In
pursuance of this act, the governor issued a proclamation to carry it into
effect, the 21st of September.

The selectmen of Boston, on the 24th, published their regulations of
quarantine, which ordered, that on the arrival of any vessel from Philadelphia,
she should be detained at, or near Rainsford's Island, to perform a quarantine
not exceeding thirty days, during which time she should be cleansed with
vinegar, and the explosion of gunpowder between the decks and in the cabin,
even though there were no sick persons on board; that in case there should be
sick on board, they should be removed to an hospital, where they should be
detained till they recovered, or were long enough to ascertain that they had
not the infection; that every vessel, performing quarantine, should be deprived
of its boat, and no boat suffered to approach it, but by special permission;
that if any person should escape, he should be instantly advertised, in order
that he might be apprehended; that any persons coming by land from
Philadelphia, should not be allowed to enter Boston, until twenty one days
after their arrival, and their effects, baggage, and merchandise should be
opened, washed, and fumigated with vinegar and repeated explosions of
gunpowder. In the conclusion, the selectmen called upon the inhabitants to use
their utmost vigilance and activity to bring to condign punishment any person
who should be so daring and lost to every idea of humanity, as to come into the
town from any place supposed to be infected, thereby endangering the lives of
their fellow men.

The governor of Rhode Island, the 21st of September, issued a proclamation,
directing the town councils and other officers, to use their utmost vigilance
to cause the law to prevent the spreading of contagious disorders to be most
strictly executed, more especially with respect to all vessels which should
arrive in that state from the West Indies, Philadelphia, and New York; the
extension to the latter place was owing to the danger apprehended from the
intercourse between it and Philadelphia.

The 28th of September, the governor of North Carolina published his
proclamation, requiring the commissioners of navigation in the different ports,
and the commissioners of the different towns in the said state, to appoint
certain places, where all vessels from the port of Philadelphia, or any other
place where the malignant fever might prevail, should perform quarantine for
such number of days as they might think proper.

The inhabitants of Charleston do not seem to have been far behind their
neighbors in their apprehensions or their cautions. The 8th of Oct. they had a
meeting, at which they resolved, that no vessel from the river Delaware, either
directly or after having touched at any other port of the united states, should
be permitted to pass Charleston bar, till the citizens have again assembled,
and declared themselves satisfied that the disorder has ceased in Philadelphia.
If any vessel, contrary thereto, should cross the bar, his excellency should be
requested to compel it to quit the port, and return to sea. Before this
meeting, vessels from Philadelphia had been obliged to perform quarantine; but
by what regulation, I cannot ascertain.

The governor of Georgia, on the 4th of October, published a proclamation,
ordering all vessels from Philadelphia, which should arrive in Savannah river,
to remain in Tybee creek, or in other parts at like distance from the town,
until the health officer of the port should, on examination, certify, that no
malignant or contagious disease was on board. All persons contravening this
proclamation, were to be prosecuted, and subjected to the pains and penalties
by law pointed out.

The people of Augusta, in that state, were as active and vigilant as their
northern neighbors, to guard against the threatening dangers.

While our citizens were thus prescribed in several cities and towns -- hunted
up like felons in some -- and debarred admittance and turned back in others,
whether sound or infected -- it is with extreme satisfaction I have to record a
conduct totally different, which cannot fail to make an indelible impression on
the minds of the people of Philadelphia, and call forth the most lively
emotions of gratitude.

A respectable number of the inhabitants of Springfield, in New Jersey, met the
first day of October, and after a full consideration of the distresses of our
citizens, passed a resolve, offering their town as an asylum to the people
flying from Philadelphia, and directing their committee to provide a suitable
place as an hospital for such of them as might be seized with the prevailing
malignant fever.

I have been informed, by a person of credit, that the inhabitants of Elizabeth
town have pursued the same liberal pla^, as those of Springfield; but have not
been able to procure a copy of their resolves or proceedings on the subject.

An asylum has likewise been offered to Philadelphians, by several of the
inhabitants of Elkton, in Maryland; and the offer was couched in terms of the
utmost sympathy for our sufferings.

The instances of this kind, through this extensive country, have been very
few; but they are therefore only the more precious, and ought to be held up to
public approbation. May they operate on people, at a future day, in similar
cases of dreadful calamity -- and teach them to temper their caution with as
much humanity and tenderness to the distressed fugitives, as prudence will
allow -- and not involve in one indiscriminate proscription the healthy and
infected.

In the mean time, the situation of affairs in Philadelphia, became daily more
and more serious. The three guardians of the poor for the city, who, as I have
said, continued to act, were quite oppressed with the labors of their office,
which increased to such a degree, that they were utterly unable to execute
them. The number of diseased persons became very great. Owing to the general
terror, nurses, carters, and attendants could hardly be procured. Thus
circumstanced, the mayor of the city, on the 10th of September, published an
address to the citizens, announcing that the guardians of the poor, who
remained, were in distress for want of assistance, and inviting such benevolent
citizens as felt for the general distress, to lend their aid. In consequence of
this advertisement, a meeting of the citizens was held at the city hall, on the
12th of September, at which very few attended, from the univeral consternation
that prevailed. The state of the poor was fully considered; and ten citizens,
Israel Israel, Samuel Wetherill, Thomas Wistar, Andrew Adgate, Caleb Lownes,
Henry Deforest, Thomas Peter's, Joseph Inskeep, Stephen Gerard, and John Mason,
offered themselves to assist the guardians of the poor. At this meeting, a
committee was appointed to confer with the physicians who had the care of
Bush-hill. This committee reported next evening, that the hospital was in very
bad order, and in want of almost every thing.

The 14th, another meeting was held, when the urgent necessities of the sick
being fully considedered, it was resolved to borrow 1500 dollars of the bank of
North America, for the purpose of procuring suitable accommodations for the use
of persons afflicted with the prevailing malignant fever. At this meeting, a
committee was appointed to transact the whole of the business relative to the
relief of the sick, and the procuring of physicians, nurses, attendants, etc.
This is the committee, which, by virtue of that appointment, has from that day
to the present time, watched over the sick, the poor, they widow, and the
orphan. It is worthy of remark, and may encourage others in times of public
calamity, that this committee consisted originally of only twenty-six persons,
men taken from the middle walks of life, and of the moderate pitch of
abilities; of these, four, Andrew Adgate, Jonathan Dickinson Sargeant, Daniel
Offley, and Joseph Inskeep, died, the two first at an early period of their
labors -- and four never attended to the appointment. "The heat and burden of
the day" have therefore been borne by eighteen persons, whose exertions have
been so highly favored by providence, that they have been the instruments of
averting the progress of destruction, eminently relieving the distressed, and
restoring confidence to the terrified inhabitants of Philadelphia. It is
honorable to this committee, that from the time of their organization to the
present, they have lived together in more harmony than is generally to be met
with in public bodies of equal number.

Never, perhaps, was there a city in the situation of Philadelphia at this
period. The president of the united states, according to his annual custom, had
removed to Mount Vernon, with his household. Most, if not all of the other
officers of the federal government were absent. The governor, who had been
sick, had gone, by directions of his physician, to his country seat near the
talls of Schuylkill -- and nearly the whole of the officers of the state had
likewise retired. -- The magistrates of the city, except the mayor, were away,
as were most of those of the liberties. Of the situation of the guardians of
the poor I have already made mention. In fact, government of every kind was
almost wholly vacated, and by universal consent vested in the committee.

On the 15th, the committee resolved, that three members of their board should
attend daily at the city hall, to receive applications for relief, to provide
for the burial of the dead, and the conveyance to Bushhill of all persons
laboring under the fever, who might be willing to go there. This order was
soon rescinded, it being found necessary for all the members to attend at the
hall.

This day, a circumstance occurred, to which the most glowing pencil could
hardly do justice. Stephen Girard, a wealthy merchant, a native of France,
touched with the wretched situation of the sufferers at Bush hill, voluntarily
and unexpectedly offered to superintend that hospital. The surprise and
satisfaction, excited by this extraordinary effort of humanity, can be better
conceived than expressed. Peter Helm, a native of Pennsylvania, actuated by the
like benevolent motives, offered his services in the same department. Their
offers were accepted, and the same afternoon they entered on the execution of
their dangerous and praiseworthy office.

To form a just estimate of the value of the offer of these men, it is
necessary to take into full consideration the general consternation, which at
that period pervaded every quarter of the city, and which made attendance on
the sick be regarded as little less than a certain sacrifice. Uninfluenced by
any reflections of this kind, without any possible inducement but the purest
motives of humanity, they came forward, and offered themselves as the forlorn
hope of the committee. I trust that the gratitude of their fellow citizens will
remain as long as the memory of their beneficent conduct, which I hope will not
die with the present generation. While I am on this subject, let me add, that
from the time of undertaking this office to the present, they have attended
uninterruptedly, for six, seven or eight hours a day, renouncing almost every
care of private affairs. They have had a most irksome tour of duty to perform
-- to encourage and comfort the sick -- to hand them necessaries and medicines
-- to wipe the sweat off their brows -- and to perform many disgusting offices
of kindness for them, which nothing could render tolerable, but the exalted
motives that impelled them to this heroic conduct.

On the 16th, the managers of Bushhill, after personal inspection of the state
of affairs there, made report of its situation, which was truly deplorable. It
exhibited as wretched a picture of human misery as ever existed. A profligate,
abandoned set of nurses and attendants (hardly any of good character could at
that time be procured,) rioted on the provisions and comforts, prepared for the
sick, who (unless at the hours when the doctors attended) were left almost
entirely destitute of every assistance. The dying and dead were
indiscriminately mingled together. The ordure and other evacuations of the
sick, were allowed to remain in the most offensive state imaginable. Not the
smallest appearance of order or regularity existed. It was, in fact, a great
human slaughter house, where numerous victims were immolated at the altar of
riot and intemperance. No wonder, then, that a general dread of the place
prevailed through the city, and that a removal to it was considered as the seal
of death. In consequence, there were various instances of sick persons locking
their rooms, and resisting every attempt to carry them away. At length, the
poor were so much afraid of being sent to Bushhill, that they would not
acknowledge their illness, until it was no longer possible to conceal it. For
it is to be observed, that the fear of the contagion was so prevalent, that as
soon as any one was taken sick, an alarm was spread among the neighbors, and
every effort was used to have the sick person hurried off to Bushhill, to avoid
spreading the disorder. The cases of the persons forced in this way to that
hospital, though laboring under only common colds, and common fall fevers, are
numerous and afflicting. There were not wanting instances of persons, only
slightly ill, being sent to Bushhill, by their panic-struck neighbors, and
embracing the first opportunity of running back to Philadelphia. But the case
was soon altered under the direction of the two managers, Girard and Helm. They
introduced such order and regularity, and had the patients treated with so much
care and tenderness, that they retrieved the character of the hospital; and in
the course of a week or two, numbers of sick people, who had not at home proper
persons to nurse them, applied to be sent to Bushhill. Indeed, in the end, so
many people, who were afflicted with other disorders, procured admittance
there, that it become necessary to pass a resolve, that before an order of
admission should be granted, a certificate must be produced from a physician,
that the patient labored under the malignant fever.

The committee sat daily at the city hall, and engaged a number of carts to
convey the dead to a place of interment, and the sick to the hospital. From
their organization to the present time, they have most unremittingly attended
to the discharge of the trust reposed in them. Neither the regular increase of
deaths till toward the middle of October, nor the afflicting loss of four very
active members, in quick succession, appalled them. That the mortality would
have been incomparably greater, but for their active interposition, is beyond
doubt; as most of those who went to Bushhill, and died there, would have
otherwise died in the city, and spread the contagion: and the dead bodies would
have remained putrefying in deserted houses in every part of the city, and
operated as dreadfully as the plague itself. In fact, at the time they entered
on the execution of the dangerous office they undertook, there were found
several bodies that had lain in this state for two, three, and four days.

In the progress of the disorder, the committee found the calls on their
humanity increase. The numerous deaths of heads of families l^ft a very large
body of children in a most abandon^d, forlorn state. The bettering house, in
which such helpless objects have been usually placed heretofore, was barred
against them, by the order which I have already mentioned. Many of these little
innocents were actually suffering for want of even common necessaries. The
deaths of their parents and protectors, which should have been the strongest
recommendation to public charity, was the very reason of their distress, and of
their being shunned as a pestilence. The children of a family once in easy
circumstances, were found in a blacksmith's shop, squalid, dirty, and half
starved, having been for a considerable time without even bread to eat. Various
instances of a similar nature occurred. This evil early caught the attention of
the committee* and on the 19th of September, they hired a house in
Fifth-street, in which they placed thirteen children. The number increasing, on
the 3d of October, they procured the Loganian library, which was generously
given up by John Swanwick, Esquire. for the purpose of an orphan house. A further
increase of their little charge, rendered ^^cessary to build some additions to
the library, which are now finished, and are nearly half as large as that
building. At present, there are in the house, under the care of the orphan
committee, above eighty children, and about forty are out with wet nurses. From
the origin of the institution, one hundred and sixty children have fallen under
their care, of whom seven are dead, all of whom, except one, were sucking
children; and about thirty have been delivered to their relations or friends.
There are instances of five and six children of a single family in the house.

Another duty soon attracted the attention of the committee. The flight of so
many of our citizens, the consequent stagnation of business, and the almost
total cessation of the labors of the guardians of the poor, brought on among
the lower classes of the people, a great degree of distress, which loudly
demanded the interposition of the humane. In consequence, on the 20th of
September, a sub-committee of distribution was appointed, to furnish such
assistance to deserving objects as their respective cases might require, and
the funds allow They had, in addition to the first loan from the bank of North
America, borrowed 5000 dollars from the same institution, making in the whole
6500.
. This was at first administered sparingly, owing to the confined state of
their finances. But the very extraordinary liberality of our fugitive fellow
citizens, of the citizens of New York, and of those of various towns and
townships, encouraged the committee to extend their views. And frequent
impositions being attempted on them, they, on the 14th of October, called to
their assistance a number of respectable characters in the different parts of
the city and liberties, to seek out and give recommendations to deserving
objects in distress. These gentlemen have undertaken this troublesome office,
which they execute with so much circumspection, as to defeat the arts of
impostors. At present, there are about twelve hundred people relieved weekly,
most of whom have considerable families, some of four, six, and eight persons.
The number, therefore, depending on the committee for assistance, is probably
above four thousand. The gradual revival of business promises to rescue some of
these people speedily from the humiliation of a dependence on public charity;
and the organization of the guardians of the poor will make provision for the
remainder.

From this time, the proceedings of the committee went on in a regular, uniform
tenor, every day like the past, without any thing remarkable occurring, worth
recording. For above five weeks of the time they have been employed, the most
dreary prospects appeared before them. The number of persons to be removed to
Bushhill daily, was for a long time from twenty to thirty -- and the number to
be buried by their carters, was often equal. These two circumstances, the
removals to the hospital, and the persons buried from the city-hall, were
regarded as the barometer, by which to judge of the state of the disease; and
in general they were a just one.

The week, beginning Sunday the 27th of October, proved for the most part cold
and raw. Easterly winds generally prevailed. Thursday and Friday, there was a
considerable fall of rain. A visible alteration has already taken place in the
state of affairs in the city. Our absent friends return in crowds. Every hour
in the day, old faces appear -- and in many instances, those of persons, whom
public fame has buried for weeks past. The stores, so long closed, are opening
fast. Some of the country merchants, bolder than others, are daily venturing in
to their old place of supply. Market-street is nearly as full of wagons as
usual. The custom house, for weeks nearly deserted by our mercantile people, is
thronged by citizens entering their vessels and goods -- the streets, too long
the abode of gloom and despair, have assumed the bustle suitable to the season.
The arrival in the city of our beloved president gives us a flattering prospect
of the next session of congress being held here. And, in fine, as every thing,
in the early stage of the disorder, seemed calculated to add to the general
consternation; so now, on the contrary, every circumstance has a tendency to
revive the courage and hopes of our citizens. But we have to lament, that the
same spirit of exaggeration and lying, that prevailed at a former period, and
was the grand cause of the harsh measures adopted by our sister states, has not
ceased to operate; for at the present moment, when the danger is entirely done
away, the credulous of our own citizens still absent, and of the country
people, are still alarmed by frightful rumors, of the disorder raging with as
much violence as ever; of numbers carried off, a few hours after their return;
and of new cases daily occurring. To what design to attribute these shameful
tales, I know not. Were I to regard them in a spirit of resentment, I should be
inclined to charge them to some secret, interested views of their authors,
intent, if possible, to effect the entire destruction of our city. But I will
not allow myself to consider them in this point of light -- and will even
suppose they arise from a proneness to terrific narration, natural to some men.
But they should consider, that we are in the situation of the frogs in the
fable -- while these tales, which make the hair of the country people stand an
end, are sport to the fabricators, they are death to us. And I here assert, and
defy contradiction, that of the whole number of our fugitive citizens, who have
already returned, amounting to some thousands, not above two are dead -- and
these owe their fate to the most shameful neglect of airing and cleansing their
houses, notwithstanding the various cautions published by the committee. If
people will venture into houses in which infected air has been pent up for
weeks together without any purification, we cannot be surprised at the
consequences, however fatal they may be. But let not the catastrophe of a few
incautious persons operate to bring discredit on a city containing above fifty
thousand people.

At the time of writing these lines, the 10th of November, the committee look
forward with pleasure to the moment of surrendering up their trust to a town
meeting of their fellow citizens, the constituents by whom they were called
into the extraordinary office they have filled. To them they will give an
account of their stewardship in a time of distress, the like of which heaven
avert from the people of America forever. They hope a candid construction will
be put upon their conduct -- and that it will be believed that they have acted
in every case that has come under their cognizance, according to the best of
their judgment.

The sympathy for our calamities displayed in various places, reflects the
highest honor on their inhabitants, and demands our warmest gratitude. The
inhabitants of Gloucester county in New Jersey, have the honor of being first
in this laudable race. So early as the 30th of September, they had a
considerable sum collected, with which they purchased a quantity of provisions
for the use of the hospital at Bush-hill. They have from that time regularly
continued copious supplies twice a week. From a few citizens of Philadelphia,
near Germantown, there have been received two thousand dollars; from others
near Darby, fourteen hundred; from New York, five thousand; from a person
unknown, five hundred; from Bucks' county sixteen hundred; from Delaware county
twelve hundred; from Franklin county nearly five hundred; from Boston sundry
articles, estimated at twenty-five hundred; and from sundry other persons and
places, contributions equally liberal and honorable.

The disorder raged with increased violence, as the season advanced toward the
mild fall months. In the month of September, the mortality was much greater
than in August; and still greater in October, to the 25th, than in September.
What is very particularly worthy of attention, is, that though all the hopes of
the citizens rested on cold and rain, especially the latter, yet the disorder
was extinguished with hardly any rain, and a very moderate degree of cold. The
26th may be set down as the day when the virulence of the fever expired. The
deaths afterward were few, and mostly of those long sick. Hardly any persons
have since taken it. That day was as warm as many of the most fatal ones in the
early part of the month. To account for this is perhaps above our power. In
fact, the whole of the disorder, from its first appearance to its final close,
has set human wisdom and calculation at defiance.

Rarely has it happened, that so large a proportion of the gentlemen of the
faculty have sunk beneath the labors of their very dangerous profession, as on
this occasion. In little more than a month, exclusive of medical students, no
less than ten physicians have been swept off, doctors Hutchinson, Morris, Linn,
Pennington, Dodds, Johnson, Glentworth, Phile, Graham, and Green. Hardly one of
the practicing doctors that remained in the city, escaped sickness -- some were
three, four, and five times confined.

To the clergy it has likewise proved very fatal. Exposed, in the exercise of
the last duties to the dying, to equal danger with the physicians, it is not
surprising that so many of them have fallen. Their names are, the rev.
Alexander Murray, of the protestant episcopal church -- the rev. F. A. Fleming
and the rev. Laurence Graessl of the Roman catholic -- the rev. John Winkhause,
of the German reformed -- the rev. James Sproat, of the presbyterian -- the
rev. William Dougherty, of the methodist church -- and three preachers of the
Friends society, Daniel Offley, Huson Langstroth, and Charles Williams. Six
clergymen have been in the greatest danger from this disorder, the rev. R.
Blackwell, rev. Joseph Pilmore, rev. William Rogers, rev. Christopher V.
Keating, rev. Frederic Schmidt, and the rev. Joseph Turner; but they have all
recovered.

Among the women, the mortality has not by any means been so great, as among
the men In many congregations, the deaths of men have been twice as numerous as
those of women.
, nor among the old and infirm as among the middle-aged and robust.

To tipplers and drunkards, and to men who lived high, and were of a corpulent
habit of body, this disorder was very fatal. Of these, many were seized, and
the recoveries were very rare.

To the filles de joie, it has been equally fatal. The wretched debilitated
state of their constitutions, rendered them an easy prey to this dreadful
disorder, which very soon terminated their miserable career.

It has been dreadfully destructive among the poor. It is very probable, that
at least seven eighths of the number of the dead, were of that class. The
inhabitants of dirty houses have severely expiated their neglect of cleanliness
and decency, by the numbers of them that have fallen sacrifices. Whole families
in such houses have sunk into one silent, undistinguishing grave.

The mortality in confined streets, small allies, and close houses, debarred of
a free circulation of air, has exceeded, in a great proportion, that in the
large streets and well-aired houses. In some of the allies, a third or fourth
of the whole of the inhabitants are no more. In 30 houses, the whole number in
Pewter Platter alley, 32 people died: and in Market-street, in 170 houses, only
39. The streets in the suburbs that had the benefit of the country air,
especially toward the west part of the city, have suffered little. Of the
wide, airy streets, none lost so many people as Arch, near Water-street, which
may be accounted for by its proximity to the original seat of the disorder. It
is to be particularly remarked, that in general, the more remote the streets
were from Water street, the less they experienced of the calamity.

From the effects of this disorder, the French settled in Philadelphia, have
been in a very remarkable degree exempt. To what this may be owing, is a
subject deserving particular investigation. By some it has been ascribed to
their despising the danger. But, though this may have had some effect, it will
not certainly account for it altogether; as it is well known that many of the
most courageous persons in Philadelphia, have been among its victims. By many
of the French, the prevalence and mortality of the disorder have been
attributed to the vast quantities of crude and unwholesome fruits brought to
our markets, and consumed by all classes of people.

The effect of fear in predisposing the body for this and other disorders, and
increasing their malignance, when taken, is well known. The following exception
to the general rule, for the truth of which I pledge myself, is curious and
interesting. A young woman, whose fears were so very prevalent, as not only to
render her unhappy from the commencement of the disorder, but even to interfere
with the happiness of the family with whom she lived, had to attend on seven
persons, all of whom were in a very dangerous state, and one of whom died. Her
attendance was assiduous and unremitted for nearly three weeks. Yet she has
never been in the slightest degree affected.

At an early stage of the disorder, the elders of the African church met, and
offered their services to the mayor, to procure nurses for the sick, and to
assist in burying the dead. Their offers were accepted; and Absalom Jones and
Richard Allen undertook the former department, that of furnishing nurses, and
William Gray, the latter -- the interment of the dead. The great demand for
nurses afforded an opportunity for imposition, which was eagerly seized by some
of the vilest of the blacks. They extorted two, three, four, and even five
dollars a night for attendance, which would have been well paid by a single
dollar. Some of them were even detected in plundering the houses of the sick.
But it is wrong to cast a censure on the whole for this sort of conduct, as
many people have done. The services of Jones, Allen, and Gray, and others of
their ^^^ur, have been very great, and demand public gratitude.

When the yellow fever prevailed in South Carolina, the negroes, according to
that accurate observer, Dr. Lining, were wholly free from it. There is
something very singular in the constitution of the negroes, says he, which
renders them not liable to this fever; for though many of them were as much
exposed as the nurses to this infection; yet I never knew one instance of this
fever among them, though they are equally subject with the white people to the
bilious fever. (...) and observations, vol. II. page 407.
The same idea prevailed for a considerable time in Philadelphia; but it was
erroneous. They did not escape the disorder; however, the number of them that
were seized with it, was not great; and, as I am informed by an eminent doctor,
it yielded to the power of medicine in them more easily than in the whites.

Those who reflect on the many revolting cases of cruelty and desertion of
friends and relations which occurred in Philadelphia, however they may regret,
cannot be surprised, that in the country and in various towns and cities,
inhumanity should be experienced by Philadelphians from strangers. The
universal consternation extinguished in people's breasts the most honorable
feelings of human nature; and in this case, as in various others, the suspicion
operated as injuriously as the reality. Many travelers from this city,
exhausted with fatigue and with hunger, have been refused all shelter and all
sustenance, and have fallen victims to the fears, not to the want of charity,
of those to whom they applied for relief. Instances of this kind have occurred
on almost every road leading from Philadelphia. People under suspicion of
having this disorder, have been forced by their fellow travelers to quit the
stages, and perished in the woods without a possibility of procuring any
assistance. At Milford, in Delaware state, a waggon-load of goods from
Philadelphia, was actually burned; and a woman, who came with it, was tarred
and feathered I am informed that a respectable merchant in this city can vouch
for the truth of this circumstance.
.

There is one fact respecting this disorder, which renders it probable, that
the exercise of the duties of humanity toward the fugitive Philadelphans,
would not have been attended with the danger universally imagined. In defiance
of all the resolutions entered into by the inhabitants of various towns, many
of our infected citizens evaded their vigilance, and took refuge among them,
and in only one or two cases is it known that they communicated the disorder --
and even in these not mortally. Three persons from Philadelphia died of this
disorder, in one house at Woodbury, in New Jersey; they had been attended
during their illness by the family, none of whom caught the infection. Six or
seven died at Darby, as many at Germantown, and eight at Haddonfield, without
communicating it to any of the inhabitants. A man from Philadelphia, of the
name of Cornell, died in New York, about two days after his arrival. The place
of his death was a boarding house, in which were a number of boarders, one of
whom slept in the same bed with him. Two of the family only were slightly
affected -- but not in such a degree as to require medical aid. Three other
infected persons from our city, who, when discovered, were removed to
Governor's island, died there, and no one took the disorder from them. A man
died at one of the principal taverns in Baltimore, of the same disorder. Many
people had visited and attended him during the whole of his illness, without
injury. No person was affected but his doctor, whose indisposition was not of
long continuance. A great number of similar instances have occurred at
Burlington, Bordenton, Lamberton, Princeton, Brunswic, Woodbridge, Newark,
Lancaster, and various other places, and in no case, except those at Baltimore
and New York, has the infection spread.

The terror that prevailed in Philadelphia, and which was spread through the
continent, arose from the fatality of the disorder at first, very few of those
who took it then having escaped. This, with all deference to the medical
gentlemen, arose probably from their being unacquainted with it. That this was
the case, is candily acknowledged by several of the most eminent among them.
The fact is, that the terror was at no time greater, than about the end of
August, at which period, the deaths did not very far exceed the usual number in
that month. When the mortality raged most dreadfully, from the middle of
September to the middle of October, the public were much less alarmed, owing to
the occurrence of several recoveries, and their becoming callous by the force
of habit. During this time it was, that all the sponges, smelling bottles,
handkerchiefs steeped in vinegar, camphor bags, etc. disappeared.

The state of the police and of society in Philadelphia, appears to no small
advantage, when we consider one circumstance. Notwithstanding the absence of
the magistrates, and the immense value of property left unprotected through the
fears of the owners, and the deaths of the persons left to take care of it, we
have as yet heard of only one or two burglaries committed. -- Another was
attempted, but the plunderers were discovered and taken. A hardened villain
from a neighboring state, formed a plot with some negroes to plunder houses.
He was a master rogue, had digested a complete system, and formed a large
partnership for the more successful execution of his schemes. However he was
soon seized, and the company dissolved.

The jail of Philadelphia is under such excellent regulation, that the disorder
made its appearance there only in two or three instances, although such abodes
of misery are the places where contagious disorders are most commonly
generated. When the yellow fever raged most violently in the city, there were
in the jail one hundred and six French soldiers and sailors, confined by order
of the French consul, besides eighty convicts, vagrants, and persons for trial;
all of whom, except two or three, remained perfectly free from the complaint.
Several circumstances have conspired to produce this salutary effect. The
people confined are frequently cleansed and purified by the use of the cold
bath -- they are kept constantly employed -- vegetables form a considerable
part of their diet -- in the yard, vegetation flourishes -- and many of them
being employed in stone cutting, the water, constantly running, keeps the
atmosphere in a moist state, while the people of Philadelphia have been
uninterruptedly parched up by unceasing heat. Elijah Weed, the late jailor,
caught the disorder in the city, in the performance of the paternal duties
toward his daughter, and died in the jail, without communicating it to any of
the people confined. I hope I shall be pardoned for paying a tribute to the
memory of this valuable citizen, under whose government of the jail, and with
whose hearty cooperation, most of the regulations in that institution have
been effected, which, with the successful experiments made in England, prove
that jails may be easily converted from sinks of human depravity and
wretchedness, into places of reformation; so that, instead of rendering the
idle vagrant, confined merely on suspicion, or for want of friends to protect
him, obdurate, wicked, and ripe for rapine and spoil, the profligate and
abandoned may leave them in a situation to become useful members of society.
For the honor of human nature, it ought to be recorded, that some of the
convicts in the jail, a part of the term of whose confinement had been remitted
as a reward for their peaceable, orderly behavior, voluntarily offered
themselves as nurses to attend the sick at Bush-hill, and have in that capacity
conducted themselves with so much fidelity and tenderness, that they have had
the repeated thanks of the managers. Among them are some who were formerly
regarded, and with justice, as hardened abandoned villains, which the old
system was calculated to make every tenant of a jail, who remained there a few
weeks. According to the same summary system, these men's lives would have been
long since offered up as an atonement to society for the injury they had done
it. That is, in plain English, because society had suffered one injury by
rapine, it was necessary it should suffer another by law. But by the improved
plan, they and great numbers of others are restored to society and usefulness
once more. So much better, although not quite so easy, is it to reform men,
than to butcher them under color of law and justice.

In the summer of 1791, the yellow fever prevailed in New York, in a part of
Water-street; and in proportion to the sphere of its action was as fatal there
as it has been here. It began in August, and continued till the middle of
September, when it totally disappeared, and has never since visited that place.
This should ease the fears of many among us, who, always viewing the black side
of every thing, terrify people with their prognostications, that we shall have
it again next spring or summer. All the symptoms were full as dangerous and
alarming in New York, as in Philadelphia. Many persons died in three days;
stupor, delirium, yellowness, the black vomit, and death, rapidly succeeding
each other. Letter from a physician in New York, to his friend in New Jersey,
Federal Gazette, Sept. 21, 1793.
It spread no farther at that time, than the one street, although no
precautions, as far as I can learn, were taken to prevent its extension. The
same species of disorder raged in this city in 1762, with great violence. It
disappeared in the month of November, and has not from that time until this
year visited Philadelphia.

The summer and fall of this year have been unhealthy in many parts of the
union, as well as in Philadelphia. At Lynn, in Massachusetts, I have been
informed, but have no means of ascertaining the truth or falsehood of the
report, that a malignant fever, not unlike ours, prevailed in August. In many
of the towns of Virginia, fevers and agues have been much more prevalent and
dangerous then they have been at former periods. Georgetown and its vicinity,
which are in general very healthy, lost, in the course of a few weeks in
summer, an unexampled number of people by the flux, which disorder has raged
with great violence in many other places. The influenza has spread generally
through the union, and been very fatal. It has been twice in Vermont, where
likewise the putrid sore throat has carried off numbers. At Harrisburg and
Middletown, in this state, the flux and a putrid fever have been extremely
destructive, and swept away, I am credibly informed, a fifteenth part of the
inhabitants. Delaware state, particularly Kent county has suffered much from
the flux, which has produced a very great mortality. And various other places
have experienced a mortality, very uncommon, and which, but for the calamity of
Philadelphia absorbing public attention every where, would have created great
alarms and uneasiness.

Although the proceedings of many people in Philadelphia have been strongly
tinctured with cruelty, and a total direliction of every principle of humanity,
yet the general conduct has not been so revolting as in London during the
plague. In that city, when a house was known to have an infected person in it,
it was fastened up, and a guard placed at the door, to prevent any one from
coming out, until after a quarantine of 40 days; and if, during that time, any
other was infected, a new quarantine was imposed. Thus entire families fell
sacrifices to an order, equally senseless and cruel; and by these means, dead
bodies lay often for weeks together in the most dreadful and noxious state of
putrefaction. Such revolting orders existed not in Philadelphia. However, there
have been various instances of houses being left to the care of a servant or
two, who fell sick, and having no means of communicating their distresses to
the neighbors, perished for want of assistance.

I have learned with great pleasure, that a few landlords, commiserating the
distresses of their tenants, have come to the very humane resolution of
remitting the payment of rents during the prevalence of the disorder. Were they
to enter into resolutions generally to do the same, it would reflect honor on
them. But there are some whose hardened hearts know no compassion, and who will
have the pound of flesh -- the penalty of the bond. Indeed, when the disorder
was at the highest stage, some landlords seized the small property of poor
roomkeepers, who were totally unable to pay their rent. One man wrote to the
committee, informing them that the poverty of his tenants rendered it
impossible for them to pay him; he therefore begged the committee would, as
they were appointed to relieve the poor, pay the arrearages due to him. Another
person, a wealthy widow, produced recommendations for several poor roomkeepers,
her tenants; and the committee gave them each a small firm. As soon as they had
received it, she seized the money and their clothes!

As I have been obliged to note a variety of horrid circumstances, which have a
tendency to throw a shade over the human character, it is proper to let in a
little light on the subject, wherever justice and truth will permit. Amidst the
general desertion that prevailed, there were to be found many illustrious
instances of men and women, some in the middle, others in the lower spheres of
life, who have, in the exercise of the duties of humanity, exposed themselves
to dangers, which terrified men, who have hundreds of times faced death without
fear, in the field of battle. Some of them, alas! have fallen in the good
cause! But why should they be regretted! never could they have fallen more
glorirusly. Foremost in this noble groups stands Joseph Inskeep, a most
excellent man in every of the social relations, of citizen, brother, husband,
and friend -- To the sick and the forsaken, whether he was acquainted with them
or not, has he devoted his hours, to relieve and comfort them in their
tribulation. Numerous are the instances of men restored, by his kind cares and
attention, to their families from the very jaws of death. -- In various cases
has he been obliged to put dead bodies into coffins, when no other person could
be had to perform that office. Andrew Adgate's merit in the same way, was
conspicuous, and of the last importance to numbers of distressed creatures,
bereft of every other comfort. Of those worthy men, Wilson, and Tomkins, I have
already spoken. The rev. mr. Fleming and the rev. mr. Winkhause, exhausted
themselves by a succession of labors, day and night, attending on the sick,
and ministering relief to their spiritual and temporal wants. Of those who have
happily survived their dangers, and are preserved to their fellow citizens, I
shall mention a few. They enjoy the supreme reward of a self-approving
conscience; and I readily believe, that in the most secret recesses, remote
from the public eye, they would have done the same. But next to the sense of
having done well, is, I believe, the approbation of our friends and fellow men;
and when the debt is great, and the only payment that can be made is applause,
it is surely the worst species of avarice to withhold it. We are always ready,
too ready to bestow censure -- and, as if anxious lest we should not give
enough, we generally heap the measure. When we are so solicitous to deter by
reproach from folly, vice, and crime, why not be equally disposed to stimulate
to virtue and heroism, by freely bestowing the well-earned plaudit? The rev.
Henry Helmuth's merits are of the most exalted kind. His whole time, during the
prevalence of the disorder, was spent in the performance of the works of mercy,
visiting and relieving the sick, comforting the afflicted, and feeding the
hungry. Of his congregation, some hundreds have paid the last debt to nature,
since the malignant fever began; and, I believe, he attended nearly the whole
of them. To so many dangers was he exposed, that he stands a living miracle of
preservation. The rev. C. V. Keating and the rev. mr. Ustick have been in the
same career, and performed their duties to the sick with equal fidelity, and
with equal danger. The venerable old citizen, Samuel Robesen, has been like a
good angel, indefatigably performing, in families where there was not one
person able to help another, even the menial offices of the kitchen, in every
part of his neighborhood. John Connelly has spent hours beside the sick, when
their own wives and children had abandoned them. Twice did he catch the
disorder -- twice was he on the brink of the grave, which was yawning to
receive him -- yet, unappalled by the imminent danger he had escaped, he again
returned to the charge. I feel myself affected at this part of my subject, with
emotions, in which I hope my reader will participate. And, as a human being, I
rejoice that it has fallen to my lot, to be a witness and recorder of a
magnanimity which would alone be sufficient to rescue the character of man from
obloquy and reproach.

Shall I be pardoned for passing a censure on those, whose mistaken zeal led
them, during the most dreadful stages of this calamity, to crowd some of our
churches, and aid this frightful enemy in his work of destruction? who, fearful
lest their prayers and adoration at home would not find acceptance before the
Deity, resorted to churches filled with bodies of contagious air, where with
every breath they inhaled, they drew in noxious miasmata? Surely yes. To this
cause I am bold in ascribing a large proportion of the mortality -- And it is
remarkable, that those congregations, whose places of worship were most
crowded, have suffered the most dreadfully. Will men never acquire wisdom? Are
we yet to learn that the Almighty architect of the heavens and the earth does
not require temples made with men's hands? that going to a place of worship,
against the great law of self preservation, implanted in indelible characters
by his divine hand, on the breast of every one of his creatures, constitutes no
part of the adoration due to the maker and preserver of mankind? That a "meek
and humble heart"; the temple wherein he delights to be worshipped? I hope not
-- I hope the awful lesson some of our congregations hold forth on this
subject, by a mortality out of all proportion to their numbers, will serve as a
memento at all future times, in the like critical emergencies!

Of the number of citizens who fled away, it is difficult to form any accurate
estimate. In the city, from Vine to South street, which has been surveyed by a
man employed by the committee, of 21,000 inhabitants, the number of absent
people is stated to be 8600. But as this business was several weeks performing,
considerable variations must necessarily have taken place. The emigration was
not finished in those streets examined in the early part of his progress, --
and toward the latter part, the immigration had been already considerable.
Allowing one to balance the other, and the removals in the liberties to have
been equal to those in the city, we shall probably nor err much when we
estimate the number who left the city at about 17,000. This is not so many as I
supposed when I last wrote on the subject Independent Gazetteer, October 26.
, at which time I estimated them at 23,000. Which of the two is accurate, or
whether either of them is so, I leave the reader to determine.

Some of those who remained in the city, have, for reasons not very easy to
justify, been in the habit of reproaching those who fled, with criminality, as
deserters, who abandoned their posts If they were even guilty of a crime, it
brought its own punishment; as I am fully convinced that those who were absent,
and a prey to the anxiety caused by the frightful reports current, suffered
more than those who remained. I speak from experience. In a few days absence,
when the disorder had not reached its summit, I heard more terrific accounts of
it, than in as many weeks in Philadelphia, when it raged most violen^ (...) off
from eighty to a hundred daily.
. I believe, on the contrary, that as the nature of our government did not
allow the arbitrary measures to be pursued, which, in despotic countries would
probably have extinguished the disorder at an early period -- it was the duty
of every person to avoid the danger, whose circumstances and situation allowed
it. The effects of the desertion were, moreover, salutary Perhaps had all our
citizens remained, we should have had famine added to our calamity; whereas we
had plentiful markets during the whole time. The prices, too, were in general
not far beyond what they are usually at the same season of the year.
. The sphere of action of the disorder was diminished. Two or three empty
houses arrested the disease in its progress, as it was slowly, but surely
traveling through a street, and probably rescued a neighborhood from its
ravages. We shall long have to mourn the severe loss our city has felt, in
being bereft of so many valuable citizens: and had the 17,000 who retired, been
in the city during the prevalence of the disorder, and lost as large a
proportion of their number, as those did who remained, we should, instead of
4000 dead, have lost nearly 6000; and perhaps had to deplore in the number,
another Clow, a Kay, a Lea, a Sims, a Dunkin, a Strawbridge, men of extensive
business, whose loss will be long felt -- a Pennington, a Glentworth, a
Hutchinson, a Sarjeant, a Howell, men endowed by heaven with eminent abilities
-- a Fleming, a Graissl, a Sproat, men of exalted piety and virtue -- a Wilson,
an Adgate, a Baldwin, a Carroll, a Tomkins, citizens of most estimable
characters. Let those, then, who have remained, regard their long-absent
friends, as if preserved from death by their flight, and rejoice at their
return in health and safety -- let those who have been absent, acknowledge the
exertions of those who maintained their ground. Let us all unite in the utmost
vigilance to prevent the return of this fell destroyer, by the most scrupulous
attention to cleansing and purifying our scourged city -- and let us join in
thanksgiving to that Supreme Being, who has, in his own time, stayed the
avenging storm, ready to devour us, after it had laughed to scorn all human
efforts.

I omitted to inform the reader in the proper place, that dr. Deveze and dr.
Benjamin Duffield have gratuitously and with the utmost punctuality, attended
at Bushhill hospital nearly from the organization of the committee to the
present time.

Committee for relieving the sick and distressed, appointed by a meeting of the
citizens of Philadelphia, summoned by advertisement in the public papers, Sept.
13, 1793.
Chairman. MATTHEW CLARKSON. Secretary. CALEB LOWNES. Treasurer. THOMAS WISTAR.
Managers of Bushhill hospital. STEPHEN GIRARD. PETER HELM.
Orphan committee. ISRAEL ISRAEL. JOHN LETCHWORTH. JAMES KERR. J. SHARSWOOD.
Committee of distribution. ISRAEL ISRAEL. JOHN HAWORTH. JAMES SWAIN. MATTHEW
CAREY. JAMES KERR. JACOB WITMAN. J. LETCHWORTH J. SHARSWOOD.
Superintendant of the burials of the dead, and removal of the sick. SAMUEL
BENGE. Steward of supplies. HENRY DEFOREST. Committee of accounts. JAMES
SHARSWOOD. JOHN CONNELLY.
Committee on the publication of letters. CALEB LOWNES. MATTHEW CAREY.
Deceased members. A. ADGATE. T. D. SARGEANT. DANIEL OFFLEY. JOSEPH INSKEEP.

List of a few of the most noted inhabitants of Philadelphia, who have died
since the first of August. This list, which is not by any means given as
complete, is taken principally from the books of sextons; and therefore the
dates, in almost every case, refer to the days of interment

Aug
1. John Davis, 7. William Shipley, 9, Benjamin Bostock, 13. John McNair. 16.
John Wharton, 19. Peter Aston, 21. Catharine Lemaigre, 24. Reuben Haines, sen.
25. Fred. W. Starman, Thomas Miller.
26. James Wilkinson, 27. John Dunkin, 28. -- Amand, Eleanor Watson, Nathaniel
Blodgett.
29. Martin McDermot, John H. Lombaert, John Morgan.
30. Woodrop Sims, Peter Thomson, sen.
31. Frederic Christian.
Sept.
3. John Richardson. 4. William Hassel, John Hockley.
6. William Bays. 7. Peter Webber. 8. William Whiteside, Mary Jones, Mrs.
Willet, Dr. John Morris.
9. Thomas Boon, Matthew Parker, Samuel Johnson, John Rudolph, William Waring,
11. Warner Washington. Sept. 12. Benjamin Pitfield, Joseph Dean, Anna Mercier,
Richard Gardener.
13. John Wigton, Joseph Shoemaker, Claudius A. Bertier, F. X. Dupont, F. Con.
14. Rev. Dr. Murray, Thomas P. Anthony.
15. Susan. Milnor, aet. 80, Elizabeth Pratt.
16. Samuel Penn, John Strawbridge, Abigail Morris.
17. Joseph Mercier, Barnabas Fearis.
18. William Ralston, Rachel Ralston, John Dickinson.
19. Benjamin Morrell. H. Heatley.
30. Nathaniel Glover, Dr. John Dodds. Samuel Tailor, Jacob Howell. Dr. John
Pennington.
21. Edward Barrington, Mary Willing, Jacob Morgan, Hannah Morgan, Benjamin
Poultney.
22. Robert Johnston, Thomas Lea, Agnes Young.
23. Christopher Kucher. 24. Dr. J. J. De Barth, Andrew Clow, Richard
Humphreys, Philip Kucher.
25. Dr. John Lynn, James Gilchrist, John Stokes,
26. Mary Allen, Aet. 73. Isaac Miller, Samuel Swan.
27. Joseph Whitehead, Richard Mason, John Weisman.
28. Francis Finlay, Anne Comegys.
29. Thomas McCormick, Samuel Powell, Alexander Penman.
30. Andrew Adgate, Joseph Hewlings, Samuel Fisher.

Oct.
1. E. Jones, Aet. 64, Abraham Mason.
2. J. D. Hamelin, James Reid, Alexander Lawrence, Robert Patton, Jonathan
Shoemaker, John Todd, sen.
3. Dr. P. S. Glentworth, Joseph Gaven, David Kay, Townsend Speakman.
4. Anna Sewell, Aet. 67. 5. Mr. Chase, George Rainsford, John Hall, Mrs.
Adgate.
6. Abraham Lot, Huson Langstroth.
7. David S. Franks, William Sellers, John Guest, sen. Jacob R. Howell,
Jonathan D. Sarjeant, David Clark.
8. James Calbraith, jun. James Lapsley, James Pickering.
9. Daniel Baldwin, Owen Jones, Aet. 84.
10. John Morton, John Wood, Charles Williams, Rowland Evans.
11. Thomas Devonald* William Sproat, Caleb Attmore, Daniel Offley.
12. Eman Scott. Catharine Mullown^y.
13. Adam Hubley, Charles Carroll. Mrs. Annan.
14. John Morrison, 16. Mary Sproat, Joseph Inskeep.
17. Thomas O'Hara, James Read, Aet. 75.
18. Rev. Dr. Sproat, Elizabeth Morris.
19. Frederic Phile, Elizabeth Dickinson, Robert Allison, Aet. 82. W. Nicholls,
Aet. 73.
20. Solomon White, Dr. -- Graham, Rebecca Smith, Aet. 70.
21. Anne Mullen, James Worstal^, Samuel Lobdell,
22. Joshua Cresson, Isaac Lewis.
23. Philip Snyder. 24. John Todd, jun. 28. Sidney Paul. 29. Samuel Bettel.
Nov.
2. Thomas Clifford. 7. Matthew Conard. 9. Jacob Graff. 11. James Alder.
Persons, of whose death the time could not be ascertained.
Charles Sing and wife. John Stuckard, wife, and daughter. Peter Stuckard,
wife, and daughter. Adam Bausch. Andrew Boshard, wife, and mother. Oliver P.
Hull. -- Carnes. David Flickwir, and 5 of his family. Michael Hay, wife, and
three children. Peter Miercken. Mary Berry, Aet. 75. Nicholas For^berg, Aet.
73. George A. Baker.
List ^f all the Burials in the several grave yards of the city and liberties
of Philadelphia, as taken from the several Books kept by Clergymen, Sextons,
etc. from August 1st to November 9th, 1793.
AUGUST.
DAYS. Christ Church. St. Peter's. St. Paul's. First Presbyterian. Second
Presbyterian. Third Presbyterian. Scoth Presbyterian. Seceders. St. Mary's.
Trinity. Friends. Free Quakers. German Lutherans. German Calvinists. Moravians.
Swedes. Baptists. Methodists. Universalists. Jews, Kensington. Potter's field.
Total. 1 1 2 1 2 1 1 Returned in gross. 1 Returned in gross. Returned in gross.
Returned in gross. 9 2 1 1 2 1 2 1 8 3 1 1 2 2 2 1 9 4 1 1 1 1 2 4 10 5 1 1 1 5
2 10 6 1 2 3 7 1 1 7 1 2 12 8 1 1 1 1 1 5 9 2 1 1 1 2 2 1 1 11 10 1 1 1 2 1 6
11 2 4 1 7 12 2 2 1 5 13 1 2 1 2 1 1 1 2 11 14 1 1 2 4 15 3 2 1 1 2 9 16 1 1 1
1 2 1 7 17 1 1 1 1 1 1 6 18 1 1 2 1 5 19 1 1 1 1 3 1 1 9 20 1 3 1 1 1 7 21 2 1
2 1 1 1 8 22 1 2 4 3 1 2 13 23 1 2 2 3 1 1 10 24 3 1 1 2 1 5 1 3 17 25 1 2 1 2
1 3 1 1 ^^ 26 2 2 1 3 1 4 1 2 1 17 27 1 1 2 2 3 1 1 1 12 28 5 3 1 2 3 1 2 3 2
22 29 4 2 1 2 2 2 1 3 4 3 24 30 1 1 4 4 3 3 1 3 20 31 2 1 ^ 3 7 3 17

SEPTEMBER.
DAYS. Christ Church. St. Peter's. St. Paul's. First Presbyterian. Second
Presbyterian. Third Presbyterian. Scotch Presbyterian. Seceders. St. Mary's.
Trinity. Friends. Free Quakers. German Lutherans. German Calvinists. Moravians.
Swedes* Baptists. Methodists. Universalists. Jews. Kensington. Potter's field.
Total. 1 1 2 1 1 Returned in gross. 4 1 Returned in gross. Returned in gross.
Returned in gross. 2 5 17 2 2 2 5 3 1 1 4 18 3 1 1 3 1 2 3 11 4 1 1 1 2 2 1 2 4
3 2 2 23 5 ^ 1 1 1 1 1 2 3 1 5 20 6 2 1 2 2 1 1 5 1 2 7 24 7 1 1 1 1 1 2 3 1 7
18 8 2 1 1 4 2 2 3 4 4 2 1 16 42 9 1 2 1 ^ 3 1 7 1 1 1 13 32 10 3 1 1 1 1 3 1 6
5 1 1 4 29 11 2 1 1 1 1 2 3 1 3 8 23 12 1 2 6 1 1 ^ 3 2 2 1 2 10 33 13 1 1 1 1
^ 1 7 8 2 1 1 10 37 14 2 1 2 3 3 1 4 1 4 5 2 2 15 48 15 4 2 1 1 3 1 5 1 10 9 1
1 1 2 14 56 16 4 2 1 2 3 1 4 ^ ^^ 12 7 1 3 14 67 17 1 1 1 1 4 2 5 2 7 21 7 3 26
81 18 3 4 2 4 2 6 2 7 10 4 2 3 19 68 19 4 2 2 3 2 4 5 ^ 5 2 23 61 20 3 1 1 1 2
2 2 3 9 7 1 3 5 27 67 21 3 3 1 2 1 6 6 8 2 4 21 57 22 6 1 2 3 1 1 1 6 7 6 ^ 1 7
33 76 23 1 3 2 4 5 2 7 8 6 9 21 68 24 5 ^ 4 4 2 9 8 12 4 8 38 96 25 4 2 4 4 2 6
8 15 5 ^ 7 25 87 26 2 ^ 1 1 1 5 6 5 1 1 25 52 27 3 1 ^ ^ ^ 4 1 6 14 6 5 2 14 60
28 1 1 1 1 1 1 2 4 5 3 2 9 51 29 4 3 ^ 2 ^ 1 4 1 10 7 3 1 2 1^ 57 30 4 1 2 1 3
6 1 8 4 6 ^ 2 22 6^ OCTOBER.
DAYS. Christ Church. St. Peter's. St. Paul's. First Presbyterian. Second
Presbyterian. Third Presbyterian. Scotch Presbyterian. Seceders. St. Mary's.
Trinity. Friends. Free Quakers. German Lutherans. German Calvinists. Moravians.
Swedes. Baptists. Methodists. Universalists. Jews. Kensington. Potter's field.
Total. 1 4 2 5 1 3 4 4 8 Returned in gross. 12 3 2 Returned in gross. Returned
in gross. Returned in gross. 5 21 74 2 2 1 1 3 1 2 2 3 1 9 5 5 31 67 3 3 1 3 2
3 3 5 1 7 10 4 1 2 33 7^ 4 1 2 4 2 1 3 3 6 5 2 1 1 27 58 5 2 1 2 3 1 2 12 11 3
1 4 3 26 71 6 2 5 1 1 2 1 5 5 14 4 2 34 76 7 7 3 1 2 1 5 1 2 1 2 9 12 7 2 2 25
8^ 8 3 2 3 1 2 1 2 3 2 5 21 6 3 3 33 9^ 9 2 1 1 1 2 1 7 1 4 19 8 1 1 3 50 102
10 7 2 2 2 2 3 1 6 26 6 1 2 1 1 31 93 11 4 2 5 1 3 2 3 1 12 21 8 5 2 50 119 12
1 3 2 1 4 1 6 1 11 17 12 1 8 44 111 13 6 3 1 1 1 4 1 9 20 5 1 4 48 104 14 2 1 1
5 2 2 5 17 7 1 7 2 29 81 15 3 3 1 1 2 1 4 1 9 14 7 2 3 29 80 16 1 1 2 2 4 2 2 6
1 4 10 2 2 2 29 70 17 5 3 2 3 3 10 16 7 2 1 28 80 18 2 1 4 1 5 1 5 11 3 1 1 2
22 59 19 2 3 4 1 4 2 2 14 2 1 1 2 27 69 20 2 3 3 2 4 1 4 11 6 1 1 17 55 21 4 2
3 1 5 2 4 8 4 1 1 24 59 22 2 2 3 2 2 5 2 7 19 2 2 1 2 31 82 23 1 1 3 5 3 10 7 1
23 54 24 1 1 3 2 2 8 4 17 3^ 25 5 1 2 1 1 1 1 1 8 2 2 10 3^ 26 2 1 1 1 1 1 2 5
2 1 1 5 2^ 27 1 1 1 1 1 2 6 1^ 28 1 1 2 4 6 3 1 1 6 2^ 29 1 1 1 2 4 2 6 1^ 30 1
1 2 3 1 2 6 1^ 31 2 1 7 4 8 21 NOVEMBER.
DAYS. Christ Church. St. Peter's. St. Paul's. First Presbyterian. Second
Presbyterian^ Third Presbyterian. Scotch Presbyterian. Seceders. St. Mary's.
Trinity. Friends. Free Quakers. German Lutherans. German Calvinists. Moravians.
Swedes. Baptists. Methodists. Universalists. Jews. Kensington. Potter's field.
Total. 1 1 3 Returned in gross. 1 1 Returned in gross. Returned in gross.
Returned in gross. Returned in gross. 2 5 13 2 1 2 3 2 3 2 8 21 3 1 1 1 5 2 1 4
15 4 1 1 1 5 1 6 15 5 2 3 2 1 6 14 6 1 3 1 1 5 11 7 2 1 1 4 1 1 5 15 8 1 2 1 1
3 8 9 1 2 3 6

August 325 September 1442 October 1993 November 118 Jews, returned in gross 2
Baptists, Do. 50 Methodists, 32 Free Quakers, Do. 39 Germ^^ part of St. Mary's
congregation 30 Total 4031
Protestant Episcopalians Christ Church 1^^ St. Peter's 109 St. Paul's. ^7^
Presbyterians First 7^ Second 128 Third 107 Scotch 12 Seceders 33
Roman Catholics St. Mary's 251 German part of do. 30 Trinity 54
Friends 373 Free Quakers Returned in gross. 39 German Lutherans 641 Calvinists
261
Moravians 13 Swedes 75 Baptists Returned in gross. 50 Methodists Do. 32
Universalists 2 Jews Do. 2 Kensington 169 Potter's field, including the new
ground 1334 4031
METEOROLOGICAL OBSERVATIONS, MADE IN PHILADELPHIA, BY DAVID RITTENHOUSE,
Esquire. AUGUST, 1793.
Barometer. Thermometer. Wind. Weather. 6 A. M. 3 P. M. 6 A. M. 3 P. M. 6 A. M.
3 P. M. 6 A. M. 3 P. M. 1 29 95 30 0 65 77 WNW NW cloudy, fair, 2 30 1 30 1 63
81 NW SW fair. fair, 3 30 5 29 95 63 82 N NNE fair, fair. 4 29 97 30 0 65 87 S
SW fair, fair, 5 30 5 30 1 73 90 SSW SW fair, fair, 6 30 2 30 0 77 87 SW W
cloudy, fair, 7 30 12 60 1 68 83 NW W fair, fair. 8 30 1 29 95 69 86 SSE SSE
fair, rain, 9 29 8 29 75 75 85 SSW SW cloudy, fair, 10 29 9 29 9 67 82 W SW
fair, fair, 11 30 0 30 0 70 84 SW WSW cloudy, cloudy, 12 30 0 30 0 70 87 W W
fair, fair, 13 30 5 30 0 71 89 SW W fair, fair, 14 30 0 29 95 75 82 SW SW fair,
rain, 15 30 0 30 1 72 75 NNE NE rain, cloudy, 16 30 1 30 1 70 83 NNE NE fair,
fair, 17 30 1 30 0 71 86 SW SW fair, fair, 18 30 1 30 0 73 89 calm SW fair,
fair, 19 30 1 30 1 72 82 N N fair, cloudy, 20 30 1 30 12 69 82 NNE NNE fair,
fair, 21 30 15 30 25 62 83 N NNE fair, fair, 22 30 3 30 35 63 86 NE SE fair,
fair, 23 30 25 30 15 63 85 calm S fair, fair, 24 30 1 30 1 73 81 calm calm
cloudy, rain, 25 30 1 30 1 71 66 NE NE rain, great rain, 26 30 15 30 2 59 69 NE
NE cloudy, cloudy, 27 30 2 30 2 65 73 NE NE cloudy, cloudy, 28 30 2 30 15 67 80
S calm cloudy, clearing, 29 30 16 30 15 72 86 calm SW cloudy, fair, 30 30 1 30
1 74 87 calm SW fair, fair, 31 30 0 30 0 74 84 SW NW rain, fair.

METEOROLOGICAL OBSERVATIONS, PHILADELPHIA, SEPTEMBER. 1793.
Barometer. Thermometer. Winds. Weather. 6 A. M. 3 P. M. 6 A. M. 3 P. M. 6 A.
M. 3 P. M. 6 A. M. 3 P. M. 1 30 0 29 30 71 86 Calm SW fog, fair, 2 29 75 29 8
73 86 SW SW fair, fair, 3 80 0 60 NW N fair, fair, 4 30 15 30 15 55 75 W W
fair, fair, 5 30 15 30 1 62 80 SE S fair, cloudy, 6 29 97 29 95 70 89 WSW W
fair, cloudy, 7 30 0 30 0 65 77 WNW NW fair, fair, 8 ^0 1 30 1 64 70 Calm Calm
cloudy, cloudy, 9 30 0 30 0 66 80 SE NW rain, fair, 10 30 0 30 0 64 72 N NNE
fair, cloudy, 11 30 1 30 0 62 72 NNE N cloudy, fair, 12 29 96 29 9 58 76 NW NNW
fair, fair, 13 29 95 30 0 57 72 NW N fair, fair, 14 30 0 30 5 58 79 NW NW fair,
fair, 15 30 0 29 97 65 80 N S fair, fair, 16 29 9 29 70 84 S SW cloudy, fair,
17 29 8 29 85 66 67 N N cloudy, cloudy, 18 30 3 44 N fair, 19 30 4 30 35 45 70
Calm SW fair, fair, 20 30 3 30 15 54 69 Calm SE hazey, hazey, 21 30 0 29 0 59
78 Calm cloudy, fair, 22 30 0 30 0 63 83 Calm cloudy, fair, 23 30 1 30 1 62 81
Calm SE cloudy, cloudy, 24 30 2 30 2 65 70 NE ENE cloudy, fair. 25 30 15 30 0
61 68 NE NE cloudy, cloudy, 26 29 8 29 7 58 79 N N cloudy, fair. 27 29 7 64 NW
NW cloudy, fair, 28 30 5 30 15 54 73 NW NW fair, fair, 29 30 3 30 3 56 74 NE
ENE cloudy, fair, 30 30 35 30 3 57 75 Calm SW foggy, fair,

METEOROLOGICAL OBSERVATIONS. PHILADELPHIA, OCTOBER. 1793.
Barometer. Thermometer. Winds. Weather. 7 A. M. 2 P. M. 7 A. M. 2 P. M. 7 A.
M. 2 P. M. 7 A. M. 3 P. M. 1 30 15 30 5 64 80 SW SW cloudy, fair, 2 29 9 30 5
70 72 W NNW cloudy, fair, 3 30 2 30 15 50 72 W SW fair, fair 4 29 75 29 7 59 72
SW W cloudy, cloudy, 5 30 0 30 1 58 66 N N fair, fair, 6 30 3 30 3 43 66 NE W
fair, fair, 7 30 45 46 calm fair, 8 30 6 30 6 53 68 N N fair, fair, 9 30 5 30 4
53 70 NW NW fair, fair, 10 30 2 30 2 49 74 E NW fair, fair, 11 30 0 29 85 51 74
W W fair, fair, 12 26 6 29 55 58 64 SW NW rain, rain, 13 29 85 29 9 49 69 NW NW
fair, fair, 14 30 5 30 0 52 76 SW SW calm, fair, 15 29 75 29 8 56 54 SW N fair,
rain, 16 30 0 30 0 37 53 NNW N fair, fair, 17 30 1 30 1 37 60 NE NE fair, fair,
18 30 1 30 1 41 62 NW NW fair, fair, 19 30 0 29 9 51 66 N N cloudy, fair, 20 30
0 30 0 44 54 NW N fair, fair, 21 30 0 30 2 49 59 N NW fair, fair, 22 29 6 29 5
51 65 NW NW fair, fair, 23 ^^ 8 29 8 47 60 W W fair, fair, 24 30 8 30 4 36 59 W
NW fair, fair, 25 30 4 30 3 46 71 S S cloudy, fair, high w. 26 30 2 30 2 60 72
calm SW cloudy, cloudy, 27 30 3 30 3 44 44 NNE NNE cloudy, cloudy, 28 30 2 30 1
34 37 N N cloudy, cloudy, 29 29 85 29 85 28 44 NNW NW fair, fair, 30 30 1 30 1
28 49 calm SW hazy, hazy, 31 30 15 30 2 42 45 calm NNE cloud, rain,

METEOROLOGICAL OBSERVATIONS, PHILADELPHIA, NOVEMBER. 1793.
Barometer. Thermometer. Wind. Weather. 6 A. M. 3 P. M. 6 A. M. 3 P. M. 6 A. M.
3 P. M. 6 A. M. 3 P. M. 1 30 1 30 1 40 4^ NNE NE rain, cloudy, 2 30 3 30 25 32
49 NNE NE fair, fair, 3 30 1 30 0 43 56 Calm SW cloudy, cloudy. 4 29 8 29 9 55
67 SW SW cloudy, fair, 5 30 15 30 1 50 64 NE NE rain, rain. 6 29 8 29 65 63 67
S S cloudy, cloudy 7 29 8 29 8 44 64 Calm SW fair, fair. 8 29 8 29 85 43 56 SSW
SW fair, fair. 9 29 9 29 95 42 64 SW SW fair, fair,


