SURE AND CERTAIN METHODS OF ATTAINING A LONG AND HEALTHY LIFE, WITH MEANS OF
CORRECTING A BAD CONSTITUTION.

WRITTEN BY LEWIS CORNARO, An Italian Nobleman, when he was near an HUNDRED
Years of Age.

WITH A RECOMMENDATORY PREFACE, BY THE HON. JOSEPH ADDISON, ESQUIRE.

The First American Edition.

PHILADELPHIA: REPRINTED FOR THE REV. M. L. WEEMS, BY PARRY HALL, CH^^NUT
STREET*

M, DCC, XCII.

PREFACE.
THE human body is certainly one of the most stupendous works of Omnipotence.
Anatomy discovers in it ten thousand marks of wisdom and goodness, which I have
no room to mention here; nor indeed is it possible for any finite intelligence
to describe the geometrical accuracy with which the Author of nature has formed
every part of the fabric. However, as I sincerely wish that all who are honored
with these curious and wonderfully wrought bodies, may possess them in health
and happiness, and, as long experience demonstrates, that this can not be
attained without TEMPERANCE and EXERCISE, I shall in this paper give the reader
such a view of the structure and mechanism of his own frame, as will convince
him of the necessity and importance of those virtues.

I consider the body as a system of tubes and glands, or, (in a more rustic
phrase) a large bundle of pipes and strainers; every part of the body, all the
bowels, muscles, tendons and ligaments, are composed by a conjunction of
countless numbers of these pipes and strainers, that is, of arteries, veins,
nerves and glands. These innumerable vessels, disposed in proper order, and
filled with suitable fluids or juices, are, by divine appointment, to maintain,
while life lasts, a continual action and motion.

The stomach and bowels are continually laboring to digest, that is, to grind
and reduce the food into a kind of milk, called chyle; this, carried by
millions of little pipes into the blood vessels, is there, by the ^nceasing
^^tion of the heart and arteries, converted into blood, and circulated
throughout all parts of the body, to repair the constantly wearing solids, to
recruit the ever wasting fluids, and to furnish a seasonable and friendly
supply to the ceaseless consumption of nature.

From this sketch of the body and its laws, it plainly appears, that two things
are principally essential to good health -- Sufficient strength of the vessels
-- and a free circulation of the fluids.

The vessels must have strength sufficient to convert the food into wholesome
blood and urge it on with vigor; and the blood must have a proper consistence
to yield to the action of the vessels and circulate freely. To preserve the
body in this natural and healthy state, is an important task indeed, and which
Infinite Wisdom has consigned chiefly to temperance and exercise. The one,
allows us to take such food only as is wholesome and suffici^^^ (...) supply
the demands (...) ^^^ure; the other gives such firmness to the fibers as to
enable them to digest and change the food into fit nourishment, and convey it
to the different parts. And though the component parts of our bodies are so
inconceivably numerous and complicated; though they are so very minute and
delicate, yet so wonderful is the wisdom and goodness of GOD in the disposition
of them, that they would seldom or never be disordered, were we but duly
temperate and laborious. And without a proper regard to those great duties, the
most sovereign medicines in nature will not have virtue sufficient to preserve
us long in health. There is an anecdote related by some of the oriental
writers, which places the importance of exercise in a proper point of view. A
king who had long languished under an ill habit of body, and had taken
abundance of medicines to no purpose, was at length cured by the following
method. His physician took an hollow ball of wood and filled it with drugs,
after which he closed it up so artfully that nothing appeared. He likewise took
a mall, and having hollowed it, he enclosed in it several drugs after the same
manner as in the ball itself. He then ordered the king to exercise himself
every morning with these instruments, till he should get into a moderate
perspiration; when as the story goes, the virtue of the medicaments perspiring
through the wood, had so good an influence on the king's constitution, that they
cured him of an indisposition which all the compositions he had taken inwardly
had not been able to remove.

This allegory is finely contrived to show us how beneficial bodily labor is
to health, and that exercise is the best physic. But there is another grand
preservative of health, I mean temperance, which may be practiced by all ranks
and conditions, at any season, or in any place, without interruption to
business, expense of money, or loss of time. These two remedies, duly observed,
will fortify the constitution and render it, in some sort, invulnerable.
Exercise tends to throw off all superfluities, and temperance to prevent them;
exercise clears the vessels, temperance never overstrains them; exercise rolls
on the vital current, temperance gives nature full play, and allows her to
exert herself in all her force and vigor; exercise dissipates a growing
distemper, temperance starves it.

Physic is hardly any thing else but the substitute of temperance or exercise.
It Is indeed absolutely necessary in some distempers, but did men but live in a^
habitual use of those two great instruments of health, there would be but
little occasion for it. Blistering, cupping and bleeding, emetics, diet-drinks
and bitters, are seldom of use but to the intemperate and idle, who use them in
order to make their luxury consistent with health. The apothecary and doctor
are perpetually employed in countermining the cook and distiller. It is said of
Diogenes, that meeting a young man who was going to a feast, he took him up in
the street, and carried him home to his friends, as one who was running into
imminent danger, had not he prevented him. What would that philosopher have
said, had he been present at the gluttony of a modern meal? Would he not have
thought the master of a family mad, had he seen him devour fowl, fish and
flesh; swallow oil and vinegar, wines and spices; throw down sallads of twenty
different herbs, sauces of an hundred ingredients, confections and fruits of
numberless sweets and flavors? What unnatural motions and counterferments must
such a medley of intemperance produce in the body? For my part, when I behold a
fashionable table set out in all its magnificence, I fancy that I see gouts and
dropsies, fevers and lethargies, with other innumerable distempers, lying in
ambuscade among the dishes.

Were I permitted to prescribe such a kind of temperance as would suit all
persons, I would copy the following rules of a very eminent physician.

Make your whole repast out of one dish. If you indulge in a second, avoid
drinking any thing strong, till you have finished your meal; and abstain from
all sauces, or at least such as are not the most plain and simple. A man would
seldom be guilty of gluttony if he attended to these few and easy rules
prudently contenting himself with one good dish, he would not be in danger of
excess, like those who indulge their craving appetites on every thing that is
set before them. And by abstaining from hot sauces, and strong drinks, he would
never feel those false appetites which often betray intemperate people to load
their stomachs greatly to their hurt. And since it is to be feared, that the
most temperate do sometimes err a little on the side of excess, a man would do
well to miss a meal now and then; it would prove a great relief to nature, help
her to cleanse and carry off her crudities, and give her time to recover the
tones and springs of her distended vessels. Besides, abstinence well timed,
often kills a sickness in the bud, and destroys the first seeds of an
indisposition. Several eminent writers of antiquity tell us, that Socrates
lived in Athens all the time of that dreadful plague which swept off so many
thousands, and yet he never took the least infection; which these writers
unanimously ascribe to his temperate way of living.

And here I cannot but observe, that if we compare the lives of those ancient
sages who were so eminent for their temperance, with the lives of any set of
kings or great men of the same number, we should think they were of two
different dates. For the generality of those wise men were nearer an hundred
than sixty years of age at the time of their deaths. But the most remarkable
instance of the efficacy of temperance toward procuring long life, is what we
meet with in a little book published by Lewis Cornaro the Venetian; which I ^he
rather mention because it is of undoubted credit, as the late Venetian
ambassador, who was of the same family, attested more than once in conversation
when he resided in England. Cornaro, the author of the little treatise I am
mentioning was of an infirm constitution till about forty, when by obstinately
persisting in an exact course of temperance, he recovered a perfect state of
health, insomuch that at fourscore he published his book, which has been
translated into English, under the title of Sure and certain methods of
attaining a long and healthy life. He lived to give a third or fourth edition
of it; and after having passed his hundredth year, died without pain or agony,
like one who falls asleep. The treatise I mention has been taken notice of by
several eminent authors, and is written with such a spirit of cheerfulness,
religion, and good sense, as are the natural concomitants of temperance and
sobriety. The mixture of the old man in it, is rather a recommendation than a
discredit to it.

SURE AND CERTAIN METHODS OF ATTAINING A LONG AND HEALTHY LIFE.
CHAP. I.
I HAVE observed that custom has lately introduced into Italy, two very
dangerous evils -- FLATTERY and INTEMPERANCE.

The first of these banishes from conversation, all frankness and plain
dealing. And against the latter I declare open war, as being the most fatal
enemy of our health.

It Is an unhappiness into which the people of this age are fallen, that variety
of dishes is become fashionable and too generally preferred to frugality. And
yet the one is the offspring of divine temperance; whilst pride and gluttony
are the odious parents of the other. Notwithstanding the difference of their
origin, yet prodigality is now adays tricked up in the pompous titles of
magnificence, generosity and grandeur; whilst blessed frugality is too often
branded as the badge of an avaricious and sordid spirit.

This error has so far seduced us, as to prevail on many to renounce a frugal
way of living, though taught by nature, from the earliest ages of the world;
and has betrayed us into those excesses which serve only to abridge the number
of our days. We are grown old before we have been able to taste the pleasures
of being young. And the time which ought to be the summer of our lives is often
the beginning of their winter. We soon perceive our strength to fail, and
weakness to come on, long before we have attained to the perfection of our
nature. On the contrary, temperance promotes and preserves to us the full
perfection of our natures. Our youth is lasting, and our manhood attended with
a vigor that does not begin to decay till after a great many years. This is so
true, that when men were not addicted to intemperance they had more strength
and vivacity at fourscore, than we have at forty.

Oh unhappy Italy! do thou not see, that gluttony and excess rob thee, every
year, of more inhabitants than pestilence, war, and famine could have done? Thy
true plagues, are thy numerous luxuries and immoderate feastings, in which thy
deluded citizens indulge themselves to an excess unworthy of the rational
character and utterly ruinous to their health; for how is it possible to
support nature under such loads of contrary and unwholesome foods? Put a stop
to this fatal abuse, for God's sake, for there is not, I am certain of it, a
vice more abominable in the eyes of the divine Majesty, nor any more
destructive. How many have I seen cut off, in the flower of their days by this
unhappy custom of high feeding! How many excellent friends has gluttony
deprived me of, who, but for this accursed vice, might have been an ornament to
the world, an honor to their country, and have afforded me as much joy in
their lives, as I now feel concern at their loss!

In order, therefore, to put a stop to so great an evil, I have undertaken this
little book, and I attempt it the more readily, as many young gentlemen have
requested it of me, moved thereto by seeing their f^^hers drop off in the
flower of their youth, and me so sound and hearty at the age of eighty-one.
They begged me to let them know by what means I attained to such excellent
health and spirits at my time of life. I could not but think their curiosity
very laudable, and was willing to gratify them, and at the same time do some
service to my countrymen, by declaring, in the first place, what led me to
renounce intemperance and lead a temperate life; secondly, by showing the rules
I observed; and thirdly, what unspeakable satisfaction and advantage I derived
from it; whence it may be very clearly seen how easy a thing it is for a wise
man to escape all the curses of intemperance, and secure to himself the
inestimable felicities of vigorous health and cheerful age.

The first thing that led me to embrace a temperate life, was, the many and
sore evils which I suffered from the contrary course of living; my constitution
was, naturally, weakly and delicate, which ought in reason to have made me more
regular and prudent, but being, like most young men, too fond of what is
usually called good eating and drinking, I gave the rein to my appetites. In a
little time I began to feel the ill effects of such intemperance; for I had
scarce attained to my thirty-fifth year, before I was attacked with a
complication of disorders, such as, head-achs, a sick stomach, cholicky
uneasinesses, the gout, rheumatic pains, lingering fevers, and continual
thirst; and though I was then but in the middle of my days, my constitution
seemed so entirely ruined that I could hardly hope for any other termination to
my sufferings but death.

The best physicians in Italy employed all their skill in my behalf, but to no
effect. At last they told me, very heartily, that there was but one thing that
could afford me a single ray of hope, but one medicine that could give a
radical cure; viz. the immediate adoption of a temperate and regular life. They
added moreover, that, now, I (...) no time to lose, that I (...) immediately,
either choose a regimen or death, and that if I deferred their advice much
longer, it would be too late for ever to do it. This was a home thrust. I could
not bear the thoughts of dying so soon, and being convinced of their abilities
and experience, I thought the wisest course I could take, would be to follow
their advice, how disagreeable soever it might seem.

I then requested my physicians to tell me exactly after what manner I ought to
govern myself? To this they replied, that I should always consider myself as an
infirm person; eat nothing but what agreed with me, and that in small quantity.
I then immediately entered on this new course of life, and with so determined a
resolution, that nothing has been since able to divert me from it. In a few
days I perceived that this new way of living agreed very well with me; and in
less than a twelve month I had the unspeakable happiness to find that all my
late alarming symptoms were vanished, and that I was perfectly restored to
health.

No sooner had I began to taste the sweets of this new resurrection, but I made
many very pleasing reflections on the great advantages of temperance, and
thought within myself, if this virtue has had so divine an efficacy, as to cure
me of such grievous disorders, surely i^ will help my bad constitution and
confirm my health. I therefore applied myself diligently to discover what kinds
of food were properest for me. I resolved to try whether those dishes that
pleased my taste, were friendly or hurtful to my health, and whether the
proverb be true, which says, that what delights the palate must be good for the
stomach. I found it to be false; and that it just serves as an excuse to
gluttons who are for indulging themselves in whatever pleases their appetites.

I therefore took no more notice of the proverb, but made choice of such meats
and drinks as agreed with my constitution, and made it an inviolable law with
myself, always to rise with an appetite to eat more if I pleased. In a word, I
entirely renounced intemperance, and made a vow to continue the remainder of my
life under the same regimen I had observed: A happy resolution this! the
keeping of which entirely cured me of all my infirmities. I never before lived
a year together, without falling once at least, into some violent illness* but
this never happened to me afterward; on the contrary. I have always been
healthy ever since I was temperate.

I must not forget here to mention a circumstance of considerable consequence.
I have been telling of a great, and to me, a most happy change in my way of
living. Now all changes, though from the worst to the best habits, are, at
first, disagreeable. I found it so; for having long accustomed myself to high
feeding, I h^d contract^d such a fondness for it, that though I was daily
destroying myself, yet did it, at first, cost me some struggle to relinquish
it. Nature, long us^d to hearty meals, expected th^^, and was quite
diss^^i^fied with my moderate (...). To (...) my mind from (...) li^^le (...),
I used immediately after dinner, to betake myself to some innocent amusement or
useful pursuit, such as, my devotions, my book, music, etc.

But to return. -- Besides the two foregoing important rules about eating and
drinking, that is, not to take of any thing, but as much as my stomach could
easily digest, and to use those things only which agreed with me; I have very
carefully avoided all extremes of heat and cold, excessive fatigue,
interruption of my usual time of rest, late hours, and too close and intense
thinking. All these are hurtful; but excessive fatigue, either of body or mind,
is eminently so. Too close and intense thinking strains the nerves, wastes the
spirits, brings on a painful headache, loss of appetite, prevents sleep, sours
the temper, wastes the flesh, and, if long continued, effectually destroys the
best constitution. Many an excellent constitution has been irrecoverably ruined
by a few months only of too close hard study; and the ill effects of this
imprudence, are greatly aggravated by that sedentary life, stooping posture,
and leaning against tables, which studious people are so often guilty of, and
by which they too frequently bring on themselves pains of the breast, and
incurable consumptions. I am likewise greatly indebted for the excellent health
I enjoy, to that calm and temperate state in which I have been careful to keep
my passions.

The influence of the passions on the nerves, and health of our bodies, is so
great, that none (...) possibly be ignorant of it. He therefore who seriously
wishes to enjoy good health, must above all things, learn to conquer his
passions, and keep them in subjection to reason. For let a man be ever so
temperate in diet, or regular in exercise, yet still some unhappy passion, if
indulged to excess, will prevail over all his regularity, and prevent the good
effects of his temperance; no words, therefore, can adequately express the
wisdom of guarding against an influence so destructive. Fear, anger, grief,
envy, hatred, malice, revenge and despair, are known by eternal experience, to
weaken the nerves, disorder the circulation, impair digestion, and often to
bring on a long train of hysterical and hypochondriacal disorders; and extreme
sudden fright, has often occasioned immediate death.

On the other hand, moderate joy, and all those affections of the mind which
partake of its nature, as cheerfulness, contentment, hope, virtuous and mutual
love, and courage in doing good, invigorate the nerves, give a healthy m^tion
to the fluids, promote perspiration, and assist digestion* but violent anger,
(which differs from madness only in duration) throws the whole frame into
tempest and convulsion, the countenance blackens, the eyes glare, the mouth
foams, and in place of the most gentle and amiable, it makes a man the most
frightful and terrible of all animals. The effects of this dreadful passion do
not stop here; it never ^ails to create bilious, inflammatory, convulsive, and
sometimes apoplectic disorders, and sudden death.

Solomon was thoroughly sensible of the destructive tendencies of ungoverned
passions, and has in many places cautioned us against them. He emphatically
styles envy a rottenness of the bones; and says that, wrath slays the angry
man, and envy kills the silly one The reader will I hope excuse me for
relating the following tragical anecdote, to confirm what the benevolent
Cornaro has said on the baneful effects of envy, etc.

In the city of York (England) there died some time ago, a young lady by the
name of D -- n. For five years before her death, she appeared to be lingering
and melancholy. Her flesh withered away, her appetite decayed; her strength
failed, her feet could no longer sustain her ^ottering emaciated body, and her
dissolution seem^^ (...) ^and. One day she called her intimate friends to her
bedside, and as well as she could spoke to the following effect:

"I know you all pity me, but alas! I am not worthy of your pity; for all my
misery is entirely owing to the wickedness of my own heart. I have two sisters;
and I have all my life been unhappy, for no other reason but because of their
prosperity. When we we^^ young, I could neither eat nor sleep in comfort, if
th^^ ^ad either praise or pleasure. As soon as they were grown to be women,
they married greatly to their advantage and satisfaction: this galled me to the
heart; and, though I had several good offers, yet thinking them rather unequal
to my sisters, I refused them, and then was inwardly vexed and distressed, for
fear I should get no better. I never wanted for any thing, and might have been
very happy, but for this wretched temper. My sisters loved me tenderly, for I
concealed from them as much as possible this odious (...), and, yet never did
any poor wretch lead so miserable a life as I have done* for every blessing
they enjoyed was a dagger to my heart. It Is this Envy, which, preying on my
very vitals, has ruined my health; and is now carrying me down to the grave.
Pray for me, that GOD of his infinite mercy may forgive me this horrid sin; and
with my dying breath I conjure you all, to check the first risings of a passion
that has proved so fatal to me."


; and that the wicked shall not live out half their days. For as violent gales
of wind will soon wreck the strongest ships, so violent passions of hatred,
anger, and sorrow, will soon destroy the best constitutions.

However, I must confess to my shame, that I have not been at all times so much
of a philosopher and Christian, as entirely to avoid these disorders; but I
have reaped the benefit of knowing by my own repeated experience, that these
malignant passions have in general a far less pernicious effect on bodies that
are rendered firm and vigorous by temperance, than on those that are corrupted
and weakened by gluttony and excess.

That eminent physician, Galen, made this observation long before me, and I
might produce several authorities to support this opinion, but I will go only
upon my own experience. It was hard for me to avoid every extreme of heat and
cold, and to live above all the occasions of trouble which attend the life of
man; but yet these things made no great impression on the state of my health,
though I met with many instances of persons who sunk under less weight both of
body and mind.

There was in our family a considerable lawsuit depending against some
persons, whose might overcame our right. One of my brothers, and some of my
relations, were so mortified and grieved on account of the loss of this suit,
that they actually died of broken hearts. I was as sensible as they could be,
of the great injustice done us, but, thank GOD, so far from breaking my heart,
it scarcely broke my repose. And I ascribe their sufferings and my safety, to
the difference of our living. Intemperance and sloth had so weakened their
nerves, and broken their spirits, that they easily sunk under the weight of
misfortune. While temperance and active life had so invigorated my
constitution, as to make me happily superior to the evils of this momentary
life.

At seventy years of age, I had another experiment of the usefulness of my
regimen. Some business of consequence calling me into the country, my
coach-horses ran away with me; I was overset and dragged a long way before they
could stop the horses. They took me out of the coach, with my head battered, a
leg and an arm out of joint, and truly in a very lamentable condition. As soon
as they had brought me home, they sent for the physicians, who did not expect I
could live three days: however, they resolved upon letting me blood, to prevent
the fever, which usually happens in such cases. I was so confident, that my
regular life had prevented the contra^^ing of any ill humors, that I opposed
their prescription. I ordered them to dress my head, to set my leg and arm, to
rub me with some specific oils proper for bruises; and, without any other
remedies, I was soon cured, to the great astonishment of the physicians, and of
all those who knew me.

I beg leave to relate one more anecdote, as an additional proof what an
impenetrable shield temperance presents against the evils of life.

About five years ago* I was over-persuaded to a thing, which had like to have
cost me dear. My relations, whom I love, and who have a real tenderness for me;
my friends, with whom I was willing to comply in any thing that was reasonable;
lastly, my physicians, who were looked upon as the oracles of health, did all
agree, that I eat too little; that the nourishment I took was not sufficient
for one of my years; that I ought not only to support nature, but likewise to
increase the vigor of it, by eating a little more than I did. It was in vain
for me to represent to them, that nature is content with a little; that with
this little I had enjoyed excellent health so many years; that to me the habit
of it was become a second nature; and that it was more agreeable to reason,
that as I advanced in years and lost my strength, I should rather lessen than
increase the quantity of my food, especially as the powers of the stomach must
grow weaker from year to year. To strengthen my arguments, I urged those two
natural and true proverbs; one, that he who would eat a great deal must eat but
little; that is, eating little makes a man live long, and living long he must
eat a great deal. The other proverb was, that what we leave, after making a
hearty meal, does us more good than what we have eaten. But neither my proverbs
nor arguments could silence their affectionate entreaties. Wherefore to please
persons who were so dear to me, I consented to increase the quantity of food,
but with two ounces only. So that, as before I had always taken but twelve
ounces of solid food in the day, I now increased it to fourteen, and as before
I drank but fourteen ounces of wine in the day, I now increased it to sixteen.
This increase had in eight days time such an effect on me, that from being
remarkably cheerful and brisk, I began to be peevish and melancholy, and was
constantly so strangely disposed, that I neither knew what to say to others,
nor what to do with myself. On the twelfth day I was attacked with a most
violent pain in my side, which held me twenty two hours, and was followed by a
violent fever which continued thirty five days, without giving me a moment's
respite. However, GOD be praised, I recovered, though in my seventy eighth
year, and in the coldest season of a very cold winter, and reduced to a mere
skeleton, and I am positive, that, next to GOD, I am most indebted to
temperance, for my recovery. O how great is the evil of intemperance, which
could, in a few days bring on me so severe an illness, and how glorious are the
virtues of temperance, which could thus bear me up, and snatch me from the jaws
of death! Order, my friends, order is every thing; by order, the arts are more
easily learnt; by order, armies are rendered victorious; by order, families,
cities and kingdoms are raised to honor and happiness; and order is the grand
preservative of health and long life; nay, I cannot help saying it is the only
and true medicine. Hence it is, that when a disinterested physician visits a
patient, the first thing he prescribes, is to live regularly. And when he takes
leave of his patient after recovery, he advises him, as he tenders his health,
to lead a regular life. And were a patient, so recovered, to live in that
manner, he would hardly ever be sick again. This we may say for a certainty,
that would all men but live regularly and temperately, there would not be a
tenth of that sickness which now makes so many melancholy families, nor any
occasion for a tenth part of those nauseous medicines, which they are now
obliged to swallow in order to carry off those bad humors with which they have
filled their bodies by over eating and drinking. -- To say the truth, would
every one of us but pay a becoming attention to the quantity and quality of
what he eats and drinks, and carefully observe the effects it has upon him, he
would soon become his own physician, and indeed the very best he could possibly
have, for people's constitutions are as different as their faces; and it is
impossible, in many very important instances, for the most skilful physicians
to tell a man of observation, what would agree with his constitution so well as
he knows himself. I am willing to allow that a physician may be sometimes
necessary; since there are some disorders against which no human prudence can
provide, and which affect us in such a manner as to deprive us of the power of
helping ourselves; it is wrong then wholly to rely on nature; recourse should
be had to some judicious physician, and in cases of danger, the sooner the
better. But for the bare purpose of preserving ourselves in good health, there
needs no better physic than a temperate and regular life. It is a specific and
natural medicine, which preserves the man, how tender soever his constitution
be, and prolongs his life to above a hundred years, spares him the pain of a
violent death, sends him quietly out of the world, when the radical moisture is
quite spent, and which, in short, has all the properties that are fancied to be
in potable gold, which a great many persons have sought after in vain.

But alas! most men suffer themselves to be seduced by the charms of a
voluptuous life. They have not courage enough to deny their appetites; and
being over-persuaded by their inclinations so far, as to think they cannot give
up the gratification of them, without abridging too much of their pleasures,
they devise arguments to persuade themselves, that it is more eligible to live
ten years less, than to be upon the restraint, and deprived of whatever may
gratify their appetites. Alas! they know not the value of ten years of healthy
life, in an age when a man may enjoy the full use of his reason, and turn all
his wisdom and experience to his own, and the advantage of the world. To
instance only in the sciences. It Is certain that some of the most valuable
books now extant, were written in those last ten years of their authors lives,
which some men pretend to undervalue; let fools and villains undervalue life,
the world would lose nothing by them, die when they will. But it is a loss
indeed, when wise and good men drop into the grave; ten years of life to men of
that character, might prove an inestimable blessing to their families and
country. Is such an one a priest only, in a little time he might become a
bishop, and by living ten years longer, might render the most important
services to the world by his active dissemination of virtue and piety. Is he
the aged parent of a family, then though no longer equal to the toils of
younger years, yet by his venerable presence and matured counsels, he may
contribute more to the harmony and happiness of his children, than all their
labors put together. And so with all others, whether in church or state, army
or navy, who are advanced in years, though not equal to the active exercises of
youth, yet in consequence of their superior wisdom and experience, their lives
may be of more service to their country, than the lives of thousands of
citizens. Some, I know, are so unreasonable as to say that it is impossible to
lead such a regular life. To this I answer, Galen, that great physician, led
such a life, and advised others to it as the best physic. Plato, Cicero,
Isocrates, and a great many famous men of past ages embraced it; and in our
time, Pope Paul Farneze, Cardinal B^mbo, and two of our Doges, Lando and
Dorato, have practiced it, and thereby arrived to an extreme old age. I might
instance in others of a meaner extract; but, having followed this rule myself,
I think I cannot produce a more convincing proof of its being practicable, and
that the greatest trouble to be met with therein, is the first resolving and
entering upon such a course of life.

You will tell me that Plato, as sober a man as he was, yet affirmed, that it
is difficult for a man in public life to live so temperately, being often in
the service of the state, exposed to the badness of weather, to the fatigues of
traveling, and to eat whatever he can meet with. This cannot be denied; but
then I maintain, that these things will never hasten a man's death, provided he
accustoms himself to a frugal way of living. There is no man, in what condition
soever but may keep from overeating; and thereby happily prevent those
distempers that are caused by excess. They who have the charge of public
affairs committed to their trust, are more obliged to it than any others: where
there is no glory to be got for their country, they ought not to sacrifice
themselves: they should preserve themselves to serve it; and if they pursue my
method, it is certain they would ward off the distempers which heat and cold
and fatigues might bring upon them; or should they be disturbed with them it
would be but very lightly.

It may likewise be objected, that if one who is well, is dieted like one that
is sick, he will be at a loss about the choice of his diet, when any distemper
comes upon him. To this I say, that nature, ever attentive to the preservation
of her children, teaches us how we ought to govern ourselves in such a case.
She begins by depriving us so entirely of our appetites, that we can eat little
or nothing. At that time, whether the sick person has been sober or
intemperate, no other food ought to be u^^^* but such as is proper for his
condition; such as broth, jellies, cordials, barley-water, and c. When his
recovery will permit him to use a more solid nourishment, he must take less
than he was used to before his sickness; and notwithstanding the eagerness of
his appetite, he must take care of his stomach, till he is perfectly cured.
Should he do otherwise, he would overburden nature, and infallibly relapse into
the danger he had escaped. But notwithstanding this, I dare aver, that he who
leads a sober and regular life, will hardly ever be sick; or but seldom, and
for a short time. This way of living preserves us from those bad humors which
occasion our infirmities, and by consequence heals us of all those distempers
which they occasion. I do not pretend to say that every body must eat exactly
as little as I do, or abstain from fruit, fish, and other things from which I
abstain, because such dishes disagree with me. They who are not disordered by
such dishes, are under no obligation to abstain from them. But they are under
the greatest obligations to feed moderately, even on the most innocent food,
since an overloaded stomach cannot digest.

It signifies nothing to tell me that there are several, who, though they live
very irregularly, yet enjoy excellent health and spirits, and to as advanced an
age, as those who live ever so soberly. For this argument is founded on such
uncertainty and hazard, and occurs so seldom, as to look more like a miracle
than the regular work of nature. And those, who, on the credit of their youth
and constitution, will pay any regard to so idle an objection, may depend on it
that they are the betrayers and ruiners of their own health.

And I can confidently and truly affirm, that an old man, even of a bad
constitution, who leads a regular and sober life, is surer of a longer one,
than a young man of the best constitution who lives disorderly. All therefore
who have a mind to live long and healthy, and die without sickness of body or
mind, must immediately begin to live temperately, for such a regularity keeps
the humors of the body mild and sweet, and suffers no gross fiery vapors to
ascend from the stomach to the head; hence the brain of him who lives in that
manner, enjoys such a constant serenity, that he is always perfectly master of
himself. Happily freed from the tyranny of bodily appetites and passions, he
easily soars above, to the exalted and delightful contemplation of heavenly
objects; by this means his mind becomes gradually enlightened with divine
truth, and expands itself to the glorious enrapturing view of the Power,
Wisdom, and Goodness of the Almighty. -- He then descends to nature, and
acknowledges her for the fair daughter of GOD, and views her varied charms with
sentiments of admiration, joy, and gratitude, becoming the most favored of all
sublunary beings. He then clearly discerns, and generously laments the wretched
fate of those, who will not give themselves the trouble to subdue their
passions, and those three most ensnaring lusts, the lust of the flesh, the lust
of honors, and the lust of riches, which all wise and good men have firmly
opposed and conquered, when they passed through this mortal state; for knowing
such passions to be inconsistent with reason and happiness, they at once nobly
broke through their snares, and applied themselves to virtue and good works,
and so, became men of good and sober lives. And when in process of time, and
after a long series of years, they see the period of their days drawing nigh,
they are neither grieved nor alarmed. Full of acknowledgments for the favors
already received from GOD, they throw themselves into the arms of his future
mercy. They are not afraid of those dreadful punishments, which they deserve
who have shortened their days by guilty intemperance. They die without
complaining, sensible that they did not come into this world to stay for ever,
but are pilgrims and travelers to a far better. Exulting in this faith, and
with hopes big with immortality, they go down to the grave in a good old age,
enriched with virtues, and laden with honors.

And they have the greater reason not to be dejected at the thought of death,
as they know it will not be violent, feverish or painful. Their end is calm,
and they expire, like a lamp when the oil is spent, without convulsion or
agony, and so they pass gently away, without pain or sickness, from this
earthly and corruptible to that celestial and eternal life, whose happiness is
the reward of the virtuous.

O holy, happy, and thrice blessed temperance! how worthy art thou of our
highest esteem! and how infinitely art thou preferable to an irregular and
disorderly life! Nay, would men but consider the effects and consequences of
both, they would immediately see, that there is as wide a difference between
them, as there is betwixt light and darkness, heaven and hell.

Having thus given the reasons, which made me abandon an intemperate, and
embrace a sober life, as also the method I observed, and the great blessings
and advantages I reaped from it, I shall now direct my discourse to those, who
suppose it to be no benefit to grow old; because they fancy, that when a man is
past seventy, his life is nothing but weakness, infirmity, and misery. But I
can assure these gentlemen, they are mightily mistaken; and that I find myself,
old as I am, (which is much beyond what they speak of) to be in the most
pleasant and delightsome stage of life.

To prove that I have reason for what I say, they need only enquire how I spend
my time, what are my usual employments; and to hear the testimony of all those
that know me. They unanimously testify, that the life I lead, is not a dead and
languishing life, but as happy a one as can be wished for in this world.

They will tell you, that I am still so strong at fourscore and three, as to
mount a horse without any help or advantage of situation; that I can not only
go up a single flight of stairs, but climb a hill from bottom to top, a foot,
and with the greatest ease; that I am always merry, always pleased, always in
humor; maintaining a happy peace in my own mind, the sweetness and serenity
whereof appear at all times in my countenance.

Besides, they know that it is in my power to pass away the time very
pleasantly; having nothing to hinder me from tasting all the pleasures of an
agreeable society, with several persons of parts and worth. When I am willing
to be alone, I read good books, and sometimes fall to writing; seeking always
an occasion of being useful to the public, and doing service to private
persons, as far as possible. I do all this without the least trouble; and in
such times as I set apart for these employments.

I dwell in a house, which besides its being situated in the pleasantest part
of Padua, may be looked on as the most convenient and agreeable mansion in that
city. I there make me apartments proper for the winter and summer, which serve
as a shelter to defend me from the extreme heat of the one, and the rigid
coldness of the other. I walk out in my gardens, along my canals and walks;
where I always meet with some little thing or other to do, which, at the same
time, employs and amuses me.

I spend the months of April, May, September, and October, at my country house,
which is the finest situation imaginable: the air of it is good, the avenues
neat, the gardens magnificent, the waters clear and plentiful; and this seat
may well pass for an enchanted palace.

Sometimes I take a walk to my Villa, all whose streets terminate at a large
square; in the midst of which is a pretty neat church, and large enough for the
bigness of the parish.

Through this Villa runs a rivulet; and the country about it is enriched with
fruitful and well cultivated fields; having at present a considerable number of
inhabitants. This was not so formerly: It was a marshy place, and the air so
unwholesome, that it was more proper for frogs and toads, than for men to dwell
in. But on my draining off the waters, the air mended, and people resorted to
it so fast, as to render the place very populous; so that I may, with truth,
say that I have here dedicated to the LORD, a church, altars, and hearts to
worship him; a circumstance this, which affords me infinite satisfaction as
often as I reflect on it.

It is with great satisfaction that I see the end of a work of such importance
to this STATE, I mean that of draining and improving so many large tracts of
uncultivated ground, a work which I never expected to have seen completed,
but, thank GOD, I have lived to see it, and was even in person in these marshy
places, along with the commissaries, for two months together, during the heats
of summer, without ever finding myself the worse for the fatigues I underwent.
Of such wonderful efficacy is that temperate life which I constantly observe.

If in discoursing on so important a subject as this, it be allowable to speak
of trifles, I might tell you that at the age of fourscore and three, a
temperate life had preserved me in that sprightliness of thought, and gaiety of
humor, as to be able to compose a very entertaining comedy, highly moral and
instructive, without shocking or disgusting the audience; an evil too generally
attending our comedies, and which it is the duty, and will be the eternal
honor of the magistracy to discountenance and suppress, since nothing has a
more fatal tendency to corrupt the morals of youth, than such plays as abound
with wanton allusions, and wicked sneers and scoffs on religion and matrimony.

As an addition to my happiness, I see myself immortalized as it were, by the
great number of my descendants. I meet with, on my return home, not only two or
three, but eleven grand children, all blessed with high health, sweet
dispositions, bright parts, and of promising hopes. I take a delight in playing
with the little pratlers: those who are older I often set to sing and play for
me on instruments of music. -- Call you this an infirm crazy old age, as they
pretend, who say, that a man is but half alive after he is seventy? They may
believe me if they please, but really I would not exchange my serene cheerful
old age, with any of those young men, even of the best constitution, who give
the loose to their appetites; knowing as I do, that they are thereby subjecting
themselves every moment to disease and death.

I remember all the follies of which I was guilty in my younger days, and am
perfectly sensible of the many and great dangers, they exposed me to. I know
with what violence young persons are carried away by the heat of their blood.
They presume on their strength, just as if they had taken a sure lease of their
lives: and must gratify their appetites whatever it cost them, without
considering that they thereby feed those ill humors, which do most assuredly
hasten the approach of sickness and death; two evils, which of all others are
the most unwelcome and terrible to the wicked. The first of these, sickness, is
highly unwelcome, because it effectually stops their career after this world's
business and pleasures, which being their sole delight and happiness, must be
inexpressibly sad and mortifying. And the impatience and gloom of sickness is
rendered tenfold more insupportable to them, because it finds them utterly
destitute of those pious affections, which alone can soothe the severity of
sickness and charm the pangs of pain. They had never cultivated an acquaintance
with GOD, nor accustomed themselves to look up to him as to a merciful Father,
who sends affliction to wean us from this scene of vanity. They had never, by
prayers and good works, endeavored to secure his friendship, or cherish that
love which would make his dispensations welcome. So that unblest with these
divine consolations, the season of sickness must be dark and melancholy indeed:
and besides all this, their hearts often sink within them at the prospect of
DEATH, that ghastly king of terrors, who comes to cut them off from all their
dear delights in this world, and send their unwilling souls to suffer the
punishment which their own guilty conscience tells them is due to their wicked
lives.

But from these two evils, so dreadful to many, blessed be GOD, I have but
little to fear; for, as for death, I have a joyful hope that that change, come
when it may, will be gloriously for the better; and besides, I trust that HE
whose divine voice I have so long obeyed, will graciously support and comfort
his aged servant in that trying hour. And as for sickness, I feel but little
apprehension on that account, since by my divine medicine TEMPERANCE, I have
removed all the causes of illness; so that I am pretty sure I shall never be
sick, except it be from some intent of Divine mercy, and then I hope I shall
bear it without a murmur, and find it for my good. Nay, I have r^ason to think
that my soul has so agreeable a dwelling in my body, finding nothing in it but
peace and harmony between my reason and senses, that she is very well pleased
with her present situation; so that I trust I have still a great many years to
live in health and spirits, and enjoy this beautiful world, which is indeed
beautiful to those who know how to make it so, as I have done, and likewise
expect (with GOD's assistance) to be able to do in the next.

Now since a regular life is so happy, and its blessings so permanent and
great, all I have still left to do, (since I cannot accomplish my wishes by
force) is to beseech every man of sound understanding to embrace, with open
arms, this most valuable treasure of a long and healthy life; a treasure,
which, as it far exceeds all the riches of this world, so it deserves above all
things to be diligently sought after, and carefully preserved. This is that
divine sobriety, so agreeable to the Deity, the friend of nature, the daughter
of reason and the sister of all the virtues. From her, as from their proper
root, spring life, health, cheerfulness, industry, learning, and all those
employments worthy of noble and generous minds. Excess, intemperance,
superfluous humors, fevers, pains, gouts, dropsies, consumptions, and the
dangers of death, vanish, in her presence, like clouds before the sun. She is
the best friend and safest guardian of life; as well of the rich as of the
poor; of the male as of the female sex; the old as of the young. She reaches
the rich, modesty; the poor, frugality; men, continence; women, chastity; the
old, how to ward off the attacks of death; and bestows on youth, firmer and
securer hopes of life. She preserves the senses clear, the body light, the
understanding lively, the soul brisk, the memory tenacious, our motions free,
and all our faculties in a pleasing and agreeable harmony.

O most innocent and divine sobriety! the sole refreshment of nature, the
nursing mother of life, the true physic of soul as well as of body. How ought
men to praise thee for thy princely gifts, for thy incomparable blessings! But
as no man is able to write a sufficient panegyric on this rare and excellent
virtue, I shall put an end to this discourse, lest I should be charged with
excess in dwelling so long on so pleasing a subject. Yet as numberless things
may still be said of it, I leave off, with an intention to set forth the rest
of its praises at a more convenient opportunity.

CHAP II.
The method of correcting a bad Constitution.
MY treatise on a temperate life has, thank GOD, begun to answer my wishes, in
being of service to many persons of weakly constitutions, who, after every the
least excess, found themselves greatly indisposed. These gentlemen, on seeing
the foregoing treatise, have immediately betaken themselves to a regular course
of living, from which, as their numerous letters to me declare, they have
experienced the happiest effects. In like manner, I should be glad to be of
service to those who are born with good constitutions, but presuming too much
upon them lead disorderly lives; whence it comes to pass, that on attaining the
age of sixty or thereabouts, they are attacked with various diseases; some with
constant cholicky pains, the tone of the stomach and bowels being in a manner
destroyed by long continued excess; others are tormented with the gout, some
are oppressed and drowned under dropsical humors, and others worn away to
skeletons by the agonies of the stone, hectical coughs, and a thousand other
mortal diseases.

I was born with a very choleric, hasty disposition; flew into a passion for
the least trifle, huffed every body about me, and was so intolerably
disagreable, that many persons of gentle manners absolutely shunned my company.
On discovering how great an injury I was doing myself, I at once resolved to
make this vile temper give way to reason. I considered that a man overcome by
passion, must at times, be no better than a madman, and that the only
difference between a passionate and a madman, is, that the one has lost his
reason for ever, and the other is deprived of it by ^its only, but that in one
of these, though never so short, he may do some deed of cruelty or death, that
will ruin his character, and destroy his peace for ever. A sober life, by
cooling the fever of the blood, contributed much to cure me of this frenzy; and
I am now become so moderate, and so much a master of my passion, that no body
could perceive that it was born with me.

A man may likewise, by temperance and exercise, correct a bad constitution,
and, notwithstanding a delicate habit, may live a long time in good health.

It is true indeed, the most temperate may sometimes be indisposed, but then
they have the pleasure to think that it is not the effect of their own vices;
that it will be but moderate in its degree, and of short continuance.

Many have said to me, "How can you, when at a table covered with a dozen
delicious dishes -- how can you possibly content yourself with one dish, and
that the plainest too at the table? It must surely be a great mortification to
you, to see so many charming things before you, and yet scarcely taste them."
This question has frequently been put to me, and with an air of surprise. I
confess it has often made me unhappy; for it proves that such persons are got
to such a pass, as to look on the gratification of their appetites as the
highest happiness, not considering that the mind is properly the man, and that
it is in the affections of a virtuous and pious mind, a man is to look for his
truest and highest happiness. When I sit down, with my eleven grand children,
to a table covered with various dainties, of which, for the sake of a light
easy stomach, I may not, at times, choose to partake, yet this is no
mortification to me; on the contrary, I often find myself most happy at these
times. How can it otherwise than give me great delight when I think of that
goodness of GOD, which blesses the earth with such immense stores of good
things for the use of mankind; and which, over and above all this goodness, has
put me into the way of getting such an abundance of them for my dear grand
children; and, besides must it not make me very happy to think that I have
gotten such a mastery over myself as never to abuse any of those good things,
but am perfectly contented with such a portion of them as keeps me always in
good health. O what a triumph of joy is this to my heart! What a sad thing it
is that young people will not take instruction, nor get benefit from those who
are older and wiser than themselves! I may use, in this matter, the words of
the wise man, "I have seen all things that are done under the sun." I know the
pleasures of eating, and I know the joys of a virtuous mind, and can say from
long experience, that the one excels the other as far as light excels
darkness; the one are the pleasures of a mere animal, the other those of an
angel.

Some are so thoughtless as to say, that they had rather be afflicted twice or
thrice a year with the gout, the sciatic, and other chronic distempers, than
deny themselves the pleasure of eating and drinking to the full of such things
as they like. Such persons would do well to consider, that by adopting a
temperate and active life, they might soon recover such vigor of constitution,
as in a great measure, if not entirely, to throw off those painful diseases,
and live in health and cheerfulness to a fine old age. Whereas by continuing
the imprudent practice of high living I would have it carefully remembered,
that those who have been long afflicted with the gout, should consult some very
experienced Physician, before they make any great change from high living to
abs^^mions^e^s.
, they keep up the feverish heat of the blood, relax their nerves, and so rivet
on themselves those inflammatory wasting distempers, which will soon carry them
to their graves.

To this some are ready to reply, that for their part they had rather eat and
drink as they like, though it should shorten their lives, that is, "give them a
short life and a merry one." It is really a surprising and sad thing, to see
reasonable creatures, so ready to swallow the most dangerous absurdities. For
how, in the name of common sense, can the life of a glutton or a sot be a merry
one? If men could eat to excess, drink to silliness, and rust in sloth, and
after all, suffer no other harm than the abridgement of ten or a dozen years of
life, they might have some little excuse for calling it a merry life though
surely it could appear so to none but persons of a sadly vitiated taste. But
since high living does so certainly tend to oppress and weaken the stomach,
filling the whole habit with superfluous and distempered humors, head-achs,
disordered stomach, indigestion, disturbed sleep, bad dreams, disagreeable
taste in the mouth in the morning, loss of appetite, eructations, sick stomach,
vomitings, diarrhoeas, fevers, rheumatisms, gouts, consumptions, apoplexies,
etc. etc. I say, since an intemperate life will assuredly sow in our bodies the
seeds of such diseases as will after a few short years of feverish pleasure,
make life a burden to us, with what face can any reasonable being call this a
merry life?

O sacred and most bountiful Temperance! how greatly am I indebted to thee for
rescuing me from such fatal delusions; and for bringing me, through the divine
benediction, to the enjoyment of so many felicities, and which, over and above
all these favors conferred on thin^ old man, have so strengthened his stomach,
that he has now a better relish for his dry bread than he had formerly for the
most exquisite dainties, so that, by eating little, my stomach is often craving
after the manna, which I sometimes feast on with so much pleasure, that I
should think I trespassed on the duty of temperance, did I not know that one
must eat, to support life; and that one cannot use a plainer or more natural
diet.

My spirits are not injured by what I eat, they are only revived and supported
by it. I can, immediately on rising from table, set myself to write or study,
and never find that this application, though so hurtful to hearty feeders, does
me any harm; and, besides, I never find myself drowsy after dinner, as a great
many do; -- the reason is, I feed so temperately, as never to load my stomach
nor oppress my nerves, so that I am always as light, active, and cheerful after
meals as before.

O what a difference there is between a temperate and an intemperate life! The
one bestows health and long life, the other brings on disease and untimely
death. O thou vile wicked intemperance, my sworn enemy, who art good for
nothing but to murder those who follow thee; how many of my dearest friends
have thou robbed me of, in consequence of their not believing me! But thou have
not been able to destroy me according to thy wicked intent and purpose. I am
still alive in spite of thee, and have attained to such an age, as to see
around me eleven dear grand children, all of fine understandings, and amiable
dispositions, all given to learning and virtue; all beautiful in their persons
and lovely in their manners, whom, had I not abandoned thee thou infamous
source of corruption, I should never have had the pleasure to behold. Nor
should I enjoy those beautiful and convenient apartments which I have built
from the ground, with such highly improved gardens, as required no small time
to attain their present perfection. No, thou accursed hag, thy nature is to
impoverish and destroy those who follow thee. How many wretched orphans have I
seen embracing dunghills; how many miserable mothers, with their helpless
infants, crying for bread, while their deluded fathers, slaves to thy devouring
lusts, were wasting their substance in rioting and drunkenness!

But thou art not content with consuming the substance, thou would destroy
the very families of those who are so mad as to obey thee. The temperate poor
man who labors hard all day, can boast a numerous family of rosy cheeked
children, while they pampered slaves, sunk in ease and luxury, often languish
without an heir to their ample fortunes. But since thou art so pestilential a
vice, as to poison and destroy the greatest part of mankind, I am determined to
use my utmost endeavors to extirpate thee, at least in part. And I promise
myself, that my dear grand children will declare eternal war against thee, and,
following my example, will let the world see the blessedness of a temperate
life, and so expose thee, O cruel intemperance! for what thou really art, a
most wicked, desperate, and mortal enemy of the children of men.

It is really a very surprising and sad thing, to see persons grown to men's
estate, and of fine wit, yet unable to govern their appetites, but tamely
submitting to be dragged by them into such excesses of eating and drinking, as
not only to ruin the best constitutions, and shorten their lives, but eclipse
the luster of the brightest parts, and bury themselves in utter contempt and
uselessness. O what promising hopes have been ship wrecked, what immortal
honors have been sacrificed at the shrine of low sensuality! Happy, thrice
happy, those who have early been inured to habits of self-denial, and taught to
consider the gratification of their appetites as the unfailing source of
diseases and death. Ye generous parents who long to see your children adorned
with virtue, and beloved as the benefactors of their kind; O teach them the
unspeakable worth of self-government. Unsupported by this, every advantage of
education and opportunity will avail them but little: though the history of
ancient worthies, and the recital of their illustrious deeds, may at times
kindle up in their bosoms a flame of glorious emulation, yet alas! this glow of
coveted virtue, this flush of promised honor, is transient as a gleam of winter
sunshine; soon overspread and obscured by the dark clouds of sensuality.

CHAP. III.
A Letter from Signior Lewis Cornaro to the Right Reverend Barbaro, Patriarch
of Aquilcia.
My Lord,
THE human understanding must certainly possess something divine in its nature.
What thanks do we not owe to the divine goodness, for this wonderful faculty of
our minds, whereby we can, though never so distant from them, indulge the
pleasure of seeing and conversing with those we love! How glorious is this
invention of writing, whereby we can easily communicate to our absent friends,
whatever may afford them pleasure or improvement! By means of this most welcome
contrivance, I shall now endeavor to entertain you with matters of the
greatest moment. It is true indeed, that what I have to tell you is no news, --
but I never told it you at the age of ninety one. Is it not a charming thing,
that I am able to tell you, that my health and strength are in so excellent a
state, that instead of diminishing with my age, they seem to increase as I grow
old? All my acquaintance are surprised at it; but I, who know the cause of this
singular happiness, do every where declare it. I endeavor, as much as in me
lies, to convince all mankind, that a man may enjoy a paradise on earth even
after the age of fourscore.

Now, my Lord, I must tell you, that within these few days past, several
learned Doctors of this University came to be informed by me, of the method I
take in my diet, having understood that I am still healthful and strong; that I
have my senses perfect; that my memory, my heart, my judgment, the tone of my
voice, and my teeth, are all as ^ound as in my youth; that I write seven or
eight hours a day with my hand, and spend the rest of the day in walking out
a-foot, and in taking all the innocent pleasures that are allowed to a virtuous
man; even music itself, in which I bear my part.

Ah, Sir! how sweet a voice would you perceive mine to be, were you to hear me,
like another David, chant forth the praises of GOD to the sound of my Lyre! You
would certainly be surprised and charmed with the harmony which I make. Those
gentlemen particularly admired, with what easiness I write on subjects that
require both judgment and spirit.

They told me, that I ought not to be looked on as an old man, since all my
employments were such as were proper for a youth, and did by no means resemble
the works of men advanced in years; who are capable of doing nothing after
fourscore, but loaded with infirmities and distempers, are perpetually
languishing in pain.

That if there be any of them less infirm, yet their senses are decayed; their
sight and hearing fails them, their legs tremble, their hands shake, they can
no longer walk, nor are they capable of doing any thing: and should there
chance to be one free from those disasters, his memory decreases, his spirits
sink, and his heart fails him; he is not half so cheerful, pleasant and happy
as I am.

Several physicians were so good as to prognosticate to me, ten years ago, that
it was impossible for me to hold out three years longer: however, I still find
myself less weak than ever, and am stronger this year than any that went
before. This sort of miracle, and the many favors which I received from GOD,
obliged them to tell me, that I brought along with me at my birth, an
extraordinary and special gift of nature; and for the proof of their opinion
they employed all their rhetoric, and made several elegant speeches on that
head. It must be acknowledged, my Lord, that eloquence has a charming force on
the mind of man, since it often persuades him to believe that which never was,
and never could be. I was very much pleased to hear them discourse; and could
it be helped, since they were men of parts who harangued at that rate? But that
which delighted me most, was to reflect, that age and experience may render a
man wiser than all the colleges in the world can. And it was in truth by their
help, that I knew the error of that notion. To undeceive those gentlemen, and
at the same time set them right, I replied, that their way of arguing was not
just: that the favor I received was no special, but a general and universal
one; that there was no man alive, but what may have received it as well as
myself; that I was but a man as well as others: that we have all, (be^^des our
existence,) judgment and reason: that we are all born with the same faculties
of the soul; because GOD was pleased that we should all have those advantages
above the other creatures, who have nothing in common with us, but the use of
their senses: that the Creator has bestowed on us this reason, and judgment to
preserve our lives: that man, when young, being more subject to sense than
reason, is too apt to give himself up to pleasure; and that when arrived to
thirty or forty years of age, he ought to consider, that, if he has been so
imprudent as to lead, till that time, a disorderly life, it is now high time for
him to take up and live temperately, for he ought to remember that though he
has hitherto been held up by the vigor of youth and a good constitution, yet
he is now at the noon of life, and must bethink himself of going down toward
the grave, with a heavy weight of years on his back, of which his frequent
pains and infirmities are certain forerunners; and that therefore, if he has
not been so happy as to do it already, he ought now, immediately to change his
course of life, especially with respect to the quality and quantity of his
food, as it is on that the health and length of our days do so greatly depend.
For in truth, my Lord, it is impossible for those who will always gratify their
appetites, not to ruin their constitutions; and that I might not entirely ruin
mine, I devoted myself to a sober life. I must confess, it was not without
great reluctance that I abandoned my luxurious way of living. I began with
praying to GOD, that he would grant me the gift of Temperance, well knowing
that he always hears our prayers with delight. Then, considering, that when a
man is about to undertake any thing of importance, he may greatly strengthen
himself in it, by often looking forward to the great pleasures and advantages
that he is to derive from it. Just as the husbandman takes comfort under his
(...), by reflecting on the sweets of abundance; and as the good christian
gladdens in the service of GOD, when he thinks on the glory of that service,
and the eternal joys that await him: so I, in like manner, by seriously
reflecting on the innumerable pleasures and blessings of health, and beseeching
GOD to strengthen me in my good resolutions, immediately entered on a course of
temperance and regularity. And though it was at first highly disagreeable, yet
I can truly say, that in a very little time the disagreeableness vanished, and
I came to find great delight in it.

Now on hearing my arguments, they all agreed that I had said nothing but what
was reasonable; nay, the youngest among them told me that he was willing to
allow that these advantages might be common to all men, but was afraid, they
were seldom attained; and that I must be singularly favored of Heaven to get
above the delights of an easy life, and embrace one quite contrary to it: that
he did not look on it to be impossible, since my practice convinced him of the
contrary, but however, it seemed to him to be very difficult.

I replied, that it was a shame to relinquish a good undertaking on account of
the difficulties that might attend it, and that the greater the difficulty, the
more glory should we acquire: that it is the will of the Creator, that every
one should attain to a long life, because in his old age, he might be freed
from the bitter fruits that were produced by sense, and might enjoy the good
effects of his reason; that when he shakes hands with his vices, he is no
longer a slave to the devil, and finds himself in a better condition of
providing for the salvation of his soul: that GOD, whose goodness is infinite,
has ordained that the man who comes to the end of his race, should end his life
without any distemper, and so pass, by a sweet and easy death, to a life of
immortality and glory, which I expect. I hope (said I to him) to die singing
the praises of my Creator. The sad reflection, that we must one day cease to
live, is no disturbance to me, though I easily perceive that at my age, that
day cannot be far off; nor am I afraid of the terrors of hell, because, blessed
be GOD, I have long ago shaken hands with my sins, and put my trust in the
mercy and merits of the blood of Jesus Christ.

To this my young antagonist had nothing to say, only that he was resolved to
lead a sober life, that he might live and die as happily as I hoped to do; and
that though hitherto he had wished to be young a long time, yet now he desired
to be quickly old, that he might enjoy the pleasures of such an admirable age.

The desire I had of giving you, my lord, a long entertainment, as being one
with whom I could never be weary, has inclined me to write this long letter to
you, and to add one word more before I conclude.

Some sensual persons give out, that I have troubled myself to no purpose, in
composing a treatise concerning temperance, and that I have lost my time in
endeavoring to persuade men to the practice of that which is impossible. Now
this surprises me the more, as these gentlemen must (...) that I had led a
temperate life many years before I composed this treatise, and that I never
should have put myself to the trouble of composing it, had not long experience
convinced me, that it is a life which any man may easily lead, who really
wishes to be healthy and happy. And, besides the evidence of my own experience,
I have the satisfaction to hear, that numbers on seeing my treatise have
embraced such a life, and enjoyed from it the very same blessings which I
enjoy. Hence I conclude, that no man of good sense will pay any regard to so
frivolous an objection. The truth is, those gentlemen who make this objection,
are so unhappily weded to the poor pleasure of eating and drinking, that they
cannot think of moderating it, and as an excuse for themselves, they choose to
talk at this extravagant rate. However, I pity these gentlemen with all my
heart, though they deserve for their intemperance, to be tormented with a
complication of distempers, and to be the victims of their passions a whole
eternity.

CHAP. IV.
Of the Birth and Death of Man.
THAT I may not be deficient in that duty of charity, which all men owe to one
another, or lose one moment of that pleasure which conscious usefulness of life
affords; I again take up my pen. What I am going to say will be looked on as
impossible, or incredible; but, at the same time, nothing is more certain, nor
more worthily to be admired by all posterity. I am now ninety-five years of
age, and find myself as healthy and brisk, as if I were but twenty-five.

What ingratitude should I be guilty of, did I not return thanks to the divine
Goodness, for all his mercies conferred upon me? Most of your old men have
scarce arrived to sixty, but they find themselves loaded with infirmities: they
are melancholy, unhealthful; always full of the frightful apprehensions of
dying: they tremble day and night, for fear of being within one foot of their
graves; and are so strongly possessed with the dread of it, that it is a hard
matter to divert them from that doleful thought. Blessed be GOD, I am free from
their ills and terrors. It is my opinion, that I ought not to abandon myself to
that vain fear: this I will make appear by the sequel; and will also evince,
how certain I am of living an hundred years. But that I may observe a method in
the subject I am treating of, I will begin with man at his birth, and thence
accompany him through every stage of life, to his grave.

I say then, that some are born with so bad a constitution, that they live but
a few days, months or years.

Others are born well shaped and healthful, but of a tender make; and some of
these live ten, twenty, thirty, or forty years, without being able to attain to
that period which is called old age.

Others there are, who bring along with them a strong constitution into the
wo^ld, and they indeed live to old age: but it is generally (as already
observed) an old age of sickness and sorrow; for which they are to thank
themselves; because they most unreasonably presume on the strength of their
constitution; and will not on any account, abate of that hearty feeding which
they indulged in their younger days. Just as if they were to be as vigorous at
fourscore as in the flower of their youth: nay, they go about to justify this
their imprudence, pretending that as we lose our health and vigor by growing
old, we should endeavor to repair the loss, by increasing the quantity of our
food, since it is by sustenance that man is preserved.

But in this they are dangerously mistaken; for as the natural heat and
strength of the stomach lessens as a man grows in years, he should diminish the
quantity of his meat and drink, common prudence requiring that a man should
proportion his diet to his digestive powers.

This is a certain truth, that sharp sour humors on the stomach, proceed from
a slow imperfect digestion; and that but little good chyle can be made, when
the stomach is filled with fresh food before it has carried off the former
meal. -- It cannot therefore be too frequently nor too earnestly recommended,
that as the natural heat decays by age, a man ought to abate the quantity of
what he eats and drinks; nature requiring but very little for the healthy
support of the life of man, especially that of an old man. Would my aged
friends but attend to this single precept which has been so signally
serviceable to me, they would not be troubled with one twentieth of those
infirmities which now harrass and make their lives so miserable. They would be
light, active, and cheerful like me, who am now near my hundredth year. And
those of them who were born with good constitutions, might live to the age of
one hundred and twenty. Had I been blessed with a robust constitution, I should
in all probability, attain the same age. But as I was born with feeble stamina,
I shall not perhaps outlive an hundred. And this moral certainty of living to a
great age, is to be sure, a most pleasing and desirable attainment, and it is
the prerogative of none but the temperate. For all those who (by immoderate
eating and drinking) fill their bodies with gross humors, can have no
reasonable assurance of living a single day longer: oppressed with food and
swollen with superfluous humors, they are in continual danger of violent fits of
the cholic, deadly strokes of the apoplexy, fatal attacks of the cholera
morbus, burning fevers, and many such acute and violent diseases, whereby
thousands are carried to their graves, who a few hours before, looked very hale
and hearty. And this moral certainty of long life is built on such good
grounds, as seldom ever fail. For, generally speaking, Almighty GOD seems to
have settled his works on the sure grounds of natural causes, and temperance is
(by divine appointment) the natural cause of health and long life. Hence it is
next to impossible, that he who leads a strictly temperate life, should breed
any sickness or die of an unnatural death, before he attains to the years to
which the natural strength of his constitution was to arrive. I know some
persons are so weak as to excuse their wicked intemperance, by saying, that
"the race is not always to the swift, nor the battle to the strong," and that
therefore, let them eat and drink as they please, they shall not die till their
time comes. How scandalously do these men misunderstand Solomon and abuse
truth! How would it startle us to hear our friends say, "that let them sleep
and play, as they please, they shall not be beggars till their time comes."

Solomon does indeed say that "the race is not always to the swift, nor the
battle to the strong;" but he must be no better than a madman, who thence
infers, that it is not generally so. For the invariable and eternal experience
of mankind demonstrates, that ninety nine time in an hundred, the race is to
the swift and the battle to the strong, bread to the industrious, and health to
the temperate.

But it is a matter of fact, and not to be denied, that, though temperance has
the divine efficacy to secure us from violent disease and unnatural death, yet
it is not to be supposed to make a man immortal. It is impossible but that
time, which effaces all things, should likewise destroy that most curious
workmanship of GOD, the human body: but it is man's privilege to end his days
by a natural death, that is, without pain and agony, as they will see me, when
the heat and strength of nature is quite exhausted. But I promise myself, that
day is a pretty comfortable distance off yet, and I fancy I am not mistaken,
because I am still healthy and brisk, relish all I eat, sleep quietly, and find
no defect in any of my senses. Besides, all the faculties of my mind are in the
highest perfection; my understanding clear and bright as ever; my judgment
sound; my memory tenacious; my spirits good; and my voice, the first thing that
fails others, still so strong and sonorous, that every morning and evening,
with my dear grand children around me. I can address my prayers and chant the
praises of the Almighty. O, how glorious this life of mine is like to be,
replete with all the felicities which man can enjoy on this side of the grave;
and exempt from that sensual brutality which age has enabled my better reason
to banish, and therewith all its bitter fruits, the extravagant passions and
distressful perturbations of mind. Nor yet can the fears of death find room in
my mind, as I have no licensed sins to cherish such gloomy thoughts: neither
can the death of relations and friends give me any other grief than that of the
first movement of nature, which cannot be avoided, but is of no long
continuance. Still less am I liable to be cast down by the loss of worldly
goods. I look on these things as the property of heaven; I can thank him for
the loan of so many comforts, and when his wisdom sees fit to withdraw them, I
can look on their departure without murmuring. -- This is the happiness of
those only, who grow old in the ways of temperance and virtue; a happiness
which seldom attends the most flourishing youth who live in vice. Such are all
subject to a thousand disorders, both of body and mind, from which I am
entirely free: on the contrary; I enjoy a thousand pleasures, which are as pure
as they are calm.

The first of these is to do service to my country. O! what a glorious
amusement, in which I find infinite delight, in showing my countrymen how to
fortify this our dear city of Venice, in so excellent a manner, as to make her
a famous republic, a rich and matchless city. Another amusement of mine is that
of showing this maid and queen of cities, in what manner she may always abound
with provisions, by manuring untilled lands, draining marshes, and laying under
water and thereby fa^ning fields, which had all along been barren for want of
moisture. My third amusement is in showing my native city, how, though already
strong, she may be rendered much stronger; and, though extremely beautiful, may
still increase in beauty; though rich, may acquire more wealth, and may be made
to enjoy better air, though her air is excellent. These three amusements, all
arising from the idea of public utility, I enjoy in the highest degree. Another
very great comfort I enjoy is, that having been defrauded when young, of a
considerable estate, I have made ample amends for that loss, by dint of thought
and industry, and without the least wrong done to any person, have doubled my
income, so that I am able not only to provide for my dear grand children, but
to educate and assist many poor youth to begin the world. And I cannot help
saying, I reflect with more pleasure on what I lay out in that way, than in any
other.

Another very considerable addition to my happiness is, that what I have
written from my own experience, in order to recommend temperance, has been of
great use to numbers, who loudly proclaim their obligations to me for that
work, several of them having sent me word from foreign parts, that, under GOD,
they are indebted to me for their lives. But that ^^ich makes me look on myself
as one of the happiest of men, is, that I enjoy as it were, two sorts of lives;
the one terrestrial, which I possess in fact; the other celestial, which I
possess in thought; and this thought is attended with unutterable delight,
being founded on such glorious objects, which I am morally sure of obtaining,
through the infinite goodness and mercy of GOD. Thus I enjoy this terrestrial
life, partly through the beneficent influences of temperance and sobriety,
virtues so pleasing to Heaven; and I enjoy, through cordial love of the same
divine Majesty, the celestial life, by contemplating so often on the happiness
thereof, that I can hardly think of any thing else. And I hold, that dying in
the manner I expect, is not really death, but a passage of the soul from this
earthly life, to a celestial, immortal, and infinitely perfect existence. And I
am so far charmed with the glorious elevation to which I think my soul is
designed, that I can no longer stoop (...) those trifles, which, alas! charm
and infatuate too great a part of mankind. The prospect of parting with my
favorite enjoyments of this life, gives me but little concern; on the
contrary, I thank GOD, I often think of it with secret joy, since by that loss
I am to gain a life incomparably more happy.

O! who then would be troubled, were he in my place? what good man, but must
instantly throw off his load of worldly sorrow, and address his grateful homage
to the Author of all this happiness? However, there is not a man on earth, who
may not hope for the like happiness, if he would but live as I do. For indeed I
am no angel, but only a man, a servant of GOD, to whom a good and temperate
life is so pleasing, that even in this world he greatly rewards those who
practice it.

And whereas many embrace a holy and contemplative life, teaching and preaching
the great truths of religion, which is highly commendable, the chief employment
of such being to lead men to the knowledge and worship of GOD. O that they
would likewise betake themselves entirely to a regular and temperate life! They
would then be considered as saints indeed upon earth, as those primitive
christians were, who observed so constant a temperance, and lived so long. By
living like them, to the age of one hundred and twenty* they might make such a
proficiency in holiness, and become so dear to GOD, as to do the greatest
honor and service to the world; and they would besides, enjoy constant health
and spirits, and be always happy within themselves; whereas they are now too
often infirm and melancholy. If indeed they are melancholy, because they see
GOD, (after all his goodness) so ungratefully requited; or because they see men
(notwithstanding their innumerable obligations to love) yet hating and grieving
each other: such melancholy is truly amiable and divine.

But to be melancholy on any other account, is, to speak the truth, quite
unnatural in good christians; such persons being the servants of GOD and heirs
of immortality; and it is still more unbecoming the ministers of religion, who
ought to consider themselves, as of all others, in the most important,
serviceable, and delightful employment.

I know, many of these gentlemen think that GOD does purposely bring these
occasions of melancholy on them, that they may in this life do penance for
their former sins; but therein, as I think, they are much mistaken. I cannot
conceive how GOD, who loves mankind, can be delighted with their sufferings. He
desires that mankind should be happy, both in this world and the next; he tells
us so in a thousand places in his word, and we actually find that there is not
a man on earth, who does not feel the good Spirit of GOD, forbidding and
condemning those wicked tempers, which would rob him of that happiness. No; it
is the devil and sin which bring all the evils we suffer, on our heads, and not
God, who is our Creator and Father, and desires our happiness: his commands
tend to no other purpose. And temperance would not be a virtue, if the benefit
it does us by preserving us from distempers, were repugnant to the designs of
GOD in our old age.

In short, if all religious people were strictly temperate and holy, how
beautiful, how glorious a scene should we then behold! Such numbers of
venerable old men as would create surprise. How many wise and holy teachers to
edify the people by their wholesome preachings and good examples! How many
sinners might receive benefit by their fervent intercessions! How many
blessings might they shower upon the earth! and not as now, eating and drinking
so intemperately, as to inflame the blood and excite worldly passions, pride,
ambition, and concupiscence, soiling the purity of their minds, checking their
growth in holiness, and in some unguarded moment, betraying them into sins
disgraceful to religion, and ruinous to their peace for life. -- Would they but
feed temperately, and that chiefly on vegetable food, they would as I do, soon
find it the most agreeable, (by the cool temperate humors it affords) the best
friend to virtuous improvement, begetting gentle manners, mild affections,
purity of thought, heavenly mindedness, quick relish of virtue and delight in
GOD. This was the life led by the holy fathers of the desert, who subsisted
entirely on wild fruits and roots, drinking nothing but pure water, and yet
lived to an extreme old age, in good health and spirits, and always happy
within themselves. And so may all in our days live, provided they would but
mortify the lusts of a corruptible body, and devote themselves entirely to the
exalted service of GOD; for this is indeed the privilege of every faithful
christian as Jesus Christ left it, when he came down upon earth to shed his
precious blood, in order to deliver us from the tyrannical servitude of the
devil; and all through his immense goodness.

To conclude, since length of days abounds with so many blessings, and I am so
happy as to have arrived at that state, I find myself bound (in charity) to
give testimony in favor of it, and solemnly assure all mankind, that I really
enjoy a great deal more than what I now mention; and that I have no other
motive in writing on this subject, than to engage them to practice, all their
lives, those excellent virtues of temperance and sobriety, which will bring
them, like me, to a happy old age. And therefore I never cease to raise my
voice, crying out to you, my friends, may your days be many, that you may long
serve GOD, and be fitter for the glory which he prepares for his children!

APPENDIX.
GOLDEN RULES OF HEALTH, SELECTED FROM HIPPOCRATES, PLUTARCH, AND SEVERAL OTHER
EMINENT PHYSICIANS AND PHILOSOPHER*
OF all the people on the face of the earth* the Americans are under the
greatest obligations to live temperately. Formed for commerce, our country
abounds with bays, rivers, and creeks, the exhalations from which, give the air
a dampness unfriendly to the springs of life. To counteract this infelicity of
climate, reason teaches us to adopt every measure that may give tone and vigor
to the constitution. This precaution, at all times necessary, is peculiarly so
in autumn, for then the body is relaxed by the intense heat of the dog days,
the air is filled with noxious vapors from putrid vegetables; Nature herself
wears a sickly drooping aspect; the most robust feel a disagreeable weariness
and soreness of their flesh, a heaviness and sluggishness in motion, quick
feverish flushings, and sudden chills darting along their nerves, (all plain
proofs of a sickly atmosphere, and tottering health.) Now, if ever we need the
aid of all-invigorating temperance, now keep the stomach light and vigorous by
moderate feeding, the veins well stored with healthy blood, and the nerves full
braced by manly exercise and comely cheerfulness. Be choice of your diet, fruit
perfectly ripe, vegetables thoroughly done, and meats of the easiest digestion,
with a glass or two of generous wine at each meal, and all taken in such
prudent moderation, as not to load but strengthen the constitution. For at this
critical juncture, a single act of intemperance, which would scarcely be felt
in the wholesome frosts of winter, often turns the scale against nature, and
brings on obstinate indigestions, load at stomach, loss of appetite, a furred
tongue, yellowness of the eyes, bitter taste in the mouth in the morning,
bilious vomitings, agues, fevers, etc. which in spite of the best medicines,
often wear a man away to a ghost. If blessed with a good constitution, he may
perhaps crawl on to winter, and get braced up again by her friendly frosts; but
if old or infirm, it is likely death will overtake him, before he can reach
that city of refuge.

"The giddy practice of throwing aside our winter clothes too early in the
spring, and that of exposing our bodies, when overheated to sudden cold, has
destroyed more people, than famine, pestilence and sword I saw (says an
American officer) thirteen grenadiers lying dead by a spring, in consequence of
drinking too freely of the cold water, while dripping with sweat in a hard
day's march, in summer. And many a charming girl, worthy of a tender husband,
has sunk into the icy embraces of death, by suddenly exposing her delicate
frame, warm from the hall-room, to the cold air. And since "the universal cause
acts not by partial, but by general laws," many a good soul, with more piety
than prudence, turning out quite warm from a crowded preaching into the cold
air without cloak or surtout, has gone off in a galloping consumption to that
happy world, where pain and sickness are unknown. What a melancholy thing it
is, that people cannot take care of their souls, without neglecting their
bodies, nor seek their salvation without ^^^ning their health!
." Sydenham.

Those who, by any accident, have lost a meal, (suppose their dinner) ought not
to eat a plentiful supper; for if they do, it will lie heavy on their stomach,
and they will have a more restless night than if they had both dined and supped
heartily. He therefore who has missed his dinner, and finds himself empty and
faint, wearied and chilly, should make a light supper of some spoon victuals,
rather than of any strong solid food." I have often (says Doctor Mackenzie)
experienced the benefit of this advice, when in the burry of country practice,
I chanced to lose my dinner and return home tired; for if I ate a hearty meat
supper, I was sure to be sick, ^ut if I supped on a dish of chocolate, or a
bowl of gruel and buttes, or toast and wine made weak and spiced, I rested
perfectly well, and rose next morning fresh and cheerful.
Hippocrates.

He who has taken a larger quantity of food than usual, and feels it heavy and
troublesome on his stomach, will, if he is a wise man, go out and puke it up
immediately The wise son of Sirach confirms this procept, and says, Eccles.
xxxi. 21. "If thou have been forced to eat, arise, go forth and puke, and thou
shall have rest." And most certain it is, (adds an ingenious physician) that
hundreds and thousands have brought sickness and death on themselves, by their
ignorance or neglect of this rule. But at the same time people should carefully
avoid a repetition of that excess, which renders such an evacuation necessary,
for frequent vomitings do greatly tend to weaken and destroy the tone of the
stomach.
. Hippocrates.

And here I cannot omit mentioning a very ruinous error into which too many are
fond of running, I mean, the frequent use of strong vomits and purgatives. A
man every now and then feeds too freely on some favorite dish; by such excess
the stomach is weakened, the body filled with superfluous humors, and he
presently finds himself much out of sorts. The only medicine in this case, is
moderate exercise, innocent amusement, and a little abstinence, this is
nature's own prescription, as appears by her taking away his appetite. But
having long placed his happiness in eating and drinking, he cannot think of
relinquishing a gratification so dear to him, and so sets himself to force an
appetite by drams, slings, elixir of vitriol, wine and bitters, pickles,
sauces, etc. and on the credit of this artificial appetite, feeds again as if
he possessed the most vigorous health. He now finds himself entirely disorderd,
general heaviness and weariness of body, flatulent uneasiness, frequent
eructations, loss of appetite, disturbed slumbers, frightful dreams, bitter
taste in the mouth, etc. He now complains of a foul stomach, or (in his own
words) that his stomach is full of bile; and immediately takes a dose of tartar
emetic or a strong purgative, to cleanse out his stomach, and so prepare for
another course of high living. Of all the Apollyons or destroyers of nerves,
health and life, this is the greatest; and I have no sort of doubt on my own
mind but it has broken down more constitutions, brought on more distempers and
sent more people to an early grave, than all the vices of this bedlam world put
together. How much wiser would it be in this case to follow the advice of the
celebrated Boerhaave, i. e. to use a little abstinence, take moderate exercise,
and thereby help nature to carry off her crudities and recover her springs. I
have been often told by a lady of quality, whose circumstances obliged her to
be a good oeconomist, and whose prudence and temperance preserved her health
and senses unimpaired to a great age, that she had kept herself out of the
hands of the physicians many years by this simple regimen. People in health
should never force themselves to eat when they have no appetite; Nature, the
best judge in these matters, will never fail to let us know the proper time of
refreshment. To act contrary to this rule, will assuredly weaken the powers of
digestion, impair health and shorten life. Plutarch.

"Let us beware of such food as tempts us to eat when we are not hungry, and of
such liquors as entice us to drink when we are not thirsty." Socrates.

"He who was active and nimble before meals, if he becomes heavy and dull after
meals, has certainly transgressed the laws of temperance; for the true end of
eating and drinking is to refresh, and not to oppress the body." Lessius.

It is really surprising (says Plutarch) what benefit men of letters would
receive from reading aloud every day; we ought therefore to make that exercise
familiar to us, but it should not be done immediately after dinner, nor
fatigue, for that error has proved hurtful to many. But though loud reading is
a very healthy exercise, violent vociferation is highly dangerous; it has in
thousands of instances burst the tender blood vessels of the lungs, and brought
on incurable consumptions. Would to God, all ministers of religion (I mention
them be^^use they are generally most wanting in this great article of prudence)
would but (...) to the advice of this eminent Philosopher. They would, many of
them, live much longer, and consequently stand a good chance to be more useful
men here on earth, and brighter saints in heaven. What can give greater pain to
a man who has the prosperity of religion (...) heart, than to see an amiable,
pious young divine, (who promised great services to the world) spitting up his
lungs, and dying of a consumption brought on by preaching ten times louder than
he had need! Since the world began, no man ever spoke with half the energy
which the interests of eternal souls deserve, but there is a wide difference
betwixt an instructive, moving, melting eloquence, and a loud, (...) monotony.
.

"The world has long made a just distinction betwixt men of learning, and wise
men. Men of learning are oft-times the weakest of men: they read and meditate
incessantly, without allowing proper relaxation or refreshment to the body; and
think that a frail machine can bear fatigue as well as an immortal spirit. This
puts me in mind of what happened to the camel in the fable; which, refusing
though often premonished, to ease the ox in due time of a part of his load, was
forced at last to carry not only the ox's whole load, but the ox himself also,
when he died under his burden. Thus it happens to the mind which has no
compassion on the body, and will not listen to its complaints, nor give it any
rest, until some sad distemper compels the mind to lay study and contemplation
aside; and to lie down, with the afflicted body, upon the bed of languishing
and pain. Most wisely, therefore, does Plato admonish us to take the same care
of our bodies as of our minds; that like a well matched pair of horses to a
chariot, each may draw his equal share of weight. And when the mind is most
intent upon virtue and usefulness, the body should then be most cherished by
prudence and temperance, that so it may be fully equal to such arduous and
noble pursuits." -- Plutarch.

Nothing is more injurious to health than hard study at night; it is inverting
the order of nature, and ruining the constitution.

All who are so wise as to rise early, and spend the day in useful industry,
will, by the time night's sable curtains are drawn, feel the need of that balmy
restorative, sleep. Now when nature is already exhausted, and needs repose, to
go to hard study, what is it but to strain the nerves, waste the spirits, bring
tiresome watchfulness, loss of appetite and general disorder? But most of all,
is it not improper to lie reading in bed by candle light? for it not only
partakes of the usual inconveniences of night study, such as straining the
eyes, weakening the sight, fatiguing the mind, and wearing away the
constitution, but is oft-times the cause of the saddest calamities; thousands
of elegant houses, with all their costly furniture, have been reduced to ashes
by this very imprudent practice. I knew an amiable lady, who was not a little
tried by this ill habit in one of her acquaintance. He would sleep all the
morning, play the truant all day, and at night nothing would serve him, but he
must read in bed till midnight, with a blazing candle all the time close to the
curtains. The thought of this, as well it might, would not allow the lady a
moment's rest, nor a single wink to the maid, who, poor thing! was packed up
stairs every quarter of an hour, to take a peep at the candle. I suppose it
might take well nigh the whole of an angel's benevolence to keep up a twelve
month intimacy with so dangerous and troublesome a visitant. But admitting this
habit of night studying and reading in bed, were attended with none of these
alarming inconveniences; no wise man would indulge in it, for it is evident he
would save no time, gain no pleasure nor advantage from it. For, it is very
certain we must sleep, and the paternal hand of GOD draws over us the shades of
night for that purpose; and if we don't sleep then, we must do it in the day,
and is it not a thousand times better to sleep in the night, while darkness
veils from our eyes all the beauties of creation, and unwholesome damps make it
dangerous to stir out, than to snore in bed all the morning, when the cheerful
light, the chirping birds, the fragrant air, and gladdening sight of gay-green
landskips, together with the spirit-stirring voice of glorious toil, invite to
health, to usefulness, and pleasure?

But how can giddy youth, hurried on by strong passions and appetites, be
prevented from running into those excesses, which may cut them off in the prime
of their days, or at least hoard up diseases and remorse for old age? Why,
their passions and appetites must early be restrained by proper discipline and
example. This important office must be done by their parents, whose first and
greatest care should be "to train up their children in the way they should go,
that when they are old they may not depart from it."

"O that parents (says the excellent Mr. Lock) would carefully instill into
their children that great principle of all virtue and worth, viz. nobly to deny
themselves every wrong desire, and steadily follow what reason dictates as
best, though the appetite should lean the other way. We often see parents by
humouring them when little, corrupt the principles of virtue in their children;
and wonder afterward to taste the bitter waters of their undutifulness or
wickedness, when they themselves have contributed thereto. Why should we
wonder, that he who has been accustomed to have his will in every thing* when
he was in coats, should desire and contend for it when he is in breeches? Youth
is the golden season to inure the mind to the practice of virtue, on which
their future health and respectability depend, and without which it will be
impossible to deliver their constitutions, unbroken, to manhood and old age.
Vice is utterly inconsistent with health, which can never dwell with lewdness,
luxury, sloth and violent passions. The life of the epicure and rake, is not
only short, but miserable. It would shock the modest and compassionate, to hear
of those exquisite pains, and dreadful agonies, which profligate young ^^^sons
suffer from their debau^^eries, before they can even each the friendly shelter
of an untimely grave. Or if some few stop short in their career of ^^ot, before
they have quite destroyed the springs of life, yet those springs are generally
rendered as feeble and crazy, by the liberties which they have already taken,
that they only support a gloomy, dispirited, dying life, tedious to themselves,
and troublesome to all around them; and (which is still more pitiable) often
transmit their complaints to an innocent unhappy offspring."

FINIS.

