RELIGIOUS COURTSHIP: BEING HISTORICAL DISCOURSES ON THE NECESSITY OF MARRYING
RELIGIOUS HUSBANDS AND WIVES ONLY: AS ALSO, OF HUSBANDS AND WIVES BEING OF THE
SAME OPINIONS IN RELIGION WITH ONE ANOTHER.

WITH AN APPENDIX: SHOWING The necessity of taking none but RELIGIOUS SERVANTS
and, A proposal for the better managing of SERVANTS.

NEW YORK. PRINTED BY W. DURELL, No. 19. (...)

M,DCC,XCIII,

PREFACE TO THE EIGHTH EDITION.
A S this way of writing, in cases not much unlike this, has been approved of,
and has met with great success in other hands; it has been an encouragement to
this undertaking.

Historical dialogues, it must be confessed, have a very taking elegancy in
them, and the story being handed forward in short periods, and quick returns,
makes the retaining it in the mind the easier, and the impression the more
lasting as well as delightful.

The story represented here is capable of such, and so many applications to the
cases of young people, whose settlement is always in view, that there will
never be a time when the instruction will be useless.

If any body should object, that too much is put here upon the woman's part,
and that a lady cannot be supposed, in the midst of her lover's addresses, to
take upon her, to demand such an account of himself as is here suggested; that
few men will s^oop to such an examination; and few women venture the loss of
their lovers upon such a subject: Let such consider how small the satisfaction
here proposed on the lady's part is, and that no gentleman can think it hard a
woman should be satisfied whether he is a Christian or a Heathen; a man of
religion or an Athiest: and indeed, no man of any tolerable share of sense,
will address himself to a lady for marriage, but he will take care to
anticipate her inquiries of that kind, by showing some concern, for knowing
what she is herself.

The universal neglect of this trifle, both in men and women, is what this book
is designed to correct, and there needs no greater satire upon that part, than
the success of the several cases here related, viz. The happy life of the
youngest sister, who came into the measures proposed; and the miserable
condition of the second sister, who rashly threw herself into the arms of a man
of different principles from her own, though blessed with all the good humor in
the world.

In (...) accounts, the very great consequence of being equally yoked is
illustrated; and it appears here how essential a share of religion, and a
harmony of principles in religion, are to the felicity of a conjugal life.

To those who do not cast off all concern for themselves; who do not make
marrying a mere leap in the dark, and as the first lady expresses it, rush like
a horse into the battle, these things will be of some moment. As to those that
are void of care of these matters, they must go on, and pay for their
experience; let them take heed, and buy it as cheap as they can.

If the women seem to be favored in this story, and have the better part of
the staff put into their hands, it is because really the hazard is chiefly on
their side, and they are generally the greatest sufferers in the success: but
if it were otherwise, yet, if they are treated with more than ordinary regard,
the author hopes they will not lay that sin to his charge.

The appendix to this work speaks for itself: Irreligious servants, in some
respects, are the plague of families, and keep our houses always in disorder.
It is a wonderful thing to reflect on, that so scandalous an evil, so easy to
be rectified, should have gone to such a degree as it has in the world; and
that masters and mistresses of families, have not long ago, for their own ease,
and for the satisfaction of one another, come to a general law, for the
managing, the punishing, and above all, for the recommending of servants; which
if they would do, they would easily, I say, bring (...) to know themselves, and
do their duty; neither of which is the case among servants at this time.

But it is all our own faults; we recommend sluts, and thieves, and drones, and
saucy, insolent fellows, and wenches: I say, we recommend them to one another,
without any concern for our neighbor's safety or peace; in a word, to pay the
debt of charity for those creatures who have abused us, we forget the debt of
justice to one another, and betray the confidence which one housekeeper and
neighbor owes to another, in one of the most essential articles of their
families' quiet.

This is all exposed here; and though this part is very short, being but an
accident to the other discourses; yet, I presume to say, it will be as
acceptable, and, in its kind, as useful as any of the rest.

This eighth edition of this work, recommends itself upon this express
condition, viz. That the author has not found occasion to alter any thing in
the seventh (errors of the press excepted), nor have I found room for any
additions, that usual pretense to set off new impressions, and impose upon
those who have bought the first; being still fully satisfied, the goodness of
the design and the usefulness of subject, will make the work acceptable
wherever it comes.

RELIGIOUS COURTSHIP.
PART I.
THERE lived in a village near London, an ancient, grave gentleman, of a good
estate, which he had gained by trade, having been bred a merchant, though of a
very good family too. He had been a man in great business, but his
circumstances being easy, and his love of a retired life increasing with his
years, he had left off his business, and taken a house a mile or two out of
town. He was a widower at the time of this affair, his wife having been dead
some years before.

He had five or six children; and all grown up, but none settled in the world,
though he had an estate sufficient to give them very plentiful fortunes. His
three daughters were very agreeable women: and, which was still better, were
very sober, modest, sensible, and religious young ladies; two of them
especially. And, as the character of their father, and the fortune he was able
to give them, recommended them very well to the world; so they had several
gentlemen that made honorable and handsome proposals to their father for their
marriage.

I shall most carefully avoid giving any room here, so much as to guess what
opinion in religion they were bred up in, or whether the old gentleman (...) or
a dissenter: and the same caution (...) with all the rest of the persons whom I
shall (...) the stage in the course of this story: my (...) for which every
body will understand by the (...) relation, and of the times we live in.

The father of these ladies had been a (...), till now, hurried in the world;
being crowded with a vast business, taken up with getting money, and with
growing rich; so that he neither had much concern for, nor indeed took any care
of the education or instruction of his children, but left them wholly to the
conduct of their mother. Nor was it any great loss to the children, especially
to the daughters; their mother being a most pious, religious, and virtuous
lady; who was not only extraordinarily qualified to instruct her children, but
gave up her whole time to it from their childhood.

One morning, a little before her death, calling her daughters to her, she told
them, among other things, That as to marriage, she had but two injunctions to
lay upon them, which, as she was not likely to live to see them settled, she
would desire them to lay down as maxims in the choice of their husbands, and
which she would, as upon her deathbed, if her words had any extraordinary
influence upon them, oblige them to observe strictly, viz.

First, Never to marry any man, whatever his person or fortune might be, that
did not, at least, profess to be a religious man.

Second, Never to marry any man, how religious soever he may seem to he, if he
was not of the same principle and opinion in religion as themselves.

And as this was but a little before her death, so the daughters were more than
ordinarily touched with the sense of it, and resolved to pursue it exactly. How
they did pursue it, and the consequences of it, will be seen in the following
dialogues.

It followed some time after, that a gentleman of a very good estate courted
the youngest of these daughters; and making very handsome proposals to her
father [for he offered to settle 600l, per annum upon her] the father was
exceedingly pleased with the match; he being a gentleman thoroughly well bred,
an agreeable person, and, in a word, nothing appearing to give ^he least
reason, why he should not be as acceptable to ^^e lady as he was to the father.

As he came thus recommended to the father, there appeared nothing disagreeable
in it to the young lady; nor had she at his first appearance the least
exception to make against the gentleman as to his person. Indeed, as to his
estate, though her fortune was very handsome, yet his was so far beyond it,
that there was no comparison in the case; and besides all this, she had this
engaging circumstance in the proposal, viz. That she being the youngest of the
three daughters, the gentleman had passed over, her two eldest sisters, and had
singled her out by his more particular fancy, giving her that undeniable mark
of his affection, viz. That she would be the wise of his choice, and
consequently should have an uncommon security of the sincerity of his love to
her.

The father opposed his proposal a little at first, as a slight offered to his
eldest daughters; but the gentleman told him, That he hoped, if he accepted his
design of coming into his family, he would give him leave to take the person
his judgment had made choice of, and that he thought he might be happy with:
That it would be a very hard circumstance to him, and what he could not think
of with patience, to marry one of his daughters, and be in love with another:
That he was very far from offering any slight to the eldest, letting him know,
that happening to see the youngest first, he found such suitableness, and
something so agreeable in her to him, that he resolved to look no further:
That, perhaps, if he had seen the eldest or the second daughter first, it might
have been the same thing; but that as he could not answer for the bias of his
fancy, so neither could he answer it to his own conduct, not to choose her, that
was from the first moment he saw her, the only woman in the world that he ever
thought could make him happy.

Her father could make no return to an answer that had so much weight in it,
and which appeared to be so sincere; and therefore, not acquainting his eldest
daughter with the design he had to propose her to him, he took occasion to talk
to them all together, (...) morning as they were drinking chocolate; and (...)
merrily with them, thus:

DIALOGUE I.
Father. WELL, girls, you little think now, which of you all is like to be
first married. What say you, child, (turning to the youngest) I hope you are
content to let your eldest sisters go before you?


3d Daughter. Yes, yes, Sir: I desire both my sisters may go before me; for I
see nothing in the world to make me in haste.


Fa. Why, what is the matter that you are so out of love with all the world on a
sudden? Is it that you think yourself too good for every body, or every body
too good for you?


3d Da. No, Sir; I am neither so vain to think the first, nor so humble to
think the last; but I desire to think of myself as I ought to think.


Fa. How is that, pray?


3d Da. Why, Sir, I think I live too well to change for the worse; and this is
not an age to change for the better: and therefore, I desire to be as I am.


Fa. Why, is this age so much worse than that which (...) before, pray?


3d Da. Nay, Sir, I don't know: but I am very well satisfied, Sir, with your
first proposal, that my sisters may try before me.


Fa. Well, well; and if you go before your sisters, there will be no harm done,
if it be to your liking, I hope. I dare say none of your sisters will be angry.
At which the two eldest said, No, no; we shall be very glad to see it. And so
they fell to jesting with their younger sister, till they almost angered her.

You are mighty difficult, says the eldest sister, that you fall upon the whole
world, as if there was nothing good enough for you.

Says the second sister, She will be as easily pleased as another, I warrant
her, if she was talked to in earnest. Upon which, notwithstanding their father
was present, they fell to rallying one another between jest and earnest, a
little too warmly, as follows.


3d Da. That may be, as my eldest sisters teach me, I hope they intend to set
me a good example; for it is their turn first.


1st Da. We don't know that; if a good offer comes in your way, you will hardly
put it off, and say, Your betters must go before you.


3d Da. For all you are both my eldest sisters, I question whether you
understand what a good offer means; and it may be have considered it no more
(...) I. There Is a great deal in that word.


1st Da. O! I Will explain it in a few words: A good estate, and a man you like.


2d Da. Nay; you might have stopped at the first: It is no matter what the man
is, if the estate be but good.


3d Da. Is that the example my eldest sisters intend to set me?


Fa. Ay; and a good example too, child.


3d Da. You are disposed to jest, Sir; but I believe you would not be pleased
with such a way of choosing a husband for any of your daughters.


2d Da. I hope my father would: I am sure I should.


3d Da. That Is no token to me that you have considered much of the matter, as I
said before.


2d Da. Why, what would you have besides a good estate? What matter is it what
the man is? I would pass by a great many homely defects for a good settlement.


3d Da. As for the homely defects, perhaps I may be no nicer than you, if there
was nothing else wanting.


2d Da. What can be wanting if there be money enough?


3d Da. Nothing I hope when my sister comes to (...)


2d Da. No; nor when you come to choose neither, it may be.


3d Da. I am afraid there will.


2d Da. For my part I shall inquire for nothing (...) as I know of.


3d Da. No! What! would you (...) have no religion.


2d Da. What have I to do with his (...) be a Christian, I hope.


3d Da. And what if he should not (...)


2d Da. Nay, then he may be (...) Heathen if he will, what is that to me?


3d Da. That Is a proof of what I said before, that you have not considered much
of the matter.


2d Da. No, indeed, not I; but I suppose my younger sister has.


3d Da. Your younger sister never told you so yet: ^^^^methinks, there requires
very little consideration, to (...), if I ever should marry, I would not have a
rake, a Heathen, a profligate fellow, a man without religion, purely for his
money. If you think these things no objections, and are got over such scruples
in the case, I must ^ell you, sister, that it seems the business has been more
in your head than in mine, or at least to worse purpose.


2d Da. Well, it may be so; and then it may follow, that when you have
considered more of it too, you will be of my mind.


3d Da. What, to marry an Atheist! a man of no principles! that knows neither
God nor devil!


2d Da. Ay, ay; that, or any thing else, if you have but a good settlement,
child. A good settlement will make up all those things: you would take him, I
warrant you.


3d Da. No, sister; not for all I can see with my eyes.


2d Da. O, you don't know your own mind, till you come to be tried; we shall
see you tell another tale hereafter.


3d Da. I an't so fond of a husband, whatever my sister is.

[Here the father seeing that the younger sister began to be a little moved,
^^d unwilling they should make a quarrel of it, put an end to the discourse,
and so they soon after withdrew; and then the father being left with the eldest
daughter only, went on with his discourse thus to her.]


Fa. Child, you are a little too hard upon your sister.


Da. She should not have taken it so, Sir: She knows it is but in jest.


Fa. But you do not know whether it may be all in jest or no.


Da. Nay, Sir, I am sure all our share in it was in jest; if there is any thing
in it, I should have talked in another way.

[Here she was very inquisitive with her father to know if there was any thing
in it or (...), at which he only smiled.]


Da. Nay, Sir, then I understand how (...).


Fa. Well, child; how will you take it, to see your younger sister married
before you?


Da. O very well, Sir, I shall be very glad of it, if it be for her good. But
if I were to speak my mind, I should say something to it about her, that it may
be there may be occasion for.


Fa. Well, pray speak your mind then.


Da. Why, Sir, for all my sister's bantering her, I must own, our youngest
sister will not be easily pleased in a husband, as times go now.


Fa. How do you mean, child?


Da. Why, Sir, I mean, that though she may be the first of us that shall be
asked, she may be the last of us that will be married.


Fa. Ay, my girl! is it so with you then? What I have you been both making your
bargains without me? And are they so near concluding? That Is very hard.


Da. Dear father, how could you have such a thought of us? You are quite wrong;
you don't understand me at all.


Fa. Nay; how can I understand you any other way! If it is not so, explain
yourself.


Da. Sir, I mean that my sister will not be easily pleased. She will scarce
take the first that comes, I dare say.


Fa. No; then I shall take it very ill: for I assure you he that I mean is a
very good one.


Da. Nay, if he is a good one, it (...) she ^^y; but it is a question, Sir,
whether her good one, and your good one, may (...) both of a sort.


Fa. Why, he has a very good estate, I Will assure you; for beyond what she can
expect.


Da. That Is a good thing; but that will go but a little way with her, I know.


Fa. Well, he is a very handsome, well-accomplished, well-bred gentleman. She
cannot mislike him. He is a most agreeable young gentleman, I assure you.


Da. That will not go a bit the farther with her neither, I am sure.


(...) Then he is in love with her, and has singled her (...) from you all. She
will be the wife of his affection to be sure. What can she desire more (...)


Da. She will desire something more still, Sir; though the last is a thing will
go very far; doubtless further than any thing we have talked on yet. But you
know, Sir, my sister is a very sober, religious body, and she will never marry
a man that is not so too; though his estate, his person, his accomplishments,
were beyond all the rest of the world. And this was the reason why I said she
may be first asked and last married.


Fa. Nay, I cannot tell how matters are as to that.


Da. I Will assure you, Sir, she will know how it is as to that, before she
engages.


Fa. Nay, let her alone to that part, that is none of my business.

[Here he was touched a little, and reflected back softly to himself, O! why do
I say it is none of my business? Whose business is it, if it is not mine?]


Da. But, Sir, when you know her mind in that case, it may prevent you
receiving any disappointment, and prevent her venturing to disoblige you, in
refusing what you may propose to her.


Fa. No, no; I dare say she will not refuse him; she is not such a fool neither.


Da. Dear Sir, then I hope you know he is a sober, religious gentleman.


Fa. I know nothing to the contrary, my dear; I suppose he is.


Da. But, Sir, it makes me anxious about it, because you said just now, you
could not tell. I hope you will inquire farther into it before you take any
farther steps about it.


Fa. Why, child, as to that, I dare say, she need not be concerned. He is so
good a humoured man, he will never cross her in small matters, especially in
religious things. Child, do you think any gentleman can be angry, that his wife
is sober and religious? To be sure, she may be as religious as she will.


Da. O dear Sir, my sister can never be satisfied so, sure.

[He observes his daughter concerned at it, and that tears stood (...) her
eyes.]


Fa. Child, what is the matter? What makes you so concerned about it?


Da. It is a sad life, Sir, for a woman to have no help from her husband in
things that are good, but only to have liberty for herself to be as good as she
will, or rather as good as she can. By the same rule, she may be as bad as she
will; and it may be, he will like her never the better for the one, nor the
worse for the other.


Fa. Well, he is a fine gentleman, and professes a great affection for her.


Da. Before he has seen her, it may be, or knows any thing of her.


Fa. No, no, he has seen her; but he has never been in her company, I know.


Da. So that I find he cares not what she is; he chooses by her outside only.


Fa. He takes all the rest upon trust.


Da. But my sister will not take him so, I can tell him that.


Fa. I will take it very ill from her if she slights him; for I assure you he
is not to be slighted, he has very near 2000l. a year estate.


Da. But I am sure if he is not a religious man, she will slight him for all
that; my meaning is, she will never have him: I suppose she will not be rude to
him.


Fa. If she does refuse him, she and I shall quarrel, I assure you, and that
very much.


Da. I hope you will not, Sir: you will give her leave to choose to her own liking.
It is for her life, and she must bear the discomfort of it; no body can bear it
for her. Besides, Sir, you know she was very religiously instructed by my
mother.


Fa. Ay, ay; your mother was a good woman.


Da. And you know, Sir, I suppose, what advice my mother gave her upon her
deathbed, viz. Never to marry a man that was not religious, whatever other
advantages might offer with him.


Fa. And did she not give you the same advice too, my dear?


Da. Yes, to be sure, and all of us.


Fa. Well; and yet you heard what your sister said just now, viz. That she
would not trouble herself about it, so there was but a good estate.


Da. But I hope my sister would consider better, if she came to the question.


Fa. Why child, would you refuse such a gentleman, and such a settlement as
this is, that offers now to your sister, for such a nicety as that?


Da. It will be time enough, Sir, for me to answer that question, when I am
offered such a one; there is no danger of me yet.


Fa. I hope you would be wiser.


Da. I hope, Sir, I should act as becomes me. But the case is not mine now; if
it was, I should not have begun the discourse.


Fa. Well, but did your mother give you such advice, child, when she was ill.


Da. Yes, Sir; and more than advice: for she told us, she would leave it as an
injunction upon us, as far as her dying words could have any influence to
oblige us.


Fa. Very well; that is as much as to say, she had found the inconvenience of
it herself.

[Here his conscience touched him again, though but slightly, and he fetched a
sigh, and said softly, If she did, it was nothing but what she had too much
reason to do; for she lived but an uncomfortable life with me on that very
account]


Da. Nay, indeed, dear father, we never put any such construction upon it.


Fa. And so, my dear, you think your sister will not like this gentleman, do
you?


Da. Indeed, Sir, I cannot tell, till I know what kind of a gentleman he is;
no, nor then neither. For how can I tell what my sister will like, o^ how her
fancy may lead her to act against her judgment, if she would like him very well
upon seeing him?


Fa. But you believe she will not.


Da. If he is not a very sober religious man, I do think she will not. If she
does, she must break in upon the most solemn resolution that she is able to
make.


Fa. Why, will nothing serve her but a saint? Alas! where does she think to
find him? What! would she marry a bishop?


Da. Nay, Sir, if she should, she is not sure she should not be disappointed.
Ministers are but men.


Fa. No, indeed, child; nor always the best of men neither.


Da. But, Sir, where there is a profession of religion, there is a likelihood
of finding the truth of it; but where there is no profession, there it cannot
be. Now, though we are no^ obliged, to be sure, our husbands should be saints,
yet I believe we ought to be satisfied that they are not Atheists. There Is a
great deal of difference, Sir, between a friend to religion, and an enemy.


Fa. Well, well; the girls of this age do not much trouble themselves about
religion. They generally let it alone, till they see what religion their
husband ^^re of.


Da. Dear father, I hope your girls are not of that sort.


Fa. My daughters are like other folks daughters, I believe. I hope they are
not worse.


Da. But, Sir, if that were true, then there would still be the more reason to
take care that they should (...) religious husbands, else they would have no
religion at (...)


Fa. But how shall you know it?


Da. We must endeavor to be satisfied as well (...) we can. If we are
deceived, it may be our unhappine^^ but will not be our fault; but if we
neglect the caution it may be a double misery, by its being our sorrow, and our
sin too.


Fa. Well, child, I hope this gentleman will please your sister, as well as he
does me; and I would not have her stand in her own light. If he is not so
religious now, it may come afterward. The man is a sober, well-bred, ingenuous
gentleman.


Da. I can say nothing to it, Sir, unless I knew him. I only take notice of the
principle, Sir, on which my sister goes; and by which I am sure ^he will act in
this matter, that you may not be disappointed, and resent it, for I know she
will not go from it.


Fa. I Will warrant you. I intend to talk with her about it. I don't doubt but
she will like him very well.

[Two or three days after this discourse, the father brings home this young
gentleman to dinner; and after dinner he takes occasion to talk with his
daughter; and to tell her, that this was the gentleman that he had told her of,
that intended to court her; and that he expected she would think of the thing,
and receive him as her own inclinations, and his merit, should direct.

The gentleman did not discourse much with her by herself that time, having no
design to begin closely at the first view. However, he had the opportunity of
walking two or three turns with her in a green walk in the garden; and when he
took his leave, told her, he resolved to wait on her again; to which she made
no answer for that time.

The next evening he came again; and after that for several evenings together;
when having made her acquainted with his design, and laid close siege to her
for some time, she found nothing to object against him; for he was indeed a
most agreeable person. And her father pressing her to it on the other hand, and
letting her know (...) honorable proposals he had made her, and how he (...)
singled her out from all her sisters, as the object of it (...) choice, she
began insensibly to find her affections ve^^^ strongly biassed in his favor.

All this while she could make no discovery of any ^^ing about religion in him;
nor so much as, whether he was well inclined or perfectly destitute. The
respect he showed her, and the distance she kept him at, permitted him not to
use any loose expressions, that might give her any light into his principles;
and, as he afterward confessed, he found her so nice in things of that kind,
that the least dislocated word would have given her offense; and therefore he
kept upon his guard a great while, till at length, when they become more
intimate, he abated his usual caution.

By this time, as she confessed to her sister, she did not only like him, but
really loved him; and having nothing to object against him, had given him
reason to see that she designed to have him. But she was under a great concern
how to know what he was as to religion; and terribly afraid lest she should
give her affections such a loose, that though she should be deceived in the
main point, she should not be able to master herself, so much as to go back. As
she was musing very seriously upon this one morning in her chamber, her eldest
sister came in to her, and began the following discourse with her.]


Eld. sist. Sister! How stands the world with you, now?


Yo. sist. Never worse, sister. If you do not help me, I am undone.


Eld. sist. What Is the matter?


Yo. sist. Why, if I have this man, I shall be the miserablest creature alive.


Eld. sist. How so?


Yo. sist. O there is nothing of religion in him.


Eld. sist. Are you sure there is not?


Yo. sist. No, I am not sure; but we have conversed this month now, and I never
heard one word about it come out of his mouth. And if I speak (...) word, he
(...) it off, and does it so cleverly, that I cannot put in another word for my
life.


Eld. sist. I warrant you, I would find it out if it were my case.


Yo. sist. You could not, I am sure.


Eld. sist. Why I would ask him point blank, what religion he was of?


Yo. sist. Why, so I did, and he laughed at me, and said, O child, I am a
mighty good Christian.


Eld. sist. I should have told him, I was afraid he wa'n't.


Yo. sist. Why, I did that too, in the very words, and still be put me off.
Another time I asked him, if he was not a papist? Immediately he sell a
crossing himself all over; and made himself and me too, so merry at it, that
though I was really troubled about it, I could not for my life get the least
serious thing out of him.


Eld. sist. Why, you must let it go on a little farther, till you are more
intimate: and till you come to talk of your way of living, the affairs of his
family and house, and the like.


Yo. sist. Really, sister, I am afraid to go on any farther: for, I must
confess, I begin to have a strange kindness for him: and, if I go any farther,
I may love him better, till my affection he a snare to me, and I may be
prevailed with to take him, without farther inquiry, which I shall have no
peace in.


Eld. sist. What will you do then?


Yo. sist. I know not what to do. I wish you would try what you can make of
him. You are free enough with him to talk any thing of that kind, sure.


Eld. sist. I can be free enough; but that will not do it. If he is too cunning
for you, he will easily be too cunning for me.


Yo. sist. Why do you think then, that it is a disguise?


Eld. sist. What else can it be? Do you think he guards himself so strictly
against all your attemps for nothing?


Yo. sist. If I thought so, I should enquire no far^^^^ it would be a plain
discovery to me.


Eld. sist. Why so?


Yo. sist. Why if he was a serious person, he would have no reason or occasion
to conceal it. If he endeavors to hide himself it is for something that he
would not have known; and then I need not ask any more after it.


Eld. sist. No doubt of it; you cannot think any other.


Yo. sist. But indeed I do think otherwise: I verily believe it is all mere
nature, and nothing but the height of good humor; for I never put the question
downright to him, but in a kind of jesting way.


Eld. sist. But why don't you then? Why do you triste and dally so long with a
thing of such consequence? You a'n't afraid of disobliging him, are you?


Yo. sist. No, indeed; I am more afraid that his answer will disoblige me.


Eld. sist. Well, well; you had better have it discoursed now than hereafter. I
would not be backward to speak plain to him.


Yo. sist. If I talk never so plain, he will not give a serious answer. He is
so merry; cannot bring him to talk. I beg you will see if you can break in upon
him.


Eld. sist. Come, I Will tell you what I will do, which will be better a great
deal than my talking with him by myself. You know we shall walk altogether a
while before supper; I Will begin it before you, and you may speak or not speak,
take it in jest or in earnest, as you find it proper.


Yo. sist. Do then; I think that will be very well.

[The next evening, the two sisters, and this young gentleman walking in the
garden, as was usual before supper, and talking of several different things, a
servant brings the eldest sister a letter, which made some little stop in their
walk. She opened it, and read it; and he finding her color change a little in
the reading, stepped upto her; says he, what is the matter, sister (for he always
called her sister) You have no bad news I hope? Truly, says she, one way it is
no bad news, and another way it (...) And, turning to her sister, she says, Sir
James is dead. He was a little concerned to hear some of the family was dead,
lest it should grieve his mistress. But she, without any appearance of trouble,
returned, Well, since it is the disposal of Providence, I am not grieved; for
my aunt is delivered from one of the worst good husbands, that ever a sober
woman had. He took hold of that (...) presently, and still directing his speech
to her sister, said, Worst good husband! What mystery is that? Why, truly, says
the sister, the thing is too true: Sir James was a very good husband in his
humor, and in several other things; but my lady had a dreadful life with him.
Why, says he, That may be very true; a man may be a very good husband in one
thing, and be very (...) it is owing much to the disagreement (...) The young
lady's sister was disappointed in his answer; for she expected he would have
inquired into the particulars; but he put it off, as a thing that did not
concern him much. At which the younger sister looked at her, and smiled, which
was as much as to tell her, that she had found now, that what she had told her
was true; namely, that she would not see it easy to break in upon him. She took
the hint, and resolved she would try the best of her skill, and she found it
soon answered her end: so she returned to him very smartly. No, no, Sir, says
she, it was not at all from a disagreement of tempers is this case; it is worse
a great deal; it was a disagreement of principles; for the gentleman was of a
very good temper I assure you. Then, if he had a good wife, returns he, he
should have made it his first principle to have been obliging and good tempered
to his wife. Alas! says the lady, he had no religion, and she is the most pious
religious lady in the world. It may be then, says he, she had enough, for her
and her husband too. Her being religious, said she, made his want of it an
insufferable burden to her. Then she was to blame, says he, for what need she
have been uneasy at that? Not uneasy! says she, How is it possible a religious
woman can live comfortably with an irreligious, profane husband! O very well,
says he again, What signifies it to a woman, whether her husband have any
religion or no? I have better thoughts of you, says she, than to believe you
speak as you think, or that you would be understood so.

Her sister had listened very attentively to all this, and was sensibly
affected with it; but said nothing till now, when she turned upon her sister:
Why sister, said she, should you think so? I hope Mr. -- says nothing but what
he is very sincere in. Do you think he has not his religion to choose as well as
other young gentlemen? Madam, says he, How should I choose my religion, that
have not chosen me a wife? Then you are for choosing you a wife first, says his
mistress, and your religion afterward! Why Madam, says he, Don't all the
gentlemen in England do so too? I don't know what they do, says she, but I know
what they ought to do.

She was now too well satisfied of what she feared before, and her mind was so
oppressed with it, that she was not able to hold; but making an excuse to take
her sister's letter, and go in and tell her father the news of the death of his
brother-in-law, she left her sister to walk with her lover, and went up into
her chamber, and locking herself in, she gave vent to her passions, by crying
vehemently a great while. When she had recovered herself, considered that she
was obliged, in civility, to go down again, she composed her thoughts, and
kneeling down, prayed to God to fortify her soul in the resolutions she had
always taken, never to join herself to any man that did not acknowledge God,
and profess to fear and serve him; and, in this temper, she went down to him
again.

She was with him after that some hours in the evening, as usual; but he
observed she was not easy nor free; at length she told him, that upon this
occasion of a relation being dead, it was proper for the family, and decent to
their father, that they should make some little alteration in their conduct,
and desired he would not take it (...), that she retired from him sooner than
she used to do. This he could not object against, and accordingly he took his
leave, believing that her uneasiness was nothing but the business of her aunt's
being a widow; which, though, as she said, she was not much concerned for, yet
several things about it might take up her thoughts, so as to make her not so
perfectly easy, or so good company as she was before.

But he was quite out in his guess; for her uneasiness was of another kind, and
she had nothing now lay upon her mind, but how she should discharge herself
entirely of his importunities, and yet without being rude and uncivil to him,
and without disobliging her father; for she was firmly resolved in her mind
never to see him more.

When she had thus taken her leave of him, she went up into her chamber,
sending her maid, to desire her sister to come up; and ordering the servant to
excuse her to her father for not coming to supper, for she was indisposed.

As soon as her sister came into her chamber, she ran to her in the greatest
passion imaginable, and throwing her arms about her neck, O sister, says she,
help me (...) out of this wretched business, and I Will never come into the like
as long as I live. [She said no more, but hung about her, crying violently a
great while.]


Sist. What can I do for you child? you know I Will do any thing I can.


Yo. sist. Don't you see how it is now? Was I not right in my suspicion.


Sist. I am afraid you are: I don't know what to say to it.


Yo. sist. Say to it! I would not marry him if he was Lord High Treasurer of
Britain.


Sist. What will you do then? How will you put him off?


Yo. sist. Put him off! let him put himself off, an' he will; I have no more to
say to him.


Sist. Nay, you must have more to say to him, you must tell him so.


Yo. sist. Not I; I Will never see him more.


Sist. Child, you must not be rude to him; you don't want manners.


Yo. sist. I would not be rude to him, that is it I want your help for.


Sist. What can I do in it? I cannot go down to him, when he comes, and tell
him you will see him no more. You cannot desire me to carry such a message.


Yo. sist. No, that is true, I cannot: I know not what to do, not I.


Sist. Shall I speak to my father to do it?


Yo. sist. I think my father is the fittest to give him his answer. He brought
him first on, and I think he should put him off.


Sist. But he will be in such a rage, I hardly dare speak of it to him.


Yo. sist. Dear sister, he will not be angry with you, his anger will be all at me.


Sist. You know, sister, my father's infirmity, that if he is angry with any
body, he is angry with every body: I know he will use me very ill if I break it
to him.


Yo. sist. What shall I do then? I Will be gone, if I never come home again while
I live.


Sist. No, no, you shan'^ be gone: whither will you go!


Yo. sist. I beg of you, sister, speak to my father about it.


Sist. What shall I say, if he calls for you? will you come down?


Yo. sist. If I must, I will; but keep it off if you can.

[The eldest daughter goes down to her father, a little before supper; and as
soon as he saw her, he began the discourse.]


Fa. Child; what is the matter with your sister? Her maid tells me she is not
well. Have you seen her?


Da. Yes, Sir: I came just from her; she is not very well.


Fa. What ails her? She must not be sick now, whatever she does. Why it is
ominous to be sick when she is a wooing.


Da. I believe she is sicker of that than of any thing else, Sir; if she was
delivered from her gentleman, she would be well enough.


Fa. What do you mean! why I intend they shall be married the week after next.
The writings are a drawing, and I designed by and by to have given her a
hundred pounds toward buying her wedding-clothes.


Da. You may adjourn that a while, Sir, she has changed her mind.


Fa. Changed her mind! what do you mean?

[The father rises up in a great passion, and walks about the room.]


Da. Dear father, do not be angry with me; it is no business of mine. I had
rather say no more of it, for I see it will put you in a passion. But why
should you be in a passion with me?


Fa. Not in a passion! who can but be in a passion with all of you? Changed her
mind, say you? Ay, and I Will change my mind too. I Will never give her a gr^^^;
no, not a shilling, to any other man; that I Will promise her.


Da. I d^^e say, Sir, she has no other man in her view.


Fa. What does she mean then! is she mad! to ruin herself thus, and stand in
her own light? Does she (...) expect to have such another offer?


Da. No, I believe not, Sir; nor does she desire (...)


Fa. No, nor ever shall, I Will marry again, as old as I am, and give away what I
have to strangers, before I Will give it to children that shall treat me thus.


Da. Will you punish, Sir, the innocent with the guilty.


Fa. Why, you are all guilty for ought I know: what do you come with such a
story for? where is she? call her down.


Da. Sir, she is very much indisposed. If you would please to let her alone
till tomorrow, she may be better able to speak for herself, and you may not be
so much in a passion with her.


Fa. Well, let her alone till morning then. I suppose she will change her mind
again by that time.


Da. I am sorry, Sir, to see you take it so ill of her; but I dare say she will
be the same tomorrow, and as long as the lives.


Fa. Well, then I Will be of the same mind too, tomorrow.

[The eldest sister went up, after supper, to her sister's chamber, who waited
for her, impatient enough. As soon as she came, she gave her sister an account
of what discourse she had with her father, and how angry he was; which, though
it terrified and afflicted her very much, yet it did not move her at all to
alter her resolutions; and she endeavored, as well as she could, to furnish
herself with answers to give her father when he should begin with her. But
whether it was, that her father was impatient to hear what she had to say, or
that she believing he would not meddle with it till next morning, came unwarily
in his way, is not material; but happening to see her the same night, he called
her in to him and told her he wanted to speak with her.

He began very mildly with her, which a little encouraged her; for she was
something surprised at his beginning to talk, before she expected it; and
taking her by the arm, feels for her pulse. What Is the matter with you child?
says her father; they tell me you wa'nt well; I think your pulse beats very
true.]


Da. I am better, Sir, now; but I was very much out of order.


Fa. Only a little in love, my dear: that is all I hope.


Da. No indeed, Sir, the contrary to an extreme, as I suppose my sister has
told you.


Fa. Your sister, child? I can lay no stress on any thing the said: I cannot
tell whether she was in jest or in earnest.


Da. Sir, I am very sorry that what she said is disobliging, and more, that it
should put you into a passion; I hope, when you consider of it, you will be in
the same mind with me.


Fa. What do you mean, child, by the same mind? I have recommended a gentleman
to you, whom you can have no objection against, and his estate is double to
what you can expect. You told me yourself that you had no objection against his
person, and he has made you his choice, and is in love with you above all your
sisters; what can you desire more?


Da. All that you say, Sir, is true; and for his person and estate, they are
both better than I ought to expect. But --


Fa. But what? Prithee, child, don't bring any of your canting scruples to me,
I Will hear none of your buts --


Da. It was my fear that you would be in a passion, Sir, and would not hear me.

[She cries.
Fa. What father can bear to be so treated, and not be in a passion? What would
you have me hear?


Da. Sir, I would have you hear the reasons why I cannot comply.


Fa. It is enough for me to ^ear you cannot. The reasons I have for the match
are good. You acknowledge the gentleman is agreeable; you cannot say that you
cannot love him, and I am sure then you cannot give a good reason against it;
and therefore I expect you go on with it: I have appointed the week after next
for your wedding, and here, there is some money to buy your clothes.

[Holds out a bank-bill to her.
Da. Sir, I beg you will not take it ill that I cannot do it.

[She pulls back her hand from the bill.
Fa. What do you mean? I advise you not to play the fool with me any longer.

[Here the father being in a great passion, her sister, who was in pain for
her, hearing him loud, came in, which greatly encouraged her; and she spoke,
though very respectfully, to her father, yet with great plainness.]


Da. Sir, this seems to be an hardship that never was put upon any one before.
If I was going to marry any one you did not like, it was no doubt in your power
to command me not to do it; but I cannot think you ought to command me to marry
any man against my will.


Fa. I have a great many reasons why I ought to expect your compliance in this;
and you know my reasons are good.


Da. You cannot then but think, Sir, that I have some reasons against it, or I
should comply with my father, for I never disobeyed you before; and why should
not my reasons be heard?


Fa. I know you can have no reasons that are sufficient.


Da. Will you please to let any one else be judge of that for me?


Fa. I Will have no arbitrators between me and my children.


Da. I cannot help myself in that.


Fa. My dispute with you is short: Will you have this gentleman or no?


Da. If it was not to my father, I should give a different answer; but I desire
to say nothing that may displease you.


Fa. I cannot be displeased with words so much as I am by actions. The gentleman
has made his way through every thing, made proposals too great for any father
to refuse: You have entertained him, showed him a great deal of respect, and
now to treat him thus, and treat your father thus, it is intolerable.


Da. When the gentleman and you treated of this matter, it was without me; I
had no knowledge of it; neither was it my part to be concerned.


Fa. Well, I know that.


Da. After you were agreed, you bring him to me: I suppose this to be that I
might converse with him, and see if I liked to make him my choice: if this was
not the case, you might as well, by your command, have ordered me to marry him
the first day, as now.


Fa. Well, what do you make of all this?


Da. Upon frequent visits made me I found nothing disagreeable in him, and
showed him as much respect as was my part. I hope I have not showed him more
than became me.


Fa. Yes, truly, if you resolve not to have him.


Da. Let him reproach me with that if he can.


Fa. Why should you have entertained him at all, if you resolved not to have
him?


Da. I did not for some time resolve not to have him, till I discovered him
farther; and it was your command, that put me first upon the trial, and my
reasons against it now are good, if you please to hear them patiently: but I Will
rather hear all you please to lay upon me, than put you into passions at me.


Fa. I desire no reasons nor no discourse; answer me, the question is short,
whether you will have him or no! It will raise my passion less than your
impertinent reasons.


Da. If it must be so, Sir, without hearing any reasons, then my answer is, No,
never while I live; and I leave my reasons for it to him that judges righteous
judgment.


Fa. Then, from this time forward, you are no relation of mine, any more than
my cook-maid.

[The young lady was too full to say any more, and went out of the room while
he was speaking.]


Eld. Da. Dear father, do not say so.


Fa. Nay, it is no matter whether she heard me or no; I Will keep my promise with
her.


Eld. Da. I hope you will not, Sir; it may be my sister may be better advised, or
you may be farther satisfied of her reasons.


Fa. I know her reasons well enough. He is not hypocrite enough for her, I
suppose; if a fawning smooth-tongued fellow would come and talk scripture to
her, she would take him presently. She does not know what religion is.


Eld. Da. Sir, if that were true, she should have stronger reasons for desiring
a religious husband, than she may have now; that she might have a kind
instructor to assist her. We have all need of helps that way at least. We need
no profane husbands to keep us back; a loose, irreligious husband is a dreadful
snare.

[This was a night of passion, and little was done all the evening by the
father but to make work for repentance. He was so provoked at his daughter,
that he made terrible resolutions against her, that he would never give her a
farthing; that he would turn her out of doors; that she should go to service,
that he would make his will, and whatever he left to the rest of his children,
it should be upon condition, that they should never relieve her, nor own her,
nor call her sister, and that if they did, what they had should go to his
eldest son; and the like.

He was so disturbed, that he got but little sleep all night; and, in the
morning, he was obliged to go out of town early to his sister's, about forty
miles off, whose husband was just dead; so that he did not see his youngest
daughter any more before he went; but just as he was stepping into his chariot,
he called his eldest daughter to him, What, says he, child, is to be done in
this affair while I am gone? She will not be so rude to turn him off while I am
away, will she? Indeed, Sir, says the daughter, I am perplexed about it; I know
not how it will be managed; but I believe she will see him no more. Not see
him! says the father; that is the unmannerliest thing in the world: sure she
will not be so rude to me; she might give me the opportunity to put an end to it
handsomely. Pray tell her, I expect it, and I assure you, if she refuses to see
him till my return, I Will never see her more as long as I live.

In this temper the father went away: the eldest daughter, poor lady, had her
heart full with such a message, and scarce knew how to deliver it; however,
upon talking farther with her sister the same morning, and finding her
inflexible, and perhaps more stiff than she thought she needed to be, she did
at last deliver it: their dialogue was short but effectual, as follows.]


Eld. sist. Dear sister, what will you do in this matter? My father is gone.


Yo. sist. What can I do? I think my father is very unkind to me.


Eld. sist. My father is passionate, you know.


Yo. sist. But not to hear me, not to ask my reasons, this is very hard! Do any
fathers marry their daughters by force?


Eld. sist. Why, I Will tell you what your father says to that; he says, he knows
your reasons beforehand, and he thinks them of no weight.


Yo. sist. Dear sister, do you think them of no moment?


Eld. sist. It Is hard for a daughter to make herself judge between her father
and the rest of his children: I am sorry you are so hard pushed at.


Yo. sist. What would you do in my case?


Eld. sist. Indeed that is hard to say too: I would act as my conscience should
tell me was my duty. I confess, there is a powerful force in a father's command.


Yo. sist. No father can command counter to God's command.


Eld. sist. That Is true, my dear; but consider, child, how far God's command
lies on you here: I know your text, Be not unequally yoked; and I remember my
dear mother's words, that this cannot be understood of any thing but a
religious person marrying with a profane.


Yo. sist. Well sister; and you remember the charge she gave us, and the
promise we made her. I look upon these things to be very binding in themselves,
and very sacred engagements.


Eld. sist. They are binding indeed to what is our duty at the same time, and
they add force to it, otherwise the case would differ.


Yo. sist. Just so I understand it; and I am sure, reason, exprience, and the
nature of the thing join with it: what a wretched house must there be, whether
it be the man or the woman's case, where one is a Christian, and the other an
infidel; one devout, the other profane; one pious and religious, and the other
knowing or valuing nothing that is serious? What helps to heaven are such to
one another! For my part, I need no wicked discouragements to pull me back in
my duty, no ill examples to allure me to folly; I want all the assistance
possible the other way.


Eld. sist. You preach like an oracle, child; I cannot oppose one word you say;
but what must you do? you heard what sad rash resolutions my father made.


Yo. sist. No, I did not hear them; and I am glad I did not; but as I am sure I
am right, I must do my duty, and trust Providence; if my father does not do the
duty of his relation to me, I Will pray to God to forgive him.


Eld. sist. Well, but what will you do with Mr. --?


Yo. sist. I have no thoughts about him now, I am pretty well over it.


Eld. sist. But you must not be rude to him, even upon my father's account.


Yo. sist. Nay, I will not be rude to him for his own sake, for I have no
quarrel at him.


Eld. sist. How will you avoid it if you do not see him.


Yo. sist. See him! I would not venture to see him upon any account.


Eld. sist. Child, what do you call venture? you are undone, if you don't see
him.


Yo. sist. I dare not trust myself to see him; I am pretty well over it now;
but if I see him again, I know not what influence my own weakness may have upon
my resolution! for I must own to you, sister, I have no aversion to him.


Eld. sist. You might as well say, you own you love him.


Yo. sist. Well, if I should own it, perhaps it might bear being called so: is
it not better than, that I should avoid the struggle between conscience and
affection!


Eld. sist. But I have a strong fancy, that you ought to enter into closer
discourse with him upon this matter. I think you do not do either him or
yourself justice else; for first, perhaps, you may find, that though he talked
loosely then, when he did not know, perhaps, whether we were in jest or in
earnest, yet if you talked seriously with him of the main point yourself (for
you know our discourse was at a distance, and was rather a kind of civil
raillery than argument) you may find one of these two things will happen, viz.
either he will talk seriously, and let you see, that he has a bottom of
religious good sentiments, which is all you ought to insist upon, and would be
a happy discovery on your side, or talk profanely, and be self convicted.


Yo. sist. There is more weight in this, than in all you have said yet; but I
can never do it.


Eld. sist. Well, let me add to it, what I was loath to tell you, and that is,
what my father said just now when he went away.

[She tells her father's words, which staggers her resolution.]


Yo. sist. My father uses me very hardly.


Eld. sist. I am sorry for it; but it is in no body's power to help it; he
would be the same to any of us.


Yo. sist. What would you advise me to do then?


Eld. sist. Truly, if I might advise you, I would have you see him once more.


Yo. sist. To what purpose?


Eld. sist. Why, if it be only to try, whether what he said before was in jest,
or in earnest.


Yo. sist. I think the discovery is not worth the compliment.


Eld. sist. Really, I cannot say that. Would you be content to have it true,
that he is a sober and religious inclined gentleman?


Yo. sist. Yes, with all my heart.


Eld. sist. Is not an estate of near 2000l. a year, and an agreeable gentleman,
very suitable, when it is joined with a good Christian?


Yo. sist. I allow it all.


Eld. sist. Well; and you have really not made trial enough to resolve whether
it be so or no.


Yo. sist. So you would have me see him once more, to try if I can persuade
myself to be cheated?


Eld. sist. That Is unkind: would I have you to be cheated! No, far be it from
me I but I would have you leave no room to blame yourself hereafter.


Yo. sist. You almost persuade me to let him come tonight; night; but if he
does, I shall be very ill-natured to him: I question, whether I shall be civil
to him or no.


Eld. sist. That is not my proposal; you may do it, and be very civil and
obliging too, let the thing take a turn which way it will; and I wish you would
try.


Yo. sist. Well, I think, I will venture then.


DIALOGUE II.
THE young lady, having resolved to see her gentleman once more, at the
persuasion of her sister, there needed nothing to be done but to sit still till
evening, when he was sure to come. It seems she had resolved to send a footman
to him, to tell him she was gone out of town for two or three days, and so to
prevent his coming, till her father would tell him in general, that it could
not be a match: and to make it good, she had ordered her father's coach to be
ready to carry her to Hampstead, to an uncle's house she had there; but, on
this occasion, she deferred it, and in the evening he came, as usual to wait on
her. It would not perhaps be possible to set down the particulars of the
courtship of this night, there being a great deal of variety in it, and nobody
present but themselves: but the best account we have of it being from her own
mouth, I have set it down as she related it to her sister in the following
dialogue.

As soon as the gentleman was gone, which, his entertainment being not much to
his mind, was some hours sooner than usual, she came directly to her sister,
who was expecting her with the utmost impatience, though she did not look for
her so soon neither as she came; the following dialogue will give an idea of
the whole.

As soon as she came to her sister, she prevented her thus:

Well, sister you have a nice guess with you; it is all as you said, and the
business is now all done and over.

1st sist. Well, before I enter into particulars, are you pleased and satisfied?


3d sist. Perfectly satisfied and pleased,


1st sist. Are you pleased that you have seen him?


3d sist. Thoroughly pleased: I would not have but seen him again for any good.


1st sist. Is it as you expected?


3d sist. Ay, ay, just as I expected; a true gentleman, perfectly educated,
politely bred, that knows about as much of religion as a parson's horse; that
is to say, knows the way to the church door, but scorns to debauch his breeding
with such a clumsy thing as religion; is more a gentleman than to trouble
himself with the meanness of religion, and not hypocrite enough to pretend to
the sublimer parts of it; one that has not been long enough in this world, to
think of the next, nor is yet come to any resolution when he shall.


1st sist I am sorry for it: I assure you it is not as I expected.


3d sist. But it is as I expected, I assure you.


1st sist. Well, but though it is, I believe you are not sorry you met him.


3d sist. No, no, not at all; I assure you; I am much the better satisfied that
I have now the open declarations of it from his own mouth.


1st sist. You surprise me; I thought he had had more policy than.


3d sist. I assure you, as I told you, he is no hypocrite. He is not ashamed to
be believed to be full as bad as he is, and made no doubt, but I would like him
the better for it.


1st sist. That Is hard another way; he could not think you were so too, sure.


3d sist. Why, he does not think he does any thing, amiss, I assure you: and
takes it ill to be thought mistaken.


1st sist. I can scarce form all this in my mind. I wish you would tell me some
of the history of this night's salutation, now it is so fresh in your thoughts.


3d sist. With all my heart; but it will be a long story.


1st sist. No matter for that^ it will be the more profitable, and, I dare say,
not the less diverting.


3d sist. Why, after we had been together about (...) an hour, he seemed to
recollect himself, and (...) he asked my pardon, that he had not condoled with
me, for the loss of my uncle, Sir James --: I told him, he need not, for the
loss was not so great. He replied, he thought I appeared very much concerned at
it last night, which made him withdraw sooner than he intended. I told him, I
was thoughtful indeed, but not so much about that; for, though I believed my
aunt very sorry for his death, yet I thought she had no great reason: for, I
was sure she lived a very uncomfortable life with him. He wanted then very much
to know, what I was so thoughtful about, if I was not troubled at the loss of
my uncle. I declined telling him, but did it in a way that I intended should
prompt his curiosity; for I desired nothing more than to have a fair
opportunity to tell him very plainly what troubled me; and he soon gave it me.
He told me, he took himself to be so much interested in me now, as to be
concerned in all my griefs; and he claimed to know if any thing afflicted me,
that he might bear his share in it; and added something so handsome and so
obliging on that head, that I must acknowledge it shook my resolution very
much; and I had almost given over my design; but I recovered myself again in a
moment or two.


1st sist. Indeed you are a resolute girl. I think what you repeat of him was
very engaging.


3d sist. I told him, it was natural for people to make sudden transitions from
other people's ease to their own, and that indeed that was the occasion that
made me so uneasy. I knew my aunt was a lady of great piety and virtue that
every one knew to be exceeding religious and serious: That, on the other hand,
Sir James was a mad, frolicksome, merry fellow, that neither understood ^^y
religion, or troubled himself about it, but would play a thousand (...) tricks
with her, because of her strict observation of religious things; and, that this
gave her a constant uneasiness. He smiled, and said, He hoped I was not afraid
of him on that score; for, Madam, says he, though I pretend to (...) religion
myself, I cannot but respect them that do. (...) was the first, and I think a
considerable confirmation what we had before; was it not sister.


1st sist. I am (...) but I Will (...) you however, there was one thing that I
observe to be a good foundation for religion, viz, That he respected them that
were religious.


3d sist. Ay sister; but we did not end here: I told him! was very sorry to
hear him say he had no religion himself; because, as perhaps I had not a great
deal, to marry a man that had none, would endanger my losing what I had, and I
should rather have a husband to help me on toward heaven, than to pull me back.


1st sist. What could he say to that?


3d sist. He told me, he did not doubt but I would go to heaven without his
help. He said, jestingly, it was a road he had never traveled; but I might be
assured, he would not willingly pull me back, if he did not help me on.


1st sist. Well, there was something very honest in that too.


3d sist. That Is true, sister; but negative religion is but a poor stock to
begin on.


1st sist. But it is better than a despiser of religion: you ought to have
acknowledged what good you found.


3d sist. My designs lay another way; I aimed at a fuller discovery, and soon
had it.


1st sist. Well go on then.


3d sist. I told him, what tricks my uncle used to serve my aunt; how he got a
book of devotions out of her closer once, and got a long printed story about
ducking a scold pasted into it; and another time got the ballad of Cheve Chase
bound into her psalm book; how, when he know she was in her closet at her
devotion, he would bring his ho^^^men to feed the hounds just under her window;
and how, one time, he made a fellow cry fire, and the like; as you know,
sister, he played many such pranks, and would do any thing to put her thoughts
into disorder. He told me, though he was but a young fellow, and had not
troubled his thoughts much about religion (there was another stab to my (...)
sister) yet he said he could not bear to make a jest of (...) neither.


1st sist. Well, but that was another word in his favor too.


3d sist. I replied, I was very sorry to hear him own, that he had not troubled
his thoughts about religion, and asked him upon what foundation he could think
of setting up a family, if that was his case? He told me he kept a chaplain,
and jestingly told me, he was devout enough for all the rest of the house. I
grew chagrin'd and dull; I told him that these things had filled me with very
sad thoughts about marrying, and it looked very dismal to me: but all I could
say, could not bring him to believe I was in earnest.


1st sist. I believe he is really very good humoured.


3d sist. Ay, sister, that is true; but I look for something farther in a
husband, or I am resolved I Will have no husband at all.


1st sist. Well but pray go on with your story; what answer did he make.


3d sist. He laughed at me, and told me he believed marrying would make him
mighty religious; that he would choose a wife first, and then choose his religion.


1st sist. The man was mad, sure, to open himself so fully.


3d sist. I appeared then really disturbed, and whether he perceived it or no,
I am sure the tears stood in my eyes; however, I struggled with my disorder,
and told him I was very sorry then that it was his misfortune to begin with
one, that could not be content to marry upon these terms; and hoped, when he
was fully satisfied of the reason of such a resolution in me, he would not take
it ill, that I would stay for him, till he resolved more seriously upon a thing
of so much importance.


1st sist. That was very cunningly answered.


3d sist. Then he began to think I was in earnest, and told me, he hoped I
would not talk so, because it might be longer then he desired to be without me.


1st sist. That was still making the case worse; for it was as much as to say,
he neither had any religion, nor intended to have any.


3d sist. I did not fail to take it so; and told him, the longer he was without
me it might be the better for him; but the longer he was without religion, I
was sure would be worse for him; and that I wondered how a man of his sense
could talk so. He replied, he had rather talk of any thing else; for he sound
this discourse did not please me. I told him he mistook me very much; for,
though I confessed it did not please me to find him to be what I hoped he was
not, that is, a person who pretended to no religion; yet it pleased me very
well that he had been so just to himself, as to let me know it, before any
engagements had passed between us.


1st sist. If I had not known that my sister was never courted before, I should
have thought you had passed a great many such encounters as these.


3d sist. You know it is all new to me; but, however, I knew the thing was for
my life, and that I must speak now or never; and I was resolved to put an end
to it.


1st sist. I must own you were in the right, though I am pursuaded I could not
have said half so much.


3d sist. Why you have not heard half of it yet; I made him angry, serious,
laugh, and think verily, once I made him almost cry.


1st sist. I am sorry I interrupted you: pray go on then: What said he next?


3d sist. He said, he wondered I could say that no engagements were between us.
He said he was so engaged to me, as he never could go back. I answered, that as
his engagements were from himself, so they were best known to himself; but that
he knew very well I was under none to him. He smiled then, and said, he hoped I
was. I answered, I had not professed to be engaged; I told him I would not
deny, that I had respect enough for him to have gone farther, had not such
difficulties appeared, as I could never get over, and had he been the person he
was represented; but that, as it was, I had too much respect for myself to ruin
myself with my eyes open, and too much respect for him to keep him in suspense.


1st sist. Would he not take that for being in earnest?


3d sist. Yes, he showed me then that he took me to be in earnest, and showed
me, that he was in earnest too; for he appeared warm, and a little angry. He
told me, he was very sorry to be charged with deceiving me; and asked, if ever
he had said any thing of himself which was not true? For, Madam, says he, if I
am not the person I appeared to be, I must (...) deceived you in something;
pray what sort of a person did you take me for? I replied, as warm as he, that
I wondered he should mistake me so much; that I thought he did not do me
justice; that I had said indeed he was not the person he had been represented,
but never said, that he had represented himself one way or other. Then he
begged pardon again, and told me, he had taken me wrong; that, whatever came of
it, he would never deceive me; I should know the worst of him, whether I would
have him or no. Indeed, Sir, said I, I am persuaded you are no hypocrite. I
understand you, said he, you think I have used more honesty than discretion.
No, Sir, said I, I very much approve of your honesty, and do not blame your
discretion at all. But I do, said he, for I find, if I could have counterfeited
more serious things than I am master of, and feigned myself a little religious,
all had been well. I told him, I would not say that it was in his power to have
deceived me; but I hoped he had acted a part much more like a gentleman. He
replied, that it was hard then I should make so unkind a return to him, as to
make him lose his mistress for his honesty.


1st sist. Why really, sister, so it was.


3d sist. I told him I thought the best return was to treat him with the same
sincerity, and that was the reason of the freedom I took; that, as he told me
plainly what (...) was, I must tell him plainly, I could not think of engaging
with him any farther, till he had thought a little of things, which alone could
make it reasonable for him to think of marrying. He would fain have turned it
off to a jest, he laughed at me, he bantereth me, he asked me, how long I would
stay for him? I told him, I was in no haste. He asked me, how long I thought I
might stay, before I got a saint to my mind, as the world went now? I told him,
I was but an ill judge of saints, and might be cheated, as wiser than I had
been; but that, as I told him before I would not fall into the pit with my eyes
open. (...) me, abruptly, he wished I had never seen him. At that word, I
confess I was a little alarmed; however, I made no answer, but looked full in
his face; I (...) he was concerned, and, as I thought, in a kind of (...) When
he found I looked at him, he repeated the words thus, I wish with all my heart
you had never seen me. I answered nothing. He added, he wished he had known my
mind sooner. I still said nothing. Then he flung himself into my arms, and hung
about me: my dear, says he, with an inexpressible tenderness, why are you
silent? Because, says I, I would not give you an answer in kind to any thing
that is disobliging. He returned, it was impossible for him to say or do any
thing disobliging to me; that it was true, he wished I had never seen him, and
that he had known my mind sooner; but it was, that he might have disguised
himself better, and not to have lost me for being so foolishly honest. Why,
said I, would you have endeavored to have cheated me? Ay, certainly, said he,
rather than loose you; and would have done it effectually too. Why, what would
you have done? said I. Done! replied he, I would have been the soberest,
gravest young fellow that ever you saw in your life. And, do you think yourself
hypocrite enough, said I, to have concealed yourself effectually? Why not, said
he, perhaps you think I am too much a fool for it. No, Sir, said I, I think you
are too honest for it: and, of the two, it is much the better on your side.


1st sist. This was a kind of turn and return between jest and earnest: but how
did it end?


3d sist. Why, he carried it on thus a long time, till he put an odd case to
me, which made me put a short end to the discourse: we were speaking of
fortunes, and the grandeur of families: at last we came to speak of the young
Duke of --. Why now, says he, if his Grace should come and court you with the
state and grandeur of his quality, the title of a duchess, etc. you would not
turn short upon him, as you did upon me, and say, My Lord Duke, pray what
religion are you of? and yet he has no more religion than I. I told him, I
thought he did not treat me fairly: that it was saying nothing at all, to say I
would not have this man or that man, who never made any pretensions to me; it
was enough to me, that I would let him know, I would refuse all the men in the
world, that should ^ver come to me, unless I found a reverence (...), a sense
of religion, and a profession at least of the duty we all owe to our Maker, had
made some impressions on them: That I might be deceived indeed with an
hypocrite, for it was not in me to judge of the heart, and as the world was now
stated, it was but too probable I should; but then it should be my misery, not
my fault: and that since he seemed to insinuate, that I did not act in that
affair with sincerity, I had no better specimen of my resolution than this,
that though I was very sorry to treat him so, who, I was satisfied had a
respect for me, and whose respect I acknowledged was not disagreeable, and
whose estate and proposals were very much better than I had reason to expect:
yet that upon this one single account I assured him, I neither could nor would
discourse more with him on this affair; and hoped he would not take it ill,
that I was forced to be so plain with him, before I could persuade him I was in
earnest; and having said all this, I offered to rise and retire, but he held me
fast in his arms, and would not let me stir.


1st sist. Cruel wretch! how could you talk so to him? how did he look?


3d sist. Look! I confess, sister, his looks moved me more than all the words
he could have said in half a year; and I shall never forget them. He seemed
strangely affected, and once or twice I saw tears in his eyes; but he turned
his head away, and recovered himself, and embarked me in another discourse, in
spite of all I had said. Hold, says he, you have broke one positive promise you
made me already. I told him, I did not remember that I had ever made him any
promise at all. Yes, said he, you told me that you would stay for me, till I
had made choice in matters of religion. I told him, I had not broke that
promise yet. Yes, he said, I had, in saying, I would never discourse more with
him on this affair. I replied, then, I would except that circumstance, though I
thought he need not insist upon it for several reasons: First, Because he might
find so many ladies abroad, who would not trouble their heads to make the
objection I dad done, and there was no occasion for him to turn religious for a
wife. Secondly, Because there was no appearance of his turning upon these
terms. He said, that was more than I knew. But, pray, Madam, said he, why do
you lay such a mighty stress upon this particular? Religion is an entire
article by itself; my being relious, or not religious, need not obstruct our
affection to one another; I am no enemy to religion. I answered, that it was
indeed an acceptable thing, as times went now, not to find a gentleman a
despiser, and hater of religion, and of all that favored it; but that I was
assured, where there was not a profession of religion, and where God was not
acknowledged, there could be no blessing expected: and that I should think I
had renounced God, and declared war against heaven, if I should marry a man
that openly acknowledged he had no religion. He told me he was sorry to see me
run things to such an extremity; that he did not think I had been in earnest,
when he, in jest, said, he had not thought of religion; that he would not urge
me in a thing, which I laid so much stress upon, but would wait on me again,
and hoped to find me in another mind, and to let me know he was not quite so
bad as I thought him to be. And thus we broke up.


1st sist. What! did he go away angry?


3d sist. Truly, I cannot say how he was; he seemed disturbed and uneasy, and
went away willinger than I expected.


1st sist. Ay, ay, and willinger than you desired too; I can perceive it,
sister, well enough.


3d sist. Why, I cannot deny but I have acted all this by a force upon my
affections; but I should have been undone; I should never have had any peace,
or expected any blessing in the match; for, as a religious life is the only
heaven upon earth, if it please God to support my resolution, I Will never sell
the prospect of it for an estate, or for the most agreeable person alive.


1st sist. It is nobly resolved, sister! I hope you will be supported in so
just a resolution; but do you think he will come no more?


3d sist. I hope not; but if he does, I resolve not to see him, if I can avoid
it.


We must now leave the two sisters a while, and follow the young gentleman a
little; for his story does not end so. He went away very much concerned, as
above, and particularly it touched him very sensibly, that he should be taken
for such a creature, that a sober, virtuous lady (for such he was sure his
mistress was) should refuse him merely on account of his wicked character; and
that though she acknowledged she had a respect for him, she was obliged to shun
him, purely because she was afraid of him, as a hater of religion, and
therefore dangerous to live with. It has often run in his mind, that she had
said, she could expect no blessing with him; and that if she married him, she
should think she had renounced God, and declared war against Heaven; so that,
to be sure, I am a dreadful fellow, says he, that she dares not take me, lest
she should appear to be a confederate with one of God's enemies.

It then occurred to him, that it really was no otherwise in fact: that she was
in the right in it all; that he had in truth no religion, or sense of God, upon
his mind, nor had ever entertained any notions of religion in his thoughts, and
had told her so himself, and that therefore the young lady was in the right of
it, and if she had any fund of religion herself, had a great deal of reason to
refuse him; that every sober woman ought to refuse him upon the same account:
and that she, that did not, was not fit to make him a wife, or at least such a
wife as he could expect any happiness from; that this young lady had made a
true judgment, and it was his business not to think of persuading her to alter
her mind, which, in short, must lessen his opinion of her, but to consider what
state and condition he was in, and what was his first business to do, to
deliver himself out of it, before he went to her any more.

He gr^w uneasy upon this subject for some time, and being perfectly ignorant
of every thing called duty, having had an education wholly void of instruction,
that uneasiness increased; and not knowing which way to cast his thoughts for
immediate direction, he grew very melancholy and dejected: he loved this young
woman to an extreme, and that affection was infinitely increased by her conduct
in this affair, and by the extraordinary manner of her refusing him: but the
reproaches of his heart, as being such a monster, that a woman, that even owned
she loved him, durst not join herself to him, doubled upon him as his
affections for her increased.

He could not think of coming to her again; for he confessed the reasons, which
she gave for her not daring to take him, were so just, and she had argued them
so well, that if she should abate any thing of them, he should not have so much
esteem for her as he had before; and yet he saw, that if she did not, he could
never expect to have her; and yet also he could not bear the thoughts of not
having her, for all that.

He lived in this uneasy condition some months: his friends perceiving him to
be very melancholy, tried many ways to divert him; but none reached his case,
or, if they did, they understood not how to advise him; for his relations were
most like himself, people of levity and gallantry, being rich and gay; a family
that dealt very little in matters of religion. He had an aunt, his mother's
sister, who seemed very much concerned about it; but as she thought all that
ailed him was his being crossed in his affection, she worked her thoughts
about, night and day, to find out a wife for him. And so to take his thoughts
off, and turn them another way. At length, she found out a young lady in the
city, of a very great fortune; for she had near 20,000l. to her portion, and
she plied it so warmly with him, that he consented to treat of it with her
friends, and his circumstances being such as few fortunes would refuse, he
found his way clear enough, and so went to visit the young lady.

It was an odd kind of courtship, you may be sure, and he went about it
accordingly; for, as he confessed afterward, he resolved, before he saw her,
not to like her or any thing she said or did; no, nor ever to be in earnest
with her upon any thing; but only to jest with, and banter her; and he told his
aunt so beforehand. However, his aunt would not take him at his word, but
would have him wait upon her, and so he did; but he needed not to have taken up
any resolutions in the case, for he was spoiled for courtship already, at
least, for most of the ladies of the times; he had no relish for any of their
conversation; it was like music to one that had no ear: all the gaiety and
flutter about them was lost upon him; his first mistress had treated him with
such solid reasoning, such serious talk, and had handled him after such a
manner, that in short nothing but what was serious had now any relish with him;
however, as I have said, he resolved to put a force upon himself so far, as to
go and see what kind of thing his new mistress was; and accordingly he did go,
as above.

But when he had been one evening there, and had talked a little with her, he
soon saw he had no need of making resolutions; that he was in no danger of
being ensnared by her; the levity of her behavior, the emptiness of her
discourse, the weakness of her conduct, made him sick of her the very first
time; and when he came away, he said to himself, It is possible for any man in
his senses to bear this (...) cock, that had been but one half hour with my
other mistress! And away he came, not pleased at all. However, he went again
for some time, till at last, not finding things mend, but rather grow worse, he
was resolved he would talk a little with her about religion; and, as he asked
her one night, What religion she was of? she answered him just in the very
words that he had bantered his other mistress, O, says she, I am a mighty good
Christian. I believe so, thought he; just such another as I was when I was
asked the same question. However, he concealed his thoughts, resolved to carry
it on a little farther, and gave her a mighty civil answer; (...) don't doubt
that, Madam, says he. Well, says she, tha^, what would you have more? Nay,
nothing, Madam returned he, I was only in jest. O, says she, you want to know
what opinion I am of? You see I am no Quaker. No, says he, Madam, I am not
concerned about your opinion; you may easily (...) ^s much religion as I. Nay,
says she, I (...) my head much about it; I don't know (...) I may do when I
keep a chaplain. He had enough of that discourse, and so he turned it off to
something else; for, though it was almost the pattern of what he had done with
(...) first mistress, yet it looked with such a different (...) to him now,
that, as he said afterward, it made (...) very blood run cold within him, and
filled him with horror at his own picture, which, he thought, now was set
before his eyes in all its just deformities. When he came away from her, he
said to himself, Well, now I see the true force of what that dear creature
argued for herself against me; that to venture upon me while I declared against
religion, was to run herself into the pit with her eyes open, and ruin herself
by mere premeditated choice. It would be just so with me in this case, if I
should marry this butterfly; we should even go hand in hand very lovingly to
the devil. This will not do my business! So he put an end to that affair as
soon as he could, and resolved to see her no more

All this while he had no assistance from either books, friends, ministers, or
any body, only the just and natural reflections of his own reason: but, as he
was a gentleman of polite manners, and bred to conversation with gentlemen of
the best quality, as well as of the best parts, so the government of himself
was the more easy, and he restrained the dejection of his spirits from making
any extraordinary discovery of itself, only, that he appeared a little more
sedate and more thoughtful than before, and was a little more retired in his
way of living; but not so much but that he came often into public company, as
before.

It happened one time, that, in promiscuous conversation, at a chocolate-house
near the court, this gentleman and seven or eight more being present, the
company fell from talking of news to talking of religion: the discourse began
about the differences which had happened in France lately, and were then
depending, between the Pope and the French clergy; and of the Sorbonne, or
faculty of theology, as they are called there, being at that time employed in
drawing up a new system of divinity, or body of doctrine as they called it; and
as a consequence it was hinted, how likely it was, that such a strict inquiry,
made by men of learning and virtue, into the fundamentals of religion, should
lead them at last into Protestant principles, and break that whole kingdom off
from the errors and ignorance of Popery, opening the eyes of the people to
Christian knowledge. There being some (...) and sensible gentlemen there, the
discourse was carried on very gravely and judiciously, and the whole company
seemed to receive it with pleasure; when a couple of young beaux, who happened
to be in the room, beginning to be tired with a thing so much out of their way,
one of them rises up on a sudden, and says to the other, Come, Jack, I am tired
of this dull religious stuff; prithee let us go, there is nothing in it. Ay,
says the other, with all my heart, I know nothing of the matter: come, will you
go to the opera? There sat another young gentleman of their acquaintance there,
and they pulled him to come with them: No, says he, I like this discourse very
well, it is worth two operas to me. Why, says the other, how long have you been
in orders, pray? Is such stuff as that fit conversation for a gentleman? Yes,
says the sober young gentleman, I think it is: pray, what can there be in
religious conversation that is unfit for a gentleman? There sat an ancient
nobleman by, talking with a clergyman, who hearing the young gentleman's reply,
fell a laughing; for this discourse put the former subject to a stop. On my
word, Gentlemen, says his Lordship, Mr. -- has met with you: I don't think you
can answer his question. Yes, my Lord, says the foolish beau, I think it is
below a man of quality to trouble his head about it. Pray, Sir, says the Lord,
is it below a man of quality to be a Christian? O, my Lord, says the other
beau, bantering and jesting, we are mighty good Christians at the opera; and
turning away to his comrades, says he, Come, come, Jack, prithee let us go: so
they went both out together, for they did not care to ^ngage. Our gentleman
listened with pleasure to all this discourse, till he heard these words, mighty
good Christians: and then reflected upon his having used that expression to his
mistress, and how his last lady gave him the same return; but he thought it was
so empty, so absurd a turn to a thing of that consequence, that he reproached
himself with having talked so foolishly, and was ashamed to think, how like one
of these sops he had appeared to her; and how he had talked after the same
senseless way, which he now looked upon to be the most empty, scandalous thing
in the world.

When the two young takes were gone, the (...), turning to the young gentleman
that had refused them, complimented him upon his having given them so handsome
an answer, and having run them both a-ground in one inquiry. My Lord, said the
gentleman, if my question ran them a-ground, your Lordship's question quite
confounded them. Indeed, my Lord ^^ontinued he, it is too much the notion now,
especially among persons of quality, that it is below them to be religious.
(...) Lord said, It was so indeed; but that he would ^ain ask such people,
whether they thought St. Paul was a gentleman or not? And whether he did not
show as much good breeding and good manners, when he appeared before Agrippa,
Festus, and the governor Sergius Paulus, as any nobleman in Britain could have
done at the bar of the house of Lords? Upon this subject his Lordship went on
for half an hour, with a discourse so handsome, so to the purpose, and yet so
serious, that it highly entertained the company; showing, how it became every
man of quality to behave himself in subjection to the rules given him by his
Maker, as it became every subject to honor his governor; how piety and
religion were the glory of a man of quality, and made (...) truly illustrious;
that it was so far from being true, that religion was not suited to the life of
a gentleman, that it was certain a man could not truly be a gentleman without
it; that religion was so far from being a dull, phlegmatic thing, and useless
in conversation, as was the fashionable notion of the town, that really no man
could be so bright, so perfectly easy, so cheerful, so sociable, and so always
in humor for society, as a Christian; that religion was the beauty of
conversation, and assisted to make it pleasant and agreeable; that without it
company was empty, discourse unprofitable, society unpleasant; and, in short,
that conversation, without a mixture of something regarding religion, and a due
connection with it, was like a dance without music, or a song without measure;
like poetry without quantity, or speech without grammar: That it was a mistake
to think Christianity received honor from the dignity of the persons who
professed it, and his Lordship said (...) wondered to hear men express
themselves so absurdly (...) as to say, such a man is an honor to religion;
that the thing was true only in the reverse, and it should be said, religion i^
an honor to such a person: That it was a contradiction in the very nature of
the thing, to say, such a man was noble, great, honorable, or a gentleman,
without religion; and it might, with every jot as much sense, be said so of a
person who had neither birth, family, nor manners.

Our gentleman came home charmed with this discourse, as indeed the whole
company were besides; especially considering the authority and dignity of the
person who spoke it. His mind was inspired with new thoughts by it, both of
religion and of himself; he not only saw more of the excellency of religion in
itself, but began clearly to see it was the ornament of a gentleman to be a
Christian. It was with the greatest contempt, that he now looked back upon the
notion he had formerly espoused of a gentleman's being above troubling himself
with serious things. How sordid and brutish did the two beaux appear, said he,
compared to that noble and excellent person, my Lord --! How were they laughed
at and despised by all the gentlemen in the company, and looked upon as fellows
fit for nothing, but in the highway to disaster! On the other hand, it occurred
to him, how handsomely did that young gentleman answer them! with what modesty
did he speak, and yet boldly, in defense of a religious life? and what an
honor was paid him for it by all the company, and by the nobleman in
particular? and then to think o^ what the Lord had said, with what applause it
was received; how all the company listened to his Lordship, as to an oracle;
how general a consent was given to it by all the gentlemen; and, in a word, how
agreeable the conversation of the day was, put it all together; and yet, said
he, of eleven gentlemen in the room, there was not one man among them, except
the clergyman, who was not above me both in quality and estate.

From all this he drew this general and happy conclusion for himself, viz. That
he should never be a complete gentleman, till he became a religious man; and
that the more of a Christian he was, the (...) should be for the conversation
of the best and (...) in the kingdom; and, in consequence of this resolution,
he resolved to apply himself seriously to the study of religious things.

To avoid the usual diversions of the town, while these serious thoughts were
upon him, he resolved to retire into the country, to a little seat he had in
Hampshire, remote from all conversation, and where he had no body to talk to,
but his own servants, or some of the neighborhood, who were all his tenants.
When he sound himself so perfectly alone, it began be a little too much for
him, and he grew very heavy, (...) a little hypochondriac: his mind was
oppressed with the thoughts of his circumstances, but dark as to the due
inquiries he ought to have made; at length he roused himself a little with
these thoughts.

I talk of being religious! and being a Christian! why, I understand nothing of
it, or how to go about it. What is it? what is religion? and what is it to be a
Christian? He posed himself with these questions, and knew not what answer to
give himself, when it came thus into his mind, Did ^^t that dear first preacher
(meaning the young lady he had courted) tell me what religion was, and how she
understood it, viz. A reverence of God, a sense of his worship, and impressions
of duty to him that made us? This certainly is religion, and this is to be
religious: but which way must I go about it?

He was seriously musing on this part one evening walking all alone in a field
near his house, when he began to look with great concern, upon the want, which
he felt, of an early foundation laid in his mind by a religious education.
Sure, said he to himself, we that are men of fortune, are the most unhappy part
of mankind; we are taught nothing: our ancestors have had to little notion of
religion themselves, that they never so much as thought of it for their
children: I don't wonder they have thought it below them: for knowing little or
nothing of it themselves, they had no other excuse to one another for the
leaving their children entirely destitute of it, but by pretending it was below
their quality. This ^ong him into a reflection which raised this sudden
passionate expression, God be (...) unto me! says he: What is become of my
father and grandfather! He went on thus, Who am I! a gentleman! I am attended
by servants, Sir'd, and Worshipped, and Honored here, by a parcel of poor
workmen and tenants, that think themselves nothing to me, and are half frighted
if they do but see me; and I am in the ^ight of him that made me, and in my own
too, a dog, a monster, a creature a thousand times worse than the meanest of
them; for I am a wretch with a soul, and yet know nothing of him that gave it
me; a soul commanded to serve and obey the God that made it, and yet never
taught to know him.

There lives a poor ploughman, and yonder lives a poor farmer; they both fare
hard and work hard; how sober, how religious, how serious are they! how are
they daily teaching and instructing their children! and how they were taught
and instructed by their parents! and there is scarce a boy of ten years old in
their families, but knows more of God and religion than I do; I have been
taught nothing, and know nothing but this, that I am under the curse of
darkness, in the midst of light; ignorance in the midst of knowledge; and have
more to give an account of, than a negro of Africa, or a savage of America.

He had wandered so long in these meditations, not minding his way, that he
found night coming on, and he scarce knew he was so far from his own house,
till he looked about him; then he resolved to go back; so he broke off his
thoughts a while, and made a little haste homeward. In his way he necessarily
went by a poor laboring man's door, who, with a wife and four children, lived
in a small cottage on the waste, where he (the gentleman) was lord of the
manor. As he passed by he thought he heard the man's voice; and stepping up
close to the door, he perceived that the poor good old man was praying to God
with his family. As he said afterward, his heart sprung in his breast for joy
at the occasion, and he listened eagerly to hear what he said. The poor man
was, it seems, giving God thanks for his condition, and that of his little
family, which he did wi^^ great affection; repeating how comfort^^^^ ^hey lived
how plentifully they were provided for (...) God (...) distinguished them in
his goodness; that they were alive, when others were snatched away by diseases
and disasters; in health, when others languished with pain and sickness; had
food, when others were in want; at liberty, when others were in prison; were
clothed and covered, when others were naked and without habitation; concluding,
with admiring and adoring the wonders of God's providence and mercy to them,
who had deserved nothing.

He was confounded, and struck as it were speechless, with surprise at what he
had heard. Nothing could be more affecting to him: he came away (for he had
staid as long as his heart could hold) and walked to some distance, and there
he stopped, looked up, and round him, as he said, to see if he was awake, or if
it was a dream. At last he got some vent to his thought, and throwing out his
arms, Merciful God! says he, is this to be a Christian! What then have I been
all my days? What is this man thus thankful for? Why, my dogs live better than
he does, in (...) respects, and he is on his knees adoring Infinite Goodness
for his enjoyments? Why, I have enjoyed all I have, and never had the least
sense of God's goodness to me, or ever once said, God, I thank thee for it, in
my life. Well might a sober woman be afraid of me. Is this humble temper, this
thankfulness for mere poverty! is this the effect of being a Christian? Why,
then, Christians are the happiest people in the world! Why, I should hang
myself, if I was to be reduced to a degree a hundred times above him; and yet,
here is peace, ease of mind, satisfaction in circumstances, nay thankfulness,
which is the excess of human felicity; and all this in a man who just lives one
degree above starving. We think our farmers poor slaves, who labor and drudge
in the earth to support us that are their landlords, and who look upon us like
their lords and masters; why, this poor wretch is but a drudge to these
drudges, a slave of slaves; and yet he gives God thanks for the happiness of
his condition! Is this the frame of religious people! What a m^^^^er am I! Then
he walked a little way farther, but not being able to contain his astonishment,
I Will go back says he, to poor William (for he knew his name) he shall teach me
to be a Christian; for I am sure I know nothing of it yet.

Away he goes back to the poor man's house, and standing without, he whistled
first, and then called, William! William! The poor man, his family worship
being over, was just going to supper, but hearing somebody whistle, he thought
it might be some stranger who had lost his way, as is often the case in the
country; and went to the door, where he saw a gentleman stand at some distance;
but not seeing him perfectly, because it was dusk, he asked who he was; but was
surprised when he heard his voice, and knew who he was.

Don't you know me, William? says his landlord.

William. Indeed I did not know your worship at first. I am sorry to see you
out so late, an't please your worship, and all alone; I hope you an't on ^oot
too.


Landlord. Yes, I am, William; indeed, I have wandered through the wood here a
little too far, before I was aware; will you go home with me, William?


Will, Yes, an't please your worship to accept of me, with all my heart; you
shall not go alone in the dark thus: an't please your worship to stay a bit,
I Will go call Goodman Jones and his son too, we'll all see you safe home.


La. No, no; I Will have none but you, William; come along.


Will. An't please you I Will take my bill in my hand then; it is all the weapons
I have.


La. Well, do then; but how will you do to leave your wife and children?


Will. God will keep them I hope, an't please your worship; his protection is a
good guard.


La. That Is true, William; come along then: I hope there are no thieves about.

They go together.
Will. Alas! an't please your worship, it is a sorry thief would rob a cottage.


La. Well, but that little you have, William, it is something to you; and you
would be loathe to lose it.


Will. Indeed I could ill spare what I have, though it be very mean, because I
could not buy more (...) the room of it.


La. I know you are poor, William, How many children have you?


Will. I have four, an't please you.


La. And how do you all live?


Will. Indeed, an't please you, we live all by my hard labor.


La. And what can you earn a day, William?


Will. Why, an't please you, I cannot get above 10d. a day now: but when your
worship's good father was alive, he always gave the steward orders to allow me
12d. a day, and that was a great help to me.


La. Well, but William, can your wife get nothing?


Will. Truly, now and then she can, in the summer; but it is very little: she is
but weakly.


La. And have you always work, William?


Will. Truly, an't please you, sometimes I have not; and then it is very hard
with us.


La. Well, but you do not want, I hope, William?


Will. No, blessed be God, an't please you, we do not want; no, no, God forbid
I should say we want; we want nothing but to be more thankful for what we have.

[This struck him to the heart, that this poor wretch should say he wanted
nothing, etc;.]


La. Thankful, William! why, what have thou to be thankful for?


Will. O dear! an't please you, I should be a dreadful wretch, if I should not
be thankful! What should become of me, if I had nothing but what I deserve.


La. Why, what could thou be worse than thou art, William?


Will. The Lord be praised, an't please your worship, I might be sick and lame,
and could not work, and then we must all perish; or I might be without a cover;
your worship might turn me out of this warm cottage, and my wife and children
would be starved with cold; how many better Christians than I are exposed to
misery and want, and I am provided for? Blessed be the Lord, I want for
nothing, an't please you.

[It was dark, and William could not see him; (...) owned afterward, that it
made his heart burn (...) him, to hear the poor man talk thus; and the tears
came out of his eyes so fast, that he walked thirty or forty steps before he
could speak to him again.]


La. Poor William! thou art more thankful for thy cottage, than ever I was for
the manor-house; prithee, William, can you tell me how to be thankful too?


Will. An't please your worship, I don't doubt but you are more thankful than
I, you have a vaste estate, and are lord of all the country, I know not how
far; to be sure you are more thankful than I, an't please you.


La. I ought to be so, you mean, William; I know that; for it all comes from
the same hand.


Will. I don't doubt but you are very thankful to God, an't please you, to be
sure you are; for he has given your worship great wealth; and where much is
given, you know, an't please you, much is required; to be sure you are much
more thankful than I.


La. Truly, William, I Would give a thousand pounds I were as happy, and as
thankful as thou art: prithee, William, tell me how I shall bring myself to be
thankful; for, though thou art a poorer man, I believe thou art a richer
Christian than I am.


Will. O! an't please your worship, I cannot teach you; I am a poor laboring
man; I have no learning.


La. But what made you so thankful, William, for little more than bread and
water?


Will. O Sir! an't please you, my old father used to say to me, that to compare
what we receive with what we deserve, will make any body thankful.


La. Indeed that is true, William: Alas! we that are gentlemen, are the
unhappiest creatures in the world; we cannot quote our fathers for any thing
that is fit to be named: was thy father as thankful as thou art, William?


Will. Yes, an't please you, Sir, and a great deal more! O! I shall never be so
good a Christian as my father was.


La. I shall never be so good a Christian as thou art, William.


Will. I hope you are, an't please you, much better already; God has blessed
your worship with a vast great estate, and if he gives you grace to honor him
with it, he has put means in your Worship's hands to do a great deal of good
with it, an't please you.


La. But you have a better estate than I, William.


Will. I an estate! an't please you, I am a poor laboring man; if I can get
bread by my work, for my poor children, it is all I have to hope for on this
side eternity.


La. William! William! thou have an inheritance beyond this world, and I want
that hope; I am very serious with thee, William: Thou have taught me more this
one night, of the true happiness of a Christian's life, than ever I knew
before; I must have more talk with thee upon this subject; for thou have been
the best instructor ever I met with.


Will. Alas! Sir, I am a sorry instructor, I want help myself, an't please you;
and sometimes, the Lord knows, I am hardly able to bear up under my burden;
but, blessed be God, at other times I am comforted, that my hope is not in this
life.


La. I tell thee, William, thy estate is better than all mine: thy treasure is
in heaven, and thy heart is there too; I would give all my estate to be in thy
condition.


Will. O Sir, I hope your worship is in a better condition than I every way.


La. Look you, William, I am very serious with thee; thou know how I have
been brought up, for you remember my father very well.


Will. Yes, I do indeed; he was a good man to the poor: I was the better for
him many a day; he was a worthy gentleman.


La. But, William, he never took any care of us that were his children, to
teach us any thing of religion; and this is my case, as it is the case of too
many gentlemen of estates; we are the unhappiest creatures in the world; we are
taught nothing, and we know nothing of religion, or of him that made us; it is
below us, it seems.


Will. It is a great pity, indeed, an't please you; but I know it is so too
often: there is young Sir Thomas -- your worship's cousin, he is a pretty
youth, and may make a fine gentleman; but though he is but a child, he has such
words in his mouth, and will swear so already, it grieves me to hear him
sometimes. It is true, his father is dead; but sure if my Lady knew it, she
would teach him better: it is a pity so hopeful a young gentleman should be
ruined.


La. And who do you think spoiled him?


Will. Some wicked children, that they let him play with, I believe, or some
loose servants.


La. No, no, William, only his own father and mother; I have heard his father
take him, when he was a child, and make him speak lewd words, and sing immodest
songs, when the poor child did not so much as know the meaning of what he said,
or that the words were not fit for him to speak. And you talk of my Lady! why,
she will swear and curse as fast as her coachman: How should the child learn
any better?


Will. O dear, that is a dreadful case indeed, an't please you; then the poor
youth must be ruined of necessity; there is no remedy for him, unless it please
God to single him out by his distinguishing invisible grace.


La. Why his case, William, is my case, and the case of half the gentlemen in
England. What God may do, as you say, by his invisible grace, I know not, nor
scarce know what you mean by that word; we are, from our infancy, given up to
the devil, almost as directly as if we were put out to nurse to him.


Will. Indeed, Sir, an't please you, the gentlemen do not think much of
religion; I fear it was always so; the scripture says, Not many rich, not many
noble are called, and it is the poor of this world that are rich in faith,
James ii. 5.


La. I find it so indeed, William, and I find myself at a dreadful loss in this
very thing, I am convinced, the happiness of man does not consist in the
estate, pleasures, and enjoyments of life; if so, the poor alone would be
miserable, and the rich men only be blessed; but there is something beyond this
world, which makes up for all that is deficient here; this you have, and I have
not; and so, William, you, in your poor cottage, are richer, and more happy,
than I am with the whole manor.


Will. Indeed, Sir, if in this world only we had hope, the poor would be of all
(...) most miserable; blessed be the Lord that our portion is (...) in this
life, But, Sir, an't please you, I hope you will not discourage yourself
neither; for God has not chosen the poor only; rich men have temptations from
the world, and hindrances very many, and it is hard for them to enter into the
kingdom of heaven; but they are not shut out; the gate is not barred upon them
because they are rich.


La. I kn^^ not how it is, William, nor which way to begin; but I see so many
obstructions in the work, that I doubt I shall never get over it.


Will. Do not say so, I beseech you, Sir, an't please you; the promise is made
to all; and if God has given you a heart to seek him, he will meet you and
bless you, for he has said, Their heart shall live that seek the Lord. Many
great and rich men have been good men: we read of good kings and good princes;
and if your difficulties are great, you have great encouragements; for you that
are great men, have great opportunities to honor God, and do good to his
church: poor men are denied these encouragements; we can only sit still, and be
patient under the weight of our sorrows, and our poverty, and look for his
blessing, which alone makes rich, and adds no sorrow to it.


La. But tell me, William, what is the first step such a poor uneducated thing
as I am should take? I see a beauty in religion which I cannot reach: I see the
happiness which thou enjoyest, William, in a humble, religious, correct life; I
would give all my estate to be in thy condition; I would labor at the (...)
and the ditch, as thou do, could I have the same peace within, and be as
thankful, and have such an entire confidence in God as thou have; I see the
happiness of it, but nothing of the way how to obtain it.


Will. Alas! Sir, an't please you, you do not know my condition: I am a poor
disconsolate creature; I am sometimes so lost, so dark, so overwhelmed with my
condition, and with my distresses, that I am (...) ^o fear God has forgotten to
be gracious; that I am cast off, and left to sink under my own burden: I am so
unworthy, (...) forgetful (...) my duty, so easily let go my hold, and cast off
my confidence, that I fear often I shall despair.


La. And what do you do then, William?


Will. Alas! Sir, I go mourning many a day, and waking many a night; but I
bless the Lord, I always mourn after him; I always cleave to him; I am not
tempted to run from him; I know I am undone, if I seek comfort in any other:
Alas! whither else shall I go? I cry night and day, Return, return, O Father!
and resolve to lie at his feet; and that, though he stay me, yet will I trust in
him: and blessed be the God of my hope, he does send comfort and peace, though
sometimes it is very long.


La. Well, William, and is this a disconsolate condition? Would you change your
condition with me that am the rich glutton.


Will. O do not say so of yourself, an't please you: God has touched your
worship's heart, I perceive, with an earnest desire after him; you have a
gracious promise, that would greatly encourage you, if you would but take it to
yourself.


La. Encourage me, William! that is impossible: What can encourage me? What
promise is it you talk of, that looks toward me?


Will. Why, a'nt please you, I heard you say, you would change your condition
with such a poor wretch as I; you would labor at the hedge and the ditch, to
have the knowledge of God and religion, and to be able to be thankful to him,
and have confidence in him: this implies, that you have a longing earnest
desire after him, and after the knowledge of his truth.


La. Indeed, that is true, William.


Will. Then there are many comforting scriptures, which speak directly to you,
Sir, viz Blessed are they that hunger and thirst after righteousness, for they
shall be filled; the longing soul shall be satisfied: he will satisfy the
desires of all those that fear him; and the like.


La. But what must I do? which is the way an ignorant wretch must take?


Will. Sir, an't please you the way is plain: we must pray to him; prayer is
the first duty, and prayer is the greatest privilege we can enjoy in the world.


La. Ay, William: but there is a great deal required in prayer, that I am an
utter stranger to: I never prayed in my life; no, nor I believe my father or
grandfather before me, William! I came of a cursed race, William, and I doubt
it is entailed upon the family, like the estate.


Will. O, Sir, do not say that: the scripture is plain, an't please you, that
the children shall not be punished for the father's transgression.


La. But then certainly they must not tread in there father's steps, as I do
exactly, William.


Will. That Is true, indeed, Sir, they must not tread in those steps.


La. But what do thou talk then of prayer being the first duty? Why, if that
be the first thing, I must not begin; for, how can such a creature as I pray to
God?


Will. As the Spirit of God will assist those, whose hearts are toward him, so
we must pray, that we may be taught to pray.


La. Is it not a difficult thing for a man to pray to God, William, that scarce
ever thought of God in all his life?


Will. Well, Sir, but who do you think put those thoughts in your mind, which
now you have? and who opened your eyes, Sir, to see a beauty in religion, as
now you see; and touched your heart with such an earnest desire after the ways
and things of God, as you now expressly say you have? do you think this is not
of God, an't please you?


La. Indeed, William, I know not; it would be a very delightful thing to me, if
I thought it was so.


Will. Without question, Sir, it is: man can have no such power; nature prompts
us to evil thoughts and evil desires, and to them only; the imagination of the
thoughts of our hearts are evil, and only evil; if there are any good motions,
or heavenly desires in the heart, they are from God. Every good gift, and every
perfect gift comes down from above; it is his power works them, his invisible
grace forms all holy desires in the soul.


La. Well; and what (...) infer from thence, William?


Will. Why, Sir, an't please you, if God has begun a good work, he will perfect
it: if he has turned your face toward him, he will lift up your heart to him:
to pray to God is as natural to a convert, as to cry after the father or mother
is to an infant.


La. Thou speaks, William, with more clearness th^n ever I heard before; but
it is a strange thing to me to talk of praying to God: I pray! that, except
just the common road of going to church, cannot say that ever I kneeled down to
pray to God once in all my life? how shall I pray?


Will. That Is sad, indeed, an't please you! I am sorry to hear your Worship say
so: does any creature live, and not pray to God! O! dear! that is a sad,
dreadful thing in truth! but however, Sir, do not let that hinder you now.


La. How do mean, hinder me? what can be said to hinder me doing what I have
no knowledge in, no notion of, no inclination to?


Will. O Sir, an't please you, you mistake your own condition very much: do not
discourage yourself thus; you know how to pray better than many that make much
noise with their devotions; I see it plainly.


La. I pray! William; I pray! I tell thee, I never prayed in all my life as I
know of.


Will. An't please your worship not to be angry with me for my plain way --


La. Prithee, William, be plain, and speak freely; do nor worship me and sir me
now; talk to me as if I were your neighbor or comrade; these are not things to
talk of with cringes and bows; I am a wretched, contemptible, pour, rich man;
thou art a poor, rich, happy Christian; talk plainly to me. William, the
coarser the better, I like it best; there will be no difference, William,
between thee and me hereafter, but what will be on thy side; tell me therefore
what you mean, William, by my praying?


Will. Why, Sir, you allow me to be plain, then, I say, you mistake your own
condition, and thereby put off the comfort you might receive; I say, you do
pray, and know better how to pray, than many that come to church and appear as
if they prayed every day.


La. You must explain yourself, William, I do not understand you.


Will. Why, Sir, those earnest desires you have after the knowledge of God, and
after the true worship of God, which is the sum of religion, I say, those
earnest desires are really prayers in their own nature; sincere wishes of the
heart for grace are prayers to God for grace; prayer itself is nothing but
those wishes and desires put into words, and the first is the essential part;
for there may be words used without the desire, and that is no prayer, but a
mockery of God; but the desires of the heart may be prayers, even without the
words.


La. You surprise me a little, William.


Will. Besides, Sir, an't please you, those earnest desires you have after
religion, and after the knowledge of God, will force you to pray first or last,
in a verbal prayer; they will break (...) like a flame that cannot be withheld,
your heart will pray, when you know not of it: praying to God, Sir, is the
first thing a sense of religion dictates, as a child cries as soon as it is
born.


La. Alas! William, I know nothing of it; I am such an unaccountable wretch,
God knows, I know nothing what belongs to praying, not I; thou have let me see
farther into it, by that thou said just now, than ever I saw or heard before.


Will. Why, look ye now, an't please you, I told you it would break out, when
you knew not of it, and you would pray to God before you were aware, Did you
not pray just now?


La. Pray! Why, what did I say? I said I know nothing of prayer.


Will. Nay, that was not all. What is the meaning of those words. Alas,
William! and whence came that sigh when you called yourself that hard name? and
what was the sense of your soul but this, God be merciful to me, and teach me
to pray, for alas! I know nothing what belongs to praying? Was not all this
praying?


La. Indeed, William, my heart had such a kind of meaning; but I cannot (...)
the thought into words no not into my very soul.


Will. It is all one, Sir; God that moves the soul, certainly hears his own
motion, how should he but hear it? is it not his own working? The preparation
of the heart, and the answer of the tongue, is of the Lord. He will hear every
sincere desire which he forms in your (...), whether it be conceived into words
or not; for it i^ the voice of his own spirit and grace.


La. Thou art a comforting preacher, William: I don't wonder you enjoy such a
shining beam of light in your own soul, when you have such a sense things as
this; you shall be my instructor, William: I may call you father rather; for
thou art better to me than ten fathers.


Will. O Sir, an't please you, my discomforts are very great, and the beam you
speak of is very dim in me. Do not speak such things of me; it makes me very
sad; for I know my own darkness; I am a poor despised creature.


La. Well, but God may make you an instrument of good to me, or to any one he
pleases: I never had thus much instruction in my life, William; you will not be
backward to do good, I hope, if it be thus cast in your way.


Will. I shall be very glad, if such a worm as I am, should be an instrument,
in God's hand, to comfort or inform your worship; and shall praise God for this
occasion as long as I live; and indeed I rejoice, an't please you, to see your
worship, inquiring after these things; I pray God increase the knowledge of
himself in your mind, and comfort you with the hope of his presence and
blessing.


La. Amen, I thank you, William.


Will. Look you now, Sir, an't please you, did you not pray then, again?


La. I joined with you, William; I don't know; but if that be praying, I think
I did pray.


Will. Thus God will move your heart to pray to him: and I beseech your worship
to read the scriptures; read them much, read them seriously; and pray, Sir,
observe this one thing, when you read, which I have experienced often, and very
comfortably; and I dare say, you and every one that reads the word of God, with
desire of a blessing, will experience the like, viz When you are reading, and
come to any place that touches you, and that your mind is affected with, you
shall find, even whether you will or no, your heart will every now and then
lift itself up thus, Lord! make good this word to me! Lord! draw my heart thus
to thee! Lord! help me thus to seek thee, and the like: and be not afraid to
call that praying; for mental petition is prayer as well as words; and is,
perhaps, the best moved prayer, and the best expressed in the world.


La. You will persuade me, William, that I both have prayed already, and shall
again, whether I will or no, and whether I know any thing of it or no, and that
I want no teaching.


Will. Pray, Sir, does a child want to be taught to cry?


La. Will that similie hold, William?


Will. Indeed it will, Sir, Read the scripture; if God's word reaches your
heart, you will not need to be taught to pray.


La. I told you, William, you hardly knew who you were talking to. You talk of
my reading the scripture; why, I Will tell thee, William, I have not a Bible in the
world, and never had one in my life: There Is the man^r house yonder; I question
whether God was ever prayed to in it, or his name ever mentioned there, except
profanely, or perhaps to swear by it, since it was built. Why, you know as well
as I, what a family it was that lived in it, when my father purchased it. They
were as much strangers to religion, William, as thou art to Greek and Hebrew;
and ours were but little better, that came after them.


Will. I fear indeed, an't please your worship, it was so. Poor Gentlemen! they
lived badly, indeed, very badly. Alas! Gentlemen must not be told of it by us
poor men; but they were a sad wicked family; I remember it well.


La. But, William, thou can lend me a (...) can thou not? and I Will read
it all over while I stay in the country.


Will. Yes, an't please your worship, I Will lend you a Bible; I Will bring it in
the morning.


La. Do, William, and come and stay with me tomorrow; I Will make thee amends
for thy day's work, and there is something for thy good advice, and coming so
far with me.

[He gives him some money, and sends him back again.]


Will. Thank your worship.

[They were now come to the manor-house, and he was loath to detain him, because
it was late, and because they were so affected with the discourse they had had,
that he wanted very much to be alone.

As soon as he came into his own house, he locked himself into a parlour, and
began to consider, with great seriousness, all these things, and especially
what the poor man had said to him about praying to God; and, as his thoughts
were intent upon the meaning of prayer, the nature of it, and the advantages of
it, at every turn of these thoughts he found a secret kind of hint like a voice
in him, O that I could pray! O, if I could pray but as the poor man does! How
happy should I be, if I could but pray to God! and the like. He was not aware
of these movements; they seemed to be wrought in his affections perfectly
involuntarily and sudden; and they passed over without being noticed or
observed, even by himself, till after a good while they returned stronger and
more frequent upon him; so that he not only perceived it, but remembered how
often his heart had thrown out these expressions; when, on a sudden, the poor
man's words came into his mind with such a force, as if the man himself had
been there; why this was praying; certainly I have been praying all this while,
and knew it not.

Upon this reflection, it was impossible for him to express, as he said
afterward, what a strange rapture of joy possessed his mind, and how his heart
was turned within him; then he fell into the same sacred ejaculations of
another kind, viz. of admiration, praises, thanksgiving, and mere astonishment;
but still without speaking otherwise than a kind of mental voice, sounding or
injecting words into his mind: such as these, Lord! shall I be brought to pray
to God! I that have never been told so much as how to mention his name! I that
have never known any thing of God, or myself! or have been taught any thing of
my duty to him! shall I be taught to pray! and taught by whom! by this poor
despicable creature, that at another time I would not have spoken to, if he had
made me twenty bows and scrapes! His tongue then was let loose; and he cried
out, Blessed be God that ever I came near that poor man.

He continued all that evening filled with comforting reflections, and wi^h a
kind of inward peace and satisfaction; which as he had never known before, so
be knew not how to describe or relate it, or indeed how to manage it. In the
morning he sound the same meditation and the same lightness upon his spirits
returned, and he remembered what the poor man had prayed for, for him, viz.
That he might be comforted with the hopes of the presence and blessing of God,
to which his heart had so readily said Amen. And now he longed for the poor
man's coming with the Bible.

The poor man was likewise mightily affected with his case, considering him a
young gentleman of such a family and fortune; and who was so far above him as
that, though he was his landlord, he durst never offer to speak to him in his
life, but with the greatest submission and distance; how he should come to call
him out, and to talk to him, of such things especially, and in so serious a
manner.

He then reflected, with a serious joy, that this young gentleman should be
thus touched with a solid sense of religion and good things; for it was easy to
see, that it was not a slight or an insincere work upon his mind. -- It
rejoiced his heart, that the heir of the estate should be thus likely to prove
a good man; and it presently occurred to his thoughts, how great a blessing
such a gentleman might be to the country, to the poor, and to the uninstructed
people round him; as well by reforming their manners, and restraining their
vices, as, perhaps, by bringing religion to be accepted and received among them
by his example.

These were some of the thoughts he came along with, and as he walked, he
prayed to God, very earnestly, that he might be made an instrument to bring the
soul of this gentleman to the knowledge of God, and to bow at the footstool of
his Redeemer as a true penitent.

His prayers were not in vain. Prayer, put up from such a principle, and with
such a spirit, seldom is made in vain.

He came to the gentleman, while he was in his bed; for he had given orders to
his servants to bring him up to his chamber; there he delivered him the Bible,
and told him he hoped he would find in it both encouragement and direction in
the great work which he was going about, and that God would bless it to him,
and would supply by his grace all the wants of early instruction, which he had
so much complained of,

He received the poor man with a glad heart, made him sit down by him, and told
him, God had made him the instrument of so much good to him, that he could not
part with him any more while he stayed in the country.

William, says he, God has made you a father to me, and I Will be a father to you
and your family; you shall go no more home to that poor cottage, you shall have
something else to be thankful to God for than bread and water.


Will. An't please your worship, I have much more to be thankful for than that
already; but, if God has been pleased to assist me to do you good in this great
business of bringing such a soul as yours to the knowledge of himself, I shall
have cause to praise him, beyond all that ever I had before.


La. Well, William, I have sent for your wife and children; they shall be my
care now, not yours; I Will provide a house for you.

[He gave them a house and a little farm rent free, to live on; and made him
his bailiff and receiver of the rents of the manor.]


Will. Your worship will be a father to me and my family indeed then; I can
never deserve so much at your hands; an't please you I am very willing to work
still for my bread, I thank your worship.


La. No, William, you shall never work any more for your bread; you have been
thankful for a little, William; I heard you last night, when you were at prayer
in your family, and giving thanks to God for the plenty you enjoyed. Poor
William! you do not know how it affected me, that never gave God thanks in my
life; now you shall be thankful for better things.


Will. I shall be greatly bound to be thankful to your worship too, an't please
you.


La. No, William, do not thank me, thank God still.


Will. And your worship mend my condition, I fear my thankfulness to God should
abate: when I lived so near misery and distress, it made me more sensible of
God's goodness, in keeping me out of it, than I may, I doubt, when I am full.


La. I do not think you will ever be unthankful, William, that could be so full
of sense of God's mercy, even in the extremest poverty: but come, William, I
shall leave that; I have ordered my steward both to provide for, and employ
you, and I shall say no more of that now: but my business now is of another
nature: and first, I must tell you how I have been employed since I left you
last night.

[Here he gave the poor man an account of himself, and of his reflections upon
what he had said to him, and how insensibly he had received secret comfort, as
above, and he sound tears run down the old man's cheeks, all the while he was
talking to him, for joy.]


Will. O Sir! give God the praise, this is all his own work; and I hope your
comfort shall increase and continue: did I not tell you, Sir, God would teach
you to pray?


La. But now, William, what should I do with this book?


Will. Read it, Sir, an't please you, and you will pray over it whether you
will or no.


La. But I am still ignorant; I have no minister near me to explain it to me.


Will. The Spirit of God will expound his own word to you.


La. Well, William, you shall be my minister; come, sit down by me and read in
it.


Will. Alas! I am a sorry creature to be a teacher, Sir; but an't please you, I
have turned down some places, which I thought of, to show your worship for your
first reading.


La. That Is what I wanted, William.


Will. An't please you, here is a text which tells you what is the whole design
of a written gospel; for what end the life of our blessed Redeemer was laid
down, and his works and doctrine were published to the world; and this seems to
be the first thing we should know of the scriptures, for, indeed, it is the sum
and substance of them.


La. Let me see it, William.


Will. Here it is, Sir, These things are written, that ye might believe that
Jesus is the Christ, the Son of God, and that believing, ye might have life
through his name, John xx. 31.


La. That is very comprehensive indeed, William.


Will. And here is another passage I folded down, lest you should ask, how
should you do to believe; it is in Mark ix. 24. it is a story of a man, who
brings his child to our Lord to be healed, when possessed of an evil spirit:
our Lords asks him, if he could believe? If thou can believe, all things are
possible to him that believes; and v. 24. The father cried; out with tears,
Lord, I believe, help thou my unbelief.

[William looks full in his face, while he repeated the words.]


La. What do you look at me for, William?


Will. O Sir! I saw your very heart; I know you prayed; I know you said amen in
your very soul to that word; glory be to the grace of God, and to the word of
God for you; the scripture, read with such a heart as yours now is, will soon
teach you all that you want to know, and all that you want to do.

[The poor gentleman was overcome with his words, and could not speak for a
good while; tears came out of his eyes; and at last he bursts out thus: Lord!
what a creature have I been, that have lived without the teachings of the
scripture all my days!

Thus far this happy poor man was made an instrument to the restoring this
gentleman, and bringing him to the knowledge of God, and to a sense of
religion; and in a word, to be a most sincere Christian. We shall hear farther
of him, after the next dialogue.]


DIALOGUE III.
WE must now go back to the family which we began with: the father of the young
ladies was gone into the country to visit his sister, who was newly become a
widow; little thinking, whatever his eldest daughter had said to him, that his
youngest daughter would make such short work with her lover in his absence, and
that she would quite put an end to the courtship all at one blow, as she had
done, before he came home again.

He spent some little time at his sister's to comfort her, and assist her in
her affairs after the loss of her husband; and particularly, because her eldest
son, being of age and just upon marrying, she intended to remove; the house,
which was the seat of the family, being to be fitted up for her new
daughter-in-law: Upon these circumstances, he began the following discourse
with his sister.

Bro. Well, pray sister, what kind of a lady has my nephew got? is he well
married?


Sist. Truly, brother, I can hardly tell how to answer you that question; I
believe every body will be better pleased than I.


Bro. Why, sister, what is the cause, pray, that you are so difficult?


Sist. O brother! the main difficulty that has made me all my days the most
miserable of all women.


Bro. What! religion, I warrant you; you would have had him have married a nun?


Sist. Nay, I don't know why I should desire a religious woman to come into the
family.


Bro. I never saw the like of you, sister, you are (...) a complaining; you
have had one of the best (...), goodest-conditioned, merriest fellows in the
world for these five and twenty years, and yet you call yourself a miserable
woman: what would you ask in a husband, that you had not in Sir James?


Sist. Dear brother, is this a time for me to tell you what I wanted in Sir
James, when he is in his grave? I have wanted nothing in him that a woman could
desire in a husband; he was rich in his estate, a lovely, complete, handsome
gentleman in his person, and held it to the last; he was the best humoured man
that ever woman had, and kind, as a husband, to the last degree: I never saw
him in a passion in my life; he was a man of good sense and good learning; a
man of honor, good breeding, and good manners; none went beyond him; all the
country knows it, and loved him for it.


Bro. Very well! and yet my sister a miserable woman! Would not any man laugh
at you? I think, sister, if ever you were a miserable woman, it is now, because
you have lost him.


Sist. Well, that is true too; I am so now, many ways, and some, perhaps, that
you do not think of, brother.


Bro. I know what you mean again; I warrant you have been whining over him, to
think what is become of him now: prithee what is that to you or me! What can
you, by your concern for him, do in that case, one way or other? cannot you
leave him to God's mercy, now he is gone?


Sist. Dear brother, it is in vain to answer you; I must leave him to God's
mercy, and so we must leave ourselves; but do you think, it is not an
afflicting, dreadful thing to me, that knows how he lived, and how he died, to
reflect upon his condition, if I had any love f^^ him?


Bro. Why, how did he live? He lived like a gentleman, as he was.


Sist. That Is true; and that, as times go, brother, is to live like a heathen;
you know well enough what a life, I have had with him on that only account; you
know, (...) was so far from having any sense of religion, or of (...) Maker, on
his mind, that he made a jest and a mock of it all his days, even to the last.


Bro. I know he did not trouble himself much about it.


Sist. Nay, he not only did not himself, but he did not really love to have any
body about him religious. I have known many gentlemen that have had no religion
themselves, yet value it in others, and value and reverence good men: but he
thought all people hypocrites that talked of any thing religious, and could not
abide to see any appearance of it in the house. It was the only thing we had
any difference about all our days.


Bro. And I think you were a great fool to have any difference with him about
that. Could not you have kept your religion to yourself, and have let him
alone, to be as frolicksome as he would without it?


Sist. Nay, I was obliged to do that, you may be sure; you know it well enough.


Bro. Yes, yes, I know he served you many a merry prank about your religious
doings* such as, putting every now and then a ballad in your prayer book, or
psalm-book; and I think he put the story of Tom Thumb once in one of Dr.
Tillotson's sermons.


Sist. No: it was two leaves out of Don Quixote. He did a great many such
things as those to me.


Bro. But they were all frolicks; there was nothing of passion or ill nature in
them. Did not he write something in the children's spelling-book once, and make
them get it without book, instead of the lesson you had set them?


Sist. Yes, yes, he played me a thousand tricks that way.


Bro. I think once he pasted a receipt to make a tanzy or a cake just next to
one of the questions of the catechism, where your daughter's lesson was.


Sist. Ay, ay; and every now and then he would paste a single printed word,
that he cut out of some other book, just over another word in their books, so
cunningly, that they could not perceive it, and make them read ^^^sense.


Bro. Why, what harm is there in all that?


Sist. Why, it showed his general contempt of good things, and making a mock of
them, otherwise the thing was not of so much value.


Bro. Well, and wherein was you miserable, pray, in all this? I don't
understand you in that at all


Sist. Why, in this, that he was not at all a religious man.


Bro. But what was that to you, still?


Sist. Why, first, brother, there was all family religion lost at one blow.
There could not be so much as the appearance of worshipping or acknowledging
the God that made us; nay, we scarce asked him leave to eat our meat, but in
secret, as if we were ashamed of it. Sir James never so much as said grace, or
gave thanks at table in his life, that I remember.


Bro. And they that do, make it nothing but a ceremony, and do it for
fashion-sake, not that they think it signifies any thing.


Sist. Well, let them do it for fashion-sake then, if they will, but let them
do it. It is the most rational thing in the world, while we own that God gives
us our meat, that we should ask him leave to eat it, and thank him for it when
we have done. But, alas! this is but a small part of the ill consequences of an
irreligious family.


Bro. Well, what more is there? for this is nothing but what is in thousands of
families, who pretend to religion on all sides.


Sist. Why, all relative religion was lost too.


Bro. Relative religion! Sister, what do you mean by that?


Sist. Why, 1st I mean by it that religion that ought to be between a man and
his wife; such as comforting, encouraging, and directing one another, helping
one another on in the way to heaven; assisting one another in Christian duties,
praying with and for one another, and much more which I could name, and which,
without doubt, passes to their mutual comfort and delight, between a man and
his wife, where they are mutually agreed in worshipping and serving God, and
walking (...) in the happy course of a religious life. All this has been lost;
and it has been a sad loss to me, brother; we (...) all need of helps: and it
is not every one that considers, or indeed that knows, what help, what comfort,
what support, a religious husband or wife are or may be to one another. This, I
say, has been a sad loss to me, I assure you.


Bro. These are nice things; but, methinks, if you could not have those helps
from your husband, you might find them in other things, such as books,
ministers, etc. it need not be called such a loss neither.


Sist. It is such a loss, brother, that if I were to live my days over again, I
would not marry a man that made no profession of religion; not I, though he had
ten thousand pounds a year, and I had but a hundred pounds to my portion; nay,
I think I would work for my bread rather.


Bro. You lay a mighty stress upon these things.


Sist. Every body, brother, that has any sense of the blessing of a religious
family must do so. Pray, if the honoring and serving of God be our wisdom, our
duty, our felicity, in this world, and our way to the next, what comfort, what
happiness can there be, where these are wanting in the head of a family.


Bro. It is better, to be sure, where they may be had, but to lay all the
happiness of life upon it, as if a man or a woman could not be religious by
themselves, without they were so both together, I do not see that; I think you
carry it too far.


Sist. I Will convince you that I do not carry it too far at all; I do not say a
man or a woman may not be religious by themselves, though the husband or wife be
not so; but I say, all the help and comfort of relative religion is lost; the
benefit and value of which none knows, but they that enjoy it, or feel the want
of it; but there is another loss which I have not named, and which my heart
bleeds in the sense of every day.


Bro. What Is that, I wonder?


Sist. Why, children! brother, children; you see I have five children; what
dreadful work has this want of family-religion made among my poor children!


Bro. Why, Sir James did not hinder you instructing your children.


Sist. Did he not! it is true he did not when they were little; but has he not
by example, and want of restraint, encouraged all manner of levity, vanity,
folly, nay, and even vice itself in them? Do you think children, thus let loose
to humor their own inclinations, and to the full swing of their pleasures,
would not soon snatch themselves out of the arms of their mother, and deliver
themselves from the importunities of one that had no other authority with them
than that of affection?


Bro. Why, truly, there is something in that; but I do not see that your
children are much the worse; there is your eldest son, Sir James that is now;
he is a pretty young gentleman: I hear a very good character of him.


Sist. Why truly, brother, as times go now with gentlemen, we may be thankful
neither he nor his brother are debauched or vicious; and I am thankful for it.
They have good characters for modest pretty gentlemen, as you say: but still,
brother, the main thing is wanting. I cannot be partial to them, though they
are my own; there is not the least sense or notion of religion in them; they
cannot say they have no knowledge of it. I took care to deprive them of that
excuse, as early as they knew any thing: but it goes no farther; my eldest son
will tell me sometimes, he has as much religion as a gentleman of a thousand
a year should have; and his brother tells me, if I would have had him have any
religion, I should have kept our parish living for him, and bred him a parson.


Bro. They are very merry with you then I find upon that subject.


Sist. It is a dreadful jest to me brother; I am far from taking it merrily;
you know I was otherwise brought up; our father and mother were of another sort
of people; they united their very souls in the work of God; they joined in
every good thing with the utmost affection; they loved the souls as well as the
bodies of us their children. The family was a house of cheerful devotion; God
was served night and day; and, in a word, as they lived, so they died; they
dropped comfortably off, and went, as it were, hand in hand to heaven.


Bro. And yet, sister, you see, we that were their children were not all alike.
There is our brother Jack, and our sisters Betty and Sarah, what can be said
about them? Pray what religion are they of?


Sist. I Will tell you what can be said, and what will stick close to them one
time or other, viz. if they are lost, it is not for want of good instruction,
or good example; they cannot blame father or mother; it has been all their own.
Parents may beg grace for their children; but they cannot give it them; they
may teach their children good things, but they cannot make them learn; that is
the work of God, and parents must submit it to him. But, when parents do
nothing, nay, rather by example and encouragement, lead their children into
wickedness, what a dreadful thing is that?


Bro. Well, but our two sisters were not led into wickedness; and yet, as I
said, they value religion as little as any body.


Sist. Ay brother, I can tell you how my sisters were both ruined; for they
were not so educated.


Bro. What do you mean by ruined? they are not ruined, I hope.


Sist. I mean as to their principles, brother, which I think is the worst sort
of ruin; they were ruined by marrying profligate, irreligious husbands.


Bro. I don't know what you mean by profligate; I think they were both very
well married.


Sist. Yes, as you call well married, and that I call being undone.


Bro. And pray what has ruined Jack? for he is as graceless a wretch almost as
your Sir James was.


Sist. Truly, brother, just the other extreme: he has a wild, giddy, play
house-bred wife; full of wit, and void of grace, that never had any religion,
nor knew what the meaning of it was; this has ruined him. My brother was a
sober, well-taught, well-inclined young man, as could be desired; but getting
such a tempter at his elbow, instead of a wife to help him on to heaven, she
has led him hood-winked to the gates of hell, and goes cheerfully along with
him; a sad instance, brother, of the want of family-religion!


Bro. Well, but what is all this to what we are upon of parents leading their
children into wickedness? he was not led by his parents.


Sist. But you see his children are.


Bro. I cannot say that; few parents, though they are bad themselves, will
prompt their children to be so too: that is what I have seldom seen.


Sist. Well, that has been the case of my family; and that it is that has broke
my heart, and gives me cause to say, I have been the most miserable woman alive.


Bro. But you have this comfort still, that you have not been the occasion of
it.


Sist. That Is true; but even that does not lessen the grief, of seeing my
children lost and ruined before my face, and their own father to be the
instrument to it.


Bro. They cannot be said to be ruined; they are very fine gentlemen, I assure
you.


Sist. They are ruined as to the best qualification of a gentleman.


Bro. I warrant you they don't think so, sister: religion makes us good
Christians, that is confessed; but I do not see it makes a gentleman. What is
more frequent, than to see religion make men cynical and four in their tempers,
morose and surly in their conversation? They think themselves above the
practice of good manners or good humor.


Sist. This is all by the mistake of the thing: it is want of religion that
makes men thus. It is in good breeding as it is in philosophy; a little
philosophy, a little learning, makes a man an Atheist; a great deal brings him
back, and makes him a Christian: so, a little religion makes a man a churl;
but, a great deal, teaches him to know himself, and be a gentleman. When good
principles join with good manners. how should they but illustrate the
education, and set off the breeding of a man of quality? As it is a mistake to
say, that jewels should be worn by none but homely women, it is just the
contrary; so, religion adorns education, as jewels give real beauty a double
luster.


Bro. Your notions are delicate. You are very nice, it seems, in these things,
sister; though I must confess, I am of your mind, when I consider it well.


Sist. Let the scripture be judge, whether the rules of life, dictated by the
apostles to the Christian churches, were not such, as not only agree well with
that of a gentleman, but indeed with that, without which no man can be a
gentleman; if you look almost through all the epistles in the New Testament,
you will find it so; I Will name you a few.

Phil. (...) 9, 10. That your love may abound in knowledge and all judgment. --
There Is wisdom and learning.

That you may approve things that are excellent -- There Is solid judgment.

That ye may be sincere and without offense -- There is the honesty and open
heartedness of a true gentleman.

1 Pet. Love as brethren, be pitiful, be courteous -- There is the charity, the
beneficence, and the good breeding of a gentleman.

Col. iii 12. Put on bowels of mercy, kindness, humbleness of mind, weekness,
etc. -- Who can be a gentleman without these?

Col. iv. 8. Whatsoever things are honest, just, pure, lovely, and of good
report, think of these things. -- What think you now? Can the practice of these
things dishonor a gentleman? or, do they honor and illustrate, and indeed
make a gentleman?

Phil. ii. 3. In lowliness of mind, let each esteem others better than
themselves -- What becomes a gentleman more than such humility?

I could name you many others. Will any man that needs these rules say, they
are not suitable to a gentleman? No, brother, it shall ever be a rule to me,
that the only complete man upon earth is a religious gentleman.


Bro. Why, you are wrapped up in these notions, sister: I fancy you have been
documenting my daughter; I am afraid of it, I assure you; she has just got the
same things in her noddle, and she has carried her scruples to such a length,
that she had like to have refused the best match that ever will be offered to
her as long as she lives; but I believe I rattled her out of it, when I came
away.


Sist. I am perhaps the fuller of it, because it has been the ruin of my
family, and of my children; and I think, if ever poor woman was unhappy with a
gentleman that had not one bad quality in him, it was I; Sir James, as I told
you, was such a man, for every thing else, as there are few such in the world;
but he hated religion, and that has ruined us all.


Bro. You would make any one laugh to hear you talk of being ruined; why, are
you not left happy, easy, and pleasant? is not your eldest son a baronet, and
has 1400l. a year? is not your second son very well provided for? have not your
daughters 5000l a piece fortune left them? and, are you not left so rich, you
know not what to do with it all?


Sist. I do not speak of ruin as you understand it, brother; I think a family
without religion, is a family ruined, and that in the worst sense, that ruin
can be understood in: if I were to marry again, I would not marry the best Duke
in the nation, that would not endeavor to carry me to heaven, and go there
himself. The command of the scripture is plain in it, Be not unequally yoked, 2
Cor. vi. 14. How shall a husband that professes no religion, dwell with a wife
according to knowledge, 1 Pet. iii. 7. and what is the reason the apostle gives
for this Christian rule in marrying, but this, That your prayers be not
hindered.


Bro. Why, Sir James did not hinder your prayers, sister.


Sist. Did he not? Sir James is in his grave, and it is not my part to say what
he did; but it is the mutual prayers of husband and wife together that is meant
in that scripture. Do you think Sir James prayed with his wife?


Bro. No, I believe he did not indeed, nor with any body else.


Sist. And do you think that is the life of a Christian, or the manner of a
Christian family, brother? You and I were not bred up so, and yet our father
was a gentleman, and wanted neither family nor fortune equal to any of them.
Sir James is in his grave, and I have no more to say of that; but if I were as
young as I was when I married him, and were to choose again, I would not marry
(...) best nobleman in the nation, if he was not a religious (...) all
enjoyments in the world are nothing without it, unless I resolved to cast off
all religion too; and where would that end?


Bro. This is just my daughter again.


Sist. Besides, brother, consider another thing: how many young women and young
men too, who have been religiously bred, has this way of marrying been a snare
to? that, when they come to husbands with no religion, or to giddy, loose,
profane wives, they drop all their own principles, and become empty of all
religion too at last. You know how it has been with our brothers and sisters,
as I hinted to you before.


Bro. There is no arguing with you, sister, who have had so much experience of
it: but I tell my daughter, that perhaps, she may convert her husband.


Sist. I don't know my niece's case, and so I can say little to (...); but if
this be it, that she refuses a man for his being of no religion, she is in the
right; she is a good religious child herself: my sister educated all your
children very well, and if she marry a gentleman, as the times go now, that
thinks religion below him, and unbecoming, as most of them do, she is undone.


Bro. So she says, and has just your arguments; that made me say, you had been
documenting her.


Sist. No, indeed, brother, not I; but I Will tell you what, I have been a
memento to the family; and don't doubt but my sister might show them the danger
of it, by their aunt's example. I pray God they make take warning. I know she
was not wanting to them in her instruction, and in cautioning them against
every thing that was hurtful; and if she forgot this of cautioning them never
to marry a man of no religion, then she was not that wise women I took her for.


Bro. I know not who has cautioned her, nor who has instructed her; but if I
had not taken it up very warmly, she had ruined herself with her nicety. I Will
tell you how it is.

[Here he tells her the whole story of his daughter and the gentleman, to the
time of his coming from home, he not knowing what had happened since]


Sist. Well, brother, you will allow me to be free with you; I must needs say I
think you are in the wrong.


Bro. Yes, yes: I expected that from you.


Sist. I speak from my experience, brother; I would not force a child's
inclination in such a case for the world.


Bro. What do you mean by inclination. She forces her own inclination: for her
sister says, she loves the gentleman, and has owned it; and yet upon this
simple nicety, she pretended to cross herself, affront the gentleman, and
disoblige her father.


Sist. And will not all that convince you then, that she acts by strength of
judgment, and upon principles of conscience? If it be as you say, it is the
noblest resolution that ever I heard, since the story of St. Catherine.


Bro. Don't tell me of your noble resolutions, and your fine principles; it is
a first principle, an original command of God, that children should obey their
parents.


Sist. Ay, brother, where the parent commands nothing that clashes with the
laws of God; but then, brother, our authority ceases.


Bro. But I am sure this match is for her advantage, and I Will make her have him.


Sist. That Is a severe resolution, and if it be against her conscience, you may
fail in all you resolve upon; besides, it is evident you ought not to resolve
so.


Bro. What! am not I her father? has it not been always the right of fathers to
give their daughters in marriage? nay, to bargain for them, even without their
knowledge: did not Caleb promise his daughter Achsah in marriage to him that
should smite Kirjathsepher, not knowing who it should be, or whether the girl
should like him or no? and are there not many such instances in the scripture?


Sist. All that is true, brother: but I do not think the laws of God or man
give parents that authority now.


Bro. Then you allow my daughters to marry who they please, without putting any
weight upon my consent one way or other; would you give your daughters that
liberty?


Sist. No, brother, you wrong me; but there is a great difference between your
negative authority and your positive authority, in the case of a daughter; as
there is a great difference between your authority in the marriage of a
daughter and the marriage of a son.


Bro. I know my lady sister is a nice civilian: pray explain yourself.


Sist. I can take all your banters patiently, brother, and I will explain
myself, contradict me if you can; I distinguish them thus: if your daughter
desires to marry any person you don't like, I grant that you have power by the
law of God to forbid her positively: the scripture is plain, you have power to
dissolve even a vow or promise of hers to marry, or not to marry at all. But if
your daughter is not willing to marry one you may like, I do not think you have
the same right to command; for you might then command her to marry a person she
may have an abhorrence of, and an aversion to, which could not be; the very
laws of matrimony forbid it; she could not repeat the office of matrimony at
her marriage, viz. to love and honor him: and to promise what she knew at the
same time would be impossible for her to perform, would be to perjure herself
(for the marriage promise is a solemn oath) and to deceive her husband in the
grossest manner; neither of which would be lawful for her to do.


Bro. Well, well, for all your fine harangue, I have made her do it.


Sist. Are they married then, brother?


Bro. No; but they shall, as soon as I come home.


Sist. I wish her well; she is a child that deserves very well, I am sure; she
is a serious, sensible, religious child, and will be an extraordinary woman;
but, if you force her to marry, as you say you will, remember my words,
brother, you will make her miserable, as I have been.


Bro. Yes, yes, so she will; just so miserable, she will have a good husband,
and about 2000l. a year estate; (...) a very miserable condition truly!


Sist. All that is nothing; nor will it lessen the misery at all to a good
woman: I am sure she had better go to service, or marry a good, sober,
religious shoemaker, and I would do so myself, if I had my choice to make
again: therefore I say it again, dear brother, remember my words: if you do it,
you make her miserable, and will repent it.


Bro. Nay, nay, I am not so positive neither; I would not ruin my child, you
may be sure; but I shall see when I come home.


Sist. Pray let me hear how it goes, when you come home.


Bro. So you shall, I promise you.

[After this discourse he staid but two or three days with his sister, and then
went home. When he came home, to be sure the first question he asked of his
eldest daughter was, how Mr. -- did? and if he was in the house.]


Da. In the house? no, Sir, I think not.


Fa. Why you think not? When was he here?


Da. Never, Sir, since the evening after you went away.


Fa. Why, she has not served me so, has she?


Da. Served you, Sir! nay, it is he has served you so, for he said, the last
time he was here, he would wait on her again; but he has never been here since.


Fa. Then she must have used him very ill, I am sure, he had never done so
else; where is she? Call her down.


Da. Sir, my sister is gone to my aunt -- 's at Hampstead.


Fa. Very well; finely managed I assure you! well, I Will manage her, and all of
you, if this be the way I am to be used. [He is in a great passion.]


Da. I believe there is nothing done to use you ill, Sir, or to provoke you in
the least.


Fa. What is she gone out of the house for?


Da. Sir, you are so angry with her, when you talk with her, that you fright
her; I was afraid, last time you talked to her, you would have thrown her into
^^^s; and so we really all advised her to go home with my aunt last week, when
she was in town, and stay there, till we could see what you will please to have
her do.


Fa. Do: she knows what I expected she should do.


Da. As to marrying Mr. --, Sir, that she can never do; and she has talked it
to him so handsomely, that, Sir, I assure you, he said himself he could not
answer her objections; that she had reason for what she did, that he could not
urge it any farther.


Fa. Why, did not you say he promised to come again?


Da. Yes, he did say he would wait on her again; but he is gone into the
country. I hear.


Fa. Well, I Will say no more, till he comes again, then.


Da. Nay, if he had come again, she had resolved she would not have seen him.


Fa. Say you so! I Will be as positive as she; if she will see him no more, she
shall see me no more; I Will let her know so much.


Da. I am sorry things are so; but I am sure, she will never see him, if she
never comes home more.


Fa. I Will try that; I Will go over to Hampstead in the morning, I Will see what I
can do with her.

[Her sister was now in as great a fright as before; she knew the principle her
sister went upon was good, and she was very loath to have her thrust by violence
into a state of life she so abhorred; and this made her take more freedom with
her father than she would have done, and take more care of her sister too, lest
her father should bring her away and marry her by force; so she sent a man and
horse away the same night to Hampstead to her sister, to give her notice of her
father's resolutions to come over in the morning, and giving her an account of
what had passed, advising her to be gone out of his way somewhere else.

As the young lady had acquainted her aunt with the whole story, her aunt was
so affected with it, and so abundantly justified her conduct in it, that, upon
this news, she told her, she would place her at a friend's house a little way
off, and she would undertake to talk to her father, when he came; and if she
could not bring him to any reason, she would send her the next day into the
country to her other aunt, the Widow of Sir James --; so she sent her away in
the mean time in her own coach to Hindon, a village beyond Hampstead, with a
maid and a footman to attend her, till her father was gone.

In the morning (as he said he would) her father came to Hampstead, and, as
soon as he had saluted his sister, he asked for his daughter; his sister told
him, she was gone a little way to visit a friend of hers, but desired him to
sit down.

She saw he was disturbed and uneasy; come, brother, says she, be calm and
moderate, and do not treat your child with so much warmth, let you and me talk
of this matter; my niece has given me a full account of the whole story.]


Bro. Has she so? but she shall give me another account of it, before she and I
have done yet.


Sist. I find, brother, you consult your passions only in all this matter, and
I must tell you, they are base counselors; I wish you would act in cool blood,
and consult your reason a little too.


Bro. So I think I do; and I will not be instructed by my children,


Sist. No, no, brother, it is evident you act too violently; if you consulted
your reason, I am sure it would tell you, that you are all wrong: did ever a
father hurry and terrify his children so with his fury and his passions, that
they are afraid to see him, and ready to swoon when they hear he is coming to
them; and then do you consider what a child this is, that you use thus?


Bro. I use her! she uses me, I think! and abuses me too.


Sist. Be patient, brother, be patient; passion, I tell you, is an ill
counselor; consider the circumstances of your child, and hear what she has to
say.


Bro. What do you mean by hearing? I think she have not heard what I have to say,
when she flies thus from place to place, as if she was a thief.


Sist. That is because you do not act like a Christian, brother; you make
yourself a terror to your children; this dares not see you; those at home dare
not speak to you: why, what do you mean, brother? you did not treat them thus,
when they were little: do you consider what they are now? that they are women
grown, and ought to be treated as such? and deserving women too they are, that
the world sees; and thus expose yourself most wretchedly to treat them thus: I
am very free with you.


Bro. How do I treat them? What, to provide a gentleman of 2000l. a year for
the youngest, a handsome complete young gentleman as any the town can produce,
and every way unexceptionable; nay, she owned herself he was one she could like
very well; and to have her affront him and her father; and to dismiss him of
her own head without consulting me, or staying till I came to town! and this
after five weeks keeping him company, and when she knew the writings were
drawing for her marriage-settlement; is this a decent way of treating a father?
I think you are free with me indeed, to take their parts in it.


Sist. Well, brother, suppose all this to be just as you relate it, yet, if the
young people could not bit it, do we not always, when we make proposals one to
another for our children, make this condition, viz. if the young people can
agree? and do we not put them together to talk with one another, on purpose
that they may be acquainted, and see whether they can like one another, or no?


Bro. Well, and so did I: has he not waited upon her ladyship. I tell you, five
weeks? was that not time enough to know whether she liked him or no?


Sist. Time enough to like or dislike, I grant it; and she tells you plainly,
she does not like, and cannot marry him: what would you have? And, as to
putting him off in your absence, she says, she told you her mind positively,
before you went out of town, and would have given you her reasons for it; but
you treated her-with so little temper, that she had no room to speak; and at
last told her; you would have none of her reasons, but expected she would have
him: how do you answer that, pray?


Bro. I knew what she had to say well enough; however, I gave her till my
return to consider of it; what had she to do to turn him off without my
knowledge, and affront a gentleman of his quality? it is an insult upon her
father, and a scandal to the whole family.


Sist. That Is all answered by what I said before, that she told you positively,
before you went out of town, she would never have him, and indeed had resolved
then to see him no more; for what should a young woman keep a man company for,
when she resolves not to have him? whatever you may think, brother, it would
not have been very handsome on her side; besides, I can assure you, your
daughters are none of those women, that do any thing unbecoming.


Bro. Why, she did keep him company after it, for all that.


Sist. Never but once, that she might dismiss him civilly, and that was merely
a force of your own upon her, because your passion with her obliged her to do
that work herself, which you ought to have done for her.


Bro. Well, she is an undutiful, disrespectful creature to me; I cannot been an
unkind father to her; but I Will let her know herself my own way.


Sist. You Will consider of that, Brother, when your passion is over.


Bro. Not I; I am no more in a passion now, than I was before.


Sist. That may well be indeed; because you were then in such a passion, it
seems, as disordered all your family. Is passion a proper weapon to manage
children with, brother?


Bro. It is impossible for any man to be thus treated by his children, and not
be in a passion; ingratitude is a thing no man can bear with patience.


Sist. But who shall be judge between you, brother? for it is possible you may
be in the wrong as well as your children; and take this with you as a rule in
all such breaches, that generally those that are in the greatest passion, are
most in the wrong.


Bro. No, no; I am sure I am not in the wrong.


Sist. That Is making yourself judge, brother; I think you should let some
judicious, sober, impartial person hear your child, since you will not bear her
yourself.


Bro. What! do you think I Will have arbitrators between me and my children?


Sist. I hope you will act the father with them, then, and not the madman, as
(I must be plain with you) I think you do now.


Bro. Yes, yes, I Will act the father with them, while they act the part of
children with me, but no longer.


Sist. If God should act so with us all, what would become of us? Think of
that, brother, when you make resolutions against your own children; and without
just cause too.


Bro. Why you will not pretend this is without cause?


Sist. Truly, brother, I do not see any cause you have to be offended with your
child; it is true you brought a very fine young gentleman to court her, and I
know you were pleased with the thoughts of such an alliance in your family; his
estate, his person, his character, were all pleasing; but here is the case, your
daughter has been religiously and virtuously educated by my sister.


Bro. By your sister only, I suppose; you might have put in that too.


Sist. Truly, brother, I do not charge you with she crime of being any way
concerned in the religious part of their education.


Bro. Did I obstruct it, or blame her for it? I left them to her; it was none
of my business.


Sist. That is a sad way of discharging your duty to your children, brother, in
their education: but that is none of my business; we will leave that now; they
have been soberly and religiously educated, whoever did it; and they are very
sober, religious young women, especially this youngest above them all; they are
an honor to your family, and to the memory of my sister their mother.


Bro. But none to me, I confess that.


Sist. They will be so to you in the end, if you know how to make yourself an
honor to them.


Bro. Well, I Will make them fear me, if they will not honor me.


Sist. You are hardly in temper enough to talk to: however, let me go on; I
tell you they have been so bred, and they so well answer their education, that
they are an honor to your family; their mother instilled principles of virtue,
piety, and modesty in their minds, while they were very young.


Bro. Well, I know all this.


Sist. Pray be patient, among the rest, this was one, That a religious life was
the only heaven upon earth; these were her very words: that honor, estate,
relation, and all human pleasures, had no relish without it, and neither
pointed to a future felicity, or gave any present, at least that was solid and
valuable; and, on her death bed, she cautioned them never to marry any man that
did not at least profess to own religion, and acknowledge the God that made
him, whatever fortunes or advantages might offer, as to this world.


Bro. She might have found something else to do, when she was just at her end,
I think.


Sist. Brother, let me be free with you: she had two bad examples to set before
them, where a want of a religious husband had made two families very miserable,
though they had every thing else that the world could give; and one was your own
sister.


Bro. And the other herself; I understand you sister.


Sist. Be that, as the sense of your own conduct directs you to think, brother;
that is none of my business; she was my sister, and therefore, I say no more of
that. -- But these are all digressions; the young women, your daughters, thus
instructed, and thus religiously inclined, are grown up; you bring a gentleman
to court one of them, who, with all the advantages his person and circumstances
present, yet wants the main thing which she looks for in a husband, and without
which she declares she will not marry, no, not if a peer of the realm courted
her: pray, what have you to say to such a resolution, that you should oppose it?


Bro. How does she know who is religious, and who not? She may be cheated
soonest, where she expects it most.


Sist. That Is true; and she has the more need to have her father's assistance
to judge with, and assist her in her choice.


Bro. I don't inquire into that part, not I.


Sist. No, I perceive you don't; she has therefore the more reason to look to
herself.


Bro. This gentleman may be as religious as any body for aught she knows, how
can she pretend to know, I say, who is religious?


Sist. It is easier to know who is not religious, than who is; but this
gentleman has been so kind to her, and so honest, as to put it out of all
doubt, it seems; for he has frankly owned to her, that, as to religion, he
never troubled his head about it; that is a road he never traveled; he makes a
jest of it all, as most young gentlemen now adays do; tells her, that his
business is to choose a wife first, and then, perhaps he may choose his religion,
and the like; is this the gentleman you would have your daughter marry?
brother! is this your care for your child! is it for refusing such a man as
this, that you are in a passion with your child! I blush for you, brother! I
entreat you, consider what you are a doing.


Bro. I will never believe one word of all this, I am sure it cannot be true.


Sist. I am satisfied every word of it is true, and you may inform yourself
from your other children, if you think it worth your while.


Bro. I Will believe none of them.


Sist. Not while you are in this rage, I believe you will not; for passion is
as deep as it is blind; but if you will cool your warmth, and let your reason
return to its exercise, and to its just dominion in your soul, then you will
hear, and believe too: for, when we are calm, and our passions laid, it is easy
to judge by the very telling of a story, whether it be true or no; but it is
not my argument whether it be true not.


Bro. No! pray what is to your argument then?


Sist. Why this, whether you are not in the wrong if it is true.


Bro. In the wrong! in what, pray?


Sist. Why, to treat your child with such fury and ungoverned passion as you do!


Bro. Why, how must children be treated when they are insolent and disobedient?


Sist. Even then not with passion and heat, brother: there is no case in the
world than can possibly happen which ought to make a father act in a passion
with his own children.


Bro. No! how must he correct them then, when they do evil things?


Sist. All with calmness and affection, brother; not with rage and fury; that
is not correcting them, that is fighting with them; he must pity when he
punishes, exhort when he corrects; he should have the rod in his hand, and
tears in his eyes; he is to be angry at their offenses, but not with their
persons; the nature of correction implies all this; it is for a child's good
that a parent corrects, not for his own pleasure: he must be a brute that can
take pleasure in whipping a child.

[He sat silent here a good while, and said not a word, his conscience
convincing him that she was in the right; at length he puts it off thus.]


Bro. Well, I am not a correcting my children now, they are past that.


Sist. Yes, yes, brother, you are a correcting now too; there are more ways of
correction than the rod and the cane; when children are grown up, the father's
frowns are a part of correction, his just reproaches are worse than blows; and
passion should be no more concerned in that part, than in the other.


Bro. These are fine-spun notions; but what is all this to the case in hand?


Sist. Why, yes, it is all to the case in hand. I am sorry there is so close an
application to be made of it; for, if we are not to be in a passion with our
children, even when we have just reason to correct them, and see cause to be
displeased with them, sure we must not be in a passion with them, when there is
no cause for displeasure; I say displeasure, for cause of passion with our
children there can never be. All passion is a sin, and to sin, because our
children sin, can never be our duty, (...) any means to show them theirs.


Bro. Does not the scripture say, "Be angry, and (...) not?"


Sist. If you would read that scripture according to (...) genuine
interpretation, it would help to convince you of all I have said: be angry, but
be not in a passion; to be angry may be just, as the occasion for it may make
it necessary; but be not immoderately angry, for that is to sin, and no cause
of anger can make that necessary; and therefore, another text says, "Let all
bitterness and wrath be put away from among you," Ephesians. iv. 13 These are
scriptures, brother, for our conduct even with strangers: but, when we come to
talk of children, is it not ten thousand times more binding? we cannot be in a
passion at any body without sin; but, to be in a passion at our children, that
is all distraction, and an abomination that tends to nothing but mischief.


Bro. You are a healing preacher, sister; I confess, there is some weight in
what you say; but what can I do, when children are thus provoking?


Sist. Do! go home and consider the case maturely, and pray to God to direct
you to your duty: if you did that seriously, you would soon see, that your
child is not to blame, and that you are very much in the wrong to press her in
a thing of this nature.


Bro. Nay, nay, don't say so neither; you may say I am wrong in being angry,
but you cannot say I am not very ill used; that I am positive in.


Sist. Let me hear you say so, when with temper and calmness you have heard the
whole case. If you will not bear to hear it from your daughter herself, hear it
from her sister; and be composed and impartial, and then I shall see, you will
be of another mind.


Bro. I cannot promise you I can have so much patience with them.


Sist. Well, till you can, you cannot say you are doing the duty of a father.

[Here the discourse ended, and he goes home again; the young lady, thinking
she had some encouragement from this discourse to hope that he would be calmer
with her, went home too in the afternoon, and took care to let her father know
it, and see her in the house; however, he took little notice of it for some
time.

The next morning, he called his eldest daughter to him, and began another
discourse with her upon the affair thus:

Come child, says the father, now passion is a little over, and I am disposed,
however ill I am used, to bear it as well as I can; pray give me a true account
of this foolish girl, your sister, and how she has managed herself since I have
been gone.]


Da. What, about Mr. --, Sir?


Fa. Ay, ay; was ever any wench so mad, to affront such a gentleman as he was?
I wish he had pitched upon you my dear.


Da. It Is my mercy, Sir, he did not; and I desire to be thankful for it as long
as I live.


Fa. What do you mean by that, child?


Da. Because I have not been forced to disoblige my father, or to marry against
my mind, as my sister has been; two things I know not which are most terrible
to me so much as to think of.


Fa. Why, you would not have been such a fool to have run into these scruples
too, would you? I have a better opinion of your sense.


Da. I desire your good opinion of me may always continue; and therefore, Sir,
as I am not tried, I hope you will not put a question to me, that it is not so
proper for me to answer.


Fa. Well, well, be easy, child, I have a religious man in my eye for you, I
assure you; we will have no need of such foolish breaches on your account.


Da. It is time enough, Sir, to talk of that.


Fa. Well then, as to your sister: you know, when I left her, I charged her to
entertain him till my return, and you know what resolutions I made if she did
not.


Da. Dear father, you went away in a passion; she had declared positively she
would not have him, and she could not think of entertaining a gentleman, after
she had resolved not to have him; it would not have been handsome: however, I
did over persuade her to see him that night you went away; in hopes, truly,
that she might have had some opportunity to be better satisfied (...) her main
scruple about religion, and that she might have got over it: but, on the
contrary, he made such (...) open declaration of his contempt of all religion,
and his perfect ignorance of any thing about it, that I could not but wonder at
it; sure he must think we were a family of Atheists, or else he did it to
affront her; for, he could never think it could be agreeable to any of us, and
upon this she made the same open declaration to him that she could never think
of joining herself to a man so perfectly void of principles: and so they
parted, as it were by agreement.


Fa. Was it so short between them, then?


Da. No, Sir, there was a great deal more; they did not part with disgust at
all; I am persuaded he loves her entirely, and I am sure she loves him too? I
wish she did not.


Fa. And is she not a double fool then, to thwart thus both her fortune and her
fancy, and all for she knows not what? Had he been a fawning hypocrite, that
could have talked of religion, whether he had any or no, she would have taken
him.


Da. She would not have been easily deceived, Sir, for she lays the whole
stress of her life's welfare upon it; it is a solid principle with her, which
she cannot go from, and which she thinks her fancy and fortune and all things
in this world, ought to submit to.


Fa. Well, but you say it was a long discourse; I don't doubt but you have
heard it all, over and over. Pray give me as full an account of it, child, as
you can.


Da. Yes, Sir.

[Here she relates the whole night's discourse between the gentleman and her
sister, as it is in the foregoing dialogue, except only that about staying for
him till he was grown religious.]


Fa. Well, I think they are both fools; he for being so open, and she for being
so nice; it will be long enough before she has such another offer, I dare say.


Da. I believe that is none of her affliction. Sir; she is only troubled at
disobliging you, which she had no possibility to avoid, without oppressing her
conscience, and making herself miserable.


Fa. I do not see that is any of her concern.


Da. Yes, indeed, Sir, it is; and I am afraid she will grieve herself to death
about.


Fa. If that had been any grief to her, she would not have acted as she has
done.


Da. It is a terrible case, Sir, to have so many powerful arguments press
against conscience; I wonder she has been able to stand her ground against
them, and I am sure it lies very heavy upon her mind.


Fa. What do you mean by arguments pressing upon her conscience?


Da. Why, Sir, to name no more, here is a gentleman, who, by his professed
choice of her, and extraordinary proposals to her, has given undoubted
testimony of his loving her very sincerely. In the next place, a splendid
fortune, giving her a prospect of enjoying all that this world can offer.
Thirdly, A very agreeable person, and one that has, by his engaging conduct,
made some way into her affection; so that it is easy to see, she not only has a
respect for him, but really loves him: and, lastly, The displeasure of her
father, who she never disobeyed before, and to disoblige whom, is effectually
to ruin herself for this world. Are not these, Sir, pressing things?


Fa. And why do not they prevail with her then; and why is she so wilful?


Da. Nothing but her conscience; a sense of her duty to God, and her own future
peace, has upheld her resolution. He has professed himself to be a man of no
religion, and such a one she dares not marry.


Fa. I understand nothing of it, nor do I see any need to pretend conscience in
the case at all; there is nothing of weight in it.


Da. I hope you cannot think but my sister would be very glad it had been
otherwise.


Fa. What need she trouble herself about his religion?


Da. It is my business, Sir, to give you an account of the fact, not to enter
into the argument, it is enough that one daughter has displeased you already.


Fa. Well, well, I see she has come home again; I have nothing to say to her; I
do not look upon her (...) any relation of mine.


Da. If you do not abate something, Sir, and show yourself a little tender of
her, I believe you will soon have but two daughters to provide for; perhaps not
that, for I think it will break all our hearts to see her.

[All that his eldest daughter could say, or that either of his sisters in the
country had said, had yet no effect upon him; but he carried it so reserved to
his daughter, that she appeared in the family as if she had not belonged to
him; and he continued it so long, that it began to be very probable he would
never alter it; which so grieved the poor young lady, that she fell very sick
with it, and it was feared she inclined to a consumption; and being very ill
one day, her sister, who was her fast friend and only comforter, desired she
would go out a little and take the ^ir; so they resolved to go to their aunt's
at Hampstead: the sister's design being to persuade her to stay two or three
days with her aunt, in which short journey several strange like adventures
b^^el them, which will gradually introduce themselves in the following
discourse, which began between them as they were in the coach going to
Hampstead.]

Dear sister, says the eldest sister, what will become of you? will you give
way to this grief so much, as to let it destroy you?


Yo. sist. What can I do, sister, I support it as well as I can, but it sinks
my spirits; it is too heavy for me: I believe it will destroy me, as you say.


Eld. sist. Shake it off then, sister.


Yo. sist. Shake it off! you talk of it as a thing in my power: no, no, sister,
effects rarely cease till their causes are removed.


Eld. sist. Nay, if you would talk philosophy, I am sure philosophy would cure
you.


Yo. sist. Ay, but I am no philosopher, I hope; pray how would that cure me?


Eld. sist. How, what I mean by philosophy, is reason; though women are not
philosophers, they are rational creatures: I think you (...) reason yourself
out of it.


Yo. sist. I do talk reason, when I say grief having seized upon my spirits,
and the cause being unmovable, while that remains so, the effect will be so
too.


Eld. sist. It is not in my power to remove the cause: but yet, I think, if you
would hear reason, you might remove the grief which has the effect.


Yo. sist. And you think reasoning would do it? pray what kind of reasoning is
that?


Eld. sist. Why, to reason but upon the folly, the madness, the in justice,
nay, the sin of immoderate grief.


Yo. sist. You begin warmly; pray let us hear the folly of it.


Eld. sist. Why, several things will convince you of its being the foolishest
thing in the world: Grief is a senseless, useless passion; it is useless,
because it is perfectly incapable of doing any good, and only capable of doing
evil: Grief is indeed no passion, but a quality, a disease of the mind, which
must be cured; it is an evil spirit that must be cast out; besides, it is a
senseless thing; for it is a means to no end; it aims at nothing, seeks
nothing, endeavors nothing, only corrodes the spirits, stagnates the very
senses, and stupifies the soul; and therefore, grief was anciently represented
as a viper, generated in the liver, and preying upon the vitals of the man;
and, when it came within a certain space of the heart, it had two ways to go;
if it ascended, it quitted the hypochondriac vessels, and so possessing the
brain, ended in madness; if it descended, it possessed the blood, and ended in
death.


Yo. sist. Pray end your reasoning; for I do not understand it; go back to the
point proposed, what must I do? You say, shake it off; I ask, what I must do to
shake it off? How can I shake it off?


Eld. sist. Why, divert your mind, think no more of him; turn your thoughts to
things that are in being, this is now a thing over; you should only esteem it
as a history done in ages past.


Yo. sist. You surprise me, sister.


Eld. sist. Surprise you child! in what?


Yo. sist. I am both grieved and astonished that you should have such mean
thoughts of me, as to think my grief is founded upon the parting with Mr --: I
protest to you, I am so far from having the least concern of that kind upon me,
that it is the only comfortable reflection I have in the world, and I give God
thanks from the bottom of my soul, as often as I think of it, that I am
delivered from him.


Eld. sist. I believe yo^ are sensible, that it is better as it is; but I know
it is a great struggle between principle and affection.


Yo. sist. Not at all, sister, I am over all that; it did not hold me half an
hour; when my conscience dictated to me my real danger, the future felicity of
my life, the commands of God, and the dying instructions of my dear mother: do
you think the little stirrings of an infant affection to the man, was able to
struggle with such an army of convictions^ God forbid! no, no; he is to me as
the most contemptible fellow on earth.


Eld. sist. No, no, sister, you never thought him a contemptible fellow, I am
sure; nor is he so in himself.


Yo. sist. No, as a gentleman he is not so; he is a lovely creature, and the
only man in the world I could ever say I had any affection for.


Eld. sist. I know you loved him; nay, and do love him still; your face betrays
you, sister; while your tongue named him, your heart fluttered, and your color
changed; I could see it plain enough.


Yo. sist. How cruel is that now, sister! you prompt the affection to revive,
you would recall the temptation, and assist it in a new attack upon me; I allow,
I loved him, and as a gentleman so every way agreeable, I do so still; but,
shall I yoke myself with one of God's enemies! embrace one that God abhors!
speak no more of it, I entreat you.


Eld. sist. That Is carrying it too far; you cannot say who God abhors.


Yo. sist. I Will put it the other way then, to stop your mouth: Shall I yoke
myself with a practical Atheist! embrace one that rejects God, love him that
hates my Savior!


Eld. sist. Nay, that is to far too: he told you he did not hate religion.


Yo. sist. You cavil, sister, you don't argue; I Will give it you in scripture
words: is he not one of those who say to the Almighty, "Depart from us, we
desire not the knowledge of thy ways?" did he not openly say the same thing? is
not he not only void of the knowledge of religion, but of any desire to have
any knowledge of it?


Eld. sist. Do not take what I said ill, sister, I acknowledge he is indeed
such a one, but you still love him, sister.


Yo. sist. No, sister; as such I abhor him; the thoughts of having been but in
danger of him, make my blood run chill in my veins; shall I marry (...)
profligate! a man of no religion! nay, that has the impudence to own it! no
sister, I rejoice that I am delivered from him, and I never desire to see him
more as long as I live.


Eld. sist. And have you really got as far above it as you say you are?


Yo. sist. Dear sister, have not you and I often lamented the loss of a
religious family, even in our own father? the want of religious conversation,
the want of a father to teach, instruct, inform and explain religious things to
us? Have we not seen the dreadful life our aunt, my father's sister, lived for
want of a religious husband, and the heavenly life my aunt here, our mother's
sister lives, that has a pious, sober, religious husband and family? And can
you think I ever would be a wife to such another as Sir James! besides, could I
bear to be tied to a man that could not pray to God for me, and would not pray
to God with me! God forbid (...) the greatest estate and the finest man in the
world should never incline me to such a thought! I thank God my soul abhors it;
and it is the joy of my heart that the snare is broken.


Eld. sist. Why, what is it then that oppresses your mind thus?


Yo. sist. O sister! you cannot ask me such a question.

[Just as she said those words, came a gentleman on horseback, and galloped by
the coach side, and looking into the coach, pulled off his hat to her; and
having paid his compliments, he rode on. The very moment he looked in, the
eldest sister had dropped her fan in the chariot, and was stooping down to
reach it, and so did not see him; but, when she got up, looking at her sister,
she found her look very pale.]


Eld. sist. What Is the matter, sister (says she, being much frighted) an't you
well?


Yo. sist. No, (...) lend me your bottle.

[(...) bottle to smell to, and she began to (...)]


Eld. sist. What was the matter, sister, was you frightened?


Yo. sist. I was a little disordered.


Eld. sist. What was it? did those men that rode by say any thing to affront
you?


Yo. sist. One of them did: did not you see them?


Eld. sist. No, I heard somebody ride by, but my head was down, looking for my
fan: why, who was it? it was not Mr. -- was it?


Yo. sist. O! yes, it was; let us go back, sister, I entreat you; I am very ill.


Eld. sist. Why, we have a long way back, and we are almost at Hampstead now,
we had better go to my aunt's; we shall be there presently.


Yo. sist. Well, let us then bid him drive apace.


Eld. sist. Alas! there he is a little before us.

[She calls to the coachman to drive apace, and looking out of the coach, she
saw the gentleman riding softly with only two servants, a little way off the
coach.]


Yo. sist. If he come again to the coach side, and offer to speak, I beg of
you, sister, do you answer him, for I will not speak one word to him.


Eld. sist. He is gone now a great way off.

[She looks out of the coach again.]

[They soon came to their aunt's house, and went in, the coach standing at the
door: after they had been there a quarter of an hour, the gentleman, who knew
well enough where they were, came to the house, and sent in their footman to
tell the eldest sister he was there, and desired the favor to speak two or
three words with her.

The servants led him into a parlour, and the young lady came down to him in a
few minutes; he told her, that before he entered into any discourse, he must
assure her of two things: First,

That his overtaking them upon the road was purely accidental, and without the
least design, as she might easily be satisfied by his servants and baggage;
for, he was just setting out on a journey of above an hundred miles, and should
not return under three weeks at least. And, secondly, That he had no design in
calling there, to move any thing to her sister concerning the old affair, but
only to have two or three words with her relating to himself. You know, sister,
says he, for I must still give you that name of respect, upon what terms your
sister and I parted; and, as I promised her I would wait on her again, and did
not, I have been very uneasy lest she might think I showed her some disrespect,
and that I took ill what she said to me; and truly for some time so I did. She
answered coldly: That she believed her sister had not at all been dissatisfied
at (...) not coming again. No, Madam, says he, I believe that, by the manner of
the dismiss she had given me: but however, I would not be rude to her, whatever
she thought fit to say to me. She returned, and with a little more concern than
before, that she hoped, however her sister had thought fit not to go on with
what was proposed, yet that she had not been rude to him. No, Madam, says he,
not rude. Sir, says she, as you had offered nothing to my sister, but what was,
like yourself, very honorable, I am sure she does not so (...) understand
herself as offer any thing unbecoming to you. He returned, with a very obliging
way of speaking, that her sister understood herself perfectly well; and I
assure you, says he, she understood my character better than I did myself. I do
not rightly take your meaning, Sir, said she, my sister could make no
objections to your character: Madam, said he, you know very well upon what
foundation your sister altered her mind, and absolutely refused any farther
treaty with me, viz That I was a profane, wicked, irreligious creature. The
fact was true, I owned it to her, that I neither had any knowledge of religion,
or desired any, for which I was a very great brute.

I think you were very sincere, Sir, said she.

O Madam, said he, I do not say I was a brute for owning it, but I was a brute
for living in that horrid manner, and yet thinking that any sober woman could
entertain a thought of having me.

I am very sorry, said the lady, it happened so.

I am very glad, Madam, that she treated me so, replied he, and shall love her
ten thousand times better for it, if that be possible, than ever I did before.

Says she to him again, Sir, you are pleased to banter a little.

No, sister, says he, I don't banter; and my stopping to speak with you was for
this reason; I do not ask to speak with your sister, but I beg you will tell
her from me very seriously, that she has been a better instructor to me than my
father or mother, or all the tutors and friends I had in my life; she has
convinced me, that I was a monster, a scandalous fellow, that ought to have
been ashamed to pretend to a woman that had the least sense of her education,
or of him that made her. I have reason to give thanks to God every day I live,
that ever I saw her face, and that I had that repulse from her. Tell her I
recommend it to her, to preserve that noble, heavenly resolution, which she
said, she had taken up, viz. never to marry any but a religious man: She is
undone if she break it; and though I am never able to deserve her, yet I will
always think of her as the mother of all that is or ever will be good in me,
and value the memory of her accordingly! He waited no answer, but, with all
possible civility, took his leave, and his horses being at the door, took horse
and went away. She waited on him to the door, and, as he was paying his
respects to her, sitting on his horse, he said to her, Dear madam, I hope you
will give your sister a particular account of what I have said to you. She
answered, she would not fail to do it with all the exactness possible.

As soon as he was gone, she ran up to her sister, but before she could speak
to her, her youngest sister cried out to her, Sister, before you speak, do not
ask me to go down; for I will not see him.]


Eld. sist. Don't be so hasty, he did not desire to see you; he is gone.


Yo. sist. Is he gone?

[She observed, for all she was so warm at first, that when she said he did not
desire to see her, she changed her countenance a little, and more when she said
he was gone.]


Eld. sist. Truly, sister, I don't think it is fit you should see him; I see by
you, if he was to talk one hour with you, you would lose all your resolution.


Yo. sist. Perhaps that is the reason why I resolve not to see him; will not you
allow me to know my own weakness? Is it not enough that I have conquered myself
once?


Eld. sist. Yes, I allow it; and that you act a very prudent part; for I know
you struggle with your own affections; I do not desire to press you, and never
did.


Yo. sist. I can better keep my resolution of not seeing him, that perhaps I
might my resolution of marrying him, if I saw him; though I know I am ruined if
I have him.


Eld. sist. As he is now, I don't know whether you would or no; there is a
strange alteration in him.


Yo. sist. What do you mean by an alteration?


Eld. sist. Why, he is quite another man he talks like a man quite changed; you
would have been surprised at him.


Yo. sist. O! has he a mind to put a trick upon me? No, no, it is too late now.


Eld. sist. What trick do you mean?


Yo. sist. O! he told me he could play the hypocrite most nicely, and was sure
he could deceive me; but it will not do; I am prepared for that.


Eld. sist. I am sure he was no hypocrite before, he was too plain before; and
I do not see why you should say he is a hypocrite now.


Yo. sist. Because he told me he would be so; he acknowledged he had shown more
honesty than discretion before, and was sorry for it; and that if he was to
begin again, he would take just the contrary course.


Eld. sist. Well, I dare say, he is no hypocrite now, any more than he was
before.


Yo. sist. I will not trust him.


Eld. sist. But you may give me leave to tell the substance of his discourse.


Yo. sist. Dear sister, do not be drawn in to lay snares for me; you would not
be willing to have me deceived, why should you assist in it? I desire to hear
nothing of it.


Eld. sist. That Is very disobliging, sister, to me; would I assist any man to
deceive you that have so much applauded your resolution not to be deceived?


Yo. sist. Nay, and assisted me too in withstanding the importunities of my own
affections, or else I believe I had not been able to have supported my sense of
duty; and therefore, I wonder you should forsake me now.


Aunt. Child, do not press your sister to hear any thing; I must confess her
case is wonderful nice; she loves the gentleman, she does not stick to
acknowledge it; she has great scruples on her thoughts about her duty to her
father, and they all sway on the same side: her father frights her with violent
words, and hard usage, and threatenings of turning her out of doors; against
all this she stands single in obedience to her conscience; I think we should
assist her.


Eld. sist. Dear madam, if my sister was not here, I would say a great deal
more; I think she has acted the noblest part in its kind that any young body
ever did; I wish I may be able to preserve such a resolution, if ever it should
be my case; and I am sure I should be far from discouraging her; but what I was
going to tell her was nothing to discourage her; I wish she would let me tell
it you first.


Yo. sist. With all my heart, tell it my aunt; I Will withdraw.

[She goes out of the room, and the eldest sister tells her aunt what the
gentleman had said.]


Aunt. Well, niece, I do think of the two it may be still better not to tell it
your sister, let us lay it up in our hearts; if it be true, and he is a
reformed man, we shall perhaps hear more of him; if not, to persuade her he is
really changed, is but to make her love him more, without knowing whether he
thinks any more of her or no, and that can be of no service to her.


Eld. sist. I submit, Madam, to your directions, but then I break my promise.


Aunt. You may find a time for that too.

[The discourse broke off here, and her aunt finding the young lady very ill
and disturbed, desired her sister to leave her there for a few days, to tell
her father, how ill she was, and that she thought the country might divert her
a little; but that if he desired her to come home, she would return whenever he
pleased. Her eldest sister did so; but all the answer she got was, She might
stay there for ever, if she would, he never desired to be troubled with her any
more.]


DIALOGUE IV.
THE former dialogue having put an end to the courtship between the gentleman
and his mistress for the present, and there being some interval of time between
those things and the remaining part of the story, that interval is filled up
with another little affair in the same family, of still a nicer nature than the
other, though not carried so far.

The father had frequently discoursed these things with his eldest daughter, in
the case of her sister, as is to be seen in the last dialogue, and found, by
her discourse, that she was pretty much of her sister's mind, in the matter of
choosing a husband: but, having a gentleman in his thoughts for her, who had the
character of a very sober, religious person, he made no question but he should
dispose this daughter both to her satisfaction and his own.

It was with a view to this design, that he had jested with her, in one of
their last discourses, that he had a religious husband in store for her, and
that he hoped he should give her no occasion to play the fool, as her sister
had done.

In consequence of this, he took occasion to tell her, one evening after
supper, that what he had spoken in a way of a jest to her, at such a time, was
really no jest in his own thoughts; that he had been spoken to by a certain
gentleman, a considerable merchant in the city, whose eldest son had an
inclination to pay his respects to her; and I assure you, my dear, says the
father, he has the character of a very sober, religious gentleman; and, I am
sure, his father and mother are very good people: indeed the whole family are
noted for a religious family, and I know no family in the whole city that have
a better character.

She made him no answer at all, till he began with her again, Why are you so
silent, child, said her father. Have you nothing to say? Methinks when I look
back on the disorder which the obstinacy of your sister has put us all in, I
would be glad to have every difficulty removed before hand with you, and
therefore I speak early, that if you have any objections I may hear them, and
not be driven afterward to ask people pardon, for ill usage which I have had
no hand in; and I would have you use your freedom now, that I may take nothing
ill from you afterward. And thus he pressed her to speak.

Daughter. I am in no haste, Sir, to marry; the times terrify me; the
education, the manners, the conduct of gentlemen is now so universally loose,
that I think for a young woman to marry, is like a horse rushing into the
battle; I have no courage so much as to think of it.


Father. But there are a great many sober civilized young gentlemen in the
world; it is hard to reproach them all, because many of them are wicked.


Da. Sir, it is those civilized people which I speak of; for even those who now
pass for sober, are not like what it was formerly. When you look narrowly among
them as they are in the gross, ten rakes to one sober man; so, among the sober
men, that are called civilized men, and whose morals will bear any character,
there are ten Atheists to one religious man; and which is worse than all the
rest, if a woman finds a religious man, it is three to one again, whether he
agrees with her in principles; and so she is in danger of being undone, even in
the best.


Fa. I never heard the like! Why, what are my daughters made of? What, is
nothing good enough in the world for you! If you all go on such niceties I must
never more think of marrying any of you.


Da. You had rather, Sir, not think of it, I dare say, than think of seeing us
miserable.


Fa. Why, there is not a man upon earth can please you, as you have stated it.


Da. Providence will either settle me as I would be settled, Sir, or will, I
hope, dispose you to be as well satisfied with my present condition as I am.


Fa. Why, it seems, you are gone mad, farther than your distracted sister.


Da. I hope, Sir, I am in my senses, and shall be kept so.


Fa. Why, it seems a religious husband will not please; What is it you would have?


Da. I desire, Sir, to live as I am, at least till something offers, which is
fit for me to accept.


Fat. What do you call fit, child? What can be fit in your way of talking?


Da. When my judgment and conscience are satisfied, Sir, I believe my fancy
will not be very troublesome to you. If I must marry, Sir, I would have it be
so, as I may expect God's blessing and my father's.


Fa. I tell you nothing in the nation will satisfy your judgment and
conscience, as you call it, if the notion you have of things be true.


Da. Then I am very well satisfied to remain as I am.


Fa. That Is ungrateful to your father's care for you.


Da. I am sure, Sir, I would not be ungrateful, nor undutiful to you; but I
know not what you would have me do.


Fa. I would have you see this gentleman that I have proposed to you.


Da. I shall submit to any thing you command me, Sir, that is not a breach of
my duty God; I hope you will desire nothing of me, that I cannot do with a
quiet mind.


Fa. Well, you may see him; I hope that can be no harm.


Da. If you will please to let me know then, how far you allow me to be in my
own disposal, and how far not; and whether I have the liberty to refuse him, if
I do not like him.


Fa. Yes, if you resolve to use your judgment, and not refuse him before you
see him, but give good reasons for what you do.


Da. I think, Sir, I ought to have a negative voice, without being obliged to
dispute my reasons with my father; for that is just bringing me into the same
condition with my sister. Her reasons are good to her, but not to you, Sir; and
so you take her conscience of duty to God, to be a contempt of her duty to you:
I would not be run into the same snare.


Fa. You are mighty positive in your demanding a negative voice against your
father.


Da. But I had better know my case before hand, that I may not insist upon more
than is my right, and offend you, Sir, in seeming to encroach upon your
government.


Fa. Let me know then what your demand is.


Da. Sir, I think, when you propose marrying to me, the discourse of portion
and settlement is in your province, and I have nothing to do with it, but I
think I ought not to be forced to like or dislike, receive or refuse the
person, and that absolutely.


Fa. What, without showing any reason?


Da. No; I ought, without doubt, to tell my father my objections, and to give a
due force to all the arguments my father may use to satisfy my doubts, but I
ought not to be forced to like, even though I could not maintain my reasons.


Fa. And you capitulate with me for this liberty, before you (...) gentleman do
you?


Da. No, Sir, I do not capitulate with you, but I hope you will, of your own
accord, grant me the liberty which the nature of the thing calls for; that if I
must see the gentleman, I may have the freedom to take or refuse; if not, there
is no need to see him; I may be given by contract, and marry by proxy, as the
great people (souls, I should say) do, as well as by treaty.


Fa. Well, well, I an't a going to give you, nor to sell you; if you will not have
him, you may let him alone.


Da. That Is all I desire, Sir; with this addition only, viz. that my father
will not be displeased or disobliged, whether I take or leaves.


Fa. I cannot promise you that, indeed daughter.


Da. Then I beg of you, Sir, I may never see him at all.


Fa. Very well, then it shall be so, you shall never see him at all (...) find
you are all alike; you may look out for yourselves, ^f you will. [He rises up
in a passion, and goes away, (...) comes in again presently.] But, it may be, I
may not like your choosing any more than you like mine. [Her father returns.]


Fa. I wonder what it is you would have me do in such a case as this: here is a
match proposed to your sister; how she has treated me, you know. Now I have a
proposal to you, where the grand objection is removed: what can you desire of a
father?


Da. Sir, I desire only, that if you think fit to discourse such things as
these with us, we might be able to speak for ourselves without discomposing
you; we have not a mother to stand between, and make our objections, and to
hear our reasons.


Fa. Well, that is true; [she weeps and that moves him, especially speaking of
her mother] it is my loss as well as yours; come, let me hear, however, if you
have any objection against the person I propose now, tell it me? I Will endeavor
not to be warm.


Da. I can have no objection to a man I never saw, or heard of; but I think we
should have a liberty to refuse, Sir, when we come to discourse of such a thing
with the person; and that is all I ask, and that we may not disoblige you, if
we use that liberty: and without that liberty, I desire you will be pleased
never to make any proposal at all to me; and if ever I make one myself, I will
be content to be denied.


Fa. You are very positive.


Da. It seems to be so reasonable, Sir, that I cannot think any children can
ask less, or any father think it is too hard; it is the children that are to
feel the consequences of the mistake, if there be any.


Fa. Well that is true: come then if you will talk with this gentleman, you
shall have your liberty to take him, or leave him; have you any objection to
make beforehand? if you have, let me know it; that will prevent all occasions
of disgust.


Da. Will you please to hear me with patience, Sir?


Fa. Yes, I will, if I can.


Da. You have heard so much said by me, Sir, in my sister's behalf, that you
must necessarily believe I am of the same opinion; that is to say, that I would
not marry a man that made no profession of religion upon any account
whatsoever, were his estate, his person, his sobriety, his qualifications ever
so inviting. I need not give reasons for this, Sir: what I have said, what my
sister and my aunts have said on that account, is enough; but it is my
misfortune, Sir, to have another scruple beyond all this, and which the case of
my sister gave no occasion to mention.


Fa. Very well; then you intend to be more troublesome than your sister, I find.


Da. I hope not, Sir, because I give my scruples in beforehand; and if any
thing offers to you abroad, that will shock the foundation I lay down, I hope
you will not hearken to it on any account, and then you will have no occasion to
say I am troublesome.


Fa. Well, let us hear it, however.


Da. Why, Sir, as I will never marry any man, who does not make some profession
of religion, however rich or agreeable, handsome or sober he is; so, however
serious or religious he is, I will never marry any man, whose principles,
opinion, and way of worship shall not agree with my own.


Fa. And is that your resolution?


Da. I hope it is well grounded, Sir, and that you will not disapprove my
reasons for it when you please to hear them calmly, and to bear with my mean
way of arguing them.


Fa. I think I was much in the right to say you would be more troublesome than
your sister: however, you do your sister some kindness in it, for this
extravagant humor makes here is look a thousand times more reasonable than it
did before.


Da. That Is what I foresaw, Sir, viz. that I shall remove your displeasure from
my sister, and bring it down upon myself; but I cannot help it.


Fa. Well, I shall relieve myself against all your humors; I Will talk no more
of settling any of you, till your curiosity is abated.

[Though her father seemed to give it over thus in discourse with his daughter,
yet he had gone farther with the gentleman that had made the proposal, than he
had sold her; and had invited the father and mother to dinner the next day,
with an intent that they should see and be acquainted with his daughters;
supposing at the same time, that they would bring the young gentleman with them.

They came to dinner accordingly; but, as the father knew well enough that the
education of their son was in a different way from that of his daughter, and
that she had declared herself so positively in that part, he had desired them
privately not to bring their son to dinner: when they were come, and before his
daughter was called in, the father told them how the case stood between him and
his eldest daughter, and that he saw no remedy but this, that, as he had not
told her any thing of the design of his invitation, or that they were the
family he had designed her a husband out of; so, if they thought fit to turn
their eyes to his second daughter, he was in hopes she would have more with
than to run into the ridiculous scruples of the eldest. They presently agreed,
that it was not at all reasonable to force the inclination of the young lady;
that they say no room to bring the opinions in religion together, in their
children, their opinions at that time differing extremely, and their son being
as positive, they believed, as his daughter: so they said with all their
hearts, if their son could fancy the second daughter as well, it should be the
same thing to them: however, the mother of the young gentleman asked him, if he
would give her leave to enter into discourse with his daughter upon the subject
of her scruples? He told her, with all his heart, for he would be glad to have
her change her mind; because, as on the one hand, he should be very well
satisfied to bring them together, so he really thought her notions were empty
and simple, and should be glad she was made wiser; but then, Madam, says he,
you must not discover the real design, for, if you do, she will be backward to
speak freely. She agreed to that, and so this private discourse ended; and his
daughters being introduced, and the usual ceremonies passed, they went to
dinner, the young ladies knowing nothing of the design of their being invited.

The father and mother were charmed at the conduct: of the young woman, her
person and manner, the modesty of their behavior, and above all the politeness
and pertinence of their discourse; and something happening to be said about
marrying, the father falls to rallying his daughters upon their nicety in that
point, that nothing would serve them but religious men. There is my daughter
--, says he, (pointing to his youngest) I think nothing will do for her but a
parson; she refused a gentleman of 2000l. a year the other day, because he was
not religious enough for her.

No, Madam, says his daughter, my father means, because he had no religion at
all; hardly so much as a coach horse; for a coach-horse often knows the way to
the church-door.

That alters the case quite, said Madam: why, Sir, says she, you would not have
married your daughter to a brute! a man without religion is a worse brute than
a horse! for the horse obeys the dictates of nature, but an Atheist acts
against reason, nature and common sense. I would not marry a child of mine to a
man of no religion, if he had ten thousand pounds a year.

Well, says he, there is my daughter -- (pointing to his eldest) she goes
farther; she is not satisfied with a religious husband, but she must have one
of her own opinion in religion, that goes to the church where she goes to
church, and worships just as the worships: I don't think she will ever be
pleased, while she lives.

Madam, says the eldest, I expected my father would be upon my bones next; my
father talks of my opinion, as if I was something that nobody else is; as if I
was one of the new prophets, or of some strange, singular opinion, something
monstrous in religion: all I say is, that as I profess nothing but what I think
is right, and wh^^ thousands agree with me in, if ever I do marry, as I suppose
I never shall, why should I not choose to have my husband and I of the same
opinion, that we may serve God together?

Madam, says the old lady, your father does but jest with you; he can never
oppose so reasonable a thing as that; I must confess, I think it is much to be
desired; I will not say but there is a possibility of doing well without it; it
may not be a sin; but I own, it is better, if it can be so.

I am sure it would be a sin in me, says the daughter, because it would be
against my conscience.

Nay, Madam, says the other, that is true; and you are very much in the right to
insist upon it, if it be so; and no doubt, your father will be far from
offering any thing that may seem to be a violence upon your conscience.

I offer violence, Madam! says the father, nay, they are above that; they take
upon them to say, I will, and I will not, to their father; I assure you they are
past my offering violence to them.

In nothing, Madam, but this crabbed business of marrying, says the daughter,
and there indeed we do take some liberty with my father.

Well, Sir, says the old lady, you must allow liberty there; marriage is a case
for life, and must be well considered; and the young ladies are to bear it,
fall it how it will, you know, for better or worse: they had need be allowed
some liberty there.

Besides, Madam, says the youngest, all the liberty we take is in negatives
only; we don't offer to take any body that my father don't like, only we don't
care to take such as we don't like ourselves.

The old gentleman then put in: Upon my word, Sir, says he, I think your
daughters are in the right; for certainly, though we may refuse to let them
marry where they may choose, yet I cannot think we should deny them the liberty
to refuse what we may offer; or else we may as well give them in marriage, as
was done in old days, and never let them see one another.

The eldest sister turned her head toward her father as this, but said nothing.

I understand you, Betty, says her father; but she said nothing still; and the
old lady, finding the discourse pinched a little hard, began some other talk,
and soon after, the men withdrawing, left the ladies together.

When the men were gone; hark ye, says the (...) gentlewoman, I was willing to
break off the discourse just now, because I was afraid it was offensive to your
father; but pray let me talk a little more to you, Madam: I fully approve the
resolution of your youngest sister, but methinks yours is a little
uncharitable, speaking to the eldest.


Eld. sist. I was very much obliged to you, Madam, for breaking off the
discourse; for my father is passionate, and is sometimes so out of temper with
us upon these points, that we are gre^^ly grieved at it, and particularly that
he will not give us leave to speak.


Yo. sist. I am sure it has almost broke my heart.


Old Lady. I am sorry for it; for indeed I think yours is nothing but what
every woman that is a Christian ought to think herself obliged to: what
dreadful doings must there be, when a religious woman marries a wretch that is
a despiser of God! a Christian to be linked to an infidel! one that serves God
to be joined to one of God's enemies! and then to love such a man too! the very
thought is enough to fill one with confusion! take it which way you will, it is
equally dismal. First, to be married to him, and not love him, that is a hell
upon earth! and to love him! one that we must reflect on as a limb of the
devil! a son of perdition! to embrace one that God abhors! to have the
affections bound to one that God hates! what contradictions are these! what
horror must fill the soul while they live! and what dreadful thoughts must
crowd into one's mind, if such a man should come to die before us! dear young
lady, says she, you are happy that you could defend yourself against such a
proposal.


Eld. sist. But, Madam, your charge upon me is a little hard; I think the
arguments are as strong almost on my part as my sister's, though they are of
another nature.


Old Lady. No, I cannot say so, Madam; it is true, there is something to be said
in your case, but nothing so essential as in the other; and, as I said,
methinks it looks as if you wanted charity: I hope, child, you do not think all
opinions but your own are fatal to be professed?


Eld. sist. No, Madam, not at all: I hope there are good people of all
persuasions; but if I did not think my own best, how could I answer the
cleaving to it myself?


Old Lady. So far you are right.


Eld. sist. Then, Madam, though in charity I ought to allow others to be good
Christians, and that I should, and do keep up a friendly correspondence with
many who dissent from my judgment in religious matters, yet there is a great
deal of difference between charity to them, and union with them.


Old Lady. You have studied the point thoroughly, I perceive; I understand you
perfectly; pray go on.


Eld sist. Madam, in discourse with my father, I could never use any freedom,
or obtain leave to propose my scruples, with the reasons of them; but I hope
you will allow me liberty.


Old Lady. With all my heart, for I am glad to enter into so curious a debate
with you.


Eld sist. Religion, Madam, without doors is one thing, religion within doors
is another. In the town, among my acquaintance, and in the neighborhood, a due
charity to every one is what I think the Christian principle calls for, and I
converse freely with good people of every opinion, extending charity to all in
lowliness of mind, esteeming every one better than myself: but, within doors,
the case alters; family religion is a sociable thing, and God should be
worshipped there with one heart, and with one voice; there can be no separation
there, without a dreadful breach both of charity and duty.


Old Lady. You start a new thing to me, indeed, and it is somewhat surprising.


Eld. sist. It may be true, Madam, that there may be diverse opinions in the
nation, without breach of charity; but I believe it is impossible it should be
so in a family, without breach of affection: what union, what opene^^ of
desires, what perfect agreement (without which, a man and wife can never be
said to discharge the duty of their relation) can there be where there is a
diversity of worship, a clashing of opinions, and an opposition of principles?


Old Lady. But child, you carry it too high; if they differ in principles,
indeed, there is something to be said; but we are talking of a difference in
opinion only, where the fundamentals may be the same.


Eld. sist. Madam, I recall the word principles then, and join with you to
confine it to opinion only; but it is the same thing in its proportion; the
union can never be perfect, while the differing sentiments of things leave room
for disputes between them: for example, Madam, the differing forms of worship;
one will pray by a book only, the other without a book wholly; this is as light
a difference as can be spoken of. But how shall God be worshipped with the
united voice and affections of the whole family even in this case? what helps
will two such relations be to one another, in praying to God either by
themselves, or with their families?


Old Lady. Upon my word, you sensibly affect me now with it.


Eld. sist. It is not enough, Madam, that they being sincerely religious apart,
shall worship God in their own separate way, though better so than not at all;
but the zeal, the affection, the uniting their hearts in their worship, their
praying with and for one another; this alas! is all lost. Then, say it be in
the public worship, there they make a woeful separation, God, that has made
them one, is served by them as two; God has joined them together, and they part
asunder in their serving him; God has made them one: how does this consist,
Madam?


Old Lady. I see you are full it.


Eld. sist. In their public worship, sacraments, etc. neither one heart or one
voice goes with their worship; though they communicate in the same ordinance,
they set up two altars; one worships here, and one there: and though their
faces are both set heaven-wards, perhaps they turn back to back as soon as they
go out of their doors to the public worship of God.


Old Lady. You are very clear in it, indeed, Madam.


Eld. sist. This is not all, Madam, there are several family circumstances
besides these, which make union of opinion absolutely necessary: as first,
family worship is a thing, without which families, however privately and
separately devout, are coupled with heathens, Jer. x. 25. Pour out thy wrath
upon the heathen, and upon the families which call not upon thy name: whatever
there may be in public worship, there should always be an exact harmony in
private; and how can this be, where either of them dissents from the manner? If
there is a discord in the manner, there can be no concord in the performance,
no union in the affections; in a word, their prayers will be hindered; and who
would be thus unequally yoked?


Old Lady. I expected you would name that scripture, though it was certain that
was spoken principally to those who married with unbelievers, which is a
different case.


Eld. Sist. Well, Madam, we come to another case; suppose the husband and wife
we are speaking of have children, what foundation of eternal schism is there in
the family! some of the children adhere to the father, some to the mother; some
worship in this mount, and some no where but at Jerusalem; some go with the
father, some with the mother; some kneel down with the father, some with the
mother; till, as they grow up, they really learn not to kneel down at all:
family education, united instruction, caution, example, they are all dreadfully
mangled and divided, till in the end they come to nothing; and the children
grow out of government, past instruction, and all lost. These, Madam, are some
of the reasons I would have given my father (if he would have had patience with
me) why, in his late proposal he had to make, I desired that I night be at
liberty to choose by my own principles, and not at random, as too many do


Old Lad. But, Madam, do you not allow, that if both parties are sincerely
pious and religious, that they may make allowances to one another, and make
conscience of hindering and palling back one another in the duties of religion?


Eld. sist. Truly, Madam, as to that, two things offer to my view, for I have
often considered them both: First, the more sincere in religion either of them
is, the more fixed in principle and opinion its likely they will be, and the
farther from making abatements to one another; and especially, secondly, in the
great article of education, and instructing their children; for what tender
mother, that having fixed her opinion, as she thinks, in the best manner and
way, could bear not to have their children brought up in the same sentiments of
religion, which she thinks most agreeable to the revealed will of God? And the
more conscientious and religious she was, the more steadily she would cleave to
it as her duty; and the like of the man: so that here would be a constant
heart-burning and uneasiness.


Old Lady. Truly, Madam, I think your reasons good, and you guard them so well
with self evident conclusions, that I cannot think your father can desire you
to break through them: if you think it will be for your service, I Will mention
it again to him.


Eld. sist. If you do, Madam, I desire to be absent; he will not hear it from
me.


Old Lady. Let me alone for that.

[When the old lady had done this conversation, she began to call for her
husband and the father; so the young ladies withdrew: when she was come to
them, she applied herself to the father and the husband in a few words.]


Wife. Upon my word, says she to her husband, this young lady has more religion
in her than all of us, and a clearer sight into the particular parts of a
religious life, than any that ever I met with before.


Fa. Why, says the father, have you had a battle with my Betty?


Wife. No, upon my word, we have had no battles; I have not been able to open
my mouth against one word she says; she is able to run down a whole society of
doctors in these points; I am a perfect convert to all she says, and though I
wish from my soul my son had such a wife, yet I would not for the world they
should come together, at the price of putting the least violence upon such
noble principles, so solidly established, and so firmly adhered to; and I defy
all mankind to confute her.


Hus. You prompt my curiosity: I wish you could tell us a little of the story.


Wife. A little! I can easily repeat it to you; it is impossible I should
forget it: but it may be you, Sir, turning to the father, may not care to hear
it.


Fa. Yes, yes; I would very willingly hear it, though I did not care to hear it
from her.


Wife. Well then -- [Here she gives them a full account of all the discourse
above]


Hus. I never heard any thing more solid, and intimating a thorough sense of
religion in my life; I wish my son and she were both of the same opinion then;
for a woman of such principles can never be fatally mistaken in opinion.


Fa. I confess I would never give her an opportunity to explain herself thus
with me; but I assure you I am so moved with it, that I never will offer to
impose upon her again.


Wife. Then, you see, Sir, it was an error to be so angry with your child, as
not to hear her; I fear you have done (...) with both of them.


Fa. Truly I have; but I say now I have been wrong to them both; and indeed
more to my youngest daughter than to my eldest: for, she refused the gentleman
because he really had no religion at all, and yet I was in a violent passion
with her.


Wife. Nay, that was hard indeed: for, if there be all this to be said, why a
woman should not marry a man of a different opinion in religion, there must be
much more to be said why she should not marry one that despises religion and
this indeed I said to your youngest daughter, applauding her conduct, though I
did not know that you had used her hardly on that account.


Fa. I would be obliged to you, Madam, to let me know what discourse you had
with her too, for that affair is still depending.


Wife. With all my heart; my discourse was not long --

[She repeats what she had said to the youngest daughter.]


Fa. Indeed, Madam, you are right; the thing is so indeed; but he was a pretty
gentleman, and had a very noble estate, and I was mightily pleased with the
thoughts of the match, and that made me the more passionate with the child than
I should otherwise have been.


Wife. But how came she to know he was such a one?


Fa. Truly, his own folly too; he told her so directly, in so many words; owned
he had not troubled his head about religion, and did not intend it; made a
banter and jest of religion in general: told her, it was a road he had never
traveled, and that he intended to choose a wife first, and then perhaps he
might choose his religion.


Wife. Nay, then either he had no conduct or no affection for her.


Fa. As to the last; he not only professed a great deal of affection, but chose
her out from the rest; and you know she is the youngest (for I designed my
eldest for him) and made her the particular mistress of his choice; and I
verily believe loved her very well; nay, the girl cannot deny but she had a
kindness for him; and indeed he is a most lovely gentleman.


Wife. She has acted a noble part indeed, and the more affection she really had
for him, the more of a Christian she has shown in her conduct.


Fa. So you would say indeed, if you knew all her conduct, and knew the person
too.


Wife. If it be not improper, I should be glad to know the person.


Fa. Madam, I should be loath to name him to his prejudice; and, if you think it
will be so, I hope you will let it go no farther.


Wife. I promise it shall never go out of my mouth without your leave.


Fa. Why, it is young Mr. --, a gentleman I believe you have heard of.


Wife. Heard of him! we know him intimately well: but I am surprised at it,
upon an account that I believe will surprise you too.


Fa. What can that be?


Wife. Why it is true, that gentleman had no religion: poor gentleman! he came
of a most unhappy stock; there never was any religion in the family; but yet
this may be said of him, he was a modest, sober, well-behaved gentleman; you
never heard an ill word come out of his mouth, (...) ^ound any indecent action
in his behavior.


Fa. That Is true, and I thought that a great matter, as the youth go now.


Wife. But I can tell you more news than that of him; he is become the most
pious, serious, religious gentleman in all the country.


Fa. You surprise me indeed, now.


Wife. I assure you, it is no copy of his countenance; it is known, and he is
valued and honored for it by all the gentlemen round him, and he behaves
himself with so much humility, and so much serious gravity, that, in short, it
is the wonder and surprise of all that know him.


Fa. Pray, how long has this alteration appeared in him?


Wife. About three months, I believe.


Fa. I wish you had told my daughter this.


Wife. It was impossible I should have brought such a thing in, that knew
nothing of the circumstance.


Fa. Nay, if you had, she would not have believed a word of it; on the
contrary, she would have taken it all for a trick of mine, and that I had
invited you hither on purpose to bring in such a story.


Wife. Let me alone for that again another time. I hope you will give the young
ladies leave to return this visit. I design to invite them to come and see me.

[Upon this footing the discourse ended for a time; and all thoughts of the
match for the eldest daughter with the son of that gentlewoman being laid aside
for the present, the old lady, at parting, in a friendly manner, invited the
young ladies to her house, and they promised to come, and the father said aloud
he would come and bring them.

It was not long before the young ladies put their father in mind of his
appointment; for, being mightily pleased with the old gentlewoman, they had a
great mind to pay the visit, that the acquaintance might be settled. Their
father appointed the next day, but being interrupted just at the time he
intended to go, he caused them to go without him, and send the coach back for
him to come after them when his business was done.

While they were here, the good old gentlewoman, who entertained them with
great civility, diverted the^ with every thing she could think of; and, after
abundance of other usual chat, they fell to talking the old stories over again
about religious husbands, and the necessity there was to have both husband and
wife join their endeavors for propagating family-religon. The youngest
daughter repeated her mother's maxim; Madam, says she, it was a rule my mother
gave us at her death, and which I see so much weight in, that I desire to make
it the foundation upon which I would build all my prospects of happiness, viz.
That a religious life is the only heaven upon earth. I have added some other
things to it since, which my own observation directs me to, but which I believe
you will allow to be in their degree just, such as these, viz. That a religious
family is one of the greatest comforts of a religious life: that where husband
and wife are not mutually, at least, if not equally religious, there can never
be truly a religious family: that therefore, for a religiously inclined woman
to marry an irreligious husband, is to entail persecution upon herself as long
as she lives. The old lady replied, I find, Madam, as young as you are, you
have studied this point very well. Indeed, Madam, said the eldest sister, my
sister has had occasion for it; for the has been hard put to it, what with the
offers of an extraordinary match, my father's violent passion, and (among
ourselves, Madam,) not a little the importunity of her own affections, that,
for my part, I must confess I wonder she has been able to hand her ground. They
are three powerful arguments, I acknowledge, said the old lady: pray, Madam, as
far as it may be proper, let me know something of the matter; you need not
mention persons; I am not inquisitive on that score, I assure you. If my sister
gives me leave, Madam, says the eldest; the youngest said she left her at
liberty. Why then, Madam, says she, my father --. [Here she gives her an
abridgement of the whole story, but without the most extravagant part of her
father's passion, that it might not reflect upon him.]

Well, Madam, says she, I will not say all my thoughts on this surprising
story, because your sister is here; for it is a rule with me, never to praise
any one to their face, or reproach any behind their backs; but it is an
extraordinary story indeed; and, turning to the youngest sister, she said to
her very seriously, I pray God fortify you, child, in such resolutions, and
grant that you may have the true end of them fully answered; that, if ever you
do marry, it may be to a man as uncommonly serious, pious, and sincere, as you
have been inimitably resolute in refusing such great offers, for the want of
it. Then, turning to her eldest sister, says she, this surprising story puts me
in mind of another story, which a very good man, an old acquaintance of ours,
told me the other day, and which, they say, has just now happened to a young
gentleman that he knows in the country; it is a pretty way off too, but he told
us his name; I believe my husband knows the name, and I tell you the story for
your sister's encouragement: who knows, but she may be a means, by such
unexampled conduct, as this of hers is, to bring the gentleman she has had upon
her hands to some sense of his condition?

There is a gentleman in that country, of a very good family, and of a very
great estate, but young, and, I think he said a bachelor; he is not above six
and twenty, and has between two and three thousand a year; it seems he is a
most accomplished, well-bred man, a handsome charming person: and every thing
that could be said of a man, to set him out, he said of him: he had, indeed,
been of a family, he said, that had been iminently wicked, so that the very
name of religion had scarce been heard of among them for some ages; and young
Master, said my friend, could not be said well to be worse than his father or
grandfather who went before him.

However, it happened it seems, that he went to London, I think, says she, my
friend said it was last winter, and when he came back, he was strangely
melancholy and dejected, and quite altered in his conversation; instead of
riding abroad and visiting the gentlemen, and receiving visits from them, he
shunned all company, walked abo^^ his gardens and woods all alone till very
late in the night, and all his servants wondered what ailed hi^; that one night
they were in a great fright for him, knowing he was out on foot, and alone;
when, about ten o'clock at night, he came in with a poor, honest country fellow
with him, that lived almost three miles off; that the next day he took that
poor man home to his house, and sent for his wife and children, who all lived
before in a poor cottage on the waste, and provided for them; gave the poor man
a farm rent free for twelve years, which always went for 22 l. a year, with a
good house; lent him a stock for manuring it too, and made him bailiff of the
manor, and, in short, made a man of him. Whereupon every body said, that the
esquire had been in some great danger or other, and the poor man had saved his
life; and, when somebody happened to say as much to him one day, he answered,
yes, that poor man had done more than saved his life, for he had saved his soul.

It seems this poor laboring wretch, though miserable to the last degree as to
the world, was yet known to be a most religious, serious Christian, and a very
modest, humble, but knowing and sensible man, and he had been discoursing good
things with him, and, from that time forward, the poor man was scarce ever from
him; that it was observed by some of the servants, that the next morning after
the poor man came home with him he came again, and brought a Bible with him,
which was left in the young gentleman's chamber, and that this poor man and he
were often locked up an hour or two together, almost every day; that next
market day the poor man went to the next market town, upon some business for
the gentleman, and brought home a new Bible, and several other religious books,
and that his master was continually reading them; in short, our friend tells
us, said she, that he is become the most sober, religious Christian, that, for
a man of his fortune, and quality, has ever been heard of, and that he is
admired by all the country for it.

I tell you this story, Madam, turning to the youngest sister, to confirm you
in your resolution, and to let you see, that there are some religious gentlemen
in the world still, and that the gentlemen may be ashamed, when they pretend to
say, religion is below their quality; for my friend says, that this gentleman
is, with his religion, also the humblest, sweetest tempered creature in the
world, ready to do good offices to the poorest in the country, and yet
mannerly, and agreeably pleasant with the greatest; and his family is a little
pattern of virtue to all round them.

Ay, Madam, says the eldest, it is such a gentleman my sister would have. But,
says her sister, where are they to be found? I never expect it. Pray, Madam,
says the eldest sister, in what part of the world does this black swan, this
unheard of, non-such thing of a gentleman live? I really forget the place,
Madam, says the old lady, but it is somewhere in Hampshire.

She perceived, at that word, both the young ladies change a little, and looked
at one another; so she turned her discourse off to some other subject, and left
them in the dark, as to the name of the gentleman; for she perceived they both
guessed at it, or suspected it.

When they had taken their leave, and the two sisters were in the coach coming
home, says the elder sister to the other, did you observe Mrs. B -- 's story of
the gentleman in Hampshire? Yes, said the other, I did; and I believe you fancy
its the same person we know of. It is very true, says the eldest, I did think
so, all the while she was telling the story; and I expected she would name him,
but I was loath to ask her his name. I am glad you didn't, says the other, for I
know no good it can be to me to hear it, one way or other, now he is gone. Why,
would not you be glad to know that he was really such a one as she has
described? says the eldest. Yes, truly, for his own sake I should, said the
sister; but it is nothing to me now; I had rather never have him mentioned at
all to me, upon any occasion whatever.

After they were come home, their father, who had been engaged all the while,
had sent the coach back for them, with an excuse for his not coming, was very
inquisitive to know of them, what discourse they had had; and, his eldest
daughter telling him one story and another story, he would cry, Well, was that
all? For he expected she had broke the thing to them. No, says the eldest, she
told us a strange story in Hampshire; and with that repeated the passage word
for word. Her father took no notice of it at that time, but two or three days
after, as they were at supper, he says to his eldest daughter, Betty, who do
you think the gentleman in Hampshire is, that Mrs. B -- told you the story of?
I cannot tell, says she: pray who was it? even as I thought when you told me of
it, said the father, for I had heard something of it before; it is nobody else
but Mr. --, the same your wise sister there thought fit to treat with so much
ill manners.

Nay, Sir, says the eldest, do not say my sister treated him with ill manners;
for he owns the contrary to that himself: but how are you sure of it, Sir, that
it is he? Why, I have had the story, says her father, from her husband, who is
greatly affected at it, and he named his name to me, not knowing in the least
that I know any thing of him.

Truly, said the eldest, I am very glad of it for his sake; but it does not
signify a farthing to her now; for, if he was to come to her again tomorrow,
with all his sobriety and reformation about him, she would have nothing to say
to him.

Why so, child, says the father, did you not own she loved him? Yes, says the
daughter, before the came to know what a creature he was. Well then, says the
father, if that be removed, and he is become another man, she will love him
again; and she had no other objection against him, had she? No, Sir, says the
daughter, she had no other objection; but she will never believe him, let his
pretenses to religion be what they will. Why so? says the father. Because, Sir,
he told her, that if he had known her mind, he would have pretended to a world
of reformation and religion, and that he did not doubt but he could be
hypocrite enough to cheat her.

Nay, if he has been so foolish, I know not what to say to it, says the father:
let it rest as it is; if she will not have him, whether he be religious or not
religious, then the objection of his not being religious, was a sham and a
cloak, and she stands out in mere obstinacy against her own interest, purely to
affront her father; let her go on, till she comes to be convinced by her own
misfortune; I Will meddle no more about it.

The eldest sister failed not to relate this story very particularly to her
sister; who, very gravely musing on the particular, answered her sister thus,
after several other sober and religious expressions:

Dear sister, says she, this thing has been affliction enough to me; but my
father's conduct has always made it double; because he cannot talk of it
without resentment and unkindness; if it be really so, that this is the
gentleman Mrs. -- told us the story of yesterday, I should rejoice; nay, though
I am loath to be cheated, and what he said of playing the hypocrite with me, has
made me the more backward to give credit to outsides; yet, were I sure it was a
real work of God in him, and that he was become a religious gentleman, you know
I have affection enough to rejoice on my own account, and to entertain him
after another manner than before: but yet two things make it still remote from
me, First, That I have no demonstration of the truth of the fact: and,
Secondly, That, if it is so, he has made no step toward me, and perhaps never
may; and you know, sister, continued she, it is no business of mine, till he
does.

Why, that is true, says the eldest sister; but, what must be done then?

Done! says she, let it alone; let it rest, till we heat something or other of
it in the ordinary way of such things.

But what must we do with my father? says the eldest, for he is always talking
to me about it.

Do! says the other, give the same answer to him from me as I do to you.

Then, says the eldest, I am sure he never will rest, till he brings it about
again; for he is strangely interest upon it.

Let that be as pleases God, I will be wholly neuter, says the youngest sister.

Some time after this discourse, the father having some occasion for his
health, went down to the bath, and taking all his daughters with him, he
continued there some months; in which time they contracted an acquaintance with
a lady and her two daughters, who came thither from Hampshire. The old lady had
been a widow of a gentleman of quality, by whom she had two daughters, but was
married to an eminent clergyman in the country where she lived; and they were
all together at the bath, and lodged in the same apartments with these ladies.

It happened one day after dinner, talking freely together about marrying
religious husbands and wives; the eldest daughter, as what is always much upon
the mind, will be in proportion much upon the tongue, insisted in discourse
upon the misery of unequal matches, and how unhappy it was, either to husband
or wife, when a religious, pious, sincere Christian, whether man or woman, was
married to another, who had no sense of religion; and she gives a long account
of a relation of her father's, but without naming their aunt, how good a
husband she had in all other respects, how comfortably and pleasantly they
lived, but only for that one thing: and then she told them (still without
naming any body) how many odd trick Sir James served his lady, and the like.

Well, Madam, says the old clergyman, I can tell you such a story of a lady in
your country, as I believe you never heard the like. I do not know the woman,
says the doctor, but I know the gentleman intimately well, and have had a great
deal of religious conversation with him, upon the occasion I shall tell you of.

He courted a young lady, says the doctor, but, whether she lived in our
country or the city, or where, he is perfectly mute, only that he often tells
her Christian name; and seeing he seems resolved to conceal her person, no body
will be so rude to press him on that head.

The gentleman, says the doctor, is of a very good family, has a noble estate,
a comely person, and a complete courtly education, and till this happened, was
almost always at London.

His mistress must be little less than an angel in human shape, by his
description; but that we give no heed to; for, Madam, says the old doctor, you
know, men in love give themselves a liberty that way: but, however, after all
things were agreed, and the writings drawing, it seems she threw him off
entirely, and refused him merely because the found he was a man of no religion.

Says the eldest sister, how could she know that, Sir? he was not so foolish to
tell her so himself, I suppose.

Yes, says the doctor, he did: why then, says the sister, I suppose he was
indifferent whether he had her or no. Indeed, says the doctor, one would think
so, and I said so to him: but he told me, that it was so far from that, that he
had taken up his resolution never to have any other woman, if she were the
richest, best, and most beautiful creature alive.

Then, perhaps, the lady has a superior fortune to him, besides her other
qualifications, says the sister. No, just the contrary, says the doctor. But,
Madam, says he, I Will tell you the history of this gentleman, if it is not too
long for you; it is a story that cannot be unprofitable to any one to hear,
especially to you, ladies, who have taken up such happy resolutions about
marrying none but religious husbands. The ladies bowed, in token they desired
him to go on with the story. So the doctor went on.

Nothing touched this gentleman so near, says he, after he was gone from his
mistress, as to reflect what kind of a wretch or monster he was, that a
virtuous young lady, and one who he had reason to believe had no dislike of
him, should be afraid to marry him for fear of being ruined, and that she
should think, if she took him, she declared war against heaven, and renounced
all pretensions of duty to her Maker. -- [Here he related the whole story, his
talk with himself, the discourse at the chocolate-house, his retreat into the
country, his happening to hear the poor countryman at prayer, his conversation
with him upon the way, and his conduct afterward, all in the manner as related
before.]

We must suppose the sisters to have much less sense of religion than they were
known to have, and particularly less sense of the case itself, in which it was
easy to know they were nearly concerned, if they were not very much moved with
the particulars of this story; and no sooner had the doctor finished his
relation, with some very handsome reflections upon it, but the sisters longed
to withdraw, to compare their own thoughts together, where they could do it
with freedom.

But the eldest daughter went farther; for though perhaps her curiosity was not
greater than her sister's, yet, as her courage was greater, and her concerns in
it less, she was resolved to get the name of this gentleman, if possible;
accordingly, at length, she asked the doctor, if the name of this gentleman was
a secret; No, Madam, says the doctor, his name is no secret; it is Mr. -- the
eldest son of Sir Thomas --, by whom he enjoys an estate of 2000l. a year, and
after his uncle, who is very old, he has near a thousand pounds a year more
entailed upon him.

The two sisters had heard too much to continue any longer; the youngest
especially, who pretending some indisposition, withdrew, and her sister soon
after: when her sister came to her, she said, well, child, what do you say to
this story? there is no room to think there can be any design in this old
gentleman, or any hypocrisy in the particulars if they are true.

Her sister said never a word; but she found she had been crying, and that she
was still too full of it to speak; so she let her alone a while, till, after
some time fetching a great sigh, which gave her passions some vent, says the
youngest, Why, what do you say to it? I say to it! says the eldest sister, I
can say neither less or more to it than what the two disciples said to one
another, going to Emmaus, about our Savior's discourse to them, after he was
gone, did not our hearts burn within us when he talked to us? I am sure mine
did, says she; ay, and mine too, says the youngest. But it is all nothing to me
now. Nay, says the eldest sister, if all the story be true, it may be something
to you still; for you see, the doctor says, he is resolved to have nobody else.
I give no heed to that, says the youngest sister, for the tables are quite
turned now between us, and he ought to refuse me now, for the very reason that
I refused him before; for I have no religion for such a convert as this, I am
sure, any more than a man without any notion of a deity, had religion enough
for me. Well, well, says her sister, let Providence, which brings all things to
pass its own way, work as he sees fit; I dare say, as my aunt said, we shall
hear more of it.

They had very little discourse at that time but what ended thus; but the
eldest sister had a great mind her father should hear the story too, if
possible, before they left the place; and she resolved to take an opportunity
to bring it about, if she could; but she was happily prevented by the
forwardness of her father to complain of his daughter's nice^y on all
occasions: for, in discourse with the doctor and his lady, the young ladies on
both sides being absent, he took a liberty to exclaim vehemently how foolish
one of his daughters had been, and how she had obstinately cast off a gentleman
of such and such qualifications, as before. My dear, says the doctor's lady to
him, pray tell Mr. -- the story you told the ladies yesterday: With all my
heart, said the doctor; so he repeated the whole story.

The father was exceedingly surprised at the particulars, but more when the
doctor told him the name of the gentleman. However, he held his tongue, as it
happened, and did not let the doctor know how near it related to his family;
but in the evening, taking his opportunity, he calls his eldest daughter to
him. Hark ye, Betty, says he, did the doctor tell you a story the other day of a
gentleman in Hampshire? Yes, Sir, says she. And was your sister by? says he.
Yes, Sir, says she. And do you know that this is the same Mr. -- that we know
of? says her father. Yes, Sir, says she, he told us his name: Well, and what
does your sister say to it? says he. She says little, Sir, says his daughter;
but she cannot but be moved at it; for it is a surprising story. I dare say,
says her father, I shall hear of him again; she will not turn him off again, I
hope; I am sure she does not deserve him now. She says so herself, says the
daughter, That he ought to refuse her now, for the same reason that she refused
him. Well, says the father, we shall certainly hear of him again; I am fully
persuaded, he will have no rest till he comes to see her again.

A few weeks after this they returned to London, and the eldest sister being
impatient to see her aunt, and to give her some account of these things, they
went both away to Hampstead: when they came thither, she failed not to give her
aunt a particular account of all these passages, as well that which had
happened at their visit to the merchant's lady at London, as what had happened
at the bath; all which, but especially the last, were wonderfully surprising
and agreeable to their aunt. Well, niece, says the aunt to the youngest sister,
what do you think of these things? I can say little to them, Madam, says she; I
am glad, for his sake, that God opened his eyes. But is it no satisfaction to
you, child, says her aunt, that you have been so far the instrument of it?
Alas! Madam, says she, I the instrument! I have been none of the instrument,
not I. Yes, yes, replies her aunt, you have, and he acknowledges it too: and
turning to the eldest sister, says she, I think, child, now you may perform
your promise, and tell your sister what he said to you when he called here ^s
he went out of town. Yes, Madam, says she, so I think too. [Here she gives her
sister a full account of what he had said, as before.]

I think you might have told me this before, says the youngest sister. Nay,
sister, replied she, did you not take me short, and forbid me telling you any
thing, and withdrew out of the room, and bid me tell it my aunt? Why, that is
true, I did so, says she again, and I have been so confused, that I know not
when I do well, and when I do ill: indeed, niece, says her aunt, I also obliged
her not to tell you; for I concluded, if there was any thing in it, we should
hear of it again: and if we did not, it could do you no service.

While they were talking thus, a coach stopped at the door, and a servant brought
word, their father and another gentleman with him was below stairs.

It will be necessary here to leave this part a while, and bring forward the
story of the young gentleman as far as it is needful to the co-herence of
things; the story also will be very short.

The young gentleman having, as has been said, taken his new tutor, the poor
countryman, into the house with him, received so much assistance from his
advice, and had daily such instruction in religious things, from the wholesome
plain counsels of this (...), poor creature, that the benefit of them soon
appeared in his conversation, and his reformation soon became visible in the
general course of his life; he kept company with the soberest, gravest, and
most religious persons that he could find; he kept a most sober, regular,
reformed family; and, seeming to resolve to reside pretty much there, for the
better government of his family, he took in a young minister of an
extraordinary good character to be his chaplain, and caused every servant who
appeared disorderly or vicious to be put away out of his house.

These are the natural consequences of a sincere work upon his own mind, were
the visible product of that blessed change, and indeed an agreeable evidence of
the sincerity of it; but they were far from being the sum of things; for, in a
word, he proved to be a most pious, sincere Christian in all his ways; and as
this was attended with a natural sweetness in his disposition, modesty and
generosity in his manner, and an excellent temper, free from all manner of
pride or hypocrisy, it made him perfectly agreeable to all sorts of people;
those who were not like him valued and honored him, and the sober, religious
part of men were delighted in him beyond expression.

He went on thus for near two years, lived generally in the country;
especially, because he could not be long from his faithful assistant, the poor
clergyman, who was upon all occasions, as we may say, clerk of the closet to
him, and with whom he kept up a most religious, but secret conversation, and
had retirements with him, which none were acquainted with but themselves.

But in all this enjoyment of himself, and the retired life he had now placed
his delight in, he found something still wanting too, as well to complete his
happiness here, as to forward his progress in things of an eternal and durable
nature; and he began to say to himself, that he had robbed himself of much of
his comfort, in neglecting so long to have the assistance of that blessed
creature whom God had made the first instrument to touch his mind with a sense
of good things.

These thoughts dwelt upon his heart a good while, and he found himself very
uneasy: it occurred to him, that certainly, as it had pleased God to make that
young woman to give him the alarm, and strike his soul with the first sense of
his wretched condition, he had certainly furnished her for his farther
assistance, and made her capable of giving him further help, light, and
directions in his duty; and that he stood in the way of his own comforts all
the while he was without her; nay, that he seemed to reject the instrument by
which God had done him so much good, without inquiring whether God had designed
her for his farther benefit or no.

He reflected, how suitable a disposition she was of in religious things, to
the design he had of keeping up a religious family, and how admirable a wife, a
mother, a mistress, such a lady must needs be to him, and his whole house; who
now saw the truth of the excellent sentence she had often repeated to him, viz.
That a religious life was she only heaven upon earth. He discoursed all these
things with his faithful counselor, poor William, who persuaded him by all the
persuasious he could use, to go and make her his own; for it was the only fear,
William said he had for him, that he would marry some lady, who, having been
brought up in the usual levity of the times, would pull him backward, rather
than forward him in his religious resolutions.

With these thoughts he resolved to go to London, and apply himself immediately
to his former mistress, and obtain her for his own, if possible; but was
exceedingly disappointed, when he found she and her father, and all the family,
were gone to the Bath.

However he waited, and hearing of her return, he went immediately to make his
visit, without any ceremony: when he found she was abroad, he fell to worn
seriously with her father; he told him, that the last time he was there, he had
indeed promised to wait on her again, notwithstanding what had passed. Her
father told him, he had received an account how his daughter had used him; that
he was in the country when it happened, otherwise he should have concerned
himself to have secured him better treatment; that he had resented it so
already to his daughter, that he had scarce been in speaking terms with her
since; that, as to his promise of coming again, he believed she was convinced
that she had no reason to expect it, seeing no gentleman would care to be ill
used twice upon the same occasion. The young gentleman answered, that he was
very sorry he should resent any thing from his daughter on his account; that he
was surprised to hear him say, she had ill used him; that, upon his word, she
had not said or done the least unbecoming thing to him; that he was even then,
when she did it, fully convinced of the reasonableness of what she had said,
and ten times as much, if that were possible; and also of the just motives she
had to say it to him: that if she had done less, she would have acted from
meaner principles than he knew she was mistress of; and that her reasons were
so good, and she so well maintained them, that he had neither then, nor now,
the least thing to offer against them; and that his business was not now to
answer her arguments, but to see if he could comply better with the just
demands that she then made, than he could before.

The father answered with a great many compliments and excuses, and such like
discourses; but the gentleman found that he neither relished the reason of his
daughter's refusal, or was affected at all with all he could say to convince
him how he had taken it; and modesty forbidding him to go farther in any
declaration about religious matters, especially where he found there was no
taste of it, he declined saying any more about it; but he turned his discourse
to desiring another interview with his daughter upon the terms of former
proposals; which the father consen^ing to, they went together in the young
gentleman's chariot to Hampstead, where the young ladies were; and this was the
gentleman, who, as I observed, was come to the door with their father, just as
they were about talking of him with their aunt.

I had given an account before, that they heard a coach stop at the gate, and
that a servant brought up word, that their father and another gentleman was
below stairs; but they were surprised, you may be sure, when the eldest sister
going down first, comes running up stairs again, with the news, in short, that
it was Mr. --, and that their father had brought him.

The aunt, unwilling her niece should appear in any disorder, says to her,
Come, child, you two shall stay a little, and let me go down first; which the
younger sister was very glad of. It was easy to perceive, and the passages
already related will allow us to suppose, that although it was some surprise to
the young lady to have him come thus suddenly and abruptly upon her, having not
prepared her thoughts, or resolved upon what reception to give him, and not
having the least intimation from her father upon what account he came, yet that
she was not alarmed as she used to be; the scruples of her conscience were all
answered; her jealousies of his hypocrisy were over, and her affection had
little or nothing to struggle with now, unless she might doubt his resentment
of things past, and whether he came upon the old account, or rather to perform
his promise, and make a visit of ceremony only; however, she begged her sister
to speak to her aunt, that they might stay at her house, and that she might
receive his visits there, because then she would have her aunt to advise and
consult with, on every occasion, and then she would put off their being left
together that night, that she might consider things a little, and know the
better how to receive him.

Her sister went down, and sending for her aunt into another room, proposed the
first to her; let me alone, niece, for that, says she. So the other went up to
her sister, and soon after the father calling for his two daughters, they went
down into the room. It was easy for her, at first sight, to perceive, that her
lover was not at all altered in his affection to her; that he did not come to
her with resentment, or with ceremony; for he flew to her, took her in his
arms, and told her, he came to see if she had goodness enough to pardon his not
keeping his word with her, in coming to wait on her again, and also to claim
her promise of staying for him. He spoke this so softly, as not to be heard by
the company, and without expecting any answer, turned about to pay his respects
to her aunt; in doing which, he told her, he hoped she would give him leave to
wait upon her niece at her house.

The aunt took the hint, and turning to the father, Brother, says she to him
privately, I think if you would let my niece stay here for some time, and let
the gentleman come to wait on her here, I would take care to prevent such
little scruples as you know interrupted that affair before, and you will she
sooner bring it to an end according to your mind. With all my heart, says the
father; if we had done so before, I believe she had not played the fool as she
did.

Upon this, turning themselves to the company, she says aloud, Niece, I don't
intend to lose your company thus; I suppose, if this gentleman designs to visit
you, he will not think it a great way to come to Hampstead, which, now the roads
are so good, is not above an hour's driving; and, I hope, we shall not make his
entertainment so ill, as to make him weary of his coming hither. Her niece
said, that must be as her father pleased to direct; I know that, said her aunt;
and therefore I have got your father's consent already. They bowed both to her
in token of assent, and night coming on, her father talked of going away; so he
told her, he would take another opportunity to wait on her, which was what she
had desired. And thus ended their first meeting.

They had scarce dined the next day, but, as he had said, he came to visit her,
and they had the whole afternoon to themselves; and, from that day, they began
to understand one another so well, that, in a few weeks, matters began to draw
to a close. But, because some part of their discourse is necessary to finish
the former account, and may be as useful as it is entertaining, I shall first
give some of the particulars, as they occurred in discourse between her and her
aunt and sister, upon this occasion.

As she had advised with her sister and aunt upon every particular, and
especially with her sister, from the first of it; so she made no scruple to
give them a full account of things as they passed. It was one morning, after
the gentleman had been above a week in his new addresses, that, coming into her
aunt's dressing room, she found her sister there drinking coffee with her aunt;
and her sister began with her thus:


Eld. sist. Well, sister, you used to be free with a body, and tell one now and
then how things went with you; now we hear nothing from you; what, is it all to
be a secret?


Aunt. Nay, niece, you ought not to press your sister to give an account of
such things.


Eld. sist. When she wanted advice, Madam, she was open enough.


Aunt. For my part, I wish her as well as I do my own children; but I cannot
desire her to give an account of such things, unless she wants advice in any
thing; and then she is a judge of that.


Yo. sist. Indeed, Madam, if I have not told any thing or every thing, both to
you and my sister, it has not been by way of reserve; I am ready to give a full
account of all you desire; for there is nothing passes between us that need be
concealed from you that are so near to me. As for my sister, I told her every
passage before; and as for you, Madam, did I not desire to be here, that I
might consult and advise with you, and have your directions in every step? and
I have wondered you never asked about it before.


Eld. sist. The chief thing I want to know is, how you find him, as to the
grand affair of religion; and, whether you think him a hypocrite, or no?


Aunt. Ay, that is what I am curious about.


Yo. sist. I am but an ill judge of sincerity, especially in a case where my
inclinations, you know, are partial.


Eld. sist. Why, you were the nicest creature alive before, sister; and yet,
you know, your affections were the same way then.


Aunt. Ay, niece, what can you say to that?


Yo. sist. Madam, my sister takes it quite wrong.


Eld. sist. How do I take you wrong, sister? did you not conclude him to be an
Atheist?


Yo. sist. But I never said he was a hypocrite: if he had been no honester,
than he was polite, I had been effectually deceived; for it was too true, as he
said, if he had talked a little religiously, nay, if he had not openly
professed his contempt of all religion, he had cheated me, and had never made
any objection.


Aunt. That Is true; you are right cousin; but how stands it now? are all the
stories you told me you heard at the Bath about him true, or no?


Yo. sist. Truly, I believe they are.


Eld. sist. Are you but I believe still? I would have had the bottom of them
all out by this time; what have you been about all this while?


Yo. sist. Truly, we have spent all the time almost about the great difficulty
of judging whether he is sincere, or a hypocrite; and we are scarce got through
it yet, I assure you.


Eld. sist. Why, then I think my sister is mad: what kind of confession of
principles do you insist on, pray? I hope you don't set up to examine the heart.


Yo. sist. You run all upon mistakes with me, sister; the dispute lies just the
other way; I am for allowing him to be sincere, but he will not grant that I
have any reason to do so: he says, that I ought to be believe he is a hypocrite.


Aunt. Come, niece, let us have the whole story of it: we shall then know how
to judge of it together.


Yo. sist. With all my heart, Madam: you know he came to me last Tuesday night,
when you first left us together. After some compliments, he repeated what he
had said before, that he came to ask my pardon for not coming again: I told
him, I did not expect him to come again, and, if I was to believe the opinion
of other people, I had used him so rudely, that it was not reasonable to think,
that any gentleman that was so treated, would ever have come again, unless it
was to affront me. He wondered, he said, who could pretend to say so; for he
assured me, he not only never said I used him ill, but never thought so, and
certainly I would not say so to any body; for he was persuaded, he said, that I
did neither do it on purpose to use him ill, or believe it was ill usage. I
told him he did me a deal of justice to say, I did not act on purpose to
affront him; but that I could not but say, I thought I had used him a little
rudely, for all (...) and that if he thought so too, I was very ready to (...)
this opportunity to ask his pardon, without so much as ^aming the necessity I
was in, on other accounts for doing what I did.


Aunt. You were very courtly in that particular, (...) pray, what did he say to
it!


Yo. sist. He told me, I had nothing to ask him pardon for; and assured me, he
had not been gone half an hour from he before he was convinced of the justice
of all I had said, and how much reason I had to refuse him, upon the nicety
which I had refused him upon. He added, that he had a thousand times since
reproached himself with the folly of his own conduct at that time, or that he
could think it would recommend him to any woman of virtue and sense, to boast
of having no thought or sense of religion: for, Madam, says he, had you taken
no notice of it, I should of necessity have concluded in a quarter of an hour
after, that you had no sense of virtue or religion yourself. Why, what if I had
not? said I; I had been but the more suitable to you, and you must have liked
me the better for that. He returned, no, Madam, just the contrary; for, though
I own I had not thought of religion myself, yet if any woman had told me so of
herself, I should presently have said, she was no match for a gentleman; for no
man can be so void of sense, as well as of religion, as not to know, that a
woman of no religion is no woman fit to make a wife of: and this, says he,
convinced me, that you were in the right to refuse me on that account.


Aunt. It was a very ingenuous acknowledgement, I confess; the truth of it is
so convincing, that I wish all the young woman, who have their settlements in
view, would reflect seriously on this point, That, however wicked men are, they
are always willing to have sober, religious, and virtuous wives; and it is very
rarely, that the worst rake in nature, if his senses are in exercise, desires
to have a wife loose like himself; -- but pray go on, niece.


Yo. sist. He told me, he was not gone a quarter of an hour from me, but this
reflection struck with horror upon his mind: what a dreadful creature am I?
Sure I am a horrid, frightful wretch! that a woman of sobriety and religion was
afraid to venture to take me, for fear of being ruined; and that she should
think she declared war against Heaven, and joined herself to one of God's
enemies! He was going on, but I found his speech stopped of a sudden; at which
I was a little surprised, and asked him, if he was not well? He said, Yes; and
endeavored to hide the little disorder he was in, and went on. He then told
me, that I had been really very just to him, and he had reason to thank me for
it; and that he had desired my sister to express his mind fully on that
account; which he hoped she had done. I told him, I could not now enter upon an
apology for what I had said to him so long ago; that, if I had treated him
rudely, or severely, I was very sorry; but that what I did was occasioned, as
he knew very well, by his making such open declarations, and such as I thought
he really had no occasion for, concerning his aversion to, and ignorance of all
religion; and that it was really a dreadful thing to think of marrying upon
such terms. He replied, that if I had said less than I did, he must
necessarily, when he came to his senses, have had a meaner opinion of me than
he had; and that it was really the reproaches that I had given him, and the
excellent reasons I had given him for my resolutions of rejecting him, that had
now brought him back to me, and had made him resolve to have no woman upon
earth but me, if I would but revoke the resolution I had taken against him; for
nothing less, than so much religion and virtue, could ever make him happy.


Aunt. If he was sincere in this, I assure you niece, it was a high compliment
upon religion, as well as upon your conduct.


Yo. sist. I told him, that, as the reason I had for using him so, was thus
approved by himself, he bound me to preserve the same resolution, on the hazard
of his having a less esteem for me. He confessed that was very true; unless he
could convince me the cause was removed; which he saw no hopes of: and that was
the reason that he came to visit me again, with so little encouragement, that
he knew not what to think of it.


Eld. sist. What could he mean by that? why, sure, then all we have heard must
be false, and he is the same man as ever.


Yo. sist. I was greatly startled at his words, and looked steadily at him, but
could judge nothing from his countenance: but it grew late, and he took his
leave, falling in with some other cursory talk, and left me, I confess, in the
greatest confusion of thoughts imaginable for I was dreadfully afraid he would
declare himself to have no sense of religion on his mind still; and then I was
in a worse condition than at first, having thus admitted a second treaty with
him.


Aunt. I thought, child, you were a little perplexed (...) Tuesday night, but I
took it to be only a little thoughtfulness more than ordinary, which is usual
on such occasions.


Yo. sist. When he came again the next night, he made a kind of an apology for
having left me in more disorder than he used to do: For, to tell you true,
Madam, says he, I was not able to go on with what I was saying to you, neither
am I now, says he, seeing I am come to wait on you, and yet have effectually
shut the door against myself. I told him, I did not perhaps rightly understand
him, unless he would explain himself: why, says he, I have first told you
sincerely, how absolutely I approve of the resolution you took against me, and
yet owned and do still, that I am no way able to convince you that the cause is
removed. I told him, that I thought he was not just to himself; and that the
same thing whatever it was, that had power to convince him that I was under a
necessity to refuse him on that occasion, would certainly assist him to remove
the cause. He turned short upon me. But, Madam, says he, did not I make
conditions with you, that whenever I talked of it, you should take me for a
hypocrite? and did I not declare positively to you, that I would deceive you,
if I could.


Eld. sist. Now I know what he meant.


Yo. sist. Ay, so did I too; but he run it up so high against himself, that I
could not answer a word, ^^less I would have turned the tables, as it were,
against myself, and courted him, by telling him how well I was satisfied of his
sincerity; so that, in short, I was quite puzzled: for what could I say to a
man that did, as it were, bid me believe him to be an hypocrite?


Aunt. You had a nice case before you, cousin; pray what said you to it?


Yo. sist. I told him very coldly, I was under a necessity of believing every
thing he said, because he had been so sincere with me all along; and I begged
him therefore not to tell me seriously now that he was a hypocrite; and that
the cause of my refusing to talk with him before was not removed; that I hoped
it was otherwise, but should despair of it, if it came from his own mouth; and
(...) if I were assured from his own mouth, that he came (...) me, he must
needs know I had nothing else (...), but to act as I did before, which he had
owned I (...) reason for. No, Madam, says he, I do not say, I desire to deceive
you; but, I say, that having told you I would, you ought to believe I design
it; and I see no room to convince you that I am not a hypocrite, seeing I
promised you I would be so; and know not whether I dare tell you that I am not
so, even in the best of me.


Eld. sist. I could have put an end to all this nicety in two words.


Yo. sist. Then you will the more easily tell me how I shall do it.


Eld. sist. Why, I would have told him, that though I had not so much concern
for him to busy myself to inquire after his conduct, yet I had not so little,
as not to be glad to know, by other hands than his own, that he was no
hypocri^e, and that I rejoiced for his sake to hear that his eyes were opened
to that which could alone make him the happiest man alive.


Yo. sist. Then I must at the same time have told him, that my scruples were
all over about him; which was as much as to tell him I would have him whenever
he pleased to take me; but I have not learned that way of talking yet.


Aunt. Well, niece, and if you had, after so long acquaintance, and so much
pressing, I do not think you could have charged yourself with being forward.


Yo. sist. Well then, you will the better like what has happened since, Madam.


Aunt. With all my heart; then pray go on, (...) dear.


Yo. sist. Why, Madam, this took up the first three or four nights of our
discourse; the night before (...) began a little more seriously, and came
closer to the (...) itself: he told me, he had made himself very melancholy
with me, the two last times he was with me; for he thought, that instead of
courting me to have him, he had taken a great deal of pains to court me to
refuse him again. I told him, I thought so too; and that I confessed I had been
a little concerned about it, because I could (...) no means understand him. He
told me, it proceeded from the just reflection he made on his foolish discourse
two years ago, viz. that he wished he had counterfeited religious discourse,
and he would certainly have cheated me if he could, and did not doubt but he
could have done it effectually. Those words, he said, flew in his face, when he
went to say any thing serious to me, and persuaded him that I would believe he
was only counterfeiting serious things on purpose to deceive me. I answered, he
might reproach himself with those things, but I did not say any stress on them;
for I believed he had too much honesty, whether it proceeded from religion or
no, to offer to deceive me in a thing, in which he owned so ingenuously I was
right. Then he told me, with the greatest affection in his discourse that ever
I saw in my life, that he must confess, as he said before, that my rejecting
him, as I had done, had made impressions on his mind, quite different from what
he had before: but that he found it the hardest thing in the world to express
what had happened to him on that account, and the thoughts of those things
which had taken up his mind since that; only this he would own to me, that I
was in the right; that, he had most notoriously exposed himself to me, and that
he had perfectly the same opinion now of those things which I had before, viz.
that a religious life was the (...) upon earth: but he could go no farther,
(...) nor could he answer for himself, how far such thoughts might carry him,
or express to me the particulars that had (...) upon his mind about them; and
how far what he had said would satisfy me, he did not know. I told him, I hoped
he did not think I set up for a judge of the particulars; that my objection
before lay against a general con^^^pt of all religion; that it was my terror to
think of carrying an enemy to God, one that had no sense of the common duties
we all owe to him that made us; but that (...) pretended to expect a confession
of faith from him, or any man, in such a case. He told me, he thought it
required more assurance than he was master of, to talk any thing of himself
that way, at least till there were more intimacy between us; that he thought
religious things (talked of in that manner) received an injury from the very
discourse; and that it was next door to boasting of them, which was the worst
kind of hypocrisy; and if he could say no more of himself but this, he hoped I
would take it for a sufficient testimony of the alteration of his thoughts,
viz. that he loved me for the honor I paid to religion, and for that
steadiness which had made me refuse him before. I told him, I saw his
difficulty, and that I would abate him of the trouble of entering into
particulars, which I found he was too modest to relate, and which however I was
not quite a stranger to; and that I desired we might speak no more of a thing
which I knew it was difficult for him to be free in. He blushed as red as fire,
when I said I was not a stranger to the particulars, which he declined to
express, and said not one word for a good while. I told him, I knew it was a
point that could not come easily from a man's own mouth; that I did not desire
it, and would make him easy, so far as to tell him, I was fully satisfied he
was no hypocrite, and hoped he would give himself no more trouble about it. He
took me in his arms, and told me very affectionately, that I had said that of
him, that he would give all the world to be able to say of himself; that
however, he hoped to be beholden to me for more than that; and as I had given
him the first view of the beauty of a religious life, he expected a great deal
more from my assistance and example in pursuing the steps of it. I told him,
that I begged of him, we might avoid all religious compliments, for they were
the oddest things in nature; that he quite mistook me; that it was not because
I thought myself capable of guiding in religious matters, that I insisted on
the necessity of not marrying a man void of religion, but from a due sense of
just the contrary, viz. the want I should be in of being guided and assisted in
religious things upon all occasions myself; that it would be a fatal mistake
the other way, and greatly to my disadvantage, to have him expect more from me
than he would find; and that, on the (...) I thought I had now so much less
religion than he, that he ought to refuse me now, for the same reason that I
refused him before.

This is the sum of our affair, and thus it stands, only with this addition,
that he told me a very pleasant story which happened at a chocolate house near
the court, which is so useful as well as diverting, that I cannot but relate it
to you.

[Here she tells them the story of the two beaux and the Lord, discoursing of
the suitableness of a religious life, to the life of a gentlemen.]


Aunt. The story is fit to be read for a lecture of instruction to all the
young gentlemen of this age. Well, niece, you are a happy girl.


Yo. sist. Why, Madam?


Aunt. Only in being courted by a gentleman of the greatest sincerity, modesty,
and piety, that I ever met with in my life.


Yo. sist. And would you advise me, Madam, to have him then?


Aunt. Ay, child, without any more difficulty, if you desire to be the happiest
woman alive, and an example and encouragement to all young women in Britain,
for rejecting profane and irreligious husbands.

Thus far, I think, contains all the useful part of this story, only adding,
that it was not long after this, both the father and all friends assenting,
they were married, and lived afterward the happiest couple that could be
imagined; having a sober, regular, well-governed family, a most pleasant,
comfortable, agreeable conversation with one another; suitable in temper,
desires, delights, and, in a word, in every thing else; and which made them
completely happy, they were exemplary in piety and virtue to all that knew them.


RELIGIOUS COURTSHIP.
PART II.
WE have seen the happy conduct of the youngest of the three daughters of the
gentleman, whose family this book began with, and the comfortable success of
it. The second daughter, from the beginning, acted upon other principles, or
rather, indeed, upon no principles at all; yet her history may, perhaps, be no
less fruitful of instruction than the other, though something more tragical, as
to her own part of it.

She had declared to her sister, as appears in the beginning of her story, that
she would not trouble herself, when it came to her turn, what religion the
gentleman was of, or whether he had any religion or no, if she had but a good
settlement; and now we shall see her be as good as her word.

Her father, whose character I have sufficiently spoken to already, having had,
for many years, a considerable trade into Italy, where he once lived, there
came an English gentleman to visit him, who had been formerly contemporary with
him, and long been his correspondent, or factor, there, viz. at Leghorn; and
who, being grown very rich, was come to England, resolving to settle here.
There were some accounts, it seems depending between them, which they had
appointed a day to settle and balance, in order to exchange releases; which
being all finished in the morning, the father of these ladies takes his factor
into his coach, and carries him home to dinner with him, where the old
gentleman entertained him very handsomely, and where he had an opportunity to
see the two maiden daughters; for the youngest, who had been married some time,
was gone into Hampshire to her country-seat with her husband.

This Leghorn merchant no sooner saw and conversed a little with the ladies,
but he took a fancy to the youngest, and from that time resolved to make her
his wife. It was not long before he let them know his mind; and, having made
very handsome proposals to her father, he [the father] received him with a
frankness suitable to their long intimacy and acquaintance, and told him, With
all his heart, if his daughter and he could agree.

Before I bring them together, it is proper to the relish of the story, to take
a little notice of the characters of the two young persons, of whose story we
ought to have a general idea, that we may not be left to gather it up slowly
among the particulars.

The young lady was very sober, virtuous to the nicest degree, extremely well
bred, and wonderfully good humoured. She was likewise a very lovely, beautiful
person, the handsomest of the three sisters beyond all comparison. As to
religion, she had a very good foundation of knowledge, and had done nothing to
make it be supposed she was not truly religious in practice; but she was not
altogether so grave and serious as her eldest sister, much less was she so
strict and devout as her younger sister that was married, as might be observed
from what passed between them at first: her temper was sprightly and gay; and,
though she governed herself so, that she gave every one room to see, that she
was one that had a true sense of religion at bottom, and a fund of good
principles and notions in her mind; yet she was young and merry, and did not
tie herself up so severely in such things as her sisters had done; which,
though it was no part of her happiness in the affair before her, yet it
rendered her very agreeable to her father; and particularly, it made the affair
with this gentleman much less trouble with her, than he had with her two
sisters.

The gentleman was, as I have observed, an Italian gentleman, a very handsome,
agreeable person, perfectly well bred, having lived abroad, and seen a great
deal of the world. He was also a man of excellent parts and sense, talked
admirably well, almost to every thing that came in his way, spoke several
languages, and in short, was not only a complete, well-bred merchant, but much
of a gentleman; and all this to be added, that he was very sober, grave, and
often times, as occasion offered, his discourse upon religious affairs
discovered him to be very serious and religious. As to his estate, it was not
very well only, but extraordinary; he was indeed a little too old, having lived
abroad twenty-two years, and was about so much above twenty, which was the age
of the lady. However, as this was an advantage in many other ways, as in his
judgment and experience in the world, the father made no scruple at all of it,
nor did his daughter inquire much after it.

In a word, having been introduced to the young lady, she must have been a
woman of much more nicety and scruple, than she professed herself to be, if she
had disliked any thing in his person or circumstances; and therefore having
kept her company for some weeks, things began to draw near a close, when one
evening, after the gentleman had been with her, and gone away, her eldest
sister and she happened to meet; and the following dialogue between them may
farther explain the case.

DIALOGUE I.
Eld. sist. WELL, sister, how do you go on? when are you to buy wedding-clothes?


Sist. Nay, I don't know; even when you will, I think. I don't know what we
stay for, not I.


Eld. sist. Prithee let us have done with it then. I want to call him brother;
then I can talk freely to him.


Sist. Why, you may call him brother now, cannot you? you see he calls you
sister already, as naturally as if you were all of a breed.


Eld. sist. Ay, so did somebody else, you know; and yet made a two year's piece
of work of it afterward for all that.

[She means the gentleman that courted the third sister.]


Sist. Yes, yes, I remember it; but I Will assure you I am none of those; I Will
either make an end of it one way, or make an end of it another way, in less
than so many months.


Eld. sist. Perhaps your objections are not so just as hers.


Sist. I don't enter into her scruples I assure you.


Eld sist. I hope you have not her occasion.


Sist. Nay, I don't know what occasion she had, not I.


Eld. sist. Nay, hold, sister; don't say so neither; without doubt her occasion
was very just; and you have same obligation upon you; but I hope you have not
the same occasion.


Sist. I know not what you mean by obligation: I have no obligation at all upon
me as I know of.


Eld. sist. Why do you say so, sister? I mean the obligation that is upon us
all from the charge my mother gave us upon her deathbed, about our marrying
religious husbands.


Sist. I look upon what my mother said, to be good counsel, which we should
give its due weight to: but I do not take it to be a command that binds me
absolutely in duty to my mother's words. Duty certainly ends, when death
separates.


Eld. sist. I know not whether it does, no, sister.


Sist. I think you are too superstitious that way, sister.


Eld. sist. Well, but suppose it to be but as advice, yet it has a double force
with it. First, as it came from a tender, dear, and most affectionate mother,
who not only most passionately loved us, but had an excellent judgment to
direct her to give us the best counsel. And, Secondly, as our own judgment and
consciences must testify with her, that what she enjoined us to observe, is the
most reasonable thing for us to do; that can be imagined for our own advantage,
and as well for our happiness here as hereafter.


Sist. You lay a greater stress upon it than I do, I confess. If my mother had
been alive indeed, I should have thought myself obliged to be guided by her
directions, and her injunctions would have been positive commands; but then she
would have been able to judge of particular circumstances, and would have given
her advice accordingly.


Eld. sist. But her advice to us was therefore suited to her present state of
absence, and went no farther than to a case described by its own circumstances,
and which nothing can alter; because the obligation supposes the circumstance,
and where the circumstance is not, the obligation ceases.


Sist. You talk so learnedly, I want explanation.


Eld. sist. No, sister, you don't want an explanation, I am sure; but you are
disposed to lay it all aside, as a thing you have no need of; however, I Will
explain myself in a word speaking. Our mother warned us against marrying men of
no religion, that is, men that made no profession of a reverence to God and his
worship, this want of a religious profession, is the circumstance which I speak
of; if the circumstance does not appear, the advice ceases; for our mother knew
we could not judge of sincerity.


Sist. Well, so then if a man tells me he is religious it is well enough,
whether he speaks truth or no.


Eld. sist. What need we talk of this, I hope we have an assurance of the
contrary in Mr. --


Sist. No, not I indeed; what assurance can I have! He seems to be a sober man,
that is all I know of.


Eld. sist. Well, and I would know more of it, however, if I were you.


Sist. Why, I do know something more of it too; now I think of it; for we were
talking of such things one night, when we happened to mention one Sir Robert
--, and he spoke of him with a great deal of indignation; he said he was a
horrid atheistical wretch, and that he could not bear his company; for he was
always making a jest of sacred things, bantering all religion in such a manner,
that no sober mind could abide it without horror.


Eld. sist. Well, there is something in that I assure you.


Sist. Why, I take it to be a plain declaration, that he has a just reverence
for religion, as my sister took the contrary in her lover, for a declaration of
his having no religion at all.


Eld. sist. Nay, he told her he had not, in so many words, and that he had not
troubled his head about it, and did not intend to do it.


Sist. Well, then, and this gentleman has told me he has; for he owns he has so
much regard for religion, that he cannot hear it ridiculed and bantered without
horror.


Eld. sist. This is something, I confess, in general; But --


Sist. But what? What would you have me do? Must I examine his principles and
opinions? Shall I ask him to say his catechism? If I should talk on that
fashion to him now, what kind of a catechetical wife will he think I shall
make? He Will think I shall be a school-mistress rather than a wife.


Eld. sist. No, no; though you are so pert with your sister, forsooth, you need
not be so with him, I hope? nor need I tell you how to manage such a point: But
I warrant you I would find it out, what his opinion was one way or another:
why, he may be a Papist for aught you know yet of him; some of them are very
religious in their way, and speak very reverently and seriously of religion in
general.


Sist. Let him be a Papist and he will, I am sure I can never ask him such a
question; but, however, I am pretty well satisfied of that too; for I heard him
say once, he had been at church: and another time accidentally speaking about
religion, he declared he was a member of the church of England, as by law
established.


Eld. sist. Well, you are an easy body; a little ma^ter satisfies you. I should
presently have said I hope, Sir, you mean the Protestant church of England.
Why, do you not imagine the Roman Catholics thinks the Popish is the only
church of England that is established by law?


Sist. Sure, sister, you take all the world to be hypocrites and cheats. I
never can suspect any gentleman that bears the character of an honest man,
would set up to impose upon me with such equivocal speeches; why, I never heard
such a vile distinction in my life.


Eld. sist. Have you not? Why then I have. I have heard that in King Charles
the Second's time, people in general were deluded with that very expression in
all their public speeches, proclamations, declarations, etc. promising always
to preserve and maintain the church of England, as established by law: and yet
all that while they meant the popish church.


Sist. These are remote things, sister; for my part, I have no mistrust; I am
honest myself, and I suspect nobody.


Eld. sist. It is a thing of moment, sister; I would be sure.


Sist. Not I; I have no room to suspect.


Eld. sist. Then you do not answer the obligation you were under ^o my mother's
desire.


Sist. Yes I do; for I think I have good reason to believe him a very serious,
religious gentleman.


Eld. sist. But you know my mother engaged us to examine particulars, and not
to marry any man, how religious soever he seemed also, unless he was of the
same opinion in religion with ourselves.


Sist. In that I think my mother went too far, sister.


Eld. sist. My mother gave us a great many examples of the misery that has
followed in the relation of husband and wife, by reason only of differences in
opinion.


Sist. It must be then where there was but little religion on either side.


Eld. sist. I don't know that neither; you and I know some families, more than
one or two, where they are all at daggers draw about opinion, and the families
are ruined as to their peace; and yet both are very religious too, nay zealous
in their way; and the more the zeal, the more the strife.


Sist. There may be zeal, but there is no charity then; and what is any religion
without charity?


Eld. sist. Well, but because charity does not always keep pace with religion,
and every one is apt to think themselves in the right, and to reproach the
sincerity of those that differ from them; therefore, our mother earnestly
pressed us to make that point sure, before we fixed our choice for our lives.


Sist. It is a fine thing to talk of, but hard to be followed. What have I to
do with his opinion? and what can I say to him, if he tells me he is of one
opinion, and I should be of another? you, nor no young body alive can prevent
being imposed upon, if a man finds it for his purpose to deceive us.


Eld. sist. Well, sister, you trample upon all caution; you are one of them
that seem perfectly indifferent, whether you are deceived or no.


Sist. No, sister, I am not willing to be deceived, you see; I have had a
general discovery of his being a man religiously inclined, that he has a
reverence for the worship of God, and the being of God; nay, you cannot but
remember, how the other night at supper he discoursed very gravely; and I
assure you, to me it was very agreeable, about the men of the town, pretending
to be Atheists, and to deny the being of a God, and the next minute profanely
swearing by his name.


Eld. sist. All this is true, and clears you from the first scruple; so far, I
may grant, you are within my mother's first injunction, Not to marry a man that
does not profess to be religious in general; but that is but one part. What say
you to the other, Not to marry any man, however professing himself to be
religious, that is not of the same opinion with yourself?


Sist. You will carry every thing up to the extremity, but however, I have a
way for that too; and you shall not charge me with slighting my mother's advice.


Eld. sist. What way have you got? I doubt it is but an odd one.


Sist. Why, if he will not be of my opinion, I Will be of his opinion; and so we
will agree one way if we cannot the other.


Eld. sist. That Is boldly said, and I must own to you, ^^^nifies, you are yet
to choose in your own opinion. Pray, what if he should be a Roman Catholic? as I
hinted before; you know he has lived in Italy.


Sist. Well, if he should be a Christian Catholic, I am a Catholic Christian:
so we need not fall out for all that.


Eld. sist. I persuade myself you are not so indifferent as you make yourself,
or else (which I hope rather) you are jesting with me, or you talk thus upon a
supposition, that you are sure he is a Protestant.


Sist. Well, you are in the right there too; I cannot entertain such thoughts
of him; besides, my father told me he was a Protestant.


Eld. sist. It is our misfortune, sister, that my father does not much concern
himself about those things; he leaves us to our fate.


Sist. And is that our misfortune, say you? I do not see it I confess; for I
think it is our business to choose for ourselves: and I observe, where fathers
are so very strait laced, and confine their children to such and such
particulars in the husbands or wives they shall choose, their children generally
choose without much regard to those injunctions, or else fly directly in the
face of them and go quite contrary.


Eld. sist. You argue, sister, from the practice to the duty, as if because
children do not regard the care and concern of their parents in their marriage,
therefore they ought to do so: and it was not the duty of parents to direct
them, or concern themselves about it.


Sist. I don't inquire what is the duty of parents; I am speaking what is the
practice of children.


Eld. sist. But you do not justify that practice, I hope?


Sist. I think, take one time with another, children do as well, when they
trust to their own directions, I mean when they choose with judgment; pray what
would become of us if we were just to follow our father's direction? you know,
he would direct us to take the first that comes, if he liked but the settlement.


Eld. sist. That Is a wrong way of arguing, sister, that because our father
neglects it, therefore children are not the better for such parents as do their
duty, and that show a ^^st concern for the religious happiness of their
children, in settling them in the world.


Sist. I do not see much difference, I say; but sometimes the one do as well as
the other.


Eld. sist. Yes, there is this difference, sister, that, where the parents act
right, the children are seldom ruined, unless it be by their own wilful
obstinacy.


Sist. And sometimes children are ruined, let the parents do their best; nay,
sometimes the parents themselves know not what to direct.


Eld. sist. You may as well say, that, because doctors die nobody should take
physic.


Sist. Every one has eyes to choose for themselves; I do not think the proverb
has any weight in this case, That love is blind: folks may easily see the
difference between a religious man and an Atheist, without their parents.


Eld. sist. But it is a matter of such weight, and so irrecoverable when done
that we ought to see with as many eyes as we can; and a careful, religious
parent is a good scout to look out for us, a good pilot to steer us, and a good
counselor to advise us.


Sist. I don't see the want of it, perhaps, so much as you do; I see,
sometimes, the very mistake of the parent is the cause of the ruin of the
children.


Eld. sist. I must confess, I do see the want of it, and I think it is a sad
thing to be left, so as we are, without the guide of our parents, for all that;
and if we, in particular, should be ruined by it, our father would have small
satisfaction in his own conduct; it is such a management makes children slight
their father's directions, as they do.


Sist. Well, our father does kind things for us another way, however.


Eld sist. I don't desire to reflect upon my father; but, if his care was as
much employed in choosing religious husbands for us (since he will have us
marry) as it is in getting portions for us, we should find the advantage of it
much more to his future satisfaction, and our own.


Sist. We must take the more care of it ourselves.


Eld. sist. Why, that is the point I am upon; I wi^^ you would do so then,
sister; for it is your case that I (...) upon.


Sist. I have done it, I think; I see no room to object.


Eld. sist. I can say no more, sister; you are resolved, I see, and must go on;
but, you will buy your experience at a terrible price; and if, upon the trial,
you should be mistaken, you will think of this discourse hereafter.


Sist. What would you have me do?


Eld. sist. Do! I would enter into a serious discourse of religious matters
with him; I would know how we were to live together, whether as Heathens, or as
Christians; I would find out his principles, if he has any, or find out that he
has none; this is not catchising him, nor is there any thing indecent in it.
You are not ashamed to enquire into his estate, and make provision for yourself
out of it by a good jointure; and will you be ashamed to inquire after that,
which is of ten thousand times the consequence! sure, you can never go on hood
winked at all hazards thus in that part that is for the happiness of your life,
soul and body; besides, had not you your sister's example before you.


Sist. Why, I tell you, it is clear to me, that he is a man that has a sense of
religion upon his mind; I gave you an instance of it in his detestation of Sir
Robert and his practices; if my sister could have had but so much satisfaction
as that, she never would have refused my brother. --


Eld. sist. You wrong my sister, I assure you; she did not come so far indeed:
because she came to a clear discovery that he had no religion at all, which was
the first point; but I can assure you, if she had got over that point, she
would have inquired farther; for, it is a poor satisfaction that is founded upon
negative religion only.


Sist. If we expect to search into positives, as the world goes now, I think we
put a hardship upon ourselves that we are not obliged to.


Eld. sist. But certainly it is our business to do it, if we expect to live
happily; for there are a great many men now adays that are not Atheists, and
that abhor bantering of religion, or making a jest of sacred things; and yet
have nothing at all in them that is fit to be called religion.


Sist. Well, I am not to examine the inside: a small deal of hypocrisy will
conceal the heart; if he be not a religious man, the worst will be his own, I
cannot find it out.


Eld. sist. Dear sister, I should not say so much, but that methinks you do not
attempt to find it out; you do not inquire after it; I do not find you have
exchanged six words upon the subject.


Sist. Why, I tell you, what he said about Sir Robert -- gave me a good
impression of him.


Eld. sist. O sister! you are soon satisfied; you would not be so easy in the
matter of his estate; it seems you will trust your soul upon lighter security
than you will your portion.


Sist. How do you mean?


Eld. sist. Why, sister, you will not take it upon his word that he has an estate,
or that you shall be provided for; but you must have his estate appear, your
part be settled, and the land bound to you; it is not enough for him to say, I
have such and such a revenue by the year, and you shall have such a part of it
if I die before you; but you will have it under hand and seal, so that he shall
not be able to go back.


Sist. Well, and should I not do so?


Eld. sist. Yes, yes; but I allude only to it and observe how less anxious you
are, how much easier satisfied, how sooner secure, about the main article that
constitutes the happiness of your life, and of your family, if ever you have
one, than about your estate.


Sist. You run this matter up to a strange height, sister, as if all my
felicity consisted in this one question, Whether my husband be a religious man
or no? nay, as if it consisted in his being of the same opinion in religion as
I am of; as if I could not be religious, though my husband was not so; nor in a
word, as I could not go to heaven without my husband.


Eld. sist. No, sister; it is you that run it too high; I do not say you cannot
go to heaven without your husband: or you cannot be religious without your
husband; but I do say you cannot go comfortably through the journey thither
without him, nor he without you. A woman is to be a help-meet, and a man is to
be the same; now a husband will be a sorry help to a wife, if he is not a help
in the religious part of her life: and a sorry help indeed in the religious
part, if he has no sense of it himself.


Sist. But I tell you he has a sense of it, and an affection to it.


Eld. sist Well, but it will hold in the other part of the question too:
suppose he has, yet, if his sense of religion is not the same with, or
agreeable to your sense of it; if he thinks you are going the wrong way, and
you think he is going the wrong way, one pulls this way, and the other pulls
that way in religion; what will this come to in the family, sister? have you
considered that?


Sist. Yes, yes, I have considered it very well.


Eld. sist. I doubt it, sister; I doubt you have only considered of it so as
not to consider of it.


Sist. I have considered it so far as to see that I can do nothing in it any
farther; I cannot enter into a debate about principles; tell him what my
opinion is, and ask him what his opinion is, and try beforehand whether they
agree or no: I tell you, I don't think it is my business, any more than the
talking to him of our settlement: that is the father's part to do; sure my
father will not bring a Heathen to me!


Eld. sist. It is true, and that is our misery, that, as I said before, we have
not a father to concern himself in that part for us; but I do not think it is
such an improper thing for you to do. Sure I could some way or other bring it
in, that I would make some guess at him: why, you have never offered it in the
least; neither has he shown you any thing of it; I do not so much as find that
he has ever gone to church with us, since he appeared so publicly.


Sist. Why no, that is true; and I wondered he did not indeed, especially last
Sunday, when he dined with us; but he made an excuse that I thought was
sufficient.


Eld. sist. Well, and would not I have laughed at him at night, and asked him
if ever he used to go to church, or whether he went to church that Sunday, or
no?


Sist. Why, so I did; and he told me he was obliged to go that day to wait upon
the Marquis de Montelon, the Spanish ambassador.


Eld. sist. The Spanish ambassador! why when he was obliged to go to the Popish
chapel with him too; for the ambassador never fails at that time of day. I Will
lay (...) hundred pounds he went to mass with him; there is a clue for him, find
out that now, and your business is done.


Sist. Dear sister, you are strangely possessed with Mr. -- 's being a papist;
have you any particular notion of it? you perfectly fright me about it.


Eld. sist. No, indeed, I must confess I have not the least ground for it; I
will not do him so much injustice; but if I were in your case, I would be
satisfied about it; I would ask him downwright in so many words.


Sist. I would not ask him such a question for an hundred pounds.


Eld. sist. And I would not marry him without asking him for ten thousand.


Sist. Why if I should, and he were really a Papist, do you think he would be
such a fool as to tell me?


Eld. sist. Perhaps, he may be so honest as not to deny what he is not ashamed
of.


Sist. I should hate him the moment he confessed it, not for being a Papist,
but for showing he had so little concern for me as to venture to own it.


Eld. sist. So that you think he ought rather to deny his religion, and disown
all his principles, than venture your displeasure?


Sist. I should think he was very indifferent, whether I was displeased or no,
or that he presumed on my being so engaged to him, that I could not go off;
either of which I should take for an insufferable insolence.


Eld. sist. No, you would have him conceal his principles, and discover them
when you could not help yourself; pray, which would be the greater insult?


Sist. You strive to push me into a strait, but I have a medium again that
delivers me from the necessity on either side, and that is, to shake of the
suspicion; and, seeing you have no real ground for it, I cannot see why I
should terrify myself with a mere jealousy.


Eld. sist. I own I have no ground to suppose him a Papist; but I would never
marry a man in the world without knowing what his principles are; it is no
satisfaction to me to say he is not an Atheist, he is not a profane despiser of
religion; negatives are a poor foundation, sister, to go upon in a case of such
consequence: if he is of any religion, he should tell it me, or I would have
nothing to say to him.


Sist. Why, I told you, he said in particular, that he was of the church of
England, as by law established.


Eld. sist. Why first, dear sister, I told you that is nothing but what any
Papist may say, even without a dispensation; but however it seems he did not
that, but in way of discourse to other people; he did not say so seriously, in
answer to any inquiry of yours, or to give you satisfaction.


Sist. No, that is true; I have not desired any satisfaction of him; for I take
those casual, occasional discoveries of himself to have more of nature in them,
and to be less liable to suspicion, than a formal, studied answer to a jealous
or doubting question; and I have many reasons for my opinion too.


Eld. sist. Why that may be true; but I cannot think that such occasional,
cursory speeches can have solid foundation enough to satisfy you in a thing of
such moment; and I think I have the testimony of the fathers of our reformation
on my side, who, without doubt, saw it in the great weight that lies on this
part, viz. of the advantage and necessity that there is, that husband and wife
should be of the same opinion in religion one with auother: when they
appointed, with the office of matrimony, that the communion be given to the
married couple at every wedding; that it might appear, not only that they both
made a profession of the Christian religion, but that they both agreed in the
profession of the same principles, and joined together in the same communion
with the reformed Protestant churches, and with one another. And I think this
is enough to convince you of the justice of our mother's injunctions, that we
should not marry any man, how religious soever he was, unless he was of the
same opinion in religion with ourselves; or, as I observed above, that, as was
the custom, the man and the wife might communicate together.


Sist. I take that to be done principally to prevent Protestants marrying with
Papists; and to discover the fraud, if there was any; you see the practice is
left off now.


Eld. sist. I know it is left off, since other and lesser differences among
Protestants have made mutual communion more difficult; but I think the reason
of the thing remains, viz. that every couple should know what communion they
are of, and should be always, if possible, sincere and without constraint of
the same communion with one another.


Sist. I rather think it is left off, because it is not thought to be of so much
moment, as they thought of it then.


Eld. sist. That is then because religion itself is less in fashion than it
used to be, which indeed is too true; also marriages are now wholly taken up
with mirth and gay things; but in those days matrimony seems to have been
understood, as it really is in itself, a solemn and serious thing: not to be
ventured on rashly, considered slightly, or performed with levity and
looseness; it is a transaction of the greatest weight, attended with
circumstances of the greatest importance, and consequences of the utmost
concern to our welfare or misery; the happiness of life, the prosperity of
families, and indeed the interest of the soul, is exceedingly dependent on the
good or bad conduct of both parties in this affair: and to run headlong upon
it, is rightly compared to a horse rushing into the battle, and argues a
miserable thoughtlessness of what is before us.


Sist. Dear sister, you terrify me with talking thus: what is it you would have
me do?


Eld. sist. I would have you take some measures, such an opportunity will not
fail (in your conversation with this gentleman) to present you with, that you
may know not only negatively, that he is no hater and despiser of God and
religion, but positively what his principles in religion are; you may go as far
farther as you see room for it, but less than this you can never be satisfied
with; and can never answer it to God, to yourself, to your mother's dying
injunctions, nor to your children, if you should have any, to venture upon
marrying him without it.


Sist. If Mr. -- heard your discourse, he would think you were very much his
enemy.


Eld. sist. If he was in his senses, he would think me very much his friend.


Sist. No, no, quite the contrary I assure you.


Eld. sist. Pray, my dear, let me ask you one question; for I must own to you
this is one of my great suspicions; has he inquired nothing after your
religion, the profession you make, or the opinion you are of? has he asked you
no question about it neither?


Sist. No, not a word, he knows better; he knows I would give him but a short
answer, if he would ask me any thing about my religion: what, do you think I Will
be catechis'd already? no, no; it is not come to that neither.


Eld. sist. This is one of the strongest grounds of suspicion to me, and
assures me that he has very little regard to religion in general, that he can
pretend to marry you, and know nothing whether you are a Heathen or a
Christian, an Atheist or a religious person, a Papist or a Protestant; the man
can have no great value for religion, that it is so little concerned whether
his wife have any, or no; for I take the thing to weigh as much on the one side
as on the other, where there is any serious consideration at bottom.


Sist. We have had no discourse about it.


Eld. sist. It seems you are pretty well agreed; that is to say, that neither
of you trouble your heads about it; I must confess I think it will be a
dreadful match.


Sist. Why so! I tell you I have a way to prevent all the mischief you fear,
and that is, as I told you before, I am resolved we will agree; for, if he is
not of my opinion I will be of his opinion, and so we will never have any
strife.


Eld. sist. But suppose you cannot do this; for I take all that for loose talk:
for example, suppose he should be a Papist?


Sist. I will not so much as suppose such a thing; I wonder you can suggest it of
him.


Eld. sist. You seem to be very much in the fashion of our city ladies, sister;
I am sorry for it.


Sist. What fashion's that, sister?


Eld. sist Why, of reserving their choice of principles, till they see what
principles their husbands shall be of.


Sist. And is it not a very obliging custom, sister, in the young ladies? I
think the gentleman owe them a great deal for so much compliance.


Eld. sist. There seems to be something of forecast in it, I confess, viz. that
they may be in the posture to take any thing that offers; but there is nothing
of serious religion in it.


Sist. Well there is a great deal of good humor in it; and it takes off the
occasions of religious disputes afterward, which I take to be the worst kind
of family-breaches.


Eld. sist. But is not a concurrence of principles beforehand a much better
way, especially considering that the inquiry is made during a state of
distance, and while there is a power of preventing the mischiefs of being
unequally yoked?


Sist. Well, I am persuaded there was never such a thing done, except by my
stiff, formal sister; did over a young gentleman, when he came to court his
mist^^^, examine her, to know her principles, and ask her (...) religion she
was of; or did ever a young lady, when she was courted by any gentleman, set up
to catechize him upon the articles of his creed, except, as I say, my surly
sister?


Eld. sist. Let me answer that question with a question, sister; did ever a
young lady, that had any regard to religion, and the future happiness of her
life, suffer herself to be courted two months by a strange person coming out of
Italy, from the very bowels of superstition, and the very kingdom of Popery,
and go on with him, even to drawing of writings, and never know what religion
he was of, or whether he had any religion, or no, except that she had heard by
accident that he was not an Atheist?


Sist. Well, I must take him for better and for worse, you know; I Will make the
best of him I can.


Eld. sist. I am very sorry that I cannot prevail with you to prevent your own
misfortunes, when it is so easy to be done.


Sist. You propose what I cannot so much as mention to him: I tell you it would
be the rudest thing; I Am sure if he should do so to me, I should spit in his
face, and bid him go and look for one that was religious enough for him; sure,
never any such thing was done in the world!


Eld. sist. I wonder you can talk so, sister! do you not remember the passages
about Mr. -- when he courted my cousin --; did he not enter into a most
serious, pretty discourse with her about religion, when we were all at table
with them? and don't you remember we all said ay, and you too, sister, when you
heard it, that he did it with so much modesty, and so handsomely, that nothing
could be more becoming? and did not you, as well as I, call her a thousand
fools for pretending to be disgusted at it.


Sist. But she took ill his public manner of doing it, which I think was wrong
too.


Eld. sist. But I find you don't know or don't remember the rest of the story:
she exposed herself to the last degree by resenting it. The case was this: the
gentleman had courted her some weeks, and liked her, nay loved her very well;
but was greatly perplexed to find out what taste of religion his mistress had;
he was loath to fall point blank upon her with the question, just as you say in
your case, yet he was not willing to be satisfied with a second hand relation
neither; but one day when we were all together at my cousin's, the young
gentleman sapped there, and after supper her mother and he and I entering into
a discourse together of several matters, at last we began to talk of religion,
and particularly of religious matches, when we were agreeably surprised to ^ear
him talk for near half an hour wholly upon that subject; you were not there
just when he talked of it, but we all gave you an account of it.


Sist. I was not there; I supped at London that night and came to you the next
day, I suppose.


Eld. sist. You did so; but it would have pleased you to have heard him talk.
He began with the meaning and nature of religion, how it consisted chiefly in
natural duties, the effects of the knowledge and acknowledgement of God
governing the world, to whom we owed the homage of our lives, and all we
enjoyed, and must account for the use or abuse of them: then, he observed how
pleasant and agreeable a religious life was, how it was religion alone that
made life happy, families pleasant, society agreeable, and relations
comfortable; how miserably some families were brought up for the want of it;
how beautiful it was to see an unity between relations in matters of that
nature, and how dreadful the strife was in families where it was otherwise.


Sist. Where was she all this while?


Eld. sist. She sat by him, and he held her by the hand all the while: he went
on then to tell us a great many pleasant stories of families that he had known;
how in some the husband was religious, and the wife Atheistic and profane; and
in others, the wife was religious, and the husband rakish, loose and
profligate, and how miserable the one made the life of the other. Then he gave
himself a loose to talk for the constant, never fading felicity of families
where was a harmony in religious things between husband and wife; and then, to
try her, I suppose, or perhaps to prevent her thinking he pointed his discourse
at her, he turned to her, and smiling, My dear, says he, if there be any
defect, on that account, between you and me, it will be on my side; but I hope
to be helped forward by you.


Sist. That was a kind of a wheedle, rather than a serious turn in his talk:
and I suppose she took it so.


Eld. sist. No, no, she took it otherwise, I assure you, for he might easily
see she was not pleased. However, he went on, and told us a long story of a
couple that were married, and were both very religious, and yet, said he, they
never had any happiness, any agreement, or any practical religion in the
family; this put me upon inquiry into the circumstances of it. Why, Madam, says
he, one was of one opinion in religion, and one was of another, both of them
were tenacious of their own opinion, and censorious of the other. One went to
one place of worship, and another to another: one prayed to God in one part of
the house, and one in another. Why, says I, they prayed to the same God I hope;
sure charity might have taught them to have prayed together! so far from that,
Madam, says he, that they not only never prayed with one another, but I believe
they scarce ever prayed for one another in their lives, but looked upon one
another as Heathens and Publicans, and such as God himself would not hear.

This was a sad family, Sir, said I; but I hope there are very few such in this
nation, where religion is so heartily espoused. Truly, Madam, says he, it may
teach us what occasion there is for us to seek out for religious wives, and to
take care to be agreeable husbands to them, when we have them. And here he said
a great many handsome things indeed of the little concern men generally took
upon themselves, either to marry religious wives, or to see that the opinions
of those they married were not too much shocking with their own; and especially
that when men had religious wives, or women had religious husbands they did not
study, as much as lay in them, both sides, to bring their opinions to agree
(...) one another, bearing with one another, yielding as much as possible to
one another, and the like, that, as the scripture said, their prayers might not
be hindered.


Sist. Well, and was this the discourse that she did not like?


Eld sist. I am sure her mother and I liked it; but she behaved herself so
simply about it the next day, that gave him a surfeit of her religion, and he
declined her afterward upon that very account; for, as he told me since, very
seriously, she discovered such a temper at that time, such a general dislike of
a religious life, and (...) a regular family, that made him particularly afraid
of her.


Sist. Ay, ay, he should have gone, if he was so nice, I should have liked his
discourse no better than she did.


Eld. sist. How can you say so, sister, when you cannot but remember how you
did like it when you heard of it.


Sist. I should have thought it was too public though, and that it was a kind
of forcing me to a kind of necessity of giving an account of my opinions
whether I would or no.


Eld. sist. Well, what you would have done I know not; but I think no woman in
her senses could have disliked such a principle as he went upon; it plainly
showed her that he was a man that placed the principal felicity of his life
upon having a religious wife, a religious conversation in his family, and a
religious government of it as it increased.


Sist. What was that to the purpose! She would have had him without it, and he
might have talked of it afterward.


Eld. sist. Yes, yes, she would have had him without it, that was her folly:
but he was resolved he would not have her without it, and that was his wisdom;
and there was an absolute necessity for him to try beforehand what he had to
expect.


Sist. Well, I would not have been tried by him; he should even have gone I
say, and taken a fool for his own finishing, where he could have found her.


Eld. sist. Well, and he did go; and you know he married afterward a very
sensible, sober, and religious (...) man, and they are a very happy family as
any I (...) whereas, our foolish cousin, you see, has married a (...) a fellow
of no religion; and is as miserable as most as it is possible for a woman that
has a good estate to be made in this world.


Sist. Well, sister, and how do you bring this story down to my case? I hope I
am not going to marry a rake, as she has done; if I thought it was so I would
soon clear myself.


Eld. sist. No, no, sister, I do not say so; but there are many kinds of
husbands to make a sober woman miserable, besides rakes, that I assure you; nor
was it upon that account I told you the story.


Sist. What, differing in opinions, you mean? I must confess, I think, sister,
you are too nice in that case, and run it up, I say, too high. I can give many
instances where such matters do very well.


Eld. sist. Pretty well, you should have said; and I know where you are going
to name a family. I suppose you mean our cousin Martha --, and our friend James
--; one a strict church woman, and the other a Quaker.


Sist. Well, suppose I did mean those; they live very comfortably, and love one
another very well.


Eld. sist. I am glad you have named them, because I would argue from the best
example you can give. I allow they live as well as it is possible for two of so
wide and irreconcilable principles to do, and it is owing to a world of good
humor, affection, and charity in both of them; but if you think there is not
something wanting between them, which ought to be between a man and his wife,
something essential to what we call happiness, something they would give half
their estate to have, and the want of which robs them of the sweetest part of
relation, and of the best and most solid comfort of a married life; or, if you
think that they are not both sensible of it, you are greatly mistaken.


Sist. I do not converse much with them, not I, but I know they are a very
loving couple, and every body takes (...) of it, and admires them for it.


Eld. sist. Before I go on where I was speaking, let (...) take notice to you,
that your very last words now are (...) argument on my side. It is true, they
are admired for their kind and pleasant way of living one with another; and why
is it? but because it is so seldom, so rare, so wonderful indeed, to find two
of different opinions agree so well, that all people wonder at these two: and
shall any young woman, that values her peace, and lays any stress upon the
happiness of an agreement with which it must needs be next to a miracle, if she
has any such happiness?


Sist. You do not know but there may be many more such.


Eld. sist. Well, but I Will keep to your own example, and I will convince you,
sister, that even in these two who are happy to a miracle, yet there is an
exception to their felicity; and, though they love entirely, and that love
covers a multitude of things, yet I say, they find something wanting, which
other people have, and something that they would be glad to have, and I have
had frequent occasions, in serious discourse with her, to hear her speak her
mind freely to me, in this very case, particularly, I will give you one example
of it, viz. One Sunday morning, when I went to church with her, O! said she to
me, cousin, if I could but get this dear Jemmy of mine to go to church with me!
Well, say, I, What then? What then! says she, why, then I should be the
happiest woman upon earth: methinks it is the melancholiest thing continued
she, to go along to the worship of God, and the man that I love, that is to me
as my own soul, will not worship with me; it breaks my heart; it quite takes away
all the comforts of my life. A while after this, as we walked along the street
to go to church, she fetched a deep sigh: What Is the matter with you, said I,
cousin? The matter, cousin! says she, ^ook there, you will see what is the matter;
there is Mrs. --, with her husband and all her children, going hand in hand to
serve God together: they live a heavenly life; while we, though we love one
another better th^n they do a great deal, yet live like two strangers on the
Sabbath Day, whatever we do all the rest of the week. Now, What think you of
all their ap^^^^ ^t affection to one another, sister? Will that make (...) loss?


Sist. They live very comfortably, for all that; and their love makes up all
those intervals in their satisfaction.


Eld. sist. Well, I Will tell you how comfortably they live; I assure you, though
they are patterns to the whole world, for extraordinary affection, and their
love is so uninterrupted, that it does make up abundance of other things; yet
here, I say, it makes up no intervals, I can assure you of it; (...), I (...)
verily, that affection, which it is confessed they have for one another, and
for which they are both so admired, makes it worse; at least it makes it the
more grievous to bear; and the part I am telling you will prove it; pray let me
go on with it. I came back with her and dined; and after dinner, honest James
takes up his gloves and his cane, and came and kissed her, and prepares to go
to the Quaker-meeting. She could hold no longer then, but burst out into tears;
he was extremely anxious to know what ailed her, but she could not speak; she
was unwilling to grieve him, and unwilling to say any thing that was unkind; he
pressed her a long time, and said a thousand tender kind things, that I hardly
expected from him; but that made her cry the more. At last, I said to him,
smiling, I know what troubles her, but you will not relieve her. Will Not I, says he,
a little moved, Why do thou say so? I would let out my blood to do her any
good; and she knows I will stick at nothing to do for her. Why, says I, you
will not serve God with her. Will Not I, says he, yes, I would with all my heart, if
she would let me. This I found laid a foundation for some dispute about their
principles; but she wisely avoided that, and I perceived it, so I put it off, I
dare say, says I, she would give all she has in the world, you would but go to
church with her now. At that she burst out, though full of tears, Ay, says she,
I would give him back my jointure with all my heart. He took her in his arms,
and with all the tenderest and kindest expressions that he was capable of,
endeavored to pacify her, and put an end to it, a thing (...) could not
dispute about without unkindness, and ^^^^^fore better to be avoided: but it
took up the whole afternoon to restore them to one another, and she neither
went to the church, nor he to the meeting; and yet here was nothing but
kindness and affection between them all this while.


Sist. I never heard any thing of this before.


Eld. sist. But I have heard a great deal more from her, and from him too;
though she loves him to an extremity, and, to give him his due, merits all her
affection; yet, as she is a very sober religious woman, that is ready to break
her heart to think sometimes what a life she lives; she can scarce talk to me
of any thing else, I having been something more intimate with her on those
occasions than ordinary.


Sist. What has she to complain of? Has she not a kind husband? And does he not
give her all the (...) and freedom in the world? Does she not go as fine, and
dress as well as she pleases? Does he not keep her a coach, and give her leave
to give her own liveries, and go where, and do what she will? Does she not live
like a queen? What can she complain of?


Eld. sist. Her case, in a word, sister, is the very case our dear mother
warned us of; and it is not hard to tell you what she has to complain of; she
is a very sober, religious woman, that serves God night and day, with a
sincerity and devotion not easy to be found among women, as the world goes now;
and I Will tell you what grieves her, and what she complains of. Her husband is
as religious too in his way as she is in hers: but, as there is no harmony or
concurrence in their several principles and ways of worship, so there can be no
public, stated family worship. He does not join with her, nor she cannot join
with him; so all the thing called family religion, the glory of a married
state, and the comfort of family society is entirely lost: the servants are
left ungoverned, the children are unguided; and there again is her grief
doubled, she has four little young children. It is true, he is a man of too
good a humor to deny or restrain her in the education of her children; has it
is a sad thing to her to be obliged to instruct and caution her children
against the practice of their father, whose life (...) to be their pattern, and
his practice their example. O sister! if ever you come to look into such a
condition, with a feeling sense of it as your own, you will find it is not all
the tenderness of the most affectionate husband in the world, can make up the
loss of these things. On the other hand, he has his dissatisfactions too; he is
as sad on the account of her difference from him, as she is for his difference
from her; so that, in short, the unhappiness is ^^^tual.


Sist. They should have considered and prevented those things beforehand.


Eld. sist. That Is true, sister; and that is the reason of all my discourse to
you: that is my proposal to you, and the reason why I press you so much to come
to a certainty in these things. You will have sad reflections hereafter, when
it is past remedy.


Sist. I am not so nice in that point: I told you my remedy for it; if he cannot
come up to me, I can come up to him. I am sure he is no Quaker.


Eld. sist. I hear you, sister, you make light of it now, I believe he is no
Quaker, but he may be worse; and you are not sure he will equal that Quaker in
goodness of humor, kindness and affection, the want of which, I must till you,
will make the want of the other be so much the worse to bear.


Sist. Well, I must run the venture of it, I think; it is gone too far to break
it off now.


Eld. sist. I have not been persuading you to break it off, sister; you mistake
me; I am only arguing, or rather persuading you to inform yourself of things,
and know beforehand what you are going to do, that you may not run into misery
blindfold, and make your marriage be, as old Hobbes said of his death, A leap
in the dark.


Sist. I think all marriage is a leap in the dark, in one respect or another.


Eld. sist. Well, sister, if it be so, it should not be so in matters of
religion, in whatever other case it is so; that should be clear, whatever is
doubtful; that should be examined into, and perfectly discovered, whatever is
omitted; (...) mistakes in this are fatal to both sides, and often
irre^^^vable, and the consequences dismal.


Sist. It is all a hazard, and that amongst the rest.


Eld. sist. No, no, sister; I am firm in my opinion; you and I have often
argued it when you seemed to be of my mind. It is true, there is a hazard in
every part of the change of life; we risk our peace, our affection, our
liberty, our fortunes; but we ought never to risk our religion.


Sist. Why I am not running the risk of my own religion, though I do not know
his.


Eld. sist. Yes, truly in some measure, sister, you do, and your own words
acknowledged it just now. Did not you say, that if he would not be of your
opinion, you would be of his? And is it not often that we see young women
change their opinions, nay, change the very principles of their religion, in
compliance with their husbands?


Sist. Well, and is it not very well to do so?


Eld. sist. If their principles were ill-founded before, they do well to change
them, to be sure; but is it not oftener that they rather abandon principle than
exchange it; lose their religion than increase it? for you cannot suggest, that
all the women who have changed their opinions, in compliance with their
husbands, were wrong before, and have changed for the better.


Sist. It is better so far, that it takes away the foundation of family
breaches, of which you speak.


Eld. sist. But it is a sad exchange, if it be wrong; for the woman then
exchanges the peace of her conscience for peace with her husband; loses her
religion, and gives up her principles, instead of exchanging them for better.


Sist. There may be some compliance sure, without entirely abandoning
principles; you propose no medium between right and wrong.


Eld. sist. Why, take our cousin we are speaking of, or her husband the Quaker,
(...) them stand for the example; suppose she, in compliance with him, for you
know she has affection enough to do any possible thing to oblige him, should
turn Quaker, would she not retain a sting in her soul, that would destroy all
her inward peace?


Sist. I don't know what to say to that; Quakers are Christians, I hope?


Eld. sist. I will not enter into that; I Will allow them to be Christians too; but
take it of him as well as of her; suppose him to change then, and come over to
her, then it would be the same with him; which is all one to the case in hand.
Pray where is the felicity of such a match, where one or other is supposed to
act without conscience, or against conscience, all their days for conjugal
peace, and to sacrifice principle to affection? are not these still invincible
arguments for what I am persuading to?


Sist. I scarce know what you are persuading to, not I.


Eld. sist. Yes you do, sister, very well; however I Will repeat it as often as
you say so: I am arguing the absolute necessity of young people comparing their
religious principles and opinions before marriage; and seeing that they agree,
at least so far as to lay no foundation of a religious breach in the family
after marriage; that they may worship God together; join in family precepts,
and support family religion; that they may agree in their instructions to their
children, join in family precepts and examples; that there may be no disputings
or dividings against one another, but a mutual harmony in the propagating their
own eternal interests, and that they may go hand in hand in the true way to
heaven.


Sist. And cannot this happen to them without settlement of circumstances
before hand, that we must capitulate about religion as we do about jointures,
and settle principles as we do fortunes, always before hand.


Eld. sist. That it may not or cannot happen so, I will not say: but if you
will take the world at large, as it is now stated, between those that have no
religion at all, and those who differ from others, you must allow, sister, it
is a lottery of a thousand blanks to one prize; and who that values their own
peace, would venture the odds?


Sist. I believe I shall venture for all that.


Eld. sist. Then either you have no principle now, sister, or, it is ten to one
but you give it up when you are (...).


Sist. Perhaps you may be mistaken in both.


Eld. sist. If I am, there is a third, which I was going to add, but restrained
it in respect to you, in which I believe I shall not be mistaken.


Sist. Let us have it, however.


Eld. sist. If you will have it then, it is this; that (to repeat the former)
either, as I said, you have no principle now, or will give up your principles
when you are married, or will be very miserable in a continual family strife to
maintain them.


Sist. It must all be ventured, sister; I see no remedy now; there is no going
back at this time of the day.

[After this discourse, the eldest sister, seeing her resolute, gave over, and
the young lady was as good as her word: for she put it all to the venture, as
will appear in the following dialogue.]


DIALOGUE II.
THE young lady mentioned in the foregoing dialogue is now to be viewed in
another station of life; she was not altogether so thoughtless of her
circumstance, or so unconcerned as she seemed to be by her discourse to her
sister about what was before her; but she had not the conduct or resolution of
her sisters to carry her through; however, she did take one step sufficient to
leave a sad example of a father perfectly unconcerned about the religious
settlement of his children, and making the good of their souls no part of his
care.

It was but a few days after the discourse which she had held with her sister,
that her father and she had the following dialogue one evening, after the
gentleman who courted her was gone away; her father being in a parlour all
alone, called her to him, and began with her thus:

Fa. Well, child, I suppose your ceremonies begin to be pretty well over now;
when are we to bring this business to a conclusion?


Da. I am in no haste, Sir.


Fa. Well, but Mr. -- is in haste; you may be sure he would be willing to have
the inconveniences of coming and going thus late be over; and as long as both
sides (...) satisfied, why would we keep him in suspense?


Da. I do not keep him in suspense, Sir.


Fa. Well then, if you are agreed, let us put an end to it, my dear, and tell
me what day you will be married, and I Will make the appointment.


Da. Agreed, Sir! I have agreed to nothing, it is all between him and you.


Fa. How do you mean child? he has now waited (...) you these six or seven
weeks; I hope you know one another's mind before now.


Da. We have spent six or seven weeks indeed in his visits, talking and
pr^^^^ing of things in general; but I am not much the wiser of it.


Fa. Why, you are a little better (...) I hope than you were at first, child,
do you like the gentleman, or have you any thing to object?


Da. Sir, I don't trouble myself much about objections: Sir, I leave it all to
you; I resolve to do as you will have me to do: I will not do as my sister did.


Fa. Well, you are in the right there; but I hope there is no occasion neither;
this gentleman is a man of sobriety, and of a good character.


Da. I hope, Sir, you have informed yourself fully of that; for I leave it all
to you, Sir; and about his religion too.


Fa. I have known him a great many years, child; he is a very honest good ^ort
of a gentleman, I assure you.


Da. I hope you have good grounds to be satisfied, Sir, for I depend upon you,
Sir, for every thing; I know you would not propose him to me, if he was not a
very sober good man.


Fa. I am fully satisfied of that, my dear.


Da. And of his being a religious person, Sir? you know what my mother obliged
us to on her deathbed, I hope, Sir, you have a good account of his being a
sober, religious man, I leave it all to you, Sir.


Fa. Yes, yes, my dear, he is a very religious good man, for ought I know, I
assure you.


Da. He is a protestant, Sir, is not he?


Fa. A protestant, child! yes, yes, he was always: protestant all the while I
traded with him; I have had an account of it from several people. A protestant!
yes, yes, you may be sure he is a protestant, I dare say he is.


Da. Well, Sir, if you are satisfied, I have no more to say.


Fa. Nay, child, why do thou put it so all upon me? I believe he is a good
man, and religious enough; I did not bring him up, nor I have not asked him how
religious he is; I do not enter into these things with folks, every one's
religion is to himself.


Da. Well, Sir, if you are satisfied, I must be satisfied, to be sure.


Fa. Nay, I would have you be satisfied, too, child, cannot you ask him what
religion he is of?

[Here the father seemed a (...) unwilling to have it all ^y upon him.]


Da. I cannot ask him such a question, not I; besides, Sir, if you are
satisfied, I shall look no farther.


Fa. I know not what occasion there is to be so scrupulous: you see what
ridiculous work your sister made of it, and yet married the same man two years
after.


Da. Sir, I do not make any scruples, not I, if you are satisfied; I shall do
as you would, have me; I do not suppose you would have me have him, if he was
not a very sober man.

[She has nothing in her but the same dull story of doing every thing her
father would have her do.]


Fa. I tell thee, child, I dare say he is a very sober, good man, and will make
a very kind husband; I can say no more to thee.


Da. All I desire to know is, that he is a Protestant; I hope you are sure of
that, Sir.


Fa. Dear child, what makes thee talk so?


Da. He has lived a long while in Italy, Sir, where they say, they are all
Papists.


Fa. Why so did I, child, when I was a young man, but never turned Papist, I
dare say Mr. -- is a Protestant; I never heard any one suspect him before.

It may be seen by this dull and empty discourse on both sides, that this poor
young lady went on tanquam boves, like the ox to the slaughter, (...) knowing
or considering, that it was for her life. She resolved all her scruples into
that weak way of answering, I leave it a^^ to you, Sir, I hope you are
satisfied, Sir; and I Will do as you would have me, Sir, and the like; not
considering, that the had a father that laid no stress upon any thing, but the
money; his whole care was for the settlement, and the estate, not inquiring
into the principles of the person, and therefore his answers are as silly for a
father, as hers were for a wife, viz. That he dare say the gentleman was a very
good, (...) man; that he has known him a long time; and did not question but he
was a Protestant, and the like, in a word, the (...) all to her father; and the
father perfectly indifferent as to matters of religion, left it out of his
inquiry. And thus they were married in a few weeks after, and abundance of
mirth and jollity they had; which covered all the appearances of other things
for a great while.

At length, the lady went home to her house in the city, which was
magnificently furnished. Among other rich furniture, the rooms were exceedingly
stored with a noble collection of very (...) paintings, done by the best
masters in Italy; the part of Italy where this gentleman had lived, viz. the
duke of Tuscany's country, being particularly eminent for choice pictures. It
happened after she had been some time at home, had settled her house, and
finished the decorations of her rooms, that her husband bringing some pictures
home, which were newly arrived from Italy, had, among others, three very choice
pieces ^ong up in their bedchamber; whereof one being a picture of the
crucifixion, and extremely valuable and fine, he (...) to have hanged up by the
bedside.

His wife, not used to such things, perfectly ignorant of the design, not at
all acquainted with the use made of them in Popish countries, took no manner of
notice of it at first, taking it to be only brought in there, as it was a most
noble piece of painting; and that her husband thought it was the best thing he
could grace her chamber with. It happened, her two sisters came together some
time after, as is usual, to see her house, and to see the fine collection of
paintings, which they had been told so much of. And after some time, their
sister and their new brother led them through all the apartments, which were
indeed extremely fine. The brother-in-law, as what he took great delight in,
made it his business to tell them the design of the several pictures, what
places or fine houses such and such represented, what stories and what faces
others were drawn for; and the like: And, being his wife's sisters, he treated
them with all the freedom and kindness imaginable.

When they came to the crucifixion which hung by the bedside, he told them,
there was one of the finest pieces of painting in England; told them the name
of the painter that had drawn it, who, he said, was one of the best masters in
Italy; and I Will assure you, sister, says he, this is counted a fine thing in
Italy.

But why must it hang in your bedchamber, brother? says the other married
sister, not suspecting any thing; for her eldest sister had not told her any
thing of what she had said to her sister. O Madam, says he, they always have
these things in their bed-chambers in Italy on a religious account. Well, says
the sister, but as we do not make use of them that way, methinks they are
better any where else. Why sister, says he, our bed-chambers are places where
we are, or ought to be most serious. Why, says she again, but we that are
Protestants do not make a religious use of them. Not so much perhaps, says he,
as the Romans do; but I cannot say but they may be useful to assist devotion.
Not at all, says the sister. At least, Madam, says he, they can be no
disadvantage to us; we want all possible helps in our adorations. We have the
promise of the Spirit of God to assist us, says the sister, very warmly, and
need no idolatrous pictures. He saw she was tart, and seemed to he forward to
dispute, which he avoided; so he called them to look on another picture, and
that passed off the discourse.

After they had gone through several apartments, and had admired the fine
paintings, as indeed they well deserved, they came to his closet. He would have
avoided going in, and told them it was in confusion, and not worth their
seeing; but his wife having told them it was her husband's closet, they would
not be denied. When they went in, they were surprised with the most charming
pictures that their eyes had ever beheld, with abundance of rarities, which
their new brother, being very curious, had picked up in his travels; and, in a
little room, on one side of his closet, upon a table covered with car^^^ of the
finest work they had ever seen, stood a pix or (...) of the host, all of gold,
and above them an ^^^^-piece of most exquisite painting. He was indeed jealous
of being betrayed by those things, but there being none but the ladies, who had
never seen such things before, and knew nothing by the form, they retired
without so much as discovering what it was; and as for his wife, she was so
perfectly ignorant, that she was easily imposed upon.

They passed from this place to the other side of the closet, where were
abundance of very fine pieces; but here the elder could not forbear observing,
that all the pictures on that whole side of the room were religious pieces,
and, though still without much suspicion, she said to him, I observe brother,
you gentlemen that have lived in Italy, are so in love with popish customs,
that you are always full of these church paintings; here is nothing but
representations of Christ and the Virgin Mary, in one shape or another, in
every room in your house. She went on jestingly for some time till she came to
the upper end of the room, to a picture which hung just over an easy chair, and
which had a curtain drawn over it: he thought she would not have let her
curiosity outrun her good manners, and so did not apprehend her opening it; but
she made no scruple of offering to fling back the curtain; but soon found it
would not run back, being, as she found afterward, to draw up in festoons with
pullies: however, she discovered by what she had done, that the picture was the
same with that in the bedchamber, viz. A large crucifix, or picture of the
crucifixion.

She said no more, but hastened to view what was farther to be seen, yet so, as
that it was easy to discover she was in no little disorder. Her sister that
came with her discovered it first, and asked what ailed her? Then the new
married sister, whose house she was in, came to her with the same question; she
owned to them she was not very well, and that presently gave her an excuse to
withdraw into the woman's apartment, where she had some room to recollect
herself. However, she took care not to give the least cause to suspect what
ailed her, till she got an opportunity, when no body was in the room with her
but her youngest sister (she who was first married) and then burst out into
tears, and taking her sister about the neck, with the greatest passion
imaginable, O my dear sister, says she, this poor child is utterly undone.
Undone! says her sister, what do you mean? I think she is nobly married. O
sister! I tell you she is undone! the man's a Papist! somebody came into the
room just a^ she had said this, so that her sister had no time to ask her any
further; and she to prevent it, added, I Will tell you more by and by; so they
passed it over.

You may be sure it was after this a very uneasy hour the two sisters spent in
the ceremonies of their visit, both longing earnestly to be at liberty to talk
together, one to disburden her mind which was oppressed with what she had
formerly suspected, and now found confirmed; and the other to hear the
particulars of what she was so much surprised at.

It was not long before they got away, and as soon as ever they were in the
coach, the married sister said, Dear sister, you have so surprised me with what
you told me just now, that I thought every minute an hour till I got away, that
I might talk about it; I entreat you what makes you talk as you do?


Eld. sist. O sister! I am too well satisfied of it: I am sure it is so. I
suspected it all along before they were married, but now I am convinced of it:
I am as sure of it as if I had seen him at high mass.

[Here she tells her what she had observed upon his pictures and crucifixes.]


Married sist. Now you surprise me again, you say you suspected it all along.


Eld. sist. Indeed I did; though I own I know no reason why I did so.


Mar. sist. But why did not you warn her of it? she ought to have known it;
certainly she would never have married him if she had known it. That was very
unkind not to warn her of it.


Eld. sist. I did very plainly tell her my suspicions; but as I had no ground
to fasten it upon him, it made very little impression upon her; nor could I
really say it was so.


Mar. sist. Well, I would have pressed her to a solemn inquiry into it; you
might have prevented her ruin, if you had done it in time; now she is undone
indeed, if it be as you say, and there is no room to prevent it.


Eld. sist. You cannot think I had so little concern for her, as not to tell
her my suspicious, and to use all the arguments I was capable of, to persuade
and prevail with her to inquire into his principles; for I knew too well what
the dwelling twenty years in Italy might do.

[Here she recites to her the particulars of the whole dialogue foregoing,
between her and her younger sister.]


Mar. sist. Poor child! She is ruined indeed. She has leaped headlong into it,
in spite of good advice, and her ruin is of her own procuring. But what will
you do now, sister? will you let her know it?


Eld. sist. No, no, I will not be the messenger of her sorrows, she will find it out
soon enough; the thing will discover itself too soon.


Mar. sist. Dear sister, what does my father say to it. Does he know it?


Eld. sist. You know, sister, my father gives himself very little trouble about
such things. I dare say he never inquired into it, or concerned himself about
it.


Mar. sist. Does he know any thing of it now?


Eld. sist. Truly, I do not know: but I know that after I had pressed her so
earnestly about it, she did mention it to my father once at a distance in their
discourse, as that she did not question but he was a good, sober man, or else
he [her father] would not have recommended him; and added, I hope he is a
Protestant, Sir?


Mar. sist. Well, what said my father to that part?


Eld. sist. He answered after the same ^light way as those who do make the main
part none of their care. Yes, yes, child, a Protestant! I dare say he is; he
was always a Protestant when I was in Italy with him, and every body knows he
is a Protestant; you need not question that I dare say.


Mar. sist. Poor child! she had no sincere concern upon her about it; if she
had, she would not have been put off in a matter of so much moment, with a bare
position; taking it for granted; or I dare say, it is so; without inquiring
into it.


Eld. sist. It is too true; she has not made it much her concern, and I am so
much the more afraid for her now.


Mar. sist. Afraid for her, say you; what, are you afraid of her turning papist?


Eld. sist. Why, yes, I am. You know I told you what an answer she gave me to
that very point several times, viz. That if he would not be of her opinion, she
would be of his; that if he was a Christian Catholic, she was a Catholic
Christian, and they would have no strife about that, and the like; and yet that
is not all my concern neither.


Mar. sist. What is it then?


Eld. sist. Why, I fear more the insinuations and subtilty of his tongue, his
unwearied solicitation, the powerful motives of a man perfectly master of the
art of persuasion; and that the more sweetness he has in his temper (for he is
really of a most engaging disposition) the more influence his words will have
on her, to win her over to error, not merely complaisance to him as her
husband, but by her not being able to answer his reasonings.


Mar. sist. I confess it is hard to resist the force of those persuasions, the
reasons for which we cannot rid our hands of by argument. And one is apt to
think, one ought to comply with what we cannot confute, otherwise the Papists
will tell us, we are Protestant, we know not why; a Jew may tell us we are
Christians, we know not why; and an Atheist may tell us we are religious, we
know not why, and so on.


Eld. sist. And that which is worse, if there is not breaking the thing to her;
to talk to her of it, is to anticipate her misfortunes. Perhaps he designs to
conceal it from her for good and all, and at least it may be a great while
before he discovers it; and all that time she will be happy, in not thinking
herself so miserable as she is.


Mar. sist. I allow you, it is not fit to mention it to her first; and yet I am
afraid if she finds it out she will endeavor to conceal it from us.


Eld. sist. I doubt so; and by that means we are perfectly deprived of all
opportunity of assisting her or endeavoring to fortify her against the
insinuations of any to turn her to Popery.


Mar. sist. But I think we should break it to my father.


Eld. sist. I know not what to say to that. I am afraid his indifference in the
thing should be a means to discover it to her, and bring some inconvenience or
other with it.


Mar. sist. I do not see any danger of that; but I think it is fit he should
know it on many accounts.


Eld. sist. I acknowledge I think he should know it, if it were possible to
engage him not to disclose it; but unless it can be done so, I would not have
any hand in telling it him, upon any account whatever.

[While they were in this dilemma, and doubtful what to do in it, a^ to telling
their father, they were delivered from it, by their father himself, as will
appear in the following discourse. As soon as they came home, their father
began with them; for he was more impatient to open his mind to them, than they
were on the other hand doubtful about consulting with him upon this unhappy
case; both sides being therefore willing to talk of it, they could not want an
opportunity; and the father, after supper, began with his new married daughter
thus:]


Fa. Well, Betty, you have been to visit your sister in her new house, I find.
How do you like things?


Mar. sist. Sir, she is nobly married to be sure, she has a house like a palace.


Eld. sist. I think there is the finest paintings that ever I saw in my life.
He has laid out vast sums sure in pictures.


Fa. He always had the finest collection of paintings of any merchant in
Leghorn. He is a great lover of art, and has a nice judgment, which are the two
only things that can make buying so many pictures rational; for his pieces are
so well chosen, that he may sell them when he pleases, for above a thousand
pounds more than they cost.


Eld. sist. I like his fancy to pictures very well; but methinks I don't admire
his having so many crucifixes and church pieces among them.


Fa. It is the custom in Italy, child; all people have them.


Eld. sist. That is, because they make a religious use of them. But I think
Protestants should not be so fond of them, who make no such use of them. It
looks so like Popery, that if the mind was not furnished against them, it seems
to give a lift that way; and then I observe he hangs them all just as they do.
His crucifixes and passion pictures hang all by the bedside. His altar pieces,
just at the upper end of the room, or on the east side. I cannot imagine why
Protestants, if they will have the pictures, should just hang them in the same
places, and mimic the Catholics in the appearances, as long as they do not make
the same use of them.

[This discourse touched their father to the heart, and, as he said afterward,
he could hardly forbear tears, but held it in a little longer, and replied,
that it was only the custom of the country, and they might think no harm in it;
and so being willing to put by the discourse, he turns again to his married
daughter thus:]


Fa. Well, but child, how do you like your new brother? for you never saw him
before, or at least never to converse with him.


Mar. sist. He is a very fine gentleman, Sir. I was going to wish you joy, Sir,
and to say I was very glad to see my sister so well married; but something
prevented me.

[Now the father could contain himself no longer.]


Fa. I know not what prevented you, but I believe it was the same that forced
me to tell you both I have no joy in it at all; your sister is undone.


Mar. sist. Undone, Sir: What do you mean: What can be the matter!


Fa. She is undone indeed, child; and more than that, I have undone her: the
man's a Papist.

[The father burst out into tears as soon as he had spoken the words, and the
daughters stood as it were speechless for some time, looking at one another; at
last the married daughter spoke.]


Mar. sist. Are you sure of it, Sir?


Fa. Ay, ay, I am too sure of it; I have lived in Italy, and know something of
the manner of such things; I presently discovered it.


Eld. sist. Will you please to tell us how you discovered it? (...) we have had
the same thoughts, but we durst not speak our minds about it?


Fa. Child, it is impossible for any one that has lived in Italy not to
discover it as soon as he sees his house.


Eld. sist. What, from the crucifixes and church pictures! spoke of?


Fa. No, no, child: but was you in his closet?


Eld. sist. Yes, Sir.


Fa. And was you in an inner room that you went to through his closet, and
through another room beyond it?


Eld. sist. Yes, Sir, we were both there, but we saw nothing there more than
ordinary, only still more church pieces, as that of the Passion, the
Salutation, the Ascension, and the like.


Fa. It is because you have not been used to such things, child; Why, it is his
oratory; it is a little consecrated chapel, and there stands an altar and an
altarpiece over it, with a crucifix, and the ascension painting above that; on
either side there are fine rich paintings, one of the baptism, and another of
the assembly at the feast of Pentecost, and the Holy Ghost descending in
flaming tongues, and the like. But that is not all, for, upon the altar is a
pix of pure gold, covered with a piece of crimson velvet, which is the
repository, as they call it, of the host.


Eld. sist. I wonder, Sir, he would let you see these things, if he designed to
conceal his profession.


Fa. It was all by accident; for, when I was in his closet, he was called
hastily down, and his wife let me into these two rooms: but alas! she knows
nothing of the meaning of them, she only takes them to be fine Italian rarities.


Eld. sist. Indeed, I do not wonder at that, for I understood them no more than
she does: and yet, my sister knows, I presently entertained the same opinion of
his religion as you do now; but it was (...) the picture of the crucifixion
that hung by his bed side with a curtain over it.


Fa. Well, child, yours are suspicions, mine is a certainty. When I charged him
with it, he (...) deny it: but seemed surprised when he found (...) been in his
chapel.


Mar. sist. Nay, it is then out of doubt, it seems, if he owns it; but what
will become of my sister! Now she will have reason to see how just my mother's
injunctions were to us all; I fear she will reproach herself with the neglect
of them.


Fa. My dear, she must reproach me with it (...) is I have ruined her; I have
given her up.


Mar. sist. No, Sir; I think it lay upon her to have inquired into his
principles in religion, before she had given herself out of her own power.


Fa. My dear, she came to me, and questioned with me upon this very point. She
asked me if he was a Protestant, and I encouraged her, told her he was a
Protestant, and a very good man.


Mar. sist. I suppose, Sir, you did not say positively, that you are sure he
was a Protestant, but that you believed so.


Fa. I assured her so much of its being my opinion, that I told her she need
not fear it; and she again left it all to me, and depended upon me: And it is I
that have betrayed and deluded her. In short, I have sold my child, and the
peace of her life, for the ^oys and fine things of Italy. I have undone her: It
is all owing to my being unconcerned for the better part.


Eld. sist. Dear father, do not take the weight of it so much upon yourself. My
sister knows it was her duty to have made a farther search into it, and I
pressed her to it in time, and with all possible importunity.


Fa. Child, you did right; and I believe she designed to follow your
directions. But what assistance did I give to her? how did I damp that
resolution, when I stopped her mouth by telling her, that I dare say he was a
Protestant? She trusted to my assurance, nay, she told me, that she did so.

[Here the father repeats to her the discourse between him and his daughter,
mentioned at the beginning of this dialogue continuing to reproach himself with
betraying his (...)


Eld. sist. But, (...), notwithstanding this discourse (for she told me every
word from time to time) I urged her a great many (...), and told her my
thoughts; for I suspected him from the beginning, and I labored to convince
her, that she ought to see with her own eyes, and to talk plainly and openly to
him of it.


Fa. Did she not tell you that her father had assured her he was a Protestant,
and that she trusted to that?


Eld. sist. She was more just to you, Sir, than to say that you assured her of
it; but she repeated your very words, that you said, you believed it, and dare
say he was, and I told he^ plainly, that it was evident from your words, that
you only spoke your opinion, and that ^he ought not therefore to call that a
positive assurance to be depended upon. Indeed Sir, I was very plain with her;
she has nobody to blame but herself, I told her.

[Here she repeats all her former discourse with her sister.]


Fa. She has herself indeed (...) to blame for want of reflection upon your
seasonable persuasions, my dear, and you (...) a faithful part to her. But had
I been as faithful to her, who was obliged in duty to have done it, and on whom
she depended, as you were, who had no obligation but from your affections, I
had delivered my child from ruin.


Eld. sist. I cannot say, Sir, you had delivered her; she seemed resolved to
have him; her eyes were dazzled with the gay things she expected, and unless
you had positively refused your consent, I fear religion had not hold enough on
her thoughts, to have balanced her love of vanity.


Fa. But I have been perfectly careless of it, and have not done the duty of my
place; I ought to have inquired into the circumstances of the person myself,
and have restrained her.


Eld. sist. I am sorry for her, but I think you (...) on yourself too severely,
Sir; to be sure you did not know that he was a Papist, neither had you any
suspicion of it; but she had; for I put the suspicion into her head, and
earnestly pressed her to satisfy herself about it from himself.


Fa. My dear, I have been always too careless in these things I remember the
case of your sister here, and cannot but reflect how, when in a passion, I told
her it was none of my business, my own heart struck me with reproach; for I
knew it was my duty. I wish this poor child had been as strict and as nice in
(...) matter as her sister was, though I took it ill then, I see now she was in
the right of it.


Eld. sist. You afflict yourself, Sir, for a case that issued well; and where,
if you were in the wrong, there were no bad consequences: whereas, in this
case, where the bad consequences have happened, you are no way the cause, it is
all their own doing.


Fa. But as it is an affliction to me, and that you may be (...) it is,
providence seems to show me my sin by my punishment. I acknowledge I was in the
wrong before, and it is not owing to my prudence or concern, that your (...)
was not ruined. Besides, every father that has a (...) concern for the souls of
his children, will certainly inquire narrowly into the principles, as well as
morals of the persons they match them to.

[In a word, their father afflicted himself so much and (...) upon this matter,
that his two daughters were obliged to drop their concern for their sister, and
apply all the skill they had to comfort their father. He was so overwhelmed
with it that it threw him into a deep melancholy, and that into a fit of
sickness; which, though he recovered, yet he did not in a long time thoroughly
enjoy himself; always charging and reproaching himself with having ruined his
child, having regarded nothing but the outside of things, and referring all her
happiness to a plentiful fortune, and a gay, extravagant way of living.

This went on some time. The eldest daughter, who was left with the father,
managed things so prudently, that no notice of these things was taken in the
family, and her father readily agreed with both his daughters, that it was by
no means proper to let their sister know what they ^ad discovered; concluding,
that whenever she discourse (...) it herself, she would come home with a sad
heart, (...) her complaint to them fast enough.

But (...) were all mistaken in their sister; for, though she discovered the
thing, and lived a melancholy life with her husband upon that occasion; yet, in
eight years that she lived with him, she never complained, or made her sorrows
known to any of her relations; but carried it with an even, steady temper, and
bore all her griefs in her own breast: as shall be seen at large in the next
dialogue.]


DIALOGUE III.
THE new married couple, of whom we have been speaking, lived in all the
splendor and greatness that the highest degree of private persons admit of and
which a family possessed of an immense wealth, (...) supposed to do. He was not
only very rich when (...) married her, as might be supposed by the noble (...)
of his house, and his very valuable collection of (...) and rarities, and the
like, of which mention has been made, but as he fell privately into a great
affair of remitting money by way of England to Genoa, for supply of the French
armies in Italy, he got that way a prodigious sum of money; and yet acting only
by correspondents at Amsterdam, he was liable to no resentment or objections
from the government here.

After he had lived thus about eight years, and in the time had six children by
this young lady, he died (...) had four of her six children living. But their
father, after having in vain tried all the persuasions, arguments, and
entreaties (for he was too good a husband, and too (...) a gentleman, to use
any other method) to bring his wife over to the Romish church, left her
however, under this terrible affliction, that having disposed of his vast
estate in a very honorable manner, as well to her as to her children, yet he
took the education of her children from her, leaving them to the tuition of
guardians, to bring them up in the Romish religion. Nor was this the effect of
his unkindness to her; for, except in disputes about these things, they never
had any difference worth the name of a dispute in their lives; and, at his
death, he left to her own disposal above six times the fortune she brought him;
but this of his children was a mere point of conscience to him, which he could
not dispense with. This was an inexpressible grief to her, and that such, and
so heavy, as it is impossible to represent it in this narrow tract, so as to
say how far it afflicted her, or what ill consequences attended it; the drift
and design of this work also lying quite another way, viz. To show the manner
of life, which naturally attends the best matches, where the religious
principles of the husband and wife are not the same.

The eldest sister was now married also, and married very happily and
comfortably; the principles as well as practice of her husband, not only
concurred entirely with her own, but answered in a most agreeable manner to the
character which was given (...) of him, viz. That he was a person truly
religious.

Their father now grown old, had been a true penitent for his mistakes in the
past conduct of his children, and had fully made up his want of care in his
middle daughter's match, by his difficulty in being pleased for his eldest. She
needed no concern for, or to show any nicety in examining into the person; for
the father was so very nice for her, that scarce any thing could please him; he
rejected several very good offers, merely on account of religious principles,
and put them off without so much as naming them to his daughter, till at last,
fixing upon a merchant in the city, who both for sobriety, piety, opinion in
religion, and estate, suited every way both his desires and his daughter's
judgment; the match, under such circumstances, was soon made. The uninterrupted
felicity this young Lady enjoyed, in having the best husband, the best
Christian, and the best tempered man in the world, all in one, made her the
happiest woman alive; and indeed recommended the caution she had always used in
her choice, by its success.

Her father lived with this daughter, when he was in town, but otherwise lived
in Oxfordshire, with his own sister, the lady --, widow of Sir James --, of
whom mention is made in the first part of this work: he lived very easy, having
thus seen his family all settled; for his two sons were very well fixed abroad,
the one at Leghorn, and the other at Cadiz; and he might really be said to have
no affection in the world but that of his middle daughter, who, though by far
the richest and most prosperous in circumstances, and lived in the most
splendor of all the rest, yet he esteemed really miserable; and so indeed in
one sense she was.

He was at dinner one day at the eldest daughter's house, his youngest daughter
being casually there also, when, while they were at table, letters came from
the Bath, where his middle daughter was gone with her husband, to acquaint
them, that her husband, after an indisposition of no more than five days, was
dead. It surprised them all; for he had not so much as heard that he was ill;
and his distemper being a plurisy, it was exceedingly violen^ and carried him
off very quickly. When their father re^^ the letter, he was extremely
surprised, and rising up from the table hastily, poor child! said he, God has
delivered her; but it is by a sad stroke. His daughters got up from table
terribly frighted, when they saw the disorder their father was in, not knowing
what the matter was; but he perceiving it, turned about suddenly and said, your
sister -- is a widow, and threw them the letter; (...) this they sat down again
all surprised, and indeed sensibly afflicted; for, excepting their religion,
which was not all that while made public, he was a most obliging relation to
them all.

I purposely pass over here the incidents that may be supposed to happen in the
family on so sad an occasion; such as the lady's coming up from the Bath; the
concern of the father and sisters to comfort her; the disposal of herself, and
the management of her affairs; hastening to the main story, viz. The account
she gave of her life past, and of what she had gone through in the eight years
of her married state, upon the particular occasion of her husband's being of a
different religion.

It was some months after her husband's death, and when all her affairs were in
a settled posture, that she went to divert her thoughts a little, and unbend
her mind from the sorrows she had been under, for she was a sincere mourner for
her husband; I say, it was some months after his death, that her younger sister
having invited her down to her seat in Hampshire, she went thither, and her
father and eldest sister, at her request, went all with her.

Here upon a casual discoursing of things past, her father, who was almost ever
bemoaning his neglect in exposing his children, threw out some words, which
first gave her to understand that both he and her sister knew her husband was
not a Protestant, at which she seemed very much surprised: but, as she found it
was known, and that however it was still so far a secret, as that it had gone
no farther than their own breasts, she was soon made easy; she then made a
confidence of it, earnestly entreating them that it might go no further, which
they willingly promised for her satisfaction.

But this opened the door for variety of conferences among them; as
particularly her sister told her, how they discovered it first, and afterward
their father; and repeated all the discourses they had had about it, and how,
and for what reason they had resolved never to mention it to her, unless she
spoke first of it; concluding, that, perhaps, he might conceal it from her, and
they would be very loath to discover a thing to her, which they knew could have
no other consequences at that time, but to ruin and afflict her; alas sister!
says she, I discovered it within a fortnight after I came home.

Ay! says her younger sister, you had a good government of yourself to refrain
unbosoming to some of us: especially considering my sister here (meaning her
eldest sister) had been so serious with you upon that very thing before you
were married.

Dear sister, says the widow, to what purpose can it be to any woman, when she
is married, to complain of her disappointments, which she knows she cannot mend.

Yo. sist. That Is true, my dear; but who is there can deny themselves that ease
to their grief?


Wid. Alas! complaining is but a poor ease to such sorrows; it is like sighing,
which relieves the heart one moment, and doubly loads it the next.


Yo. sist. Well, sister, seeing you had so entire a mastery over yourself in
that part, and you brought the dominion of your reason over your passions to so
perfect an exercise, which is what I confess I must admire you for; I say,
seeing you mastered yourself so well that way, I am obliged to think you
mastered yourself as well within doors; and with good conduct perhaps you made
it no inconvenience to you. I wish you would let us hear how you managed, that
we may see, perhaps, difference of opinion may be so managed as to make no
breaches in a family, and it might be as well as if it had been otherwise.


Wid. No, no, sister, do not fancy so: our dear mother was wiser than I, and
you were all wiser than I, to lay so much stress upon it as you did; I am a
convert now to my mother's instructions, though it be too late to help it.


Yo. sist. Why, Mr -- and you lived mighty easy: you were always mighty well
with one another, I thought.


Wid. It was impossible to be ill with him, he was of so excellent a temper:
but this makes my case perfectly instructing to others, and proves effectually,
that no goodness of the disposition, no excess of affection, no prudent
compliances, though they make the case rather better than worse, can yet make
it up, no, not in the least, or any way balance the inexpressible deficiency
that such a breach in religious matters makes in a family.


Fa. Ay, ay, my dear; I see it now, with a sad heart, but it was far from any
of my thoughts then; you owe all the misery of it to my neglect.


Wid. Sir, I dare say, you did not mistrust it; I remember you said, he had
always been a Protestant when you was at Leghorn, and that you knew he was bred
so.


Fa. Ay, my dear; but it was my business to have inquired farther into it; I
might easily have known it if I had inquired; for several merchants told me
afterward of it; but I laid no stress upon it; in short, I did not consider
the consequences.


Yo. sist. There is no need to afflict yourself now, Sir, about it (...) my
sister, is delivered another way, Sir, and the thing is over.


Fa. But I am a warning to all parents, that have the good of their children at
heart, never to make light of such things, but search them to the bottom; and
the more their children depend upon them, the greater is their obligation to be
very careful.


Yo. sist. Well, my sister is delivered from it all now.


Wid. It is a sad deliverance, sister, and it is a dreadful case to be so
married, as that the death of a husband should be counted a deliverance; and
especially a good husband too.


Yo. sist. I do believe he was a good husband indeed, that one particular
excepted; but that was a terrible circumstance, and would have made the best
husband in the world a bad husband to me.


Wid. Ay, child, and so it did to me in some cases, though he was otherwise the
best honored man, and the best husband imaginable.


Yo. sist. No question, there was some uneasiness at first; but it seems you
got over it. I wish you would t^ll us, sister, how you managed the first
discovery between you.


Wid. Truly, sister, the uneasiness was not so much as first as at last, and
had we lived longer together, it must of necessity have grown worse, especially
as the children grew up.


Yo. sist. Indeed there you might have come to clash in matters very essential
to your peace.


Wid. Might have clashed, do you say! indeed, sister, we must have clashed, it
was unavoidable; it could not be, that I could be easy in have the children
bred Papists, or that he could have been easy to have them bred as he called
it, heretics.


Yo. sist. It was impossible indeed; and the more you were both settled and
serious in your opinions, the more impossible it would be for you to yield that
point to one another.


Wid. Why, you know, sister, Mr. -- was a very serious, grave man; and I assure
you, in his way, he was very devout; and this made his yielding to me sometimes
to be very difficult to him. He had very strong struggles between his principle
and his affection.


Eld. sist. Dear sister, it is always so where there are differing opinions
between a man and his wife; the more zealous and conscientious they are in
their several ways, the more difficult it is for them to yield those points up
to one another, which kindness and affection may incline them to give up. But
pray give us a little account of your first disputes about these things.


Wid. It is a sad story, sister, and will bring many grievous things to
remembrance.


Eld. sist. I should be very unwilling to impose so irksome a task upon you;
but I think it will be very instructing to us all.


Wid. Why, it was not much above a fortnight after we came home, as I observed
to you, before I discovered it; and the manner was thus. I wondered that every
Sabbath Day my spouse contrived some excuse or other to avoid going to church
with me. I had taken some notice of it before we went home; but the second
Sabbath Day (...) took upon me to desire him to go. He seemed not to deny me,
and went into the coach with me, but pretended a sudden thought, he was obliged
to go up to St. James's; and having very civilly handed me out of the coach,
and gone with me into the very place, made a light bow, when I could not stand
to persuade, and went back.


Sist. What did he take the coach too, and leave you to come home on foot?


Wid. No, no; he never showed me so little respect as that. He went but as far
as Temple Bar in the coach, and sent it back, charging the coachman to go and
wait for his mistress, which he did This however troubled me a little, and I
began to be uneasy, though I knew not for what.


Sist. Why, my dear, did nothing occur to your thoughts, as it did to ours,
about his pictures, his crucifixes, altar-pieces, and such things?


Wid. No, not at all. I had heard my father say it was the fashion in Italy;
and it being so remote from my thoughts to imagine any thing of what was the
real case. I had indeed (...) thoughts at all about it, till the following
affair alarmed me. I was with him one day in his closet, and viewing his fine
(...), the pictures, the imagery, and other (...), of which he had abundance,
and some pieces of (...), that are of very great value, he was mighty busy, and
pleased in showing me things, and telling me what they were, for then they were
as new to me almost as they were to you. At last I went into the little room
within his closet, and looked upon all the fine things there, where you know,
sister, there are abundance of valuable pieces of paintings.


Sist. Yes, indeed, it is a charming place.


Wid. Upon the table there stood two fine silver candlesticks g^lded, with
large wax candles in them. My dear, says I, like an innocent fool these
candlesticks are very fine, I think, they are much finer than any we have about
the house. My dear, says he, if you had rather have them in your closet, than
to let them stand her^, they shall be removed. No, my dear, said I, if we (...)
want them upon an extraordinary occasion, it is but borrowing them of you. We
said no more or that then, (...) the next day he sent me in from a goldsmith's
in Drury Lane two p^^r of very curious workmanship and all the high embossed
work double gilt.


Yo. sist. So you had no need to grudge him those he used in his closet any
more.


Wid. No, indeed. But (...): after I had done speaking of the candlesticks, I
laid my hands upon a large piece of crimson damask, which seemed to cover
something that stood upon the table and standing up about seven or eight inches
high in the middle, looked as if there were several things together; and going
to turn it up, I said, what is under here, my dear? But added with a smile, and
thinking nothing of the matter, may I look? He smiled a little, but laying his
hand upon it too, I had rather not, my dear; they are things I brought from
Italy, but nothing of ornament. Well, well, says I, let it lie; I don't desire
to look, not I, and immediately turned to look at a picture that hung near me;
and all this while I was so dull as to perceive nothing.


Eld. sist. Your curiosity was not much, it seems.


Wid. Innocence suspects nobody; but a strange (...) in his countenance gave me
an alarm, which I was not aware of; there was a visible hurry and confusion in
his ^ace when he laid his hands upon the piece of damask to prevent my taking
it up; and, on a sudden, when I so (...) and unconcernedly passed it off, all
that (...) went off his countenance in a moment, and he was as bright and as
good humoured again as ever, and this made me think again afterward that there
was something in it more than usual.


Eld. sist. You must have been very dull, if you had not, seeing you perceived
such a double alteration; and this would have heightened my desire to inquire
farther into it.


Wid. Perhaps it did so too in me; but I saw evidently he was concerned; and
why should I make him uneasy* I could have passed an hundred such things by,
and have restrained my curiosity while I had no suspicion.


Eld. sist. Well, but what was this to the case? it seems here was no discovery
then.


Wid. Yes, here was a discovery too, as it prepared for farther observation; I
told you that the next day he sent me ^ome two pair of candlesticks, which were
indeed very fine: and as I was admiring them, I desired to have the other
fetched down to compare them with; upon which he made some difficulty, and
said, he could not trust a servant to go into his closet alone, where things of
consequence lay about; but, my dear, says he, we will go up and match them.


Eld. sist. Well, that reason was just enough.


Wid. It was so; and I went up with him to his closet, but not into the inner
room: but I observed just when he steps in, he made an extraordinary low bow
toward that place where the candlesticks stood. Indeed I took no notice of it
at first, for I verily thought he had stooped for something; but, when he
carried the candlesticks in again, he did the same, and that gave me some
thought.


Yo. sist. That was a discovery indeed.


Wid. No really it was not yet; for I was a perfect stranger to any of their
Popish ceremonies; I scarce understood it when I was told: but however it gave
me some idea of this being an extraordinary place, though I did not know what;
and I very innocently asked him this foolish, laughing question; My dear, you
are mighty mannerly to your empty rooms, you bow as if the king was there. He
put it off with a smile, and an answer that was indeed according to Solomon,
answer a fool in his folly: my dear, says he, it was our custom in Italy.


Eld. sist. He was no fool; what he said was very true.


Wid Well, even all this while, and farther, I was still blind; for, a little
while after I pushed into the same place with him, not out of curiosity, but
merely by chance; but though the piece of crimson damask lay upon the table,
yet there was nothing under it, nor did he make any bow^ as before.


Yo. sist. My dear, there was no need of it then; for, to be sure the idol was
removed.


Wid. Well, however, as that was more than I knew, it caused all my former
hesitations and observations to vanish, till they were renewed again upon the
following occasion: He was taken ill one evening, in a manner that alarmed me
very much, and we were obliged to get him to bed with all speed; but just as he
was undressing by the bedside he started up in a kind of rapture, and pulling
a string which dr^w back a curtain, he cast up his eyes toward a picture that
hung there, and said some words which I did not understand, and I perceived he
crossed himself two or three times on the breast, and then steps into bed.


Fa. (...) one that had lived in Italy, this had been no novelty at all.


Wid. He, Sir, I understand it well enough now, but I did not then (...)
however, it was so plain then that (...) no explanation to me; but it was such
a surprise to me, that I thought I should have fainted; my heart sunk within
me, and with a sigh, said I to myself, O Lord! I am undone! I thought I had
spoke so softly, that nothing could have overheard me; but yet so unhappy was
my passion that he heard the last words, and raising his voice, my dear, said
he, hastily, what is the matter? what art thou undone for? I made him no answer,
which increased his eagerness to know what ailed me; but I declined it. At
last, pressing me still, I answered, my dear, excuse me for the present, I am a
little frighted; with which he rings a little bed, that I used to ring for my
woman, and she being but in the next room, came running in? I bade her fetch me
a little bottle out of my closet, and taking a few drops rather by a
counterfeit illness than a real, put an end to this inquiry, and got him to
sleep.


Eld. sist. I should even have charged him with it downright, and have raved at
him for a rogue, that had cheated and deluded me.


Wid. Indeed, sister, I did not do so; I was oppressed with the terror of it,
and the disappointment, but my affection stepped in the way of all resentment; I
loved him tenderly; and besides, it was not a time for it; for he was really
very ill, and thought he should have died; it was a spice or taste of the same
distemper that did at last kill him, for it was a pleurisy; and after he had
slept a little he waked again in such a condition, that frighted all the house,
and we were forced to fetch a surgeon out of his bed to let him blood.


Sist. Well, that relieved him, I hope.


Wid. Yes, it did; but I name it to tell you a circumstance which attended it:
we had in the house an old man, an Italian, whom he always kept in the
compting-house to copy his letters, and translate his Italian accounts, and for
such other business as he employed him in; and they called him doctor: the
surgeon we had sent for being in bed, did not come time enough, and he grew
black and desperately ill, which frighted me exceedingly; and when he saw I was
under a surprise he (...) signs (for he could not speak to be understood, he
(...) bad) to call up the old Italian. When he came into the room, he held out
his arm, and pointing at it with (...) finger, every one might understand that
he meant he should let him blood; upon which, immediately the old man called
for things proper, and I found he had a lancet in his pocket. I asked him if he
had been used to it: he said, yes, Madam, I have let him blood several times
before now. In a word, he opened a vein, and it gave him ease, and he recovered
soon after.


Fa. I Will lay a hundred pounds, then, that doctor is a priest.


Wid. Yes, Sir, he is so; and I knew it quickly after.


Fa. And after he knew that you understood it, did he not besiege you with his
discourses and importunities, my dear, to turn?


Wid. No really; at least not so; as I believe is usual; he frequently let fall
some words about it, but with great modesty; for he was really a very good sort
of man, exceeding retired and devout: very mannerly and respectful: he spoke
once at table (for sometimes my spouse would ask me to let him sup with us) and
we had been talking very cheerfully, when the Doctor said something in Italian
to his master, that gave me plain reasons to know, that he desired I should
know what he said; upon which my spouse said to me, my dear, what do you think
the doctor says? I do not know, but I am sure it is about me. Yes, says he, so
it is: and he says I must tell you what it is, or else you will think he is
unmannerly, to speak any thing in a language you do not understand. Well, pray,
said I, what is it he says? What pity is it, said my spouse, such a fine genius
as my lady, your wife is, should not be within the pale of the Catholic church!
While my spouse was telling me this, he looked very earnestly at him to observe
when he repeated the words, and, just as he repeated them, the good old father
lift up his eyes, and said some words softly, but with great appearance of
seriousness, which it seems was to pray to Christ to convert me; and my spouse
looking very seriously too, crossed himself, and said Amen.


Yo. sist. This was dangerous work, indeed, sisters for the more serious they
were in it, the more it would have affected me.


Wid. Indeed so it did me; I answered my husband, my dear, I hope I am; and if
I thought I was not, I would not sleep till I was. At which the doctor, my
spouse repeating the words to him, shook his head, and said, no, no! signifying
that to be sure I was not; and added, he hoped God would hear his prayers for
me; but this was the most that ever he offered that way.


Fa. Well, that was nothing but what any man who thought himself in the right,
might do, and very modestly too.


Wid. Indeed he always kept himself rather at a greater distance then we
desired.


Yo. sist. Well, but pray go back to the story.


Wid. Why, I told you my husband recovered from his illness; but it was
otherwise with me; for, being now fully satisfied that my spouse was a Papist,
it cast me down to that degree, and overwhelmed my spirits, that I was scarce
able to bear it, and especially for want of some body to lodge my thoughts
with, and open my soul to.


Eld. sist. Why, did you not charge him with it point blank? did he not
perceive your disorder?


Wid. He did to be sure, and pressed me with the utmost tenderness and
importunity, to let him know what grieved me.


Eld. sist. Ay, and I should have told him of it in his ears.


Wid. Dear sister, you are too tender a wife yourself not to know that where
there is a sincere affection, even the highest resentment expresses itself in
the softest terms. I could afflict myself freely, but I could not think of
afflicting him; and though I do acknowledge I thought myself ill treated, yet I
could not use him ill in return.


Sist. Come tell us what you said to him.


Wid. Why, when he pressed me to let him know, what disturbed me, I told him, I
had rather bear my grief than complain to him; that I was too sensible he knew
what I meant, when I said I was undone; and I begged him not to oblige me to
blame him, for having been unjust to me. Why, my dear, says he, why are you
undone; if your opinion in religion and mine may differ, must is affect our
love? cannot we bear with one another without entering into any disputes; but I
did reckon myself undone for all that. Tears s^opt my very breath for a while,
for this was an open acknowledgement of his profession; and I would fain have
flattered myself so much, as to hope there was yet some room to have thought
myself mistaken. When he saw me so overwhelmed, he came to me, and took me in
his arms, and said all the kind things it is possible to think of, to pacify
me: my dear, says he, though you may think this a grief to you, expect to have
it made up to you abundantly, by all that is possible for man to do to oblige
you: and indeed if all the affectionate things a man could say or do, could
make it up, it was made up to me; if it was possible for a man to do any thing
to make a woman forget her disappointment, he did it; and this from a man too,
who had a perfect understanding of every thing that could oblige and engage the
affections: in a word, no man could do more, or woman desire more, to make up
the loss.


Eld sist. Well; sister, and pray tell me, did it do? was it fully made up to
you? is it possible that two can be happy in the condition of man and wife,
where two opinions in religion differ? you have had the experience of it to be
sure in its best fortune, with all the advantages imaginable; now be plain, and
tell us, is it possible the conjugal felicity can be complete? was our dear
mother in the right or no, sister?


Wid. Indeed, sister, you put hard upon me, because I know I too much slighted
my mother's injunctions: and I remember I jested with you about it; but I paid
for the experiment.


Eld. sist. Dear sister, those things are forgotten long ago, I did not intend
to reflect upon them; but I ask upon a serious account, I assure you.


Wid. Why truly, sister, I must acknowledge, it is impossible. I say again, I
find by sad experience, it is impossible: no kindness, no tenderness, no
affection, can make it up; the condition can never be happy, God faithfully
served, children rightly educated, the mind perfectly easy, or the duty of the
relation faithfully performed, where the opinions in religion differ.


Eld. sist. I am of opinion also, that it would have been the same, though your
differences had not been so great as that of a Papist and Protestant.


Wid. Ay, ay, all one! for we never entered into the question about our
principles. I resolved it from the beginning to avoid bringing on any thing
that might be unkind or disobliging between us, and he approved it, and did the
same for the same reason; so that I never, after the first discourse, so much
as inquired what his opinion was: it was sufficient to have the grief that we
could not worship God together, either abroad or at home; we could not think of
one another with charity, but as deceived persons, out of the way of eternal
felicity, out of God's blessing and protection; we could not look upon one
another but with sighs and sad hearts. Again, we could never converse with one
another upon religious subjects, for we could not enter upon the least serious
thing, but it led us into contradictions and wild distracted notions, which we
were immediately forced to take the help of our affections to suppress, that we
might not break out into indecencies to one another.


Yo. sist. Well, sister, and what became of your smart answers to my sister --,
when she and you talked of these things, viz. That if he was not of your
opinion, you would be of his; that if he was a Christian Catholic, you was a
Catholic Christian; and so you would have no difference about that?


Wid. Why, truly sister, I was young, and did not consider what I said! and
besides, I did not in the least suspect what my sister suggested; and yet so
far have I kept up to it, we have by the help of abundance of good humor on
his side, and a great deal of love on both sides, avoided differences and
disputes upon that subject: but, alas! sister, that is but a negative, and it
can only he said we did not quarrel, which is a great deal to say too; but,
what is this to a happy life? how was our family guided, our children educated,
and how would they have been educated, if he had lived? and how was God
worshipped? he and his priest at their mass in the (...) or chapel, I, and my
little unhappy babies in my chamber and closet, where I mourned over them
co^^^^ally (rather than prayed over them) to think that (...) time or other,
they should be snatched from me, and brought up in Popery; nor would it have
been much otherwise, if he had been of any other irreconcilable opinion; for,
as I told you before, though I knew his opinion, I never asked it; for any
opinion, where there is not a harmony in worshipping, a joining in public prayer
to God, and in joint serving him in our families, is the same thing, only not
in the same extreme.


Yo. sist. Well, but had you no private breaches about it?


Wid. No, never; we carefully avoided it: but this is but an evidence of the
dreadful consequences of such marriages in general: for, where is there a
couple that can say, as we could, that they have had no jars about it? And what
breaches have religious differences made in families* But, if the happiness is
so little, and the evil consequences so many, even with a husband so
exquisitely kind and obliging, and where a woman cannot say she has any other
thing to complain of, what must be the case in other families?


Yo. sist. But, sister, you hint that the longer you lived, the worse those
differences grew.


Wid. Why, it was impossible, sister, but as we grew forward, these things must
have come more in our way: We have four children, and Mr. -- was not a man so
indifferent in his religion, as to be more careless about the (...) of his
children, that I assure you; and though he left them entirely to my management;
when they were little; yet he would hint sometimes, that he hoped I would leave
them free, when they grew up to choose for themselves, as God should enlighten
them; and that at least we should both stand neuter.


Yo. sist. What could you say to that?


Wid. I told him I could not tell how far I could promise that; for, if I
thought myself in the right way to heaven, I could but ill answer it to him
that gave me my children, to stand still and see them go wrong, and not
endeavor to persuade them (at least) to choose better for themselves. He told
me, that was an argument just as strong on his side, as it was on mine: and he
added, smiling, How shall we do to agree, my dear, when it comes to that? I
hope we shall not love less than we do now. I told him I had a great many
melancholy thoughts about it; and thus at last we were always fain to drop the
discourse; but to this hour I cannot conceive how we should have done to have
divided our children's instruction between us, if he had lived to see them grow
up.


Fa. Well, my dear, God has otherwise ordered it; and I hope the children will
have the benefit of a good instruction now without that interruption.


Wid. Alas! Sir, I perceive you do not know their case yet; and this is a
remaining grief to me that I have not mentioned.


Fa. What Is that, child?


Wid. Why, Sir, by his will he has appointed the old priest, whom I named
above, to be tutor to my two sons, and has settled his estate so, that, unless
the trustees bring them up Roman Catholics, a great deal of his estate goes
from them; so that I am robbed of my children.


Fa. I am surprised at that: why, I never heard a word of it! And what has he
done with his two daughters?


Wid. He has left them to me.


Fa. Did you know this before, child? had you any discourse about it before he
died?


Wid. Yes, Sir, as much as the violence of his distemper would admit. I
entreated, I persuaded, I argued, as much as tears and my oppressed thoughts
would allow me; for I thought my heart would have burst while I talked to him,
to see his condition, whom I loved as my soul, and to think what was to befall
my children; you can hardly conceive what a time it was to me; it wounds my
very spirit to look back upon it.


Eld. sist. It was a very bitter thing, no doubt* but what said he to you?


Wid. He begged of me not to important him; he told me it was far from being an
unkindness to me, but his conscience obliged him to it, and he could not die in
peace, if he did not, as far as in him lay, provide for the souls of his
children.


Fa. Why, if it was his conscience, how came it to pass he did not do the like
by his daughters?


Wid. Why, he said, he thought I had a right to their government, as a half of
the family; for, my dear, says he, we are partners, but, says he, I entreat
you, and as far as I am able to do it, enjoin you to it, let the poor innocent
babes be reconciled to the church, and brought up in the Catholic faith; and I
hope you will, in God's due time, embrace it yourself.


Yo. sist. What was you able to say to him?


Wid. I bless God I made no promise about my children; nor indeed was I able to
speak to him for grief: for he was in such agonies, that my heart could not
hold to stay by him; and the next morning he died; and now I am a dreadful
example of the miserable condition of a married state, where principles of
religion differ, though with the best husband in the world.


Fa. But, my dear, do not afflict yourself now about your sons.


Wid. Afflict myself, Sir! Is that possible?


Fa. Yes, yes, they shall not be bred up Papists, I Will assure you, for all that
he has done to bring it to pass.


Wid. Alas! Sir, they shall be taken away from me.


Fa. No, no; no^ shall they be taken away from you neither: (...) law gives you
a right to the bringing up your own children; and as for the doctor, I Will
engage he (...) give you no disturbance; he knows his own circumstances; and
I Will take care he shall take it for a favor to be concealed here, and leave
all to you.


Wid. But then the estate will go from my children too.


Fa. Perhaps not neither; but if it should, you h^^^ enough for them.


Wid. Well, that is none of my care, let me but (...) them from a wrong
education, I Will willingly leave that part to fall as it will.


Yo. sist. But, dear sister, did Mr. -- never try you by arguments, to bring
you over to him?


Wid. Only by all that he could ever advise; except as I said before: for I
must do that justice to his (...), that he never offered any thing that was
rough, or threatening, or limiting, or unkind; but all the contrary to the
highest extreme.


Yo. sist. That was the effect of his extraordinary good breeding, and his
being so much a gentleman.


Wid. Not that altogether, sister, though that might join: but it was the
effect of an excellent disposition, and of an inexpressible affection to me in
particular; for otherwise he was the most zealous man in his way that ever was
heard of, and thought every body an enemy to him, that would not be of his own
opinion.


Eld. sist. Did he never go about to bribe you to it?


Wid. O sister! very frequently; and that with all the subtilty of invention in
the world; for he was always giving me presents upon that very account.


Fa. Presents to a wife! What do they signify? It is but taking his money out
of one pocket, and putting it into the other; they must all be apprised, child,
in the personal estate.


Wid. It has been quite otherwise with him indeed, Sir: for he has made it a
clause in his will, that all the presents he gave me shall be my own, to bestow
how I please; besides all the rest that he has left me more than he was obliged
to do.


Eld. sist. I suppose that is your diamond cross.


Wid. It is so: he brought it home in a little case, and coming into my room
one morning before I was dressed, hearing I was alone, he told me, smiling and
very pleasant, he was come to say his prayers to me. I confess, I had been a
little out of humor just at that time, having been full of sad thoughts all
the morning, about the grand point, and I was going to have given him a very
unkind answer; but his looks had so much goodness and tenderness always in
them, that when I looked up at him, I could retain no more resentment: Indeed,
sister, it was impossible to be angry with him.


Eld. sist. You might well be in humor indeed, when he brought you a present
worth above six hundred pounds.


Wid. But I had not seen the present, when what I am telling you passed between
us.


Eld. sist. Well, I ask pardon for interrupting you pray go on where you left
off, when he told you he was come to say his prayers to you.


Wid. I told him, I hoped he would not make an idol of his wife.


Elst. sist. Was this the ill-natured answer you was about to give him?


Wid. No, indeed; I was going to tell him, he needed not worship me, he had
idols enough in the house.


Eld. sist. That had been bitter and unkind indeed, I hope you did not say so?


Wid. Indeed I did not; nor would I have said so for a thousand pounds; it
would have grieved me every time I had reflected on it afterward, as long as I
had lived.


Eld. sist. It was so very apt a return, I dare say I should not have brought
my prudence to have mastered the pleasure of such a repa^^^^.


Wid. Dear sister, (...) a sorry pleasure that is taken in grieving a kind
husband; besides, sister, as it was my (...) mercy that my husband ^trove
constantly to make his difference in religion as little troublesome and
offensive to me as possible, it would very ill have become me to make it my
jest; it had been a kind of be speaking the uneasinesses which was my happiness
to avoid.


Eld. sist. Well, you had more temper than I should have had I dare say; but I
must own you were in the right. Come, pray, how did you go on?


Wid. Why, he answered, he hoped he worshipped no idols but me; and if he erred
in that point, whoever reproved him, he hoped I would not.


Eld. sist. Why, that is true, too; besides, it is not so often that men make
idols of their wives.


Wid. Well, while he was saying this, he ^^lls out the jewel, and opening the
cases, takes a small crimson string that it hung to, and put it about my neck,
but kept the jewel in his hand, so that I could not see it: and then taking me
in his arms, Sit down, my dear, says he, which I did upon a little stool. Then
he kneeled down last before me, and kissing the jewel, let it go, saying
something in Italian, which I did not understand, and then looking up in my
face, Now, my dear, says he, you are my idol.


Eld. sist. Well, sister, it is well he is dead.


Wid. Dear sister, how can you say such a word to me?


Eld. sist. He would certainly have conquered you at last.


Wid. If the tenderest and most engaging temper, the sincerest and warmest
affection in nature could have done it, he would have done it that is certain.


Eld. sist. And I make no doubt but they are the most dangerous weapons to
attack a woman's principles. I cannot but think them impossible to resist.
Passion, unkindness, and all sorts of conjugal violence, of which there is a
great variety in the married life, are all nothing to them. You remember,
sister, some lines on another occasion, but very much to the case: Force may
indeed the heart invade,
But kindness only can persuade.



Wid. I grant that it is difficult to resist the influence of so much
affection; and every thing that came from so sincere a principle, and to a mind
prepossessed with all the sentiments of tenderness and kindness possible to be
expressed, make a deep impression; but I thank God I stood my ground.


Eld. sist. Well, well, you would not have stood it long, I am persuaded; and
this is one of the great hazards a woman runs in marrying a man of a different
religion, or a different opinion from herself, viz. That her affection to her
husband is her worst snare; and so that which is her duty and her greatest
happiness, is made the most dangerous gulf she can fall into. Well might our
dear mother warn us from marrying men of different opinions.


Wid. It is very true, I acknowledge it; my love was my temptation, my
affection to my husband went always nearest to stagger my resolution; I was in
no danger upon any other account.


Yo. sist. Well, but pray go on about the jewel; what said you to him?


Wid. Dear sister, let me confess to you, fine presents, flattering words, and
the affectionate looks of so obliging, so dear, and so near a relation, are
dreadful things, when they assault principles; the glittering jewel had a
strange influence, and my affections began to be too partial on his side: O let
no woman that values her soul, venture into the arms of a husband of a
different religion? The kinder he is, the more likely to undo her; every thing
that endears him to her, doubles her danger; the more she loves him, the more
she inclines to yield to him; the more he loves her, the stronger are the bonds
by which he draws her; and her only mercy will be, to have him barbarous and
unkind to her.


Yo. sist. It is indeed a sad case, where to be miserable is the only safety;
but so it is, no doubt; and such is the case of every woman that is thus
unsuitably matched. If her husband is kind, he is a snare to her; if unkind, he
is a terror to her; his love, which is his duty, is her ruin; and his slighting
her, which is his scandal, is her protection.


Wid. It is my case, dear sister; such a jewel! such a husband! how could I
speak an unkind word: every thing he did was so engaging, every thing he said
was so moving, what could I say or do?


Eld. sist. Very true; and that makes me say, he would have conquered you at
last.


Wid. Indeed I cannot tell what he might have done, if he had lived.


Yo. sist. Well, but to the jewel; what said you to him.


Wid. I stood up and thanked him with a kind of ceremony, but told him, I
wished it had been rather in any other form. Why, my dear, says he, should not
the two most valuable forms in the world be placed together? I told him that as
he placed a religious value, upon it, he should have it rather in another
place. He told me, my breast should be his altar; and so he might adore with a
double delight. I told him, I thought he was a little profane; and since I did
not place the same value upon it, or make the same use of it as he did, I might
give him offense by mere necessity, and make that difference which we had both
avoided with so much care, break in upon us in a case not to be resisted. He
answered, no, my dear, I am not going to bribe your principles, much less force
them; put you what value you think fit upon it, and give me the liberty. I told
him, I hoped I should not undervalue it as his present, if he did not overvalue
it upon any other account. He returned warmly, my dear, the last is impossible;
and for the first, it is a (...); give it but leave to hang where I have placed
it, that is all the respect I ask you to show it on my account.


Yo. sist. Well, that was a favor you would not deny, if a stranger had given
it you.


Wid. Dear sister, you are a stranger to the case, if you had seen what was the
consequence of it, you would have been frighted, or perhaps have fallen quite
out with him.


Yo. sist. I cannot imagine what consequences you mean.


Wid. Why, first of all, he told me, that now he would be perfectly easy about
my salvation, and would cease to pursue me with arguments or entreaties in
religious matters.


Yo. sist. What could he mean by that?


Wid. Why, he said, he was sure that blessed ^or^ that (...) so near my heart,
would have a miraculous, (...) some time or other, and I should be brought home
(...) the bosom of the Catholic church.


Yo. sist. Well I should have ventured all that and have slighted the very
thoughts of it.


Wid. You cannot imagine what stress he laid on it; now, he said, every good
Catholic that saw me but pass by them, would pray for me; and every one in
particular would exorcise me by the passion of Christ out of the chains of
heresy.


Yo. sist. What said you to him?


Wid. I put it off with a smile, but my heart was full, I scarce knew how to
hold; and he perceived it easily, and broke off the talk a little; but he fell
to it again, till he saw the tears stood in my eyes, when he took me in his
arms, and kissed me again; kissed my neck (...) the cross hung, and then kissed
the jewel, repeating the word JESU two or three times, and left me.


Eld. sist. This was all superstition, sister, I should not have borne it: I
would have thrown the jewel in his face, or on the ground, and have set my foot
on it.


Wid. No, sister, you would not have done so, I am sure; neither was it my
business to do so: my business was not to quarrel with my husband about his
religion, which it was now too late to help, but to keep him from being uneasy
about mine.


Eld. sist. I should not have had so much patience; I would not have lived with
him; I do not think it had been my duty.


Wid. Nay, sister, that is expressly contrary to the scripture, where this very
case is stated in the plainest manner imaginable, "The woman that has a
husband which believes not, if he will dwell with her, let her not leave him,"
1 Cor. vi. 1, 3.


Eld. sist. That is true indeed; I spoke rashly, sister, in that; but it was a
case, I confess, I do not know what I should have done in it; I would not have
borne it then.


Wid. That had been very disobliging.


Eld. sist. I would have obliged him to have forborne his little idolatrous
tricks then, and used them on other occasions.


Wid. That had been to desire him not to be a Roman Catholic: why, in foreign
countries, that are popish, as I understand, they never go by a cross, whether
it be on the road, or on a building, but they pull off their hats.


Fa. So they do, my dear, and often kneel down, though it be in the dirt, and say
over their prayers.


Wid. It is impossible to tell you how many attacks I had of that kind when I
wore this jewel.


Fa. I do not doubt it; especially if he brought any strangers into the room:
how did you do, child, when the Venetian ambassador dined at your house? had
you it on then?


Wid. Yes, Sir, my spouse desired me to put it on, and I could not well deny
him; but I did not know how to behave; for the ambassador and all his retinue
paid so many bows and homages to me, or to the cross, that I scarce knew what
to do with myself, nor was I able to distinguish their good manners from their
religion; and it was well I did not then understand Italian; for, as my dear
told me afterward, they said a great many religious things that would have
given me offense.


Fa. Those things are so frequent in Italy, that the Protestant ladies take no
notice of them, and yet they all wear crosses, but sometimes put them out of
sight.


Wid. I did so afterward, I lengthened the string it hung to, that it might
hang a little lower, but it was too big, if it went within my stays it would
hurt me; nor was it much odds to him; for, if he saw the string, he knew the
cross was there, and it was all one.


Yo. sist. Did he use any ceremony to it after the first time?


Wid. Always when he first came into any room where I was he was sure to give
me his knee with his bow, and kiss the cross as well as his wife.


Eld. sist. I should never have borne it.


Wid. You could never have resisted it any more than I, for I did what I could;
but his answer was clear; my dear, says he, take no notice of me, let my
civilities be to you; take them all to yourself, I cannot show you too much
respect; believe it is all your own; and be easy with me.


Eld. sist. How could he bid you believe, what you knew to be otherwise? Why
did you not leave it off, and reproach him with the difference?


Wid. Dear, I did so for months together: But then he doubled his ceremonies,
and told me, I only mortified him then by obliging him to reverence the place
where once the blessed figure had been lodged, as the holy pilgrims worshipped
the sepulcher.


Eld. sist. He was too hard for you every way, sister.


Wid. Ay, and would have been too hard for you too, if you had had him.


Eld. sist. It was my mercy that I had him not.


Wid. Well, it was my mercy too, that I had him, I had loss inconvenience with
the unhappy circumstance, than I must have had perhaps with any other man of
his principles in the world.


Eld. sist. That Is true, only this I must add, viz. that those engaging ways
would certainly, first or last, have brought you to Popery.


Wid. I hope not, sister; but I cannot say, when I seriously reflect on it, how
far I might have been left.


Fa. My dear, let me ask you a question or two about that: I know the first
method they take in such cases, is to let you see that you have been mistaken
in your notions about Popery; that the difference is not so great as has been
suggested to you; that we are all Christians; that we worship the same God;
believe the same creed; expect eternal life by the merits of the same Savior,
and the like; and by this method they bring us at first not to have such
frightful ideas of the Roman Catholic religion as we had before.


Wid. That is true; and this I had frequently in discourse; and, I confess,
such discourse had some effect on me.


Yo. sist. It lessened the aversion you had to them, no doubt.


Wid. It is true, they became not so frightful to me as before; but they had
another argument which my dear often used to me, and it was this: My dear, says
he, all your own divines, and all that have written on these subjects, own that
a Papist, as you call us, may be saved; that it is possible for us to go to
heaven. Our church have no reason to believe so of the Protestants, why, if you
may go to heaven among us, should you not join with us?


Eld. sist. I know not what answer I should have given to that.


Wid. I know not what your answer would have been, but I Will tell you what mine
was; I told him I did not know but it might be so; and I was willing to have as
much charity as I had affection for him; but as for myself, I was sure I could
not go to heaven that way, because I must act against my own ^ight.


Yo. sist. That was the (...) answer indeed. What could he say to it?


Wid. Then he told me, he would pray for me that I might be farther
enlightened; and he did not doubt but to prevail. I thanked him, and told him,
I would do the same for him; and that though perhaps it might not be with so
strong a faith, I was sure it would be with as earnest a desire.


Yo. sist. Well, you stood your ground nobly, sister; but it is a mercy to you,
that your perseverance was tried no farther: it is a dreadful thing to have so
dangerous an enemy so near one.


Wid. It is true, there lay my danger; for I must own, words spoken with so
much tenderness have a singular effect, and sink deeper on the mind than
others, especially where the affection is so mutual as it was with us.


Eld. sist. Why, sister, do you think in time his tenderness, and his
affectionate way of treating you would not have abated?


Wid. I often feared it, but indeed I never found it. Sometimes I suggested it
to him, that I feared it; and one day I told him, that if I did not turn, I was
afraid he would. He guessed what I meant, but would have me explain myself.
Why, my dear, says I, when I reflect what your thoughts are about Protestants,
That they are out of the pale of the church, and in a condition that they
cannot be saved, I cannot but apprehend, that if I do not come over to your
opinion, your love to me will abate, and at last turn into a stated aversion
and hatred: how can you love an object whom you think God hates? My dear, says
he, taking me very affectionately in his arms, I will prevent all your fears,
by telling you, that, were what you mention possible, it could not be till I
utterly despaired of your ever being brought over to the church and I shall
never be brought to believe, but God will open your eyes first or last; and,
besides, my earnest desire to persuade you, and win you to embrace the true
religion will teach me to do it by all the tenderness and love that it is
possible for me to show you; for, to be unkind to you, would be the way to
drive you farther off: but, be it as it will, I can never abate my affection to
you; and, my dear, say he, (with the most obliging passionate air of concern
that it was possible to show) that I hope, to love you tenderly and violently,
is not the way to keep you at a distance from the church, but rather to draw
you, to engage you, and let you see, that peace, love, joy, charity, and all
the virtues of a Christian, are to be found among us, and not that we are
furies and tyrants, as we have been represented. And when he had said this,
holding me still in his arms, he kissed me several times, and went on: My dear,
says he, let God alone change your heart his own way; I Will never take any
method, but that of loving you sincerely and most passionately while I live,
and praying for you even after I am in heaven. While he said this, I saw such
an inexpressible tenderness in his countenance, and every word came from him
with such passion, that I could not hold from tears: but he had not done with
me yet; for, while he held me with one arm, he put his other into his pocket,
and taking out his pocketbook, he bid me open it, and there dropped a loose
paper, doubled pretty thick, which I took up; says he, put it up, you shall
have a pledge for the continuance of my affection to you, whether you change
your opinion or no. I opened it, but could read very little of it, for I had
but newly begun to learn Italian. What is it, my dear, said I. It is, said he,
an assignment on the Bank of Genoa for 2000 ducats a year, and it shall be made
over to your father in trust for you, and to whoever you will bestow it after
you.


Eld. sist. Well, sister, I would never tell this story to any Protestant lady,
that was in the least danger of marrying a Roman.


Fa. Why, child, if her story be told with it, I think it may be told to
advantage.


Eld. sist. It may teach them indeed to pray, Lead us not into temptation.
Well, sister, I must repeat what I have said before to you, though it does
grieve you; it is your great mercy that he is dead.


Wid. O do not speak such a word, sister, it wounds my very soul.


Eld. sist. Pray answer me (...) Would you marry such (...).


Wid. There is not such another upon earth, sister; and besides, how can you
name the word? that is the unkindest thing you could think of; I must break off
the discourse.


Eld. sist. Do not call it unkind; I do not mean it the way you take it;
suppose things at the remotest distance you can, or suppose it to be any other
body's case, would you advise any other person that had such an offer, I say,
would you advise them to marry such another?


Wid. No, not to be a princess!


Eld. sist. I am answered; and I must own, I should take them for distracted if
they did.


Wid. Unless the lady resolved to turn Papist; and if that, she had best to do
it before hand, openly and avowedly, that she might not be under the reflection
of doing it on a worse account, viz. by compulsion.


Yo. sist. But after you have said so many things of him, that are enough to
recommend him, not to the affection, but even to the admiration of any one,
what can you say to persuade any young woman not to think that you were very
happy in him, and that consequently they would (...) so with such another?


Wid. O sister! do not suggest that I was happy with him: I had as few happy
hours as it was possible for any one to have that ever had a good husband.


Yo. sist. How can you convince any one of that?


Wid. Why, sister, it is plain to any one that knows wherein the happiness of
life consists. It is true, I wanted nothing; I lived in the abundance of all
things; I had the best humoured husband on earth, and one that loved me to an
extreme; which, had not our case indeed called for so much affection another
way, would have been a sin; for, in a word, he sum'd up all his earthly
felicity in his wife.


Eld. sist. If you were to give an account of it to the gentlemen of this age,
they would say you were writing the character of a fool.


Wid. It is no matter for that; it was his mercy and mine too; for, if it had
been otherwise, we had been the miserablest creatures alive; it was bad enough
as it was; and all that knew him, will grant that he was no fool.


Yo. sist. But what do you think then would have been the consequence, if, as
you say, he had loved you less? Wherein must you have been miserable?


Wid. Why, sister, if his abundant affection had not closed every debate with
kindness, whither must we have (...)? If he had not checked all the forwardness
of his religious zeal for converting me, by his love to me, to w^^t severity in
our mutual reproaches should we have gone on! In a word, sister, I must have
turned, or turned out of doors; I must have been a Papist, or we must have
parted.


Yo sist. Why, sister, you know there is Mr. P -- and his wife are in the very
same case, and yet they agree well enough.


Wid. Dear sister, how can you name them! He is a Papist, and she is a
Protestant, and when the name is taken away, it is hard to tell whether either
of them have any religion or no, nor do they care one farthing which way either
goes. People that can live easy without religion, may live easy without any
religion; that is not the case we are speaking of.


Eld. sist. There is a difference there I confess.


Wid. (...) if, sister, a religious life be the only heaven upon earth, as we
have been taught to believe, tell me, if you represent such a case to yourself,
what must it be for two to live together, who place their happiness really in
such a life as we call religious, but differ so extremely about what religion
to build it upon; that aim mutually at the end, viz. going to heaven, but turn
back to back as to the way thither? Can a religious life be formed between such
as these! and if not, then they are mutually deprived of that heaven upon earth
which, as you and I agree, is alone to be found in a religious life.


Eld. sist. That is true; but then in such a case the enjoyment must be
reserved and singular, and a woman must keep her religion to herself.


Wid. But you will allow her then to be deprived at once of all social
religion, of all family religion, and by consequence of all the comfort of a
religious husband.


Eld. sist. Nay, that is true, and I am not speaking for it; but asking your
experience, whether with so tender a husband, as you had, it might not be
otherwise?


Wid. Dear sister, his tenderness, as I said before, was my great mercy, as it
made him bear with my obstinacy, as he called it. Had he had the same
tenderness, and been indifferent in his principles, I might have turned him;
but had he wanted that tenderness, and yet been as zealous in his religion as
he was, he must have turned me, or I must have lived a dreadful life with him.


Yo. sist. I find he was a mighty religious man in his way.


Wid. To the greatest degree imaginable devout, and very serious, I assure you.


Yo. sist. Well, though he was mistaken in his principles, yet he was the more
sober, the more honest, and every way the better prepared to be a good man.


Wid. His devotion made him, without doubt, the better man; but, if it had not
been for the restraints of his affections, it had certainly made him the worse
husband.


Yo. sist. So that in this question of marrying a man of a different opinion in
religion, you suppose, that the more devout and serious the person is in his
way, the worse husband.


Wid. Without question it is so: The zeal in their own opinions makes them
always uneasy and impatient with their wives, ^eazing and baiting them with
impertinent disputes, and even driving them by force of restless importunities
(which, by the way, is the worst sort of persecution) into a compliance.


Yo. sist. I agree with you in that part. But, sister, you say, that even when
your husband's love was your protection from these importunities, you were yet
unhappy, and could not be able to lead a religious life.


Wid. No, sister, I did not say so; I said we could not have a religious
family: all social religion was lost; mutual help and assistance in religion
were wanting; public worshipping God in the family as a house, could not be set
up; education and instruction of children was all destroyed; example to
servants and inferiors all spoiled; nothing could be of religion, but what was
merely personal and retired.


Aunt. There indeed you are right, niece.


Wid. I assure you, Madam, from my experience, that next to the having the
husband and wife being religious, or at least religiously inclined, they that
would have a religious family, should take as much care as possible to have
religious servants.


Aunt. I agree with you in that, my dear, with all my heart.


Wid. It is impossible to observe the necessary rules of a religious family
without it, or to have a due regard shown to the orders which must be given on
that account.


Aunt. Nay, child, I go farther than that; I insist, that our servants ought to
be so chosen, as to be of the same opinions too in religion as ourselves.


Wid. I have not so much considered that part indeed; but I believe, madam, the
reasons for it are very good.


Aunt. I have a great deal to say to that from my own experience.


Eld. sist. And so have I too, Madam, from what I have seen in some families of
my acquaintance.


Wid. I have seen enough of it in my little family, to make me resolve, that
while I have a family, and can keep my servants, I will entertain none but such
as worship God the same way as I worship him.


Eld. sist. And did so before you took them, I hope, you mean so, sister.


Wid. Yes, indeed, I do mean so too.


Aunt. I must put in an exception, niece, there, in behalf of poor ignorant
creatures, that may come into a family untaught, and are willing to be
instructed in things that are good.


Wid. I know not what to say to that part, because I am but ill qualified for a
school mistress.


Aunt. Well, we will discourse of this by itself, niece, for I have a great
deal to say ^^on that subject.


Wid. With all my heart, Madam.


Aunt. But in the mean time, child, let us go now where we left off.


Wid. There was as much religion in our house, as it was possible there could
be, in our circumstances; for both of us desired it in general, and pursued it
in particular, only we could not join in the manner; and it was a perfect scene
of confusion, to see how religion was carried on among us; the servants were
some Papists, some Protestants, some Pagans; for we had three East India blacks
and one negro among our people. The Christian servants were every now and then
together by the ears, about persuading the negro to turn Christian, and be
baptized, but could not bear to think what sort of a Christian the poor
creature should be; one of our men, an Italian, would have him be a Papist, and
the other would have him to be a Protestant; and the poor negro was so
confounded between them, that he could not tell what to do. The negro was a
sensible, inquisitive fellow, and had, by mere asking questions on both sides,
gotten a great deal of knowledge of religion: but was nearly stopped in his
search after further particulars by the impertinent quarrels of those servants
who pretended to instruct him: both told him he must believe a God, a future
state, a heaven, a hell, a resurrection to life, or to death, and that he must
be saved by a Redeemer. They agreed exactly in their description of the joys of
eternal life, the torments of hell, and particularly they had joined in giving
the poor negro a frightful apprehension of hell, as the reward of his doing
wickedly, and of the devil as a tempter, an enemy, and tormentor; so that the
poor fellow would pray to God very heartily to save him from hell, and to keep
him from the devil.

But when these poor ignorant fellows began to instruct him how to worship God,
and who to look to as his Redeemer and Savior; to talk to him about reading
(...) scriptures, and such things, they fell out to the last (...); the English
footman told the Italian he was an idolater, and he was worse than a heathen;
that Ne^^^^ ((...) so the poor (...) was called) was as good a Christian as he;
(...) he did not worship in the name of Christ, yet (...) Italian footman)
worshipped a piece of wood for a savior, Christ would not accept him; and it
was as bad as Negum's worshipping a Hobgoblin, or any thing else. The Italian
told him he was a heretic, and his religion was no religion at all; that he was
an enemy to God, and to the church; and told Negum, that if he believed what
that fellow said the devil would take him away alive. They had many quarrels
about it; but one day above the rest they came to that height, that they fell
to fighting: it seems the rest of the servants had parted them before their
master or I heard of it; but as we were both walking together in the evening in
our garden, we, by mere chance, saw the negro in the kitchen-garden crying: his
master saw him first, and called him to us; and the fellow came with a book in
his hand, but terribly afraid his master should be angry.

What is the matter, Negum? says his master, and so they began to talk.


Neg. No much matter, no much.


Ma. Why you were crying, Negum: what did you cry about? Has any body beat you?


Neg. No much cry, no bea^^ me.


Ma. What then Negum? What book have you got there?


Neg. Indeed^ me no go away [kneels down] Sir; me no go be a Christian, no
indeed^.

[The fellow, it seems, was afraid his master would think, if he turned
Christian, he would be baptized, and so think himself free; and he kneeled down
to his master to beg him not to be angry.]


Ma. Well, well, thou shall be (...), Negum, if thou have a mind for it, God
(...) should hinder thee. What book is that?


Neg. Bible book, me read (...) to be a christian!


Ma. Who gave you that book to read?


Neg. Augustino.


Ma. Let ^^e see it. [He looked in the book and (...) it was an Italian missal
or (...)


Neg. (...) have other (...) book [He pulls another ^ook out] too.


Ma. Let Us see that too. [His master looked in that too, and found it was an
English Bible.]


Ma. Who gave you this too?


Neg. William.


Ma. Well, you understand the languages; read them both: but, poor fellow, thou
have got but two sorry teachers.

[When he gave the book back to him, and bid him read them both, he turned to
me; my dear, says he, these fellows pretend to instruct this poor negro in the
Christian religion, when they cannot agree about it themselves I am sure. [Upon
which Negum makes his master a bow, and puts in his word.]


Neg. No indeed, they no agree: they fight just now about teach me.


Ma. What! did they fight?


Neg. Yes, indeed they fight just now; they no teach me; one say, me go to
the devil; the other say, me go to the devil; they no teach me to go away from
the devil; they make me no know what I do.


Ma. And was that it you cried about, Negum?


Neg. Yes, indeed, me cry to go to the devil? me would go away from the devil.


Ma. You must pray to God to keep you from the devil.


Neg. Yes, indeed, me do pray God keep away the devil.


Ma. You must pray God to teach you too.


Neg. God teach me! No, Augustino teach me! No, William teach me! God teach
me, how that?

[Here my spouse found how the case stood, and turning to me, my dear, said he,
these fellows quarrel continually about this poor man, and so in the end he
will be brought rather to abhor the Christian religion in general, than to turn
Christian at all; while one pulls him one way, and one another; now, what
course must you (...) I take? I cannot pretend to desire him to be made a
Catholic: and so the poor fellow must be lost. I told him, it was a critical
case which I knew not how to act; but as they were his servants in particular,
and that he brought his negro out of Italy with him, I thought they were to be
at his disposal and direction, rather than mine My dear, says he, there is
nothing mine but what is yours; do not shift it off so, but tell me what I
shall do? I confess I trembled when he said so; for I was afraid some debate
would fall in between us, in consequence of the case; however, I answered him
thus: My dear, you determined before for me, what you might be sure would be my
thoughts; but what can I determine about your servants? Well, my dear, says he,
I will do as Solomon did in the case of dividing the child, I will show you
that I am the truest lover of his soul, I mean of us two; for rather than he
should not be taught to worship God at all, let him be taught the way of the
country where we are; if we divide as our two men have done, he will not be
taught at all.

Upon this principle he acted, and consented I should act in it as I saw cause;
upon which I sent the negro down to a country tenant we have in Essex, upon
pretense to learn to plow and sow, and do country work, and there I kept him
near a twelvemonth: at the same time, the farmer being a very sober, religious
man, and having a hint from me what to do, this poor negro is become a very
sensible, religious fellow, has been baptized now about two years ago, and I
think verily (...) an excellent Christian.


Sist. And did he run away, or claim his freedom upon his being baptized?


Wid. No, not he; but I gave him his freedom when his master died, and gave him
wages, and he is an extraordinary servant, I assure you.


Sist. Your husband strained (...) of religion there, I assure you.


Wid. Why you see what principle he did it from; he saw the fellow was in a
Protestant country, and would either be a Protestant at last, or nothing at
all; and he rather chose he should be a Protestant, than (...) a Heathen, or
lose all desire (...) being a Christian; for, says he, God can enlighte^^^ him
farther by (...) when he pleases; and the (...) been taught the general notions
of religion, (...) would (...) easier (...) to embrace the true church; but, if
he continues a Heathen, he will have no knowledge at all.


Eld. sist. I believe you would not have shown the same charity for his church.


Wid. I confess I did not show so much zeal for the soul of the poor negro, as
I think I ought to have done, or so much charity as he did; but had other
thoughts at that time to take me up: however, sister, to bring this back to the
first discourse, you see by this how fatal in a family, difference in
principles is within the same house; and had he not been biassed by an
extraordinary temper, as well as by an uncommon charity, we had been the most
miserable couple on earth; so that, in short, there is not one part of a
woman's life, in such a circumstance, that is not dreadfully embarrassed, if
she has any sense of her own principles, or her husband any sense of his.


Yo. sist. But do you think then, that there may be a case of some kind or
other, in which a man and a woman may be happy together, though there be a
difference in opinion?


Wid. No, indeed, I do not think there is. I do not think you can name a case,
in which it is possible to say with truth, that they can be happy; that is,
that there is not some interruption to their happiness on that very account.


Yo. sist. That is supposing them to be both religiously inclined.


Wid. Nay, that need not be supposed; for we go upon our mother's principle,
That without a religious family there can be no happiness of life: if they are,
as I said before, indifferent about religion, then there is no happiness at
all, in (...) sense of felicity; and if they place their happiness in pursuing
their duty, as every true Christian must, there must be some of that happiness
wanting, where they cannot worship God together, and go hand in hand to heaven.


Yo. sist. You know, sister, I was always of that mind; but I am exceedingly
confirmed in it by your experience.


Wid. You were happy in your early cleaving to this principle, and I miserable
in neglecting it; may both our examples be directing to those who come after us.


Fa. Come, children, blessed be God for the experience of both. Let us end this
discourse, for it makes me melancholy, that have had a very unhappy part in
both your your cases. In yours, my dear, [speaking to the youngest] I violently
endeavored to force you to be miserable; and in yours, my dear, [speaking to
the other] I entirely omitted the concern I ought to have had upon me, to
prevent your making yourself so.


Sist. Do not afflict yourself, Sir, about that now; blessed be God we have
both got it over.


Fa. But it does afflict me for all that: and let all fathers learn from me,
how much it concerns them, if they wish well to their children, either to their
souls or bodies, to establish religious families in their posterity, and to
prevent their children marrying, if possible, either where there is no
religion, or no agreement in opinion about it; for in either case they are sure
to be made miserable.


RELIGIOUS COURTSHIP.
THE APPENDIX.
PART III.
IN the latter part of the discourse we left the aunt and the widow sister, who
had married the Roman Catholic gentleman, entering into a discourse about the
inconveniences of entertaining irreligious servants; and also of entertaining
servants of different persuasions and opinions in religion, one from another,
or of different opinions from the family they serve in. The ladies put off the
discourse of that affair for another time, the aunt being willing to enter into
a more particular conversation about it. This caused several entertaining
discourses among them at several times, some of which, I hope, may be useful to
be made public for the direction of other families, and for the encouragement
of all masters and mistresses of families, who desire to promote good
government and religious things among their children and servants; and
particularly in such a time as this, when it is known that servants are less
apt to submit to family regulations, and good household government, than ever.

The two ladies being at their aunt's house, which was at Hampstead, as I have
observed, their aunt had a little squabble with one of her maids upon the
following occasion: The maid had, it seems, been out in the afternoon of a
Sabbath day, and staid longer than the usual time of being at church: and her
lady, who otherwise had known nothing of it, happened, unluckily for the wench
to be just in the way when she came in; that is to say, the lady chancing to go
down the back stairs, which was not ordinary for her to do, meets her maid
dressed in her best clothes, and just going up to undress herself; and this
rencounter between the mistress and the maid produced the following dialogue.

DIALOGUE I.
Lady. HA! Mary, says the lady, not undressed yet! Mary. I shall be ready
presently, madam.


La. But how come you to be so fine at this time of day? I suppose you are just
come in, Mary?


Ma. Yes, madam, I have come in a good while.


La. What do you call a good while, Mary?


Ma. A great while, madam.


La. Must not I know how long, Mary?


Ma. Yes, madam, if you please; but you (...) not use to inquire into such
trifles; I hope I have not been wanted.


La. It would have been a trifle, Mary, if it had been on another day; but it
being on the Sabbath day, Mary, makes the case differ extremely. I hope you
were at church, Mary?


Ma. Yes, madam, to be sure.


La. At our church, Mary? I think I did not see you there.


Ma. No, madam, indeed I was not there; I hope it is all one if I was at
another church?


La. No, Mary, it is not all one, because I cannot be sure that you were at any
church at all.


Ma. You may take my word, madam, for that, for once I hope.


La. I cannot say, Mary, that it is so much to my satisfaction to take your
word for it, as it would have been to see you at church myself.


Ma. I am sorry, madam, you should be so uneasy at those things; I hope I do
your business (...) content; and as to going to church, I hope I may be (...)
liberty to go to what church I like best.


La. Why, yes, Mary, I am willing to allow liberty of conscience, but then it
is upon condition, that it is really a conscientious liberty; it is not my
question, what church you go to, if I am satisfied you were at church at all;
but how shall I be sure of (...) Mary?


Ma. It is not worth (...) inquiry, madam; those things are trifles below a
mistress to trouble herself with.


La. No, Mary, you are much mistaken there, I think I am obliged to inquire
whether my servants go to church or no; and how they spend their time on
Sabbath Days: besides, Mary, it is a great while since church was done, and I
find you are but just come home: I desire to have some little account where you
have been.


Ma. I am not ashamed to tell where I have been, madam; I have been doing (...)
harm; I have been taking a walk, madam; I work hard enough all the week, I
think I may take a little pleasure on Sundays.


La. Well, Mary, so you have been walking in the fields, and taking your
pleasure to day.


Ma. Yes, madam, I hope there is no offense in it; I think you said I have not
been wanted.


La. Well, but just now you said you had been at church, Mary?


Ma. Why, that is true, madam; I was at High-gate church-door, but I did not go
in, that is true; I did not think you would have troubled yourself to examine
such trifles so very particularly.


La. You and I differ very much about the thing itself; I do not think it is a
trifling thing at all, Mary, whether my servants spend the Sabbath Day at
church, or in taking their pleasure.


Ma. I work very hard, madam, all the week.


La. What is that to keeping the Sabbath Day, Mary?


Ma. Why, madam, sure I may take a little pleasure on Sundays, I have no other
time; I am sure you give your servants no other time for diversion.


La. Did I ever refuse you, Mary, when you asked me for a day for yourself?


Ma. I never troubled you much with asking.


La. I had rather you had, Mary, than take God's time for yourself?


Ma. God's time, Madam, all our time is God's (...) I think.


La. Yes, Mary, but some time he has appo^^^ed for religion, Mary.


Ma. Religion! O dear! indeed, Madam; I do not trouble myself about religion,
not I.


La. So I find, Mary, and am very sorry for it.


Ma. O Madam, you have religion enough for us all: what can I do.


La. Do not make a jest of it, Mary, I am not jesting with you.


Ma. I think you are, Madam, when you talk to me of religion; I do not
understand it: what can I say to it?


La. You can go to church, Mary, cannot you?


Ma. Yes, Madam, so I do sometimes.


La. And do not you go every Sunday?


Ma. No indeed, Madam, not I; it is a (...) to lie.


La. I am sorry for it, Mary; I assure you, they that live with me shall go to
church every Sunday, or I shall not desire their service.


Ma. You never made that bargain, Madam, when you hired me.


La. Well, Mary, then I make it now; for they shall not serve me all the week,
that make my work an excuse for not serving God on Sunday; I should think it
would bring a curse upon my work, and upon my whole family.


Ma. As you please for that, Madam.


La. No, Mary, it must be as you please, it (...) for you know my conditions
now, and I expect you (...) observe them, or remove them.

[Here her mistress left her, seeing she began to talk a little saucily, and
she had no mind to vex herself, or put herself in any passion with her.]

The wench a little heated with the reproof her lady had given her, and vexed
that she (...) ^^^ght, for she did not expect (...) see her mistress on the
back stairs, went up and undressed herself, and hearing another of the maid
(...) next room, she goes to her; and there gives a full ^ent to her passion;
railing heartily at her mistress and (...) religion, and at every thing that
came in her way. The following discourse will give some part of their talk: she
knocks at the door, and calls to her fellow servant thus (...) Betty, open the
door, I want to speak with you: so ^^^ty let her in, and she begins.


Ma. I suppose you have heard what a lecture I have had, have not you, Betty?


Betty. No, not I: who have you had a lecture from?


Ma. Nay, no body but my mistress: I wonder what business she had upon the
back-stairs.


Bet. Back-stairs! Why did you meet my mistress upon the back-stairs?


Ma. Ay, ay, I met her there: or rather, she met me there, as ill-luck would
have it; for I was but just come in, and was coming up to undress me, but she
caught me; I would I had been a mile off.


Bet. Why, what did she say to you? was she angry?


Ma. Ay, ay, angry? I never had such, a rattle from her, since I came into the
house.


Bet. What was the matter? what was it for?


Ma. For! for nothing, I think; but forsooth she would needs know where I had
been, and whether I had been at church or no: what has she to do with it,
whether I go to church or no? it is nothing to her.


Bet. O that was only because you was but just come in, and it was so long past
church time, I suppose, that made her suspect you.


Ma. Suspect me! what do you mean by that? I do nothing to be suspected, not I.


Bet. I do not say your do; I say that made her suspect you had not been at
church.


Ma. Well, she need not trouble her head with her suspicious of me; I told her
I had not been at church; I told her I had been to take a walk with a friend as
far as High-gate.


Bet. Did you? that is more than I dare do; if I made a slip now and then, I am
in such a hurry to get back just as church is done, that it takes (...) the
pleasure of it.


Ma. I do not trouble my head with it; if I have a mind to take a walk, as long
as she does not (...) what need -- she trouble herself? I shall not be (...)
afraid of her, not I; as long as it is on Sunday, (...) work is done too.


Bet. But then, I can assure you, my mistress and you will not agree long
together; for, if she knows it; she will not keep you an hour.


Ma. Nay, she may do as she will for that; I told her plainly where I went, and
that I thought she had nothing to do with it.


Bet. Did you so, Mary? Then I suppose she told you her mind.


Ma. Ay, ay, and I told her my mind too; I will not be tied up to her religious
trumpery, not I: if I do her work, what has she to do with what religion I am
of, or whether I have any religion or no? it is no business of hers.


Bet. No, Mary, I cannot go that length ^^^ther; I think my mistress may
concern herself with that; for, if she is religious herself, she may desire to
have her servants be so too; and therefore, if I do make a breach sometimes, I
always do it so as not to be found out; and I have had such good luck, that my
mistress has never caught me yet.


Ma. Well, she has caught me; and, if it be a fine day next Sunday, she shall
ketch me again, if she has a mind to it; I will not be tied to go to church but
when I please; is not that liberty of conscience?


Bet. No, Mary, I think that is liberty without conscience; for, it is a liberty
in what we would not do; that can never be liberty of conscience, Mary.


Ma. Well, well: then let it be liberty without conscience; it is the liberty I
love; and I see no harm in it: Why, you acknowledge you do so yourself, don't
you?


Bet. That Is true, so I do (...) I cannot say it is as it should be; I cannot
say, (...), that there is no harm in it; it is a (...), I (...) this and I don't
do it very often; and when I do, (...) you, I take care not to have it known.


Ma. Very well, then you are worse than I; (...) you (...) it is a fault and
yet you do it: now I don't (...) it is a fault at all, if I did, it may be, I
would, not (...).


(...) I don't believe you can say with a safe con^^^^, that there is no harm
in it; you only are hardened a little more than I.


Ma. It may be so; and you are even with me; for you are a little more of a
hypocrite than I, and for aught I see, that is all the difference between us.


Bet. Truly, Mary, your reproof is bitter; but perhaps it is too true; and I
shall l^arn so much from you, that I shall take more care how I do again what
my own conscience convinces me is a fault.


Ma. Well, and I may go on, because I have more impudence than you: I suppose
that is what you mean.


Bet. I did not say so; I believe you know it is a fault as well as I do, but
you are a little more used to those things, it may be, than I have been.


Ma. (...) as I was bred, and so, it may be, (...) you; I was never taught to
lay much stress upon these things, and so I never trouble myself about them.


Bet. Well, Mary, I am glad you think I have been taught better.


Ma. Why, as well as you have been taught, I find you can take a walk on Sunday
as well as I.


Bet. But I tell you again, I don't do it, and think there is no harm in it, as
you do; and I think you have touched me so home with your reproof, that I
resolve never to do so again while I live.


Ma. But what is all this to my mistress and me? what has she to do with it?


Bet. Why, Mary, my mistress is a very pious, religious lady, and she thinks
herself bound to call her servants to an account how they spend their time.


Ma. Ay, so she may for all the weekdays, for that is her time; but Sunday is
my own, she has nothing to do with that.


Bet. I assure you my mistress will not allow that doctrine; she thinks she has
as much to do with you on Sunday as any other day,


Ma. You talk of my mistress being a religious lady, why so she may be, for
aught I know; and I think we have so much religion at home, we need not go
abroad for it: does not the chaplain teaze us twice a day (...) his long
prayers, and reading of chapters? I am (...) he has made me neglect my business
many times to (...) into prayers: but I give him the slip sometimes, and if I
did not, they would have many a good dish of meat spoiled, so they would.


Bet. You are a merry girl, Mary, when you, ^^^k of religion.


Ma. Nay, I don't understand it; I know nothing of the matter; I come to do my
business and mind the kitchen; if their dinners are not dished up, they may
find fault, and I should take some care to mend it, but, to talk to me about
religion, it is time enough hereafter, let them let me alone to myself.


Bet. But my mistress will satisfy you, that she is obliged, while she keeps
you for a servant, to see that you serve (...) as well as you serve her.


Ma. (...) dear! let them serve God (...) better first; (...) don't see that
any of them (...) regard to their prayers and their chapters than I have that
stay away, but only for form's sake, and it may be for the credit of employing
a chaplain.


Bet. Nay, do not say so neither; I can assure you my mistress is a very pious,
religious lady, and you cannot ^^y otherwise, I am sure, and so are all the
young ladies too, they are like her.


Ma. It may be so; and yet I have seen them all asleep at prayers many a time,
when I am sure they (...) not much more need to be sleepy than I had, that work
hard, nor so much neither.


Bet. Sometimes they may be heavy, but that is not often; and I suppose you
cannot say they were ever all asleep together.


Ma. It Is no matter for that, they do the same at church; and pray what is the
difference between my going into the fields to take my pleasure on Sundays, and
their going to church to take their case? between my washing my dishes, while
the chaplain is at prayers, and their being fast asleep at prayers?


Bet. Why, Moll, thou art very malicious to take notice of such things; and
they are faults, to be sure; but there is a vast difference in them too.


Ma. As how, pray?


Bet. Why thus: That though they may sometimes drop asleep, it is not always;
and they do it but seldom, You, it seems, make the other a practice, and do it
always: Then, if they do sleep sometimes at church or at prayers, they don't
pretend to say there is no harm in it, they must acknowledge they ought not to
do so; but you have the impudence to say, when you spend your time in the
fields, or perhaps worse, there is no harm in it. Now there is a great deal of
difference between doing a thing which they acknowledge to be wrong, and doing
what is really wrong, and justifying it as if it was right.


Ma. Well let them do what they will, and let me do what I will; I don't meddle
with them, let them let me alone, cannot they?


Bet. But it may be, my mistress thinks she (...) to govern her servants in
religious things, as well (...) her house-affairs.


Ma. Why, let her think what she will, and do what she will, I will have my own
way, I shall mind nothing they say to me.


Bet. That Is none of my business, Mary; you may do as you will.


Ma. No; and it is none of her business neither, I think.


Bet. I cannot say that, Mary; I think if you were a mistress, and kept a great
many servants, as our mistress does, you would talk otherwise and do otherwise
too, or else you would soon have a house full of whores and rogues.


Ma. I don't know what I would do then, nor do I trouble my head with it; for I
am never like to be tried with it: but if I was a housekeeper; and kept maids,
I would take care they should do my business, and that would keep them from
making such a disorderly house as you speak of; as for their religion I should
not trouble myself about it.


Bet. Well, but I would trouble myself about that too, I assure you, if I were
a mistress.


Ma. Why, what would you do?


Bet. Why, if I had a chaplain or a husband that kept up good order in his
house, I would take care my servants should always attend at prayers; and on
Sundays I would take care they should all go to church, and come home again too
when church was done.


Ma. You would! And if I was your maid, you ^ould make me come into prayers
every night and morning, would you?


Bet. Yes, I would, or you should not live with me.


Ma. Well, and if I did come in, I should only laugh at you all when I did, and
make a jest of your chaplain or your husband, and so would other servants too;
don't you see me do so here? an't we always making a sport at our poor dull
thing called a chaplain?


Bet. Yes, I cannot say but I see it, but I never join with you (...) for I
think there is no jest at all in it: And as (...) poor good man himself, I know
he sees it, and it is a great trouble and discouragement to him.


Ma. Why, what is such a fellow good for, but to be gamed and made sport with?
does he think we take him for any thing but a religious Merry Andrew?


Bet. You must think, however, my mistress takes him otherwise, and thinks it
her duty to keep him, and to have good order in her house; and it does not
become us that are servants to mock at such things: No (...) or mistress that
knew their servants mocked at God's worship in their house, ought to keep those
servants an hour longer in their families.


Ma. And you would make me come to church if I was your cook, would you, Betty?


Bet. No, I don't say I would make you go to church, but you should either go
to God's worship, or go about your business.


Ma. Well, but what if I were I (...) and did not like your way, or did not
care to go to your church? Or, what if you were a dissenter, and I did not like
to go to the meeting house?


Bet. Why truly, Mary, in general, I say (...) were the real case, I would not
restrain you, provided I was satisfied you went but somewhere; but your dispute
with my mistress is between going somewhere and nowhere, not between serving
God in this manner or that manner, but between serving God some way or other,
and serving him no way at all; and that alters the case mightily.


Ma. But as to the matter of coming to prayers at home, it would be the same
thing: for, if I were a Church woman, and my mistress a dissenter; or I a
dissenter, and my mistress of the Church; or I a Quaker, and my mistress a
Roman C^tholic, or my mistress a Quaker, and I a Catholic, it would be all the
same thing; there would be the same dislike and contempt of what was done in
the house; I should no more like the crosses and the masses of the Papists, the
yea and nay of the Quakers, and reading prayers of the Church, or extempore
prayers of the Presbyterians, if I was of the other opinion, than I now like
any of them, while I declare I understand (...) of them; and so all their
family doings would be (...) jest to me; and I Will make a jest of them.


Bet. Why, this is too true; and therefore I must own, that if I were mistress
of a house, I would always have my servants go to the same place, to serve God,
as I did myself, or I would not keep them; whether I went to the Church, or to
the Meeting House; or to the Quakers-meeting, or to the Mass-house.


Ma. And what would you be the better? They would but make a jest of you still;
they would be not the more of your opinion for forcing them to go where you
went.


Bet. You mistake me much; I mean they should be such as by choice went to
worship so before they came to me, and that declared their opinion to be so
when I hired them: For otherwise, I grant, that compelling them afterward
would be nothing at all, or perhaps worse than the other.


Ma. And what if an honest plain wench like me came to be hired, that knows
nothing at all of religion, and troubled not herself about it?


Bet. Why, such an one, when I asked her whether she went to this or that
place, should say yes to any of them, as I happened to be myself, and so I
might be deceived.


Ma. Well, and what would you do then, when you found her out, and met her on
the back-stairs, Bess, as my mistress has done by me?


Bet. Why, I should do just as my mistress has done with you, inquire about it,
and when I found you a reprobate profane wench, and a saucy one too, as it
seems you acknowledge you have shown yourself to day, I should even give you
warning to mend your manners, or provide yourself, as it seems my mistress has
done too.


Ma. A pretty story! So I am to come to make my complaint to you to a fine
purpose; it seems you think me in the wrong all the way.


Bet. Indeed so I do.


Ma. And what if I had come to you to be hired, and you had asked me my opinion
about religion, and I had answe^^ you, that I had not had many thoughts about
it: that (...) opinions were alike to me: that when I did go any where, I would
go where you would have me go, and the like?


Bet. Why Mary, I must own I should not like it at all; neither, I believe,
should I hire you at all. I should be afraid to take such a stupid despiser of
God and religion into my house; you should even go without a mistress for me.


Ma. Well, and you might go without a servant too for me; for I can tell you
there are mistresses enough in the world that never ask (...) question either
before or after, nor care whether their servants serve God or the devil.


Bet. Ay, Mary, and that is the reason why so many of us servants are of the
same kind.


Ma. Well, well, I don't doubt, however, but I shall get a place among them,
and not be questioned about going to church. I go to service to work, not to
learn my catechism; I understand my cookery, what is it to them whether I
understand religion or no?


Bet. Why, look you, Mary, I don't learn my catechism any more than you, and
yet I do not like my mistress the worse, I assure you, for taking care that her
servants should go to church, and not caring to keep those that are despisers
of religion. I think it is a pity any lady that is religious should not have
religious servants about her.

[They had another dialogue upon this subject afterward: but it had too much
passion in it to merit a place in this account; for the case was this; Betty
gave her lady an account of some part of Mary's discourse, particularly that of
making a jest of her chaplain, and of calling the family to prayers: upon which
her mistress turned her out of her house, giving her a month's wages instead of
a month's warning as one not fit to be allowed to stay in her family; and Mary
fell upon her fellow servant for that part in a great rage. Betty told her in
so many words, she thought herself obliged to mention it, though it was not
till her mistress, having heard that they had discoursed together, made her
promise to give her a full account of all that had passed between them, and if
she had not done it faithfully, her mistress would have (...) them both away
together.

These two short dialogues or disputes about the maid's rambling on the
Sabbath Day, was the reason why the young lady's aunt was willing to discourse
again with her niece upon that subject; and accordingly meeting together some
time after, they renewed their discourse about servants in the following
manner.]


Aunt. I think, niece, when you and I talked last, we were upon the subject of
taking religious servants: I want to hear what you have to say upon that head;
for I think there is really much more in it than most people imagine.


Niece. Pray, Madam, it is what I lay a great stress upon; and though I have
not had much occasion to complain in the first years I have kept house; yet I
have seen so much of it in my mother's time, and since that in other families,
and a little in my own, that I am resolved, whatever shift I make, I will have
no servants, but such as, at least, have a common reverence for religion, and
for religious persons in a family. To be sure I will never have any scoffers
and mockers of religion, if I can help it.


Aunt. As the world goes now, child, it will be very hard to find such; for
religion is so much made a jest of among masters, that it is hard to find any
servants that do not jest at it too, and mock and slight all those that have
any regard to it.


Niece. That is my case, Madam, exactly; but there is another mischief in it
too.


Aunt. Another mischief, child! There are innumerable family mischiefs in it.


Niece. I believe so, Madam. But this is one particular case, and which I have
the greater reason to take notice of, because a certain lady, and acquaintance
and neighbor of mine, has had a great deal of that kind; and indeed in a
particular manner with her servants.


Aunt. What lady is that? Pray, do I know her?


Niece. You had some discourse with her, Madam, if I remember right, the last
time you did me the favor to dine with me.


Aunt. I remember it very well; and we talked a little upon that very subject;
I mean, how rude and insolent servants were grown at this time: but I think we
had not much talk of their being irreligious and profane.


Niece. Madam, she had a servant, whom they called her woman; for she was one
to whom she entrusted every thing, and who was like a housekeeper; and all the
servants were as it were under her: she was a very good sort of a body indeed
in the house; and as that lady, if you remember, was very lame, she could not
stir about to look much after her servants herself, but trusted all to this
woman.

She was a sensible woman, had the knowledge of almost every thing in the
world, and talked admirably well; had a world of wit and humor, very mannerly
and well behaved, sober and modest enough; in short, she was an excellent
servant.


Aunt. You give her an extraordinary character, niece, I assure you.


Niece. In a word, Madam, she had every thing about her, that could be desired
in a servant, but religion; and of that she was as entirely empty as you can
imagine it possible for any creature in the world to be, and that had ever
heard of God or the devil, or had lived among Christians.


Aunt. Nay, niece, you say she was not an ignorant body.


Niece. No, indeed, Madam, she was so far from being ignorant, that she was
able to deceive any body: she would talk of religious things as well, and argue
upon them strongly enough to delude any body: and this made it the worse, for
she was such a human devil, that she made use of a fluent tongue, and of an
uncommon wit, not to talk irreligiously only, but to mock and make a jest of
religion in general, and of all those that had any regard for it.


Aunt. She was a dangerous body indeed! Pray, was she a maid or a wife? for she
is not very young it seems.


Niece. She had never been married, Madam, but I think was engaged to a man
whom my spouse sent to Italy: and they are to be married when he comes back.


Aunt. You say she is a sober woman?


Niece. Yes, madam, I dare say she is. But her wicked, profane, and atheistical
behavior is enough to poison a whole family.


Aunt. But why does the lady your friend entertain such an one in her house?


Niece. She has such a subtilty in her conduct, and behaves so cunningly, that
her mistress does not perceive it; at least she does not think her so bad as
she is.


Aunt. But what says her husband to it? does he know it?


Niece. Yes, madam, he knows more of it than she does; for the menservants
tell him of it, and give him a particular account sometimes of passages which
they observe.


Aunt. Perhaps he does not trouble himself about it; for the men do not often
value these things.


Niece. Indeed, madam, just the contrary; for he is a very sober, religious
gentleman, and keeps very good order in his house, and it is a very great
disturbance to him.


Aunt. And has he spoken of it to his wife?


Niece. Yes, madam, he has very often, and told her such particulars as are
very essential to the good of the family; and such too as almost carry their
own evidence with them.


Aunt. And what does she say?


Niece. I know not indeed how she manages; but I know that her husband and she
have had more words about it, than about all other matters put together, since
they were married; and sometimes it grows high, and they are very warm, and
even angry about it.


Aunt. Why, she seems to be a good sensible, religious lady: how can she take
such a creature's part, especially against her husband!


Niece. Why, first of all, she pretends that she does not believe it; that the
other servants rival her in the favors she receives, and her mistress'
particular kindnesses, and do it out of a malicious design: than she says she
has examined her, and she finds she clears herself of much of the charge, and
makes the rest appear to be trifling, and not worth notice.


Aunt. But perhaps, niece, it really may be so too, and the other servants may
make things worse than they are, for the reasons you mention.


Niece. But, madam, it is otherwise in fact; for the truth is, the wench, or
woman, manages all the servants so effectually, that, in short, if any of them
are religiously inclined when they come, she makes them ashamed to be so, when
they come to her; for she makes such a meek of religion, and such a jest of
going to church, or going to prayers in the family, that she laughs them out of
their religion, and, in a word, they all turn reprobates like herself.


Aunt. But can this be, and her lady not know or hear of it.


Niece. Yes, very well, madam; for, as I told you, she is an excellent servant,
and the more her mistress is loath to part with her, the harder she is to
believe these things of her.


Aunt. But niece, her husband, you say, knows it; sure she will believe him.


Niece. But ^he alleges, he knows it but by hear say from the rest of the
servants, who, she says, hates her, and therefore falsely accuses her.


Aunt. But does he know nothing from his own knowledge?


Niece. Yes, madam, he knows too much; for the unwary creature let him
over-hear her one evening, making her jeers, and flo^t at him to some of the
servants, but behind his back, for his calling them all to prayers; and not
only so, but at some expressions which he had used some time or other, which
she pretended were nonsense, and others trifling, and the like, as the
redundancy of her wit gave her room to banter.


Aunt. That was very unhappy indeed, and the worse that he should know it too.


Niece. So it was, madam; for it made the poor gentleman decline performing his
duty for some time, and made a very great breach between him and his lady,
which is hardly quite made up yet.


Aunt. How so, pray?


Niece. Why, madam, she wanted to have him continue to go on with his duty, and
to pray in his family as he used to do; he declared he could not do it while
that creature was to be there; that it was a restraint to him, and he could not
perform when he knew there was one in the place who made a scoff and jeer at
him for it.

She alleged, he ought to perform his duty for all that: and that it was a
piece of the devil's craft, contrived to interrupt the worship of God in his
family, and that he ought to disregard it entirely.


Aunt. Well, I think he was very much in the wrong in that part; for he
certainly ought not to have omitted his duty upon so mean an objection as that.


Niece. That is true, and he owned it; but said it was a difficulty upon him, a
restraint to him in the performance of his duty, and that she ought to remove
it from him.


Aunt. He ought to have considered, that the less of religion was to be ^ound
in his servants, the more reason he had to pray for them, and with them; that
he might perhaps be the occasion of good to them; and of bringing them to the
knowledge and love of religion, which would be an advantage he ought to be
thankful for, and think it a blessing to his house if it happened so.


Niece. She did argue just so to him, madam: but he returned it so strong upon
her, that she ought, as far as lay in her, to remove every difficulty that lay
in the way of his duty, that it was much more forcible as to her; for he told
her, that if she granted, that the difficulty was a snare laid in his way by
the devil, she ought, at the same time, that she told him it was his duty to
resist it, do all she could possible, or that lay in her power, to remove the
occasion; otherwise she made herself accessory to the temptation, and assistant
to the devil, in laying a snare for her husband, and much of the sin would lie
at her door.


Aunt. There was a great deal in that, I confess: and I think she ought to have
yielded immediately. Pray, what did she say to it?


Niece. She insisted that the charge was false; that her woman denied it, and,
as I said before, that it was a malicious design of the other servants; but, in
short, the business was, that she was very loath to part with her woman, who, as
I said before, was a very good servant, and useful to her diverse ways.


Aunt. But you said, that he heard something of it himself. Surely she would
believe him then.


Niece. Why, she could say nothing to that indeed: but she put it off as well
as she could, with telling him she would tell her woman of it, and take care
she should do so no more.


Aunt. That seemed to be trifling, because it was in a matter of such
consequence, as ought not to be trifled with.


Niece. It was so: but he went yet further; he entreated her, he begged of her
to take away a thing so irksome from him, and which was so much a hinderance to
his duty. He told her, that had a servant been a mere ignorant, untaught
creature, he should have no difficulty upon him, but rather it would be an
encouragement to do his duty, in hopes of being an instrument of opening their
eyes: but, for a mocker at religion, and one that not only despised religion
itself, but mocked at others for it: this made the case differ exceedingly, and
he knew not how to get over it.


Aunt. And would not such arguments as these move her?


Niece. Truly, not so much as they should have done.


Aunt. And pray, what was the consequence of it?


Niece. Truly, madam, the consequences were bad many ways For, first, it kept
the lady and her husband in very ill terms with one another for near two years.
And, secondly, that unhappy creature bantered all the other servants of the
family out of the little religion they had, and indeed made them all like
herself.


Aunt. And where did it end?


Niece. Why, madam, besides this, it broke and put an end to all good order,
and to the worship of God in the family; I mean, to all family worship.


Aunt. What dreadful work was that! What! and does it continue so still?


Niece. No, madam. Her husband, who is a very religious gentleman, could not
content himself with living in that manner with his family, and not being able
to prevail with his wife to part with her woman, he took so much upon him as to
force her out of the house, that is to say, he put away the whole set of
servants in the family; for they were all made alike at last, and took all new
people at once.


Aunt. And how did the lady take it?


Niece. Truly, madam, I cannot say she took it so well as I wish, for her sake,
she had: for though her husband and she are very religious, sober, and good
people, yet I cannot but say, it has broken very much in upon their tempers and
affection one to another, and there is not all the harmony between them that
there used to be.


Aunt. And all along for one graceless, irreligious servant.


Niece. It is very true, madam.


Aunt. Besides, as you say, ruining the morals of the rest of the servants.


Niece. Yes, madam.


Aunt. Pray, how did that appear among them?


Niece. Why, madam, in the first place, she made all religious things her jest;
turned all that was said to them at church, or in the family, that had any
thing serious in it, into banter and ridicule, and laughed them out of every
thing that looked like religion She represented religion to be a mere piece of
state policy and priestcraft, contrived between the clergy and the statesmen,
only to subject the world to their management. -- The ministers and servants of
Jesus Christ set apart for the altar, and whose business it is to preach
salvation to a lost world, by a glorious but crucified Redeemer, she despised
with the lowest or last degree of contempt, calling them mercenaries and
tradesmen, the church their idol, and the pulpit their shop, where they sold
the word of God to who bid most; and suchlike horrid and blasphemous stuff.
When the honest servants would have gone to church with their master and
mistress, she would carry them away into the fields, or to make some visit or
other, and continually turn them off from what was religious to something of
levity and diversion, as a more suitable work for the Sabbath Day; and still
when she had brought them to break in upon conscience, and to profane the
Sabbath Day, she would fall foul of religion for laying the burden of rules
upon the liberties of the world; and all she did or said was with a great deal
of wit, and by way of sarcasm, (...) sharp and as keen as if she had been a
philosopher, or a doctor in theology.


Aunt. She was the more dangerous.


Niece. She was so indeed, for she had the tongue of a Siren: it was neatly
hung, but hellishly employed; for she delighted in making every body as bad as
herself.


Aunt. Your story is so very good, let me tell you another.


Niece. I should be glad to hear it, madam. But if you please to put it off
till by-and-by; for I see your [She whispers her maid] servant waits to speak
with you.


Aunt. She does so indeed; it is to call us to dinner. Well, we will talk again
of this part; for I am very much of your opinion, niece, about taking no
profane, irreligious servants, if we can help it.


DIALOGUE II.
IN the evening, the lady and her niece taking a walk in the garden, had a
farther conversation upon the same subject, and the niece said to her aunt,
which began the dialogue, madam, when we left off our discourse in the morning,
you were pleased to say, at the end of my story of an irreligious, profane
wench, that my neighbor Mrs. -- had been troubled with, that you would tell me
a story of another.

Aunt. I did so, child: it is of a family that lives at [She points to a house
that could be seen over the garden wall] that house, just over the way, in the
back lane. The people are Dissenters; the gentlewoman is a very sober,
religious, good sort of a person indeed; and her husband is a very grave,
religious man also. They endeavor to take servants of their own persuasion as
much as they can; but that is sometimes very difficult to do; and she has
indeed had very bad luck that way. However, this gentlewoman, as she told me
herself, having occasion to hire a maid servant, I forgot whether she was a
cook or chamber maid, or what else, for they kept three or four: but after she
had agreed in every thing else, she asked her maid (that was to be) what
religion she was of?

Madam, says the maid blushing (for she looked mighty sober) that is a question
I do not understand very well.

Why, says the mistress, I hope you are a Protestant; I do not mean, whether
you are a Papist or no.

Yes, madam, says the maid, I think I am a Protestant.

Nay, says the mistress, do you think so? but then, I doubt you do not think
much about it.

Not so much as I should do, madam, says the maid, and looked very simply and
innocently at the discourse.


Niece. Not expecting, it may be, to be asked such questions.


Aunt. No, I believe not; for they are questions that I think none of us ask so
much as we should do when we hire servants.


Niece. Servants value themselves so much now, that they would take it as out
of the way to be asked about these things.


Aunt. Well, if I have any servants, they shall all be asked such questions,
and answer them too, or they shall be no servants to me.


Niece. I am of the same mind, madam, if I can possibly find servants that will
submit to it.


Aunt. Child, if they will not submit, before they are hired, to tell me what
religion they are of, what are they like to submit to, after they are hired,
about religion, or any thing else?


Niece. Why, really, madam, I have had two or three that made a great deal of
difficulty to do it, and thought it very much out of the way to have me ask
them about it.


Aunt. And did you take them after that?


Niece. Why truly, yes, I did take two of them.


Aunt. And were they good for any thing when you had them?


Niece. Indeed they were good for very little I must confess.


Aunt. It may be possible indeed that a wench may be a good servant, that is
not a good Christian; but I must acknowledge it is but very seldom that it
proves so; but when a good servant is a good Christian too, such a one is ten
times the more valuable for a servant, as well as for her religion.


Niece. It is true, madam. But what shall we say, that some that are good
Christians, are nevertheless not good servants: nay, there is a kind of a
scandal upon those we call religious servants, that they are generally saucy,
reserved, and value themselves too upon it, always making conditions with you,
and claiming times and liberties on account of religious affairs, which are
neither proper for the work of religion, nor perhaps employed so, when granted.


Aunt. That brings me back to the story I was telling you, at least to one part
of it.


Niece. I am sorry I interrupted it then. Pray, madam, go on with it.


Aunt. I told you the gentlewoman, my neighbor, asked the wench about her
religion, and how modestly she answered. However, her mistress put an end to
that kind of discourse, and said, Look ye, sweetheart. I shall not catechize
you too far; the question is, whether you have been bred to the church, or the
meeting house; for I tell you beforehand, we are all Dissenters, and go to the
meeting.


Niece. That was too open, she might have first heard what the maid said of
herself.


Aunt. No, no; she was willing to let her know first, and see what answer she
would give to it, not doubting but that if she gave an answer not founded upon
principle, she should find it out.


Niece. Well, madam, perhaps she would be any thing to get a good place.


Aunt. As to that, she made herself judge of it from her answer, which was very
honest indeed, though not to her mistress's satisfaction at all.


Niece. Why, madam, if it was honest, why should it not satisfy her mistress?


Aunt. 'Twas an answer which discovered the unhappy consequences of divided
families, and shows much of the necessity of what we have had so many dialogues
about in the case of yourself and your sisters.


Niece. What, about husbands and wives being of the same opinion, madam?


Aunt. Yes, She told her mistress, that her father went to the meetings, and
her mother went to the church.


Niece. What was that to the question, of what religion or opinion she was?


Aunt. Yes, my dear, she asked her what she was bred to, and it was a proper
answer.


Niece. That Is true; and so between both, I suppose she was bred to be
indifferent to either.


Aunt. No, my dear, 'twas worse than that; and her mistress took it
immediately; for she turned pretty quick upon the wench; and so sweetheart,
says she, I suppose you were bred between them, and go neither to one nor
the other.

Yes, madam, says the maid, sometimes I went to one, and sometimes to the other.

And sometimes to neither, says the mistress.

My father and mother were poor people, madam, says she.

Poor people! says the mistress, what then, child? They might have carried you
to serve God with them, one where or other; their poverty did not hinder that.

That Is true, madam, says the maid: but they could not agree about it.


Niece. So, in short, the poor girl was left between them without any
government or instruction; I suppose that must be the case. A sad example of a
family, where the husband goes one way, and the wife another.


Aunt. Ay, so it was: however, she answered upon the whole, that she was
willing to go to the meeting, since her mistress desired it.


Niece. That was to say, she was perfectly indifferent in the matter, and it
would have been the same thing to her, if her mistress had been a Church-woman,
or a Roman Catholic, or a Jew, or any thing, or nothing.


Aunt. But her mistress did not take it so; but seemed satisfied, that she
agreed to go to the meeting, and so took her into the house.


Niece. And pray, madam, what came of it? how did she prove?


Aunt. Why, just as a poor, uneducated, ignorant creature would prove. She went
with them to the meeting, but pretended to the servants she did not like it,
and she had rather go to the church. So her mistress, taking an opportunity of
talking with her again one day, told her what she had heard in the house of
her, and asked her, if she had said, that she did not like going to the
meetings, but had rather go to church; and she said, that indeed she did say
so, but she meant nothing of harm.

Well, says her mistress, I never desire to offer violence to any servant's
conscience; if you had rather go to church, you shall go to church, though you
know what you said to me, when I hired you, that you were very willing to go to
the meeting.

That was very true, she said, and she had not said otherwise now; but she said
only, that she had rather go to church: However, if she pleased, she would stay
at home.

No, no, says the mistress, I Will have no staying at home; I will have all my
servants go to the public worship of God somewhere: staying at home may be as
much mispending the sabbath day, as going abroad for pleasure: therefore go to
church, Betty, says her mistress, by all means; I am not so much against going
to church, as to think that they do not serve and worship God there. By all
means, if you do not care to go to the meeting, go to church; it is certainly
your duty to go somewhere, and mine to oblige you to it.


Niece. That was spoken like a woman of very good principles.


Aunt. She is a very good sort of a person, I assure you, and generally governs
herself upon good principles, principles of justice and of charity, which is a
great part of religion.


Niece. Well, pray what followed?


Aunt. Why she went to church, as she said; but in a little while her mistress
began to suspect her: and once or twice she betrayed herself, and discovered
among the servants that she had been rambling about, but had not been at church
at all. Upon this suspicion, her mistress told her one day very calmly, that
she had some reason to suspect, that her saying she had rather go to church
than to the meeting, was not a sincere dislike, or approving of the one more
than of the other, but really a project of her own to have the liberty of
spending the Sabbath Day no where; that is to say, in running about, as she had
been suffered to do, when she was at home with her father and mother.

She replied with some confidence, that indeed it was not so, and began to be
more positive about her having been at church than her mistress desired she
should be, because she knew she told her what was false. However, she run on,
told her mistress a lie or two, which she knew to be so; and insisted that she
desired to go to church, because she liked to serve God in that way better than
the other. So her mistress let it pass for that time, and she went to church as
usual, that is to say, went where she pleased for some time.

At last she was trapped accidentally, and could not get off any manner of way.
For, going rambling for her pleasure with some of the neighboring servants,
men and maids together (for by this time she had got a gang like herself) and
going to cross the road about a mile from the town, a citizen that was spending
the Sabbath Day on horseback, as she was spending it on foot, I mean in
pleasure, coming just up at that minute, his horse started at something, I know
not at what, and giving a spring forward, ran against the poor wench, beat her
down and threw him off a little farther, and hurt him too very much.


Niece. And what became of the poor girl?


Aunt. Why, she was more frighted than any thing else; but she had a kick or
bruise by the horse on her knee, or the horse trod on her knee, she could not
tell which. But by that means she was lamed, and could not get home till about
eight o'clock at night, when her mistress, coming to the knowledge of it, sent
the coach for her, and brought her home.


Niece. Then there was a full discovery indeed.


Aunt. Ay, so there was; for the neighbor's servants that were with her, owned
where they had been, and with whom: and told honestly that they had been at a
cake-house to be merry.


Niece. It was no crime perhaps in the families where they lived.


Aunt. No, none at all; or at least no notice was taken of it, especially since
they were only with neighbors, and, as they called it, were in no bad company.


Niece. But what did she do with her maid?


Aunt. Why her maid was the same; she was sorry for a while, and pretended she
would never go abroad for pleasure again on a Sabbath Day. But that held but a
little while; she was the same again a little while after; so her mistress
resolved to part with her, for she two or three times enticed the other
servants to go abroad with her, and still when they had been missed, the answer
was, they went to church with Betty; and then if Betty was asked, she would lie
very readily too, and say yes. At last this came out too, and Betty was called
to an account for it, and when she could deny it no longer, then she would own
it, but promise to alter it, and do so no more. At length her mistress, who was
in a little strait still, and loath to put any force upon the wench about going
to the meeting, told her she could not bear these things, and gave her warning.


Niece. It was time to part with her, when she found she spoiled the rest of
the servants.


Aunt. Well, but the wench, very loath to leave a good place, came to her
mistress, and begged her to let her stay, and she would go to the meeting, and
then she should be sure she did not ramble any more on the Sabbath Day.


Niece. So that 'twas plain she would serve God any way for a good place; and
that was what I said of her as soon as I heard her first answer.


Aunt. But her mistress acted upon another principle still, and she refused
her: No, says she, Betty, you declared in the house that you used to go to
church; that you did not like the meeting, and that you had rather go to
church. Now, I will not have any body forced from going to church, to please
me; if you had been one that was bred to go to the meeting, I had been better
pleased, because I have been so brought up myself; but if you choose to go to
church, because you like to serve God after that manner, better than in the way
I go, God forbid I should put any force upon you. I doubt not, but you may
serve and worship God very acceptably either way; but if you go to the meeting,
which you do not like, it is only to keep your place which you do like, it is
plain to me you will worship God no where; for you cannot be said to worship
God in a way you do not like.


Niece. She was too nice, I think, and talked to an ignorant wench in language
that she did not understand; she might even have let her gone any where: for
'twas plain she would serve God no where.


Aunt. Well, she acted on her principles, however.


Niece. But what did she do with the maid then?


Aunt. Why, she made her a new proposal. Look-ye Bett, says her Mistress, if
you will go to church honestly, and satisfy me that you do so, and that you do
not under a pretense of going to church, go abroad and spend your time idly, I
shall be easy; for this was all the reason why at first I asked you where you
went, and told you I expected you should go with me; not that I am against any
body's going to the church, but because I desire they should serve God, and not
ramble abroad. Betty promised heartily; ay, but says her mistress, how shall I
be satisfied of the performance? Betty stood hard to have her word to be taken
for it; but that would not do, because she had broke her promise before, and
had told some lies too about the other servants' going to church with her, as
above. Well, Betty, says her mistress, I Will put you in a way to satisfy me
effectually: you know the clerk of the parish lives just by, and in your way to
the church; his wife is a very good, sober woman, and I know never fails of
going to church, if she be well. Now, if you will go every Sunday with her,
I Will answer for it, that if you are not there she will be (...) to me, and so
kind to you, as to tell me of it; and this shall satisfy me.


Niece. If the clerk's wife was so faithful to be (...), it was right; but that
was a doubtful thing; (...) would be loath, I reckon, to ruin the poor wench for
failing now and then.


Aunt. Well, the short of the story was this; (...) was Betty still: and ill
habit, and want of principle, led her away; she seldom came to church, and the
clerk's wife would lie for her, and so at last her mistress turned her away:
and thus I think all servants, men and maids, should be served, would the
masters and mistresses do their duty; and, if this was universally practiced,
servants would serve God and their mistresses too, better than they do.


Niece. They would so indeed, and for want of it, they serve neither God nor
their mistresses. It Is a want of a religious regard to the well ordering of
servants that makes them as they are.


Aunt. Well, but I have another story to tell you, of the same gentlewoman: for
after this she took a servant that she thought must necessarily be religious;
for she was bred to the meetings from her infancy: but she told her where she
used to go, and capitulated for liberty to go to the same meeting still. This
her mistress readily consented to, not doubting, but that one, that was under
such obligations, would certainly be careful to do her duty; and when she
mentioned to the maid that she was very ready to yield to her going where she
said she went, that she only desired to be satisfied that her servants did
really go where they said they went; the maid seemed a little surprised, that
she should be thought capable of so wicked a thing as that, and so stopped her
mistress' mouth with her character.


Niece. Well, Madam, then I hope she had one to her mind.


Aunt. At the same time her husband had a manservant who was a very religious,
devout fellow, and he was a churchman: he truly conditioned, that he would be
at liberty to go to church, which, upon their being satisfied that he was
really a well-meaning, sober, and serious fellow, they easily consented to.


Niece. I thought you said they insisted on their servants going to worship God
where they did.


Aunt. I told you they desired it, but that it was chiefly that they might be
sure to have orderly servants; and that they did observe the Lord's day, and
worshipped God in some place or other, not mis-spending the Sabbath; otherwise
they were persons of large charity, and of a true Christian temper to those
from whom they differed.


Niece. Well, but to return to their servants, how did they prove?


Aunt. Only the worst that ever were heard of.


Niece. What! both of them?


Aunt. Ay, ay, both of them. The wench was saucy, rigid, censorious; took upon
her to find fault, that her master and mistress, who were cheerful and good
tempered people, were not serious enough; she would not come into their
family worship, because, she said, it is sorrily performed, and she did not like
it: when her mistress entertained any friends, she did not like it, 'twas
wicked, and it was loose and extravagant, and had too much luxury in it, and
the like.


Niece. She should have been mistress, and not maid.


Aunt. Her mistress told her so indeed one day, when over-hearing some of her
talk by an accident, she called her to her, and speaking something angrily to
her, Jane says she, answer me one question: What did I hire you for? Jane was a
little surprised at first, not understanding the question, and said nothing,
till her mistress repeated the question by way of explanation thus, Jane, pray
did I hire you to do my work and to be my servant?

Yes, madam, says Jane.

Well then, says her mistress, pray do your business, and behave like a
servant, as becomes you, or remove and provide yourself; and, when I want a
school-mistress to teach me how to behave in my family, I Will send for you.


Niece. That was right; that was acting like a mistress; pray, what said Jane
to it?


Aunt. She was confounded, and struck (...) first; but her mistress explained
it to her afterward.


Niece. But pray, what was she for a servant!


Aunt. O! A most extraordinary accomplished (...), and a surly, heavy,
unmannerly creature, that (...) always as if she thought herself fitter to be
mistress, than her that was so; did every thing with reluctance auk ward and
disrespectful, and yet wilful and above (...) taught, dull to the last degree,
but scorned reproof.


Niece. Certainly she had more of the pretense to religion than of the reality;
for Christianity teaches us to fill up every relative duty with equal
exactness, and with a suitable diligence and application.


Aunt. Why, to bring my story to a point, she had the outside of religion only:
Whether she (...) it up with a design to deceive, or whether she deceived
herself, and fell from what she at first professed, I know not, but she fell
quite off from religion itself at last; and adding to that some follies, which
I choose to say nothing of, my good neighbor turned her off, and got rid of her.


Niece There she was cheated in her own way.


Aunt She was so, and I told her of it; but she answered me with a saying which
I have often made use of before, and that with relation to myself; I am never,
said she, in so much danger to be cheated, as when people pretend to be
religious* for then I think they dare not do such things as I am afraid of.

[Here the second sister came into the room, and finding what discourse they
were engaged in, after her respects paid to her aunt, and to her sister, she
desired they would go on with their discourse, for that she knew the subject,
and it was what she came on purpose to have a share in.]


Aunt. I was telling your sister, how a lady of my acquaintance was cheated
with two religious servants.


Sec. Niece. I heard the last part; and she was a nice one indeed.


Aunt. O! I have not told you one half of her behavior.


Sec. Niece. Well, but madam, how did it fare with the (...) servant? how did
he behave?


Aunt. Why every jot as ill another way: When he (...) be at hand to be called,
and when his master wanted him upon any occasion, he was gone to church to
prayers; and when prayers were done, he would often fall in, as he came home,
at a certain alehouse that unhappily stood in the way home, and I think, once
or twice came home drunk.


Sec. Niece. Fine things indeed for a conscientious wretch? these were
religious servants, it seems.


Aunt. Hold, niece! Religion, no nor any profession or opinion in religion is
not altered one way or other, by the mistakes or miscarriages of those that
make a profession of it. The eleven blessed apostles were not at all the worse,
nor is the memory of them to be the less reverenced, for the twelfth being a
devil; nor must we expect that all our servants shall be saints, when they are
what we call religious: All people have failings, religion does not always
change natural tempers.


Sec. Niece. But we should expect they should be Christians, and servants too.
Religion never takes away good manners, or privileges servants from observing
the due space which nature has put between the person to be served, and the
person serving.


First Niece. The great thing I insist upon taking religious servants for, is,
that they may be examples in a family, of sobriety, quietness, submission,
diligence and seriousness, to their fellow servants; that they may be
encouragers, not hinderers of God's worship in the house, that the whole family
may cheerfully unite in serving God, and in all religious rules and orders;
that if an ignorant and untaught creature is taken into the house, they may be
instructed and led by the hand into the proper duties of a Christian: that all
the house may be a class of Christians, doing their duty in their respective
places, both from a principle of justice and charity.


Aunt. But it is very rare, niece, to find what you speak of.


First Niece. It is so, Madam: But then, since it is not probable we should
always find such, all that I insist on in the mean time is, that we should take
care, as near as possible, to take those who are well inclined, and well
educated: Not enemies to all religion, nor such as (...) a mock of worshipping
their Maker, or observing (...) rules; such I would not entertain at all, on
any (...) whatsoever; they would be a continual offense in a (...) family.


Sec. Niece. But there are some that may be i^ the middle way, no enemies to
religion, not mockers at all sober things, and yet not much stored with serious
thoughts, not void of principle, nor void of modesty.


Aunt. Why, it is true, there are some such, and I know not what to say to
such, I would rather have them than the other.


First Niece. I like those but a little better, I would have neither of them if
I could help it.


Aunt. It is true, that they always discover a coldness and backwardness to
every good thing, and secretly despise the most serious things as well as the
other: But good manners restrain them a little from insulting the family. I do
not like such, I confess.


Sec. Niece. But they may be better borne with, madam, than the first sort.


Aunt. Well, but your sister here is so far from approving that sort, that
even, if they were seriously religious, she would not entertain them, if they
were of a different opinion; she is of the same notion with a cookmaid, that I
told you the story of, that all differing opinions in religion, will, in such
creatures as these, despise and contemn those that differ from them, and either
hate or make a jest of one another.


Sec. Niece. My sister, it may be, is grown rigid that way, from the disaster
of her family, with respect to her husband and herself: But in carrying it so
far, then, she will make it always impossible to have any servants at all, but
such as we bring up ourselves.


First Niece. It is no matter for that, I am positive in it, with respect to a
family's peace, and the harmony of religious worship in any family, it is all
destroyed and lo^^ by these little difficulties: As long as there are servants
to be had, and I could pay wages, I would change five hundred servants, till I
found one to my purpose, nor should any fitness for my business, or any
goodness of humor in a servant, prevail with me to keep her, if she ^^nted the
main article of religion, and the same opinion of religion too with my own.


Aunt. I am afraid, child, you would change five hundred indeed then, before
you would be fitted.


First Niece. Why, Madam, I hope I am not of such strange principles and
opinions, that no body can be found of those opinions but me.


Aunt. No, my dear: but servants have rarely any notions of those things, or
enter far into them.


First Niece. Well, madam, I would venture it, for I would no more entertain
those who differed from my opinion in religion, than I would entertain those
that had none at all; for the difference in opinion in servants, has more
mischiefs in it sometimes, than the other.


Aunt. I grant it would be very well to have servants of the same opinion in
religion with ourselves; but it cannot be always so; the first and main point
that I have made my rule, has been, to have servants that are religiously
inclined in general, and that are willing to be instructed; these, having a
modest, sober behavior in the main, are more easily brought to comply with
religious things in the family, whether they are the same way that they were
first inclined to, or not; such as these are often brought by good examples in
the house to be of the same opinion with ourselves.


Sec. Niece. Such are indeed a great tie upon masters and mistresses of
families to take care that we recommend the profession we make of religion by a
good example^ for servants are not likely to turn to our opinion, or embrace
with us the part which we take in religion when they see us not practicing the
things we pretend to teach, and not winning them to our opinion by a
conversation becoming religion.


Aunt. It is very true, niece; and would masters and mistresses keep upon their
minds a sense of what influence their conduct may have upon their servants; how
they may be the means of bringing them to a serious embracing of religion, or
to a greater levity and indifference, that it may be they had before, as they
see a good or ill example in those they serve, we would have much better
masters and mistresses than we have; and more religious servants too.


First Niece. That Is very true, and it were to be wished it were well observed.
But since it is not always so, I cannot reconcile it to common reasoning, that
we should take servants of any principles or opinion of religion, but such as
we profess ourselves.


Aunt. If it can be avoided.


First Niece, Certainly it may be avoided if we will.


Sec. Niece. You would except such as, being ignorant and untaught, profess
themselves willing to come into religious families, that they may be guided
into good things by teaching and example.


First Niece. Yes, I do except such: For such are to be molded this way or
that, as Providence casts them into religious or irreligious families.


Aunt. We agree in that part exactly; and indeed, were I to choose, I would
rather take a servant, who being ignorant in religious matters, was yet sober
and willing to be instructed: I say, much rather than take one fixed in his or
her religious opinion, and that opinion differing from my own.


First Niece. Indeed, Madam, I am positive in that point; I cannot go from it.
I would not take one that differed from me in opinion in religion by any means;
no, upon no account at all; it is attended with nothing but confusion in the
family. I would almost as soon take a loose, profane, wench, that owned no
religion at all; I have seen so much of it, and found such inconveniences in
having religious quarrels and differences in the family by it, that I think
it is insufferable. I told you the story of our poor Negro, that would turn
Christian. We had one servant a Papist, and he would have the boy a Roman
Catholic; another would have him to be a Church of England Protestant, and
another would have had him to be a Presbyterian. 'Twas a reproach even to the
name of Christian, to hear one how he told him he would be damned if he was
this; another told him he would be damned if he was that; and the other told
him he would be damned if he was either of them, and so of the rest; so that
the poor boy was almost distracted among them, as I told you at large before.


Aunt. Without entering into examples, I grant it is very pernicious, and a
great obstruction to family religion, and that many ways.


Sec. Niece. Were there a spirit of peace and charity always to be found, where
there was an outward appearance of religion, it would be quite otherwise; but
that is not the case, in this age You see, Madam, what was the c^^e in your
neighbor's family, where, the religious servants, I mean appearingly
religious, were the worst servants, and the worst Christians, they could have
met with.


Aunt. I did not bring these examples to lessen the value of good, serious,
religious servants: but to hint to you the danger there is (among those that
call themselves such, to find hypocrites, and also to note, that religion does
not always make a good servant.


Sec. Niece. It ought to do so; and would do so, if the rules of Christianity
were faithfully observed.


Aunt. But it is not always so, and therefore I say I would not take a servant
that was not religious or religiously inclined; so I do not say, that I would
not for the sake of their being serious and religiously inclined take a bad
servant; for religion does not always qualify a servant.


Sec. Niece. No, Madam, religion does not make them good humoured, cleanly,
active, diligent and mannerly, and the like; it will make them faithful and
honest, that is inseparable; but there is many a good Christian that makes a
bad servant.


Aunt. But I know some of them expect we should bear with all the rest, for
what they call religious.


First Niece. And perhaps are not so at bottom neither.


Aunt. Nay, that sort of them are generally otherwise, and put on an appearance
of religion only to disguise themselves the more dexterously, and these are the
religious servants that I am aptest to be deceived by; but there are some of
the other too.


Sec. Niece. It Is one of the worst parts of a ^^^^crite I think, when they
study to cover a vicious life (...) the mask of religion.


Aunt. But I think too, that it is soonest discover^^.


Sec. Niece. It may indeed be sooner discovered (...) other disguises, because
the levity is apt to break (...) at proper intervals, in spite of the utmost
caution: But (...) mischief is often done first, when the discovery is (...)
late to prevent it; and therefore upon the (...), th^^^ is a great risque in
taking servants, that we (...) not very well assured of, one way or another.


First Niece. But I hope you do not argue for being indifferent in this case.


Sec. Niece. No, no, very far from it; but I own it is a critical case.


First Niece. Let it be as critical as it will, it is absolutely necessary to be
taken care of, if we will have religious servants. It Is a sad thing to have the
master and mistress praying in one part of the house, and the man and maids
swearing or railing, laughing or jeering, in another part of it. Next to having
the master and mistress religious, it is essential to a religious family to
have the servants religious too.


Sec. Niece. If it be possible to find such.


First Niece. They must be found religious, or be made so.


Sec. Niece. It Is but coarse work to new mould a servant. As you find them, you
have them generally. Most of the servants of this age are incapable enough to
be meddled with. I mean as to instruction.


Aunt. I cannot say so: I am thankful that I can say, that I have had a loose,
wicked, irreligious servant or two, who, by taking some pains with them, have
been brought to be very serious and very religious.


Sec. Niece. Then they have thanked God for your bettering them by your
instruction.


Aunt. So they have I assure you, niece.


First. Niece. But they were originally of a docile, tractable temper then,
which is very rare among servants. But, Madam, allow you could take that task
upon you, and your application had success, you would not expect that every
mistress like you, should set up for an instructor of their servants.


Aunt. No, no; but it is not so hopeless a thing however, as you may imagine:
For, if a girl has any modesty, she cannot but listen a little to the
instruction of ^^ose that wish her so well, and that have so little obligation
upon them to do it.


First Niece. Why, Madam, an untaught wench, that is modest and willing to be
instructed, I take, as I said before, (...) among the number that are fit to be
taken: the very example of a religious family will make her religious also.


Aunt. My dear, you touch us all there, and that upon a nice point too; it must
be confessed that it is because there are so few religious families, that there
are so few religious servants.


First Niece. That is true, Madam; but, on the other hand, loose, profane,
irreligious servants are a great hindrance to the setting up a religious
family. Those I am utterly against.


Aunt. And that is the reason, child, that I say they should not be taken into
our families.


First Niece. And should be turned out again as soon as discovered, and that
without any certificate given them of their good behavior, or without giving
them what we call a good character.


Aunt. We cannot deny them a certificate, child, when they have not wronged or
robbed us, the law requires that of us.


First Niece. But then, Madam, the certificate should mention that I dismiss
such a man, or such a maid, for being a profane, irreligious person, or for
breaking the Sabbath day, or for not going to church, when ordered to go there,
or for going abroad to be merry, when they should have been at church, and such
like, as the case may happen to be.


Aunt. I own there is a great deal of reason to do so; but we are apt to think
it hard to do so, and that it is taking a poor servant's livelihood from them.


First Niece. But we should consider too, how much harder it is to push a
profligate wretch into a sober family, under the recommendation of a false
character. We cannot say we can do justice to our neighbor, to do as we would
be done by: For still I go back to what we both said before, that irreligious
servants are a great hindrance to masters and mistresses in setting up
religious rules and exercises in their families.


Aunt. Ay, and a great discouragement in carrying them on, when they are set
up; and for both these reasons, I would advise all my friends to take (...)
servants that had not some sense of religion upon them.


Sec. Niece. I join heartily with my sister in her opinion, if such servants
can be had; but what then must be done when we get irreligious and
profane-creatures into our houses, and cannot help it; or find them so when we
expected the contrary.


Aunt. No! my dear! The case is plain; we must not let servants laugh us out of
our religion: We must go on in the way of our duty, and set up the worship of
God in the house; and as often as we find the servants flout at it, or contemn
it, return the contempt upon themselves, and turn them out, but go on to
perform the duty: Turn them all away, that pretend to behave irreverently, or
pretend to mock or scoff at it; I say, turn them all away, and let it be the
standing known rule in the family, that all the servants that come, may hear of
it as soon as they converse in the house; then they will know what they have to
trust to, and will behave accordingly. It Is omitting our duty in our families,
not our performing it, that makes servants mock. When they see us religious to
day and wicked tomorrow, they may well scoff; but where serious religion is
steadily maintained in a family, it commands that awe and reverence of
servants, that they grow religious of course. Thus one good family breeds good
servants for another, and the good example of a sober family makes the servants
all sober.


Sec. Niece. I acknowledge all that: But I have not practiced that part indeed,
of turning them away for their irreligious profane carriage when discovered. I
have endeavored to get religious servants; but when I have found them
otherwise, I have not turned them off, which indeed I should have done.


Aunt. So far you are wrong, my dear? for why not put away a coachman, or a
chamber maid, as well for being wicked as idle, for being an offender against
Heaven, as well as for being an offender against ourselves? I think the
reasoning is every way as good.


Sec. Niece. It may hold in many cases.


Aunt. Indeed, niece, I think it will hold in all cases; and (...) give you
some instances, where servants knowing it before, have behaved much the better
on that account: but it is late now, we will talk of that part another time.


DIALOGUE III.
A Few days after this lady and her two nieces had discoursed this point about
servants, the aunt had both her neices, that is to say, the eldest of the
sisters and the widow, had another dialogue upon the subject of giving a
character to servants, and the justice that was to be done in it on one side,
and on the other, on the following occasion.

The eldest sister had taken a very scoundrel, idle jade of a servant, and that
too after having received a very good character of her from a gentlewoman with
whom she had lived before; and she complained heavily of the injustice of it,
and that she had been abused by the said gentlewoman, and was telling her tale
to her aunt, which introduced the following dialogue.

Aunt. I find, child, you lay all the fault of your being disappointed upon the
wench's former mistress! you don't seem to say the maid herself had deceived
you.


First Niece. Indeed, Madam, I am deceived both ways; but I blame the maid's
former mistress most.


Aunt. Why so? did not the maid pretend to be otherwise than you ^ound her?


First Niece. Yes Madam, that is true; but I did not expect so much from a
maid, when she came to be hired: I did not expect she would tell me her own
faults.


Aunt. Well, but on the other hand, you did not expect she would tell you she
was able to do what she did not understand, or should undertake what she was
noways qualified to perform.


First Niece. No, that is true, Madam; (...) she was willing to get into a good
place.


Aunt. And to do it, she must be allowed to introduce herself by a parcel of
lies and shams, and pretended to be what she has no pretense to; I think that
as bad as any of the rest.


Sec. Niece. I join with my aunt in that part. I think the law should have
provided some punishment, for servants that give themselves characters they do
not deserve, as well as for other pieces of dishonesty; for, in short, it is a
downright fraud, a cheat, and a piece of dishonesty, intolerable. For example,
a cook comes and hires herself to me, to serve as such; and when she has
undertaken the business, it appears she understands nothing of cookery, and has
never been any thing but a middle maid, to wash and scrub the rooms, and the
like: Or, a chambermaid offers herself, and tells me she knows how to make
mantuas, cut hair, clear starch, and the like; and, when it comes to the trial,
acknowleges she does not understand any of them, or only this, and not that, as
it happens: Why should not this maid be punished, as well as she that
pretending to be honest, proves a thief?


Aunt. No, child; she does deserve to be ill used: But the case differs as to a
thief; for she is punished not for pretending honesty, and deceiving me in the
character, but for her actual theft, and robbing me of my goods.


Sec. Niece. Well, Madam, then the punishment should differ too. I do not say
she should be hanged, but I think she should be punished however some way or
other.


First Niece. We have ways to punish such a servant, and all servants too, if
all mistresses would be but just to themselves, and to one another. We might
make up the deficiency of the law in that case to ourselves very easily, and
the want of doing ourselves justice is the thing I complain of.


Aunt. How would you make it up?


First Niece. Why, Madam, whenever any such servant came to me, I would be sure
to turn her away again, with all the resentment that her behavior required;
and when she sent any future mistress to me for a character, I would do her
justice.


Sec. Niece. You should say, sister, that you would do the gentlewoman justice,
who came to enquire of you about her.


Aunt. Why truly you put it right there, niece.


Sec. Niece. Indeed, Madam, that is the foundation of all the grievances we are
under about servants, that we make no conscience of doing one another justice,
when we make inquiries after the characters of another's servants.


First Niece. Why, we are loath to hinder poor servants, for to take away their
characters, is to take away their bread.


Sec. Niece. We may say the same of a thief, or a house-breaker, when we find
them in our houses or gardens, and take them even in the very fact: We are loath
to ruin them for it; that it was necessity forced them to do what they did; and
if we have them committed, they will be hanged or transported; nay, the
argument is stronger, because the injury done may have been trifling, and the
punishment there is loss of life, which we may be loath to be concerned in.


First Niece. You carry the case a great deal too high, sister; I cannot think
that they are alike.


Sec. Niece. Truly, sister, I think it is much the same; but of the two here is
the greater obligation.


Aunt. I believe I take your notion right, niece; the obligation is this: If I
take the thief and give him up to the law, he is undone, and his life must pay
for it; and it is a sad thing for me to let a poor fellow be put to death, or
transported, for robbing me of a trifle: But, on the other hand, I am to
consider, 1. I am obliged by the law to do it; that it is not I that put him to
death, but the laws of his country, and his own crime is the cause of it; and I
am an offender against that very law, and in some sense a confederate with him,
at least an encourager of him in his crime, if I omit it. But which is more
than that, 2. By my perharps unseasonable and indeed unjust compassion, become
accessery to all the robberies he shall be guilty of after it; because if I had
done as the law directed me, I had put him out of a condition to rob or injure
any other person.


Sec. Niece. You have fully explained my meaning, madam, and I take the case to
be the same; I by no means do as I ought, or as the law directs, if when my
neighbor taking a servant after me, and coming to me for a character of her, I
decline speaking the truth of her, ay, and the whole truth too.


First Niece. Then no servant would get a place, as servants are now.


Aunt. Then, niece, they would be more humble, and careful how they behave.


First Niece. It is a nice case, and we ought to take a great care then, that
we do not injure them.


Sec. Niece. That Is true, we ought to do them no wrong; but we do the person
that is to take them an irreparable wrong, if we recommend an ill servant to
them.


Aunt. Nay, we break another law that you have not thought of yet; for we do
not do in it as we would be done by, which is the great Christian rule.


Sec. Niece. Not only so, madam, but we do as we would not be done by; for
would any of us, if we go to inquire of a servant, be told she was honest, when
she was a thief; that she was neat, when she was nasty; tight, when she was a
slattern; diligent, when she was idle; quiet when she was saucy; and modest,
when she was it may be, a bold hussy and the like.


Aunt. I observe, indeed, there is a general backwardness in people whenever we
go to inquire about a servant. A mistress cannot ^e supposed to recommend
earnestly, because it is to be granted that she parted with the servant, for
something or other. But she is therefore, on the other hand, shy and backward,
and will say nothing, or but little of the real character of the servant,
because, forsooth, she would not hinder her of a place; and indeed I would be
very loath myself to ruin a poor girl, because I did not like her: but I do
think, as you say, niece, we mistresses are too backward to be free with one
another in such cases.


Sec. Niece. It would not only answer the end, madam, as to the law part, but
it would bring servants back to be servants again, as they used to be, and as
they ought to be; for really they can hardly be called servants now.


First Niece, I wish it was with us in case of our maids, as it is with the
gentleman in the case of their men servants, viz. that we should be obliged to
give certificates to our maids when they went away.


Sec. Niece. Why even then, the case would be the same; for, if the form of the
certificate was not settled too by the act of parliament, we should sign any
thing they desired us.


First Niece. Nay, sister, that would be our faults.


Aunt. Why, so it is our faults now, child, if we give them wrong characters.


First Niece. I do not say we should give wrong characters; but I should be
loath to say the utmost of a poor servant, and so prejudice every body against
her: Perhaps what she did amiss with me, she might mend with another, and
perhaps what might not please me, another might bear with.


Sec. Niece. I will put an end to all that immediately, sister: I do not mean
that I should enter into a long accusation of a servant, and give the history
of her life; or that I would blast her for trifles, or give her an ill name,
for not suiting exactly to my temper. But I speak in capital essential
articles, such as denominate a wench a good or a bad servant; and I Will tell you
a case, when I went to a lady myself to enquire about a chambermaid who had
been sent to me by another person.


Aunt. But what was the person that sent or recommended her? Did she know her?


Sec. Niece. She was an honest, well-meaning, poor woman, that used to help me
to maids when I wanted.


Aunt. But then, I suppose, did not know much of her own knowledge?


Sec. Niece. No, madam, but the maid gave me an account where she had lived
last, and I went to the lady, and I told her I came to enquire of such a maid
servant, who, as she had said, had lived with her. Yes, she told me, she had
lived with her.

Pray, how long did she live with you, madam, said I?

Pray, madam, how long does she say she lived with me? says she.

Almost a year, madam, says I; I think it wanted but a month or thereabouts: at
which she made a kind of a hum, and said nothing for a while.

Now I did not like the way of answering my question with a question; for I
thought she might have told me positively how long the maid had lived with her,
and left me to judge whether she had spoken truth: Whereas, by returning the
question upon me, she kept it in her own breast to accuse or excuse her. So I
turned it short upon her. I hope, Madam, says I, you will be so plain with me,
as to let me know whether she says true or not.

Yes, yes, Madam, says she.

This surprised me again; for this had a double meaning as plain as could be,
and it was impossible to know whether she meant, yes, that it was as the maid
had said, or yes, that she should let me know whether the maid had said true or
not. So I stopped a while to give her time to go on, and explain himself; but
finding she did not, I repeated my question. Pray, Madam, says I, be pleased to
let me know exactly how long she lived with you.

Why, Madam, says she, not quite a year: The maid says true in that.

I was far from being satisfied with that kind of answer, the manner of drawing
out her words showing me plainly that the wench had lied. However, lest I
should quarrel with her too soon, and so have no more out of her, I dropped it,
and asked her some other questions.

Pray, Madam, says I, is she a good work-woman?

Yes, yes, says she, she does her work well enough.

This was all equivocation again. Any body would have understood by my
question, that I enquired if she was good at her needle; but she would not take
it as I meant it, and put it off with an answer which might be true, if the
wench knew but how to make a bed, or sweep a room; so I explained myself, and
said, Madam, by a good work-woman, I mean at her needle, I hope you understand
me.

Truly, Madam, says she, I think she is well enough, I (...) put her to much of
that kind, having other hands in the house.

Well, there she came better off with me a little than before; but still all
this gave me no character of the maid; so I went on.

Pray, Madam, says I, what do you say to her honesty? She is honest, I hope.

I have no reason to tax her honesty, says she, she never wronged me of any
thing that I know of; I charge her with nothing.

Even this was but a very indifferent way of vouching for a girl's honesty, and
if she was really honest, she was not just to her.

Well, Madam, says I, may I ask you what was the occasion of your parting with
her?

O, Madam, says she, we parted indeed; she and I could not agree; I am
passionate and pretty troublesome, and my maid and I could not hit it; but she
may do very well with another. Perhaps other mistresses may not be so
troublesome and difficult as I am; she may do very well; I assure you she knows
how to please any body but me; she told me so herself.

I was indeed provoked now, and answered, Madam, you are pleased to give
yourself some hard words; but I beg you will allow me to say, I did not come
for a character of the maid's mistress, but a character of the maid; and I
doubt, by your discourse, you are willing to recommend your maid's character at
the expense of your own.

She only smiled at me, when I said this, and said again, she was very
difficult and ill to please; but Betty might do very well with another.

I pressed her again to let me know what she parted with her maid for: but
still she shuffled me off, and gave me the cunningest, evasive answers. Betty
herself could not have put me off with half the dexterity as her mistress did;
so I made my honors as if I was going away.

Madam, says I, you are exceeding tender of your maid: but I cannot say you are
equally just to a stranger, that you see resolved to depend upon your word for
the character of a servant. However, I shall take (...) the way I hope you
intend it, namely, that though it may not be for the girl's advantage to have
the particulars of her behavior told; yet you would have me understand by it,
that her conduct will not bear a character, and that you would not have me
venture upon her; and I shall take your advice.

At this she seemed concerned, as if she had expected that her awkward way of
talking of the wench had satisfied me, and that I did not understand her; and
as I offered to go, pray, Madam, says she, don't say so; Betty may make you a
very good servant; I am sorry you should take me so; the maid may do very well
in another place, though she might not suit me.

As I was talking, I observed, that in the drawing room to the room we sat in,
there sat a gentleman reading in a great book, and every now and then he looked
off his book, when his wife (for it was her husband) spoke, as if he was
surprised at what she said; and as the folding doors stood wide open, so that
the rooms were as it were let both into one, he heard all we said, and I
perceived that as he looked off his book when his wife spoke, so he almost
laughed outright when I spoke.

At last, as if he was not able to hold any longer, he clapped up the book
pretty hard, and threw it by, and came forward into the room we were in, and
making me a very low bow as he passed, he offered to go out; when his lady
stepped up to him, and said something softly, which he answered softly, and with
abundance of good humor in his face, said to his wife, my dear, I will not
interrupt you; upon which I offered to go away. By no means, Madam, said he, my
business is of no moment. So taking hold of his wife's hand, he as it were
turned her toward me, and at going away, my dear, says he, don't hold the lady
in suspense about your maid, for I hear that is the business: Let her have a
true character of her; you would be glad to be dealt plainly with yourself. His
wife smiled, but said nothing at first, but presently turning to him, and all
in a pleasant, good humor, she gave him a little tap on the arm with her hand:
Do you give a character of her, if you think I (...) done it well. Must I? says
he: Why then, Ma^^^ says he to me, with my wife's leave, she is a damned (...)
a horrid scold, a liar, and though she has, I believe, (...) nothing from us,
was a thief in the place she came last from, which we heard of since, and for
that very thing my wife turned her away.

I made him a courtsey, and told him I was greatly obliged to him for so much
sincerity, and found his lady had been only tender of his maid's character, but
had not at all recommended her. Why, Madam, says he, my wife was cheated in
this wench, only by the people she lived with before giving her ambiguous
answers, and speaking as favorably of her as they could; and that is the ruin
of us all, adds he, in taking servants.

But Sir, says I, the lady she lived with before, did your lady a great deal of
wrong, if she knew her to be what you say she was in her service.

I don't know, Madam, how it was for that: I never meddle with these things,
says he, but I believe my wife was not so nice in her inquiries as you are; or,
if she was, she was easier to be cheated in their answers; and it is the ladies
being thus backward to give just and plain accounts to one another, that is the
reason that such a wretched gang of wenches run from house to house and get
places, and behave in them as they do. Would the ladies, says he, be just to
one another, speak plainly and honestly, and give the creatures such characters
as they deserve, they would take care to deserve better characters, and not
behave so insolently, and so saucily as they do. This jade, Madam, says he,
that you come to inquire of, has insulted and taunted her mistress two or three
times, at such a rate, that I have been forced to send a footman into the room
to bring her out by the head and shoulders, for fear her mistress should be
frighted: and yet she is so good to that ^lut, that she cannot find in her
heart to speak the truth of her.

My dear, says the lady, I have not said any thing but truth of her.

Well, my dear, says she again, I was not upon my oath.

Why, that is true too, child, said he, but you are upon your honor, and that
is equivalent to an oath; (...) would be hard to have this lady left to take
such a (...) into her house, merely for fear of injuring the wench; why, you
would injure the family you suffer to take her, much more than the maid. Let
her go seek her fortune where nobody knows her, and there she may have time to
mend her manners, and come to town again.


Aunt. Why, niece, this gentleman was your instructor. I think it is just his
language that you speak; only I think you did not talk so moderately quite as
he does.


Sec. Niece. And very good language too, Madam; it is for want of this
gentleman's rule that we have any saucy, insolent, idle servants in the world.


First Niece. It would make servants more cautious of their behavior, I
confess: But then, sister, it would put it into the power of mistresses to ruin
poor servants when they pleased, and even when there was no good cause; the
bread of a servant would depend upon the breath of a mistress.


Sec. Niece. There is no good in this world without a mixture of evil; no
convenience without its inconvenience; but the damage that way, if it should be
so at any time, is infinitely less than the mischief to families which comes by
the insolence and wickedness of servants.


Aunt. Nay, by the universal degeneracy of servants you might have said; for
even those we call good servants at this time, are quite different things from
what they were in former times, ay, even since I can remember.


Sec. Niece. Well, Madam, but I could propose a remedy even against that part
which my sister objects against, of doing servants wrong; for I do not deny
that some mistresses may injure their servants, and there ought to be no wrong
on either hand.


First Niece. I have I known a mistress refuse to give a poor servant a
character, only because she was unwilling to part with her, and yet at the same
time use her ill too.


Sec. Niece. Such things may happen, I do not deny that.


First Niece. I have also known a mistress injure a servant by her partially in
favor of other servants, and give a maid an ill character when she has not
deserved it, by the mere reproaches raised on her by others.


Sec. Niece. It is not possible to reckon up all the cases in which a mistress
may injure a servant it is true, and there can no rule be set so exact, as that
nobody shall be oppressed. But I have two things to say:

1. All the injustice that can be supposed to happen that way, is not equal to
that which mistresses and families now suffer from the insolence and baseness
of servants; and therefore the remedy is to be embraced, and the lesser evil
chosen.

2. There may be methods directed by the law, that in such cases, where
mistresses have nothing capital to charge upon a servant, they shall be obliged
to give them certificates of their behavior.


Aunt. I have often thought of that; but unless the form of that certificate be
settled and adjusted by that very act of parliament, the mistresses will just
write what they please, and when they are produced against a servant, will say
nothing in their certificates that shall do them any service, or recommend them
at all to any one else.


Sec. Niece. Those must be very malicious people that will go that length with
a servant.


First Niece. But such people there are, and such perhaps always will be.


Sec. Niece. Well, there may be a remedy for that too, for there may be two or
three several forms of certificates directed by the law; one volunteer, and
full to all the behavior of a servant, and the other to her honesty and
sobriety only.


Aunt. Why then, child, nobody would take a servant that had only your
second-rate certificate; they would presently say, her mistress had given no
character but what she could not help.


Sec. Niece. I rather think, Madam, that all servants would content themselves
with what you are pleased to call my second rate certificate.


Aunt. Come, let us hear what kind of certificate it is, if you are lawyer
enough to draw it up.


Sec. Niece. I am not lawyer enough to draw it up in form; but it should be to
this purpose, Madam.


THE CERTIFICATE.
I A. B. do hereby certify, that the bearer hereof, M. B. lived with me as a
chamber maid, one year and a quarter, ending the day of last: during which time
she behaved herself honestly, modestly, and dutifully, as becoming a servant.

Witness my hand, A. B.

Aunt. Why truly, niece, a servant that could not deserve so much character as
that, no body ought to take.


Sec. Niece. Well, Madam, and a servant that did deserve so much character as
that, no mistress ought to deny.


First Niece. But suppose, sister, a mistress would maliciously deny it, as I
said before.


Sec. Niece. Why then the maid should have the same remedy as she has for her
wages, viz. complain to a justice of peace, that in case upon the mistress's
being heard, if she could not give sufficient reasons and proof of the fact,
for which she refused such a certificate, the justice should sign the
certificate to the maid, intimating that having heard all that could be
alleged, he did not find there was sufficient cause for refusing it.


Aunt. Well, niece, and what was your first rate certificate pray, that you
call this the second?


Sec. Niece. Why, Madam, when a mistress may have a kindness for a servant, and
is willing to give her an extraordinary recommendation, she may add, she is a
very good needle-woman, or that she is a very good cook, that she was not only
faithful, but diligent, and so in other cases: But, as I said, I believe any
servant will be contented with the second, which is sufficient.


First Niece. I agree, that the giving such certificates, would put and end to
these inquiries.


Sec. Niece. Which oftentimes leaves us in the dark as much as we were before
they are made; nay, and sometimes more a great deal.


Aunt. That is our fault indeed, that we will not with freedom and plainness
acquaint one another, what we are to expect ^^om the maids we hire; and it is
presuming upon this charitable disposition of mistresses, that maids behave so
saucily as they do.


Sec. Niece. Well, if any of my maids go from me, I tell them plainly
beforehand what they are to expect of me, and what kind of character I shall
give them, if they send any body to me.


First Niece. And what effect has it upon them? Are they the better for it?


Sec. Niece. Why, I Will tell you what effect it had upon one of my maids. I had
told her my mind very roundly one day, upon occasion of somethi^g I did not
like, and truly my maid turned very short upon me, and told me she was sorry
she could not please me, and hoped I would provide myself then. I told her,
that she should not say, she could not please me, but that she would not please
me.

She answered very pertly, that it was as I would, I might take it which way I
pleased.

Very well, says I, Mary, you are very tart with me, I hope when you send your
next mistress to me for a character, you will expect to hear these very words
again.

Why, would I be so barbarous, said she, to rip up words that passed in anger,
and give them for the character of any servant.

No, Mary, says I, you should not say, will I be so barbarous; you should say,
would I be so honest as to give a character of you from your own mouth. Depend
upon it, Mary says I, I should not be so unjust to any mistress to conceal a
thing of that moment from them; why, it would be doing them the greatest injury
in the world.

She stood still a good while, and said nothing; but as she saw me looking at
her, as if I expected an answer, the girl fell a crying, run to me, and
offering to kneel to me, begged my pardon, and told me, she hoped I would allow
her to recall her warning, for she was resolved she would live with me till she
deserved a better character.


Aunt. Poor girl! I should have told her she might go when she would then, for
she had deserved a better character just then.


Sec. Niece. I did not say so to her, but I would not let her kneel; and I told
her I would not insist upon her warning; for as long as she behaved so to (...)
I believed I should never put her away.


Aunt. Well, but did she mend afterward*.


Sec. Niece. Indeed she was a very good servant before, only a little hasty,
and impatient of reproof; but she proved the best servant after it, that any
body ever had. She is with me still.


Aunt. It is certainly so, if we give fair, bold, and just characters of them,
and if it once came to be the custom or general usage among mistresses,
servants would quickly carry it after another manner; at least they would take
care to part upon as good terms as they could with their mistresses.


Sec. Niece. And we should not cheat one another as we do now, in giving
characters to the vilest creatures that fall in our way.


FINIS.

