FRONTISPIECE America trampling on Oppression


THE HISTORY OF NORTH AMERICA CONTAINING A REVIEW OF THE Customs and Manners OF
THE Original Inhabitants; The first Settlement of the BRITISH COLONIES, THEIR
RISE AND PROGRESS, FROM The earliest Period to the Time of their becoming
United, free and independent States.

BY THE REV. MR. COOPER,

Embellished with Copper Plate Cuts.

BENNINGTON: [VERMONT:] Printed by ANTHONY HASWELL, for THOMAS SPENCER, of
ALBANY. MDCCXCIII.

PREFACE.
FUTURE generations will perhaps view the late revolution in North America, as
the most singular phenomenon that ever appeared in the political hemisphere of
any nation.

To point out the gradual steps by which America finally obtained her
independence, to describe those terrible scenes of rapine, blood, and
slaughter, which accompanied those struggles, so fatal to thousands of brave
officers and men on both sides, and so ruinous to the sinances of the
mother country, are principally the objects of this epitome.

In the execution of this business, we have endeavored to divest ourselves of
every spark of national prejudice, and have therefore contented ourselves with
barely relating facts, without presuming to give our opinion thereon, wishing
to leave our readers the sole power of judging for themselves.

Besides the detail of these important events, we have given an account of the
customs and manners of the original inhabitants of North America, and such as
they nearly are at this day. We have also shown at what time, and by what
causes, the British colonies in North America were first settled, and have
marked their rise from their original insignificance, till they became Thirteen
United and Independent States.

CONTENTS.
CHAP. I. DESCRIPTION of the persons, manners, and customs of the original
inhabitants of North America. -- Their dress, education, and employments. --
Their hospitality and resentments. -- Liberty the darling passion of the
original natives. -- Feasts, on what occasions appointed. -- Method of atoning
for murder. -- Mourning for their dead -- The feast of souls, -- Method of
preparing for war. -- Miserable state of their prisoners. Page 13 CHAP. II.
Account of the first settlers of North America. -- Settlement at New Plymouth
-- The Puritans purchase and settle the Massachusetts Bay. -- Connecticut and
New Haven colonies settled. -- Providence and Rhode. Island. -- New Hampshire
and the Main. -- New York. -- New Jersey. -- Virginia. -- Maryland. --
Carolina. -- Pennsylvania and Delaware. -- Georgia. Page 32 CHAP. III.
Expedition against Louisburg. -- Genesis Braddock defeated. -- Massachusetts
assembly declare against parliamentary taxes. -- The stamp act. -- Rlots at
Boston on account on that act. -- The stamp act repealed. -- Mr. Charles
Townsend's bill for taxing the colonies afresh. -- Troops ordered to Boston. --
Soldiers at Boston fire on the inhabitants. -- East India company empowered to
export their own teas. -- Tea thrown toif the sea at Boston. -- Measures
pursued relative to the Boston port Bill. -- Massachusetts people prepare to
defend their rights by arms. -- Gage fortifies the entrance into Boston.
Proceedings in the British houses of Parliament. Genesis Gage sends troops to
Salem. He sends troops to Concord and Lexington, who are defeated. The
restraining bills. How, Clinton, and Burgoyne sail for Boston. Page 47 CHAP.
IV. The expedition against Ticonderoga. George Washington, Esquire elected
commander in chief of the continental forces. The battle at Breed's hill,
commonly called Bunker's hill. Georgia acceeds to the union. The Thirteen
United Colonies. The Asia man of war fires upon New York. Col. Arnold's
expedition into Canada. Falmouth destroyed, and on what account. Col Allen, an
American officer, taken prisoner, and put in irons. Genesis Montgomery appears
before Quebec, and is killed there Page 56 CHAP. V, Genesis How evacuates Boston.
Norfolk in Virginia burnt. Sir Peter Parker and Earl Cornwallis sail for
America. The Blockade of Quebec continued. The Americans retreat from before
it. A number of highlanders and Col. Campbell taken at Boston. Declaration of
American Independence. Genesis How lands the royal army on Long Island Page 85
CHAP. VI. Wretched state of the American armies under Washington and Gates.
New York taken by the English. The battle of the White Plains. A body of
Hessians defeated at Trenton. Genesis How removes his army from Staten Island.
Genesis Burgoyne proceeds to Crown Point. Ticonderoga and Fort Independence
evacualed by the Americans. Description of the slag of the United States.
Battle at the Brandywine. Philadelphia taken by the royal forces. Account of
Miss M'Rea's cruel death by the Indians. Americans engage the British under
Genesis Burgoyne. Distress and calamity of the royal army. Genesis Burgoyne baffled
in all his designs, and reduced to the last extremity. He signs the convention.
-- 104 CHAP. VII. Count Donop repulsed in the attack upon Red Bank. Mud Island
reduced by the British. Congress receive the treaties concluded between France
and the United States. The Randolph, an American frigate, blown up. Sir Henry
Clinton succeeds General How in America. The Marquis de la Fayette, with 2500
men, narrowly escapes being cut off by the british forces. The treaties between
France and the United States signed. Lord North's conciliatory propositions,
Mess. Franklin, Deane, and Leo, have a public audience at the French court. The
British army evacuates Philadelphia. Skirmishes between the British and
Americans. The British arrive at Sandy Hook. Count d' Estaing's fleet anchors
within the Hook. Genesis Johnstone attempts to corrupt certain members of the
congress. Dr. Franklin sent as minister to the court of France. -- 123 CHAP.
VIII. The British operations against Georgia. -- The affairs of the United
States in a deplorable condition. Genesis Lincoln sent to South Carolina. Genesis
Ash surprised and defeated. Sir Henry Clinton takes Stony Point. Count d'
Estaing sails from the West Indies for the American coast. The French and
Americans repulsed at Savannah. Distress of Washington's army, for want of
bread. Charlestown taken by the British forces. Tarleton defeats col. Buford. A
French fleet with troops arrive at Newport. Treaty signed between Holland and
America. Earl Cornwallis defeats Genesis Gates. Major Andre taken and executed as
a spy. Gen Arnold takes refuge on board the Vulture sloop of war. -- 139, CHAP.
IX. Sir Henry Clinton sends 3000 troops to the Bay of Chesapeak. The French and
Spanish fleet form a junction in the West Indies. Mr. Laurens taken in his
passage to Holland. Sir Joseph York leaves the Hague. Lieut. Col. Tarleton
^et^^^^d after Genesis Morgan, by whom Tarle^^^ is defeated. Cornwallis attacks
Green, and defeats him. Sir George Rodney and Genesis Vanghan take St. Eustalia,
St. Martin, and Saba -- The French troops join the Americans under Washington.
Sir S^muel Hood and Count de Grass engage. Lord Cornwallis repairs to York
Town and Gloucester. A capitulation settled, and Cornwallis surrenders the
forts of York Town and Gloucester. The British fleet and army, destined for the
relief of Lord Cornwallis, arrive off Chesapeak after his surrender, and
consequently return to New York, De Grass sails for the Westindies. 161 CHAP.
X. Mr. Laurens discharged from his confinement in the tower of London. Sir
George Rodney comes up with count de Grass in the West Indies. They engage, De
Grass is defeated and taken. The necessity of peace for the United States of
America. Savannah evacuated by the British forces. Charleston also evacuated.
Provisional articles of peace signed between the British and American
commissioners. -- The definitive treaty of peace signed between the English,
French, Spanish, and Americans -- 175
THE HISTORY OF NORTH AMERICA.
CHAP. I.
BEFORE we proceed to describe what America is at present, or by what means she
became independent of the mother country, it cannot be disagreeable to our
readers, to be informed of the persons, customs, and manners, of the original
inhabitants of North America.

The native American indians are tall and strait in their limbs beyond the
proportion of most nations. Their bodies are strong, but more fitted to endure
much hardship, than to continue long at any servile work, which they cannot
support. Their bodies and heads are flattish; their features are even and
regular, but their countenances fierce; their hair long, black, lank, and very
strong, but without beards. The color of their skin is a redish brown, which
most of them admire, and take proper methods to improve.

The Europeans, on their first arrival in America, found the Indians quite
naked, except those parts, which it is common for the most uncivilised people
to conceal. Since that time, they have generally a coarse blanket to cover
them, which they buy from their neighbors. The whole tenor of their lives is
of a piece: they are hardy, poor, and squalid; and their education, from their
infancy, is solely directed to fit their bodies for the mode of life they
pursue, and to form their minds to inflict and endure the greatest evils. Their
only occupations are hunting and war, for agriculture is left to their women.

As soon as their hunting season is over, which they go through with much
patience and in which they exert great ingenuity, they pass the rest of their
lives in entire indolence. They sleep half the day in their huts, and observe
no bounds of decency in their eating and drinking. Before the Europeans
discovered them, they had no spirituous liquors; but now, the acquirement of
these is the principal object of their pursuit.

The indians are grave, even to sadness, in their deportment upon any serious
occasion, observant of those in company, respectful to the old, and of a temper
cool and deliberate. They are never in haste to speak before they have thought
well of the matter, and are sure the person, who sp^ke before them, has
finished all he has to (...). They have, therefore, the greatest contempt for
the vivacity of the Europeans, who interrupt each other, and frequently speak
all together. In their public councils and assemblies, every man speaks in his
turn, according as his years, his wisdom, or his services to his country, have
ranked him. Not a word, not a whisper, not a murmur is heard from the rest
while he speaks; no indecent condemnation, no ill-timed applause. The younger
class attend for their instruction, and here they learn the history of their
nation; here they are inflamed with the songs of those who celebrate the
warlike actions of their ancestors; and here they are taught what are the
interests of their country, and how to pursue them.

Though the American Indian is naturally humane and hospitable, yet, to the
enemies of his country, or to those who have privately offended him, he is
implacapable. He conceals his resentments, he appears reconciled, till, by some
treachery or surprise, he has an opportunity of executing an horrible revenge.
No length of time is sufficient to allay his resentment, no distance of place
great enough to protect the object; he crosses the steepest mountains, he
pierces the most impervious forests, and traverses the most hideous bogs and
deserts for some hundreds of miles, bearing the inclemency of the seasons, the
fatigue of the expedition, the extremes of hunger and thirst, with patience and
cheerfulness, in hopes of surprising his enemy, on whom he exercises the most
shocking barbarities.

The Americans have scarce any temples; for, as they live by hunting, inhabit
mean cottages, and are given to change their habitation, they are seldom very
religious. Some appear to have little ideas of God; others entertain better
notions, and hold the existence of the Supreme Being, eternal and
uncorruptible, who has power over all. Satisfied with owning this, which is
traditionary among them, they pay him no sort of worship.

The darling passion of the Americans is liberty, and that in its fullest
extent: to liberty the native Indians sacrifice every thing. This is what makes
a life of uncertainty and want supportable to them, and their education is
directed in such a manner as to cherish this disposition to the utmost. They
are indulged in all manner of liberty; they are never, upon any account,
chastised with blows, and very rarely even chidden.

Though some tribes are found in America with a king at their head, yet his
power is rather persuasive than coercive, and he is reverenced as a father,
more than feared as a monarch. He has no guards, no prisons, no officers of
justice. In some tribes, there are a kind of nobility, who, when they come to
years of discretion, are entitled to a place and vote in the councils of the
nation. But among the Five Nations, or Iroquois, the most celebrated
commonwealth of North America, and in some other nations, ^here is no other
qualification absolutely necessary for the headmen, but age, with ability and
experience in their affairs.

Whenever any affair of consequence is to be transacted, they appoint a feast,
of which almost the whole nation partakes. There are smaller feasts on matters
of less general concern, to which none are invited but those who are engaged in
that particular business. At these feasts it is against all rule to leave any
thing; so that, if they cannot eat all, what remains is thrown into the fire.
They look upon fire as a thing sacred, and in all probability their feasts were
anciently sacrifices. Before the entertainment is ready, the principal person
begins a song, the subject of which is the fabulous or real history of their
nation, the remarkable events which have happened, and whatever matters may
conduce to their honor or instruction. The others sing in their turn, they have
dances too, with which they accompany their songs, chiefly of a martial kind;
and no solemnity or public business is carried on without such songs and dances.

The charge of the internal peace and order is likewise committed to the same
council of the elders, which regulates whatever regards the external policy of
the state. Their suits are few, and quickly decided, having neither property
nor art enough to render them perplexed or tedious.

The loss of any of their people, whether by war or a natural death, is
lamented by the whole town he belongs to. In such circumstances no business is
taken in hand, however important, nor any rejoicings permited, however
interesting the occasion, until all the pious ceremonies due to the dead are
performed, which are always discharged with the greatest solemnity. The dead
body is washed, anointed, and painted, so as in some measure to abate the
horrors of death. Then the women lament the loss with the most bitter cries,
and the most hideous howlings, intermixed with songs, which celebrate the great
actions of the deceased, and those of his ancestors. The men mourn in a less
extravagant manner. The whole village attends the body to the grave, which is
then interred, habited in the most sumptuous ornaments. With the body of the
deceased are placed his bow and arrows, with what he valued most in his life,
and provisions for the long journey he is to take. Feasting attends this, as it
does every solemnity.

No instances of regard to their deceased friends are so striking as what they
call the Feast of the Dead, or the Feast of Souls. The day of this ceremony is
appointed in the council of their chiefs, who give orders for every thing that
may enable them to celebrate it with pomp and magnificence. The neighboring
people are invited to partake of the feast, and to be witnesses of the
solemnity. At this time, all who have died since the last solemn feast of that
kind, are taken out of their graves; th^se who have been intered at the
greatest distance from the villages are diligently sought after, and brought to
this great rendezvous of sepulchral relicts.

The opening of these tombs displays one of the most striking scenes that can
be conceived. -- This humiliating portrait of human misery, exhibited in so
many images of death, wherein a thousand various shapes of horror are depicted,
according to the different ravages that time has made; forms altogether a scene
too indelicate to be here described. I know not which ought to affect us most,
the horror of so striking a sight, or the tender piety and affection of those
poor people toward their departed friends.

This strange festival is the most magnificent and solemn of any they have, not
only on account of the great concourse of natives and strangers, and of the
pompous re-interment they give to the dead, whom they dress in the finest skins
they can get, after having exposed them some time in this pomp, but for the
games of all kinds which they celebrate upon the occasion, in the spirit of
those, which the ancient Greeks and Romans celebrated upon similar occasions.
In this manner do they endeavor to sooth the calamities of this life, by the
honors they pay to the dead. Though among these savage nations this custom is
impressed with strong marks of the ferocity of their nature; yet an honor to
the dead, a tender feeling of their absence, and a revival of their memory, are
some of the most excellent means of softening our rugged nature into humanity.

Though the women in America have generally the laborious part of economy upon
themselves, yet they are far from being the slaves they appear, and are not at
all subject to the great subordination, in which they are placed in countries
where they seem to be more respected. On the contrary, they hold their
councils, and have their share in all deliberations that concern the state; nor
are they sound inferior to the part they act. Polygamy is practiced by some
nations, but it is not general. In most places, they content themselves with
one wife; but a divorce is admitted, and for the same causes that it was
allowed among the Jews, Greeks, and Romans. No nation of the Americans is
without a regular marriage, in which there are many ceremonies. Incontinent
before marriage, after wedlock the chastity of their women is remarkable. The
punishment of the adultress, as well as that of the adulterer, is in the hands
of the husband himself, and it is often severe, being inflicted by him who is
at once the party and the judge. Their marriages are not fruitful, seldom
producing above two or three children; and from hence we may derive the
principal cause of the depopulation of America.

The manner of their preparing for war, and their mode of carrying it on, seem
peculiar to themselves. Almost the sole occupation of the American Indian is
war, or such an exercise as qualifies him for it. His whole glory consists in
this, and no man is at all considered until he has increased the strength of
his country with a captive, or adorned his hat with the scalp of one of his
enemies. When the ancients resolve upon war, they do not always declare what
nation it is they are determined to attack, that the enemy, upon whom they
really intend to fall, may be off their guard; and they sometimes even let
whole years pass over without committing any act of hostility, that the
vigilance of all may be unben^ by the long continuance of the watch, and the
uncertainty of the danger.

In the mean time, they are not idle at home. The principal captain summonses
the youths of the town to which he belongs, the war-kettle is set on the fire,
the war songs and dances commence, the hatchet is sent to the villages and
allies of the same nation, and the most hideous howlings continue, without
intermission, day and night, over the whole tract of country. The women add
their cries to those of the men, lamenting those whom they have either lost in
war or by natural death, and demanding their places to be supplied by their
enemies.

The fury of the nation being thus raised to the greatest height, and all
longing to embrue their hands in blood, the war captain prepares the feast,
which consists of dog's flesh. All that partake of this feast receive little
billets, which are so many engagements they take to be faithful to each other,
and obedient to their commander. None are forced to the war; but, when they
have accepted this billet, they are looked upon as enlisted, and it is then
death to recede. All the warriors in this assembly have their faces blackened
with charcoal, intermixed with dashes and streaks of vermillion, which give
them a most horrid appearance. Their hair is dressed up in an odd manner, with
feathers of various kinds.

In this assembly, which is preparatory to their military expedition, the chief
begins the war song, which having continued for some time, he raises his voice
to the highest pitch, and turning off suddenly in a sort of prayer, he
addresses himself to the God of war, whom they call Areskoni. "I invoke thee
(says he) to be favorable to my enterprise! I invoke thy care of me and my
family! I invoke ye likewise, all ye spirits and demons good and evil! all ye
that are in the skies, or on the earth, or under the earth, to pour destruction
on our enemies, and to return me and my companions safely to my country!" All
the warriors join him in this prayer with shouts and acclamations. The captain
renews his song, strikes his club against the stakes of the cottage, and begins
the war-dance, accompanied with the shouts of all his companions, which
continue as long as he dances.

On the day appointed for their departure, they take leave of their friends,
and change their clothes, or what movables they have, in token of friendship.
Their wives and female relations go out before them, and attend at some
distance from the town. The warriors march out all dressed in their finest
apparel and most showy ornaments, regularly one after another, for they never
march in rank. Their chief walks slowly on before them, singing the death song.
while the rest preserve the most profound silence. When they come up to the
women they deliver to them all their finery, put on their worst clothes, and
then proceed as their commander directs.

The Indians seldom engage in a war upon motives common to Europe: they have no
other end but the glory of victory, or the benefit of their slaves, which it
enables them to add to their nation, or sacrifice to their brutal fury; and it
is very seldom, that they take any pains to give their wars even the color of
justice. They fall sometimes on one nation, and sometimes on another, and
surprise some of their hunters, whom they scalp and bring home as prisoners.
Their senators wink at this, or rather encourage it, as it tends to keep up the
martial spirit of the people, enures them to watchfulness and hardships, and
gives them an early taste for blood. The qualities of an indian war are
vigilance and attention, and to give and avoid a surprise; and patience and
strength to endure the intolerable fatigues and hardships which always attend
it.

They often enter a village, while the strength of the nation is employed in
hunting, and massacre all the helpless old men, women and children, or make
prisoners of as many as they can manage, or have strength enough to be useful
to their nation. They often cut off small parties of men in their huntings; but
when they discover an army of their enemies, their way is to throw themselves
flat on their faces among the withered leaves, the color of which their bodies
are painted exactly to resemble. They generally let a part pass unmolested, and
then, rising a little, they take aim, being excellent marksmen, and setting up
a tremendous shout, which they call the war-cry, they pour a stream of musket
bullets on the enemy, having long since laid aside the use of arrows. The party
attacked returns the same cry. Every man in haste retires behind a tree,
returns the fire of the adverse party, as soon as they arise from the ground to
give the second discharge.

Having fought sometime in this manner, the party which thinks it has the
advantage rushes out of its cover, with small axes in their hands, which they
dart with great address and dexter^ty. They redouble their cry, intimidate
their enemies with menaces, and encourage each other with a boastful display of
their own brave actions. Thus, being come hand to hand, the contest is soon
decided, and the conquerors satiate their savage fury with the most shocking
insults and barbarities to the dead, biting their flesh, tearing their scalps
from their heads, and wallowing in their blood, like the wild beasts of the
forest.

The fate of their prisoners is indeed miserable. During the gr^ater part of
their journey homewards they suffer no injury; but when they arrive at the
territories of the conquering state, or at those of their allies, the people
from every village meet them, and think they show their attachment to their
friends by the barbarous treatment of the unhappy victims; who on their arrival
at their destined station, generally bring with them marks of the most cruel
and merciless treatment.

The conquerors enter the town in triumph; the war captain waits upon the head
men, and in a low voice gives them a circumstantial account of every particular
of the expedition, of the damages the enemy have suffered, and his own loss in
it. This being done the public orator relates the whole to the people. Before
they yield to the joy which the victory occasions, they lament the friends they
have lost in the pursuit of it. The parties most nearly concerned are
apparently afflicted with a deep and real sorrow; but, by one of those strange
turns of the human mind, fashioned to any thing by custom, as if they were
disciplined in their grief, upon the signal for rejoicing, in a moment the
tears are wiped from their eyes, and they rush into an extravagance and phrenzy
of joy for their victory. All this time the fate of the prisoners remains
undecided, until the old men meet, and determine concerning their distribution.

It is usual to offer a slave to each house that has lost a friend, giving the
preference according to the greatness of the loss. The person who has taken the
captive attends him to the door of the party's cottage, where he delivers him,
and with him gives a belt of wampum, to show that he has fulfilled the purpose
of the expedition, in supplying the loss of a citizen. They for some time view
the present that is made them, and according as they think him or her, for the
sex matters not, proper or improper for the business of the family, or as they
take a capricious liking or displeasure to the countenance of the victim, or in
proportion to their natural barbarity, or their resentment for their losses,
they decide whether they will receive him into the family, or sentence him to
death. If they be received into the family, happy is their lot, as they are
then accepted into the place of the father, son or husband that is lost; and
they have no other mark of their captivity, but that of not being suffered to
return to their own country, to attempt which would be certain death. On the
contrary, if they dislike the captive, the throw away the b^lt with
indignation. Then it is no longer in the power of any one to save him, the
nation is assembled as upon some great solemnity, a scaffold is raised, and the
prisoner tied to the stake. He instantly begins his death song, and prepares
for the ensuing scene of cruelty with most undaunted courage. -- On the other
side, they prepare to put it to the utmost proof, with every torment that the
mind of man ingenious in mischief can devise.

It would be too shocking for the ear of our youthful reader to be told what
inhuman tortures are inflicted on him, till at last, one of the chiefs, out of
compassion, or weary with cruelty, generally puts an end to his life with a
club or a dagger. The body is then put into the kettle, and this barbarous
employment is succeeded by a feast equally inhuman.

On this occasion, the women, forgetting the female nature, and transferring
themselves into something worse than furies, act their parts, and even outdo
the men in this scene of horror. The principal persons of the country set round
the stake smoking, and looking on without the least emotion. What is most
extraordinary, the sufferer himself, in the little intervals of his torments,
smoaks also, appears unconcerned, and converses with his torturers about
indifferent matters. Indeed, during the whole time of his execution there seems
a contest between him and them, which shall e^ceed, they in inflicting the most
horrid pains, or he in enduring them with a firmness and constancy almost above
human. Not a groan, not a sigh, not a distortion of countenance, escapes him;
he possesses his mind entirely in the midst of his torments; he recounts his
own exploits, informs them what cruelties he had inflicted upon their
countrymen, and threatens them with the revenge that will attend his death; and
though his reproa^^^s exasperate them to a perfect state of madness, rage, and
fury, he continues his reproaches even of their ignorance in the act of
tormenting, pointing out himself more exquisite methods, and more sensible
parts of the body to be afflicted.

We do not dwell upon these circumstances of cruelty, which so much degrade
human nature, out of choice; but as all, who mentions the customs of this
people, have very particularly insisted upon their behavior in this respect,
and as it seems necessary, in order to give a true idea of their character, we
do not choose wholly to omit it. It serves to show, in the strongest light, to
what an inconceivable degree of barbarity the passions of men let loose will
carry them. It will point out to us the advantages of a religion that teaches a
compassion to our enemies, which is neither known nor practiced in other
religions; and it will make us more sensible, than some appear to be, of the
value of commerce, the benefits of a civilized life, and the lights derived
from literature, which, if they have abated the force of some of the natural
virtues by the luxuries which attend them, have taken out likewise the sting of
our national vices, and softened the ferocity of the human race, without
enervating their courage. On the other hand, the constancy of the sufferer in
this trying scene, shows the wonderful powers of an early institution, and a
ferocious thirst of glory, which makes men imitate and exceed what philosophy,
and even religion, do not produce.

Having thus taken a cursory review of the customs and manners of the original
natives of North America, we shall now proceed to give an account of the first
settlement of the British colonies, and show from what small beginnings time
has raised them to an immense republic, under the title of the United and
Independent States of America. In order to accomplish this matter, we have
given a general history of the late war, which ended in the loss of thirteen
British American colonies. The different sieges and battles that took place
during that period, we shall describe as copiously as our narrow limits will
permit us.

CHAP. II.
SEVERAL of the most zealous and eminent protestants, in the reign of Edward
VI. opposed the popish ceremonies and habits though otherwise united to their
brethren in religious tenets. Hundreds of them fled into foreign parts to avoid
persecutions, where they connected themselves with protestants of other
nations, who were equally arduous for a reformation.

Upon the accession of Queen Elizabeth, in 1558, the refugees returned to
England, loaded with experience and learning, but in the utmost distress and
poverty. Those of the clergy who could comply with the Queen's establishment,
were quickly preferred; but the rest, after being permitted to preach a while,
were suspended, and reduced to their former indigence.

The clergy and laity, who wished for greater ecclesiastical purity, struggled
hard for the abolishment of popish ceremonies and habits, or at least, leaving
the use of them indifferent in divine service, by which, they obtained nothing
but the honorable nick name of PURITANS. Queen Elizabeth had enough of the
blood of Henry the Eighth, to make her impatient of any opposition to her will,
especially in matters of religion, in which she had an high opinion of her own
knowledge; and, during her whole reign, she kept down the puritans with an
uniform and inflexible severity. The merits, however, of their sufferings, the
affected plainness of their dress, the gravity of their deportment, and the use
of scripture phrases on the most ordinary occasions, and even their names,
which had in them something striking and venerable, as being borrowed from the
Old Testament, gained them a general esteem among sober people of ordinary
understandings.

When King James came to the throne, he had a very fair opportunity of
pacifying matters, or, at least he might have left them in the condition he
found them. On the contrary, he suffered them to be persecuted, but not
destroyed; they were exasperated, and yet left powerful; and the then ministry,
like those who lately lost us our colonies, exposed their own weakness,
ignorance, and baseness, by an ill-timed severity.

In this state matters remained, until the accession of Charles the First, when
they were far from being mended. This prince, andowed with some virtues, had
very few amiable qualities. As grave as the puritans themselves, he could never
eagage the licentious part of the world in his favor; and that gravity being
turned against the puritans, made him more o^^ous to them. He gave himself up
entirely to the church and churchmen, and he finished his ill-conduct, in this
respect, by conferring the first ecclesiastical dignity of the kingdom, and a
great sway in temporal affairs, upon Dr. Laud, who, hardly fit to direct a
college, was entrusted with the government of an empire.

The puritans considered the most dreary realms, and the most unfrequented
regions, where they could enjoy liberty of conscience, as superior to the most
splendid palaces, where they were to be governed by Laud. In consequence of
these disaffections, a little colony sailed from England, and established
itself at a place called New Plymouth, on the continent of A^^^rica. This
happened in 1620.

The were but few in number, they landed in a bad season, and were supplied
only from their private funds. The winter was premature, and extremely cold.
The country was every where covered with wood, and afforded very little for the
refreshment of persons sickly with such a voyage, or even for the sustenance of
an infant people Nearly half of them perished by the scurvy, by want, and the
severity of the climate; but those who survived, not dispirited with their
losses, nor with the hardships they were still to endure, supported by the
vigor which was then the character of Englishmen, and by the satisfaction of
finding themselves out of the reach of the spiritual arm, were enabled to
procure in this savage country, a tolerable livelihood, and by degrees a
comfortable subsistence for themselves and their families.

The people of New Plymouth, having cleared the way for other sufferers to
settle, in America, with less difficulty and danger than what they had
experienced; the fame of their plantation spreading through the western part of
England, and the government in church and state growing every day more
oppressive, the territory of the Massachusett's Bay was purchased of the
Plymouth council, in 1628, and a company soon formed, who consulted on settling
a plantation, to which nonconforming puritans might emigrate, in order to
enjoy their own principles in full security.

In 1630, a large company arrived at Salem, consi^^ing of more than fifteen
hundred persons, from different counties in England. From the beginning of the
colony, until the emigration ceased, in 1640, through a change of affairs in
England, there arrived in 298 vessels, about 21,200 settlers, men, women, and
children, or four thousand families.

They did not however, all confine themselves to this colony: several families
removed to Connecticut River, by mutual agreement with their fellow emigrants,
who remained behind. Plantations were formed at Hartford, Windsor, and
Weathersfield. The inhabitants being soon after fully fatisfied, that they were
out of the Massachusett's limits, and of course its jurisdiction, entered into
a combination among themselves, became a body politic, without restraining the
freedom of their civil government to the membership of their churches, and
proceeded to the choice of magistrates and representatives.

Two large ships arrived at Massachusett's Bay, in 1637, with passengers from
London. Great pains were taken to prevail upon them to remain in the colony;
but they hoped, by moving to a considerable distance, to be out of the reach of
a general governor, with whom the country was then threatened. They sent to
their friends in Connecticut to purchase of the natives the lands lying between
them and Hudson's River. They then laid the foundation of a flourishing colony,
of which New Haven was the capital. Connecticut and New Haven continued two
distinct colonies for many years. At length the general court of Connecticut
determined to prefer an address and petition to Charles the Second, professing
their subjection and loyalty to his majesty, and soliciting a royal charter;
and John Winthrop, Esquire who had been chosen governor, was appointed to negociate
the affair with the king. He succeeded, and a royal charter was obtained,
constituting the two colonies forever one body corporate and politic.

Mr. Roger Williams, a pastor of the church of Salem, being banished from the
Massachusetts, on account of some religious disputes, went to the Narraganset
country, accompanied with twelve companions, and had land give him by the
Indian Sachem Canonicus; of whom he afterward purchased the large tract, lying
between Pawtuchet and Pawturat rivers, (the great falls and the little falls,
as the Indian name signifies) and styled it Providence, from a sense of God's
merciful providence to him in his distress.

The authority and power of Miantonomy, another Sachem, and his uncle
Canonicus, awed all the indians round to assist him and his few associates.
When the determinations of the Massachusetts general court, occasioned by what
they called antinomian disputes, banished many, and induced others to leave the
colony, the heads of the party were entertained in a friendly manner by Mr.
Williams, who advised them to seek a settlement on Rhode Island, in the year
16^^, and was very instrumental in procuring if of the indian sachems.

Newhampshire and the Main were settled about the same time with the
Massachusetts, by different proprietors, who had obtained patents, and whose
views were to enrich themselves by the fishing trade at sea, and the beaver
trade ashore.

The colony of New York demands our next attention. The Dutch had settled it,
and named it the New Netherlands. Charles the Second resolved upon its conquest
in 1664; and in March granted to his brother, the Duke of York, the region
extending from the western banks of the Connecticut to the eastern shore of the
Delaware, together with Long Island, conferring on him the civil and military
powers of government. Col. Nichols was sent with four frigates and three
hundred soldiers ^o effect the business. The Dutch governor being unable to
make resistance, the New Netherlands submitted to the English crown, in
September, without any other change than of rulers. Few of the Dutch removed,
and Nichols instantly entered upon the exercise of his power, as
deputy governor for the Duke of York, the proprietary.

About the same time, 1664. New Jersey, which was also taken from the Dutch,
who were considered as having no right to any of their settlements in these
parts of America, were included in the grant to the Duke of York. The Duke
disposed of it to Lord Berkeley and Sir George Carteret, who being sole
proprietors, for the better settlement of it, agreed upon certain constitutions
of government, so well liked, that the eastern ports were soon considerably
peopled.

Virginia was the original name of all the English North American (...) c^^im^,
given in honor to the vi^^in Queen Elizabeth. King James, being applied to,
granted letters patent to a ^^^y (...) gentlemen, on the 6th of April, 1606,
with powers to divide themselves into two distinct companies, the one
consisting of London adventurers, called the first, or southern colony of
Virginia; the second, or northern colony composed of merchants, belonging to
Bristol, Plymouth, and Exeter. The territory granted to the first, or southern
colony was generally called Virginia, without any distinguishing epither, and
retained that name after the second or northern colony, obtained the name of
New England in 1614.

We come next to speak of Maryland. The first emigration to this part of
America consisted of two hundred gentlemen of considerable fortune and rank,
with their adherents, chiefly Roman Catholics, who hoped to enjoy liberty of
conscience under a proprietary of their own profession. They sailed from
England in November, and landed in Maryland the beginning of 1633. Gov.
Calvert, brother to Lord Baltimore, very wisely and justly purchased, by
presents of various goods, the rights of the Indians, and with their free
consent took possession of their town, which he called St. Mary's. The country
was settled with so much ease, and furnished with so many conveniences, that
emigrants repaired thither in such numbers as soon to render the colony
populous and flourishing.

Carolina follows Maryland in the order of existence. A few adventurers
emigrated from the Massachusetts, and settled round Cape Fear, about the time
of the Restoration They considered mere occupancy, with a transfer from the
natives, without any grant from the king, as a good title upon the lands they
possessed. They deemed themselves entitled to the same civil privileges as
those of the country from whence they had emigrated. For years they experienced
the complicated miseries of want. They solicited the aid of their countrymen,
and the general court of Massachusetts, with an attention and humanity which
did it the greatest honor, ordered an extensive contribution for their relief,

The final settlement of the province was effected equally through the rapacity
of the courtiers of Charles the Second, and his own facility in rewarding
those, to whom he was greatly indebted, with a liberality that cost him little.
The pretense, which had been used on former occasions, of a pious zeal for the
propagation of the gospel among the indians, was successively employed to
procure a grant of the immense region, lying between the ^6th degree of North
latitude, and the river of St. Matheo, under the thirty first degree. In March,
1663, this territory was erected into a province by the name of Carolina, and
conferred on Lord Clarendon, the Duke of Albemarle, Lord Craven, Lord Berkeley,
Lord Ashley, Sir George Carteret, Sir John Colleton, and Sir William Berkeley,
as absolute lord proprietaries, for ever, saving the allegiance due to the
crown.

Pennsylvania and the Delaware counties next demand our attention. Mr. William
Penn, one of the joint purchasers of the western part of the Jerseys, having
received the most exact information of the country to the westward of the
Delaware, while engaged in the administration of the joint purchase, became
desirous of acquiring a separate estate.

He presented a petition to Charles the Second in June, 1680, stating not only
his relationship to the late admiral, but that he was deprived of a debt due
from the crown, when the Exchequer was shut. He prayed for a grant of lands,
lying to the northward of Maryland, and westward of the Delaware; and added
that by his interest, he should be able to settle a province, which might, in
time, repay his claims. Having a prospect of success, he copied from the
charter of Maryland the sketch of a patent, which in November was laid before
the attorney general for his opinion.

Penn had the same object in view as Lord Baltimore had, the guarding against
the exertions of prerogative, which experience had taught both were very
inconvenient. The attorney general declared the clause of exemption from
taxation illegal; and chief justice North being of the same opinion, and
observing its tendency, added the saving of the authority of the English
parliament; so that it was stipulated by the king, for himself and his
successors, that "no custom or other contribution shall be laid on the
inhabitants or their estates, unless by the consent of the proprietary, or
governor and assembly, or by act of parliament in England."

The next year, 1681, the patent was granted, in consideration of "the merits
of the father, and the good purposes of the son, in order to extend the English
empire, and to promote useful commodities." It was provided by fit clauses,
that the sovereignty of the king should be preserved, and that acts of
parliament, concerning trade, navigation, and the customs, be duly observed.
Penn was empowered to assemble the freemen, or their delegates, in such form as
he shall think proper for raising money for the use of the colony, and for
making useful laws, not contrary to those of England, or the rights of the
kingdom. A duplicate of the acts of the assembly was to be transmitted, within
five years, to the king in council, and the acts might be declared void within
six months if not approved -- It now remains only to give a concise account of
the settlement of Georgia.

In 1732, a number of gentlemen considering the vast benefit that might arise
from the tract of land, lying between the Savannah and the river Alatamaha,
petitioned the king for a charter, which was accordingly granted in June. They
meant that the country should be made a bulwark for the southern colonies
against the Spaniards, and should give employment to numbers of people, who
were burdensome at home to their friends and parishes.

Toward the end of August, Sir Gilbert Heathcote recommended, in the strongest
terms, to the directors of the Bank, the interest of the colony. His speech had
the desired effect, and the members of the court, after his example,
contributed largely toward the undertaking, as did great numbers of the
nobility, gentry, clergy and others; and the parliament granted 10,000 l. By
the beginning of November, about one hundred and sixteen colonists presented
themselves, most of them laboring people, and were furnished with working
tools of all kinds, stores, and small arms.

Mr. Oglethorpe, one of the trustees, generously attended the first set of
emigrants to Carolina, where they arrived in good health in, January 1733. The
Carolinians made them a present of one hundred breeding cattle, besides hogs,
and twenty barrels of rice, and furnished them with a party of horse, and with
scout boats, by the help of which they reached the Savannah, where Mr.
Oglethorpe, ten miles up the river, pitched upon a spot for a town, and in
February the building of the first house commenced.

Mr. Oglethorpe was waited upon by a numerous deputation from the lower Creek
nation, with whom he concluded a treaty, and soon after set out for
Charlestown on his return to England, bringing with him several chiefs and a
war captain. Before the end of March, 1734, more emigrants, to the amount of
six hundred, were either sent over by charity, or went at their own expense.

In October, the Indians embarked for their own country, having had an
allowance, while in London, of twenty pounds a week, of which they spent
little, as they commonly eat-and drank at the table of persons of the highest
distinction. They embarked at Grave^end, in a ship which carried over a number
of Salez burghers, being German protestants, who, with others of their
countrymen that followed, settled on the Savannah, a town they called Ebenezer,
and which, by their habits of industry and sobriety soon became considerable.

The Georgians made a surprising progress in clearing their lands, and building
their houses, and as an encouragement, the British parliament granted them a
supply of 26,000 l. which, with very great private donations. were expended
upon strengthening the southern part of Georgia.

Thus have we given a succinct account of the first establishment of the
British colonies in North America. By what unhappy means they at last became
separated from the mother country. will be clearly shown in the subsequent part
of this history.

Memorable events recorded in this chapter:
Anno 1606 First settlement made at Virginia. Anno 1620 Settlement at New
Plymouth. Anno1628 New Hampshire and the Main settled, Anno1628 Puritans
purchase and settle Massachusetts Bay. Anno1633 Settlement at Maryland.
Anno1635 Connecticut and Providence. Anno1637 New Haven settled. Anno1638
Settlement of Rhode Island. Anno1663 Carolina settled. Anno1664 New York and
New Jersey. Anno1681 Pennsylvania and Delaware counties. Anno1733 Georgia
settled.
CHAP. III.
THE narrow limits prescribed to us in this epitome, will not permit us to
enter into a copious detail of all the minute concerns of the colonies, which
may be found in more voluminous works, and there read by those, who have
leisure and inclination to pursue so dry a study. We shall therefore proceed to
describe only events of some consequence.

News being received in the Massachusetts of war being declared against France
and Spain, the general court, then sitting, made immediate provision for
raising forces for Anapolis in Nova Scotia.

Toward the end of the month of April, 174^, Commodore Warren arrived from the
West Indies, with a sixty gun ship, and two of forty. He was soon after joined
by another of forty, which had reached Canso a short time before. The men of
war failed immediately to cruise before Louisbourg. The forces soon followed,
and landed at Chapeaurouge Bay the last day of April. The transports were
discovered from the town early in the morning, which gave the inhabitants the
first knowledge of the design.

The second day after landing, four hundred men marched round, behind the
hills, to the northeast harbor, where they got about midnight, and set fire to
all the dwellings and storehouses, till they came within a mile of the grand
battery. The clouds of thick smoke proceeding from the pitch, tar, and other
combustibles, prevented the garrison's discovering the enemy, though they were
but at a short distance.

They expected the body of the army upon them, and therefore deserted the fort,
having thrown their powder into a well; but the cannon and shot were left,
which proved of great service to the besiegers. The army had near two miles to
transport their cannon, mortars, etc. through a morass, which required great
labor to accomplish. The men were yoked together, and during the night made
great advances.

While the forces were busily employed on shore, the men of war, and other
vessels were cruising off the harbor, as often as the weather would permit. On
the 18th of May, they captured a french 44 gun ship, having 560 men on board,
and stores of all forts for the garrison.

It was given out, that an attack would be made by sea with the ships, on the
18th, while the army did the like by land. Whether a general storm was really
intended or not, the French appeared to expect it, from the preparations making
on board the men of war, and seemed not inclined to attempt to withstand it.

On the fifteenth, a flag of truce was sent to the general, desiring a
cessation of hostilities, that they might consider of articles for a
capitulation. Time was allowed, but their articles were rejected by the general
and commodore, and others offered, which were accepted by the French, and
hostages given on both sides. The town was in consequence delivered up on the
seventeenth. As this was a time when vessels were expected from all parts at
Louisbourg, the French flag was kept flying as a decoy. Two East Indiamen, and
one South Sea ship, of the value of 600,000 l. sterling, were taken by the
squadron, at the mouth of the harbor, into which they failed as usual, not
knowing that the place had been taken by the English.

The French having been very troublesome in the back settlements of our
colonies, it was concluded to take effectual methods to drive them from the
Ohio. The reduction of Niagara, Crown Point, and their forts in Nova Scotia,
was also resolved on. General Braddock was accordingly sent from Ireland to
Virginia, with two regiments of foot; and on his arrival, when joined by the
rest of the forces destined for that service, he found himself at the head of
2200 men. He had bravery, but wanted other qualifications to render him fit for
the service to which he was appointed. The severity or his discipline made him
unpopular among the regulars, and his haughtiness deprived him of the esteem of
the Americans. His pride disgusted the indians, and led him to despise the
country militia, and to slight the advice of the Virginian officers.

Colonel Washington earnestly begged of him, when the army was marching for
fort Du Quesne, to admit of his going before, and scouring the woods with his
rangers, which was contemptuously refused. The general had been cautioned by
the Duke of Cumberland to guard against a surprise, and yet he pushed on
heedlessly with the first division, consisting of 1400 men, till he fell into
an ambuscade of 400, chiefly indians, by whom he was defeated and mortally
wounded, on the 9th of July, 1755.

The regulars were put into the greatest panic, and fled in the utmost
confusion; but the militia had been used to indian fighting, and were not so
terrified. The general had disdainfully turned them into the rear, where they
continued in a body unbroken, and served under Colonel Washington as a most
useful rear guard, which covered the retreat of the regulars, and prevented
their being entirely cut to pieces.

Previous to this and agreeable to the views of the British ministry, the
Massachusetts assembly raised a body of troops, which were sent to Nova Scotia,
to assist Lieutenant Governor Lawrence in driving the French from their several
encroachments within that province.

The expedition against Niagara was entrusted to Governor Shirley, but failed
through various causes.

Sir William, then Colonel, Johnson, was appointed to go against Crown Point.
The delays, slowness, and deficiency of preparation, prevented the several
colonies joining their troops till about August. In the mean time the active
enemy had transported forces from France to Canada, marched them down to meet
the provincials, and attacked them; but, meeting with a repulse, lost six
hundred men, besides having their general Baron Di^skau wounded and made
prisoner.

The next year, the Massachusetts raised a great armament to go against Crown
Point; but Lord London, on his arrival, did not think it proper that the forces
should proceed, owing to a temporary misunderstanding between his Lordship and
the general (...).

In the year 1758, happily for the British nation, the great Mr. Pit was
placed at the head of the ministry, when the face of affairs was soon changed,
the war was prosecuted with unexampled success, and the enemy was at length
driven out of America.

Mr. Israel Mauduit, the Massachusetts agent, in 1763, gave early notice of the
ministerial intentions to tax the colonies; but the general court not being
called together till the latter end of the year, instructions to the agent,
though solicited by him, could not be sent in proper time.

The next year however, 1764, the house of representatives came to the
following resolutions: "That the sole right of giving and granting the money of
the people of that province, was vested in them as their legal representatives;
and that the imposition of duties and taxes by the parliament of Great Britain,
upon a people who are not represented in the House of Commons, is absolutely
irreconcilable with their rights." -- "That no man can justly take the
property of another without his consent; upon which original principle, the
right of representation in the same body, which exercises the power of making
laws for levying taxes, one of the main pillars of the British constitution, is
evidently founded."

These resolutions were occasioned by intelligence of what had been done in the
British House of Commons. It had been there debated in March, whither they had
a right to tax the Americans, they not being represented; and determined
unanimously in the affirmative. No^ a single person present ventured to
controvert the right.

After various propositions for taxing the colonies, Mr. Grenville's intended
stamp act was communicated to the American agents. Many of them did not oppose
it, half their number being placemen or depo^^^^^ on the ministry. Mr. Joseph
Sherwood, an honest quaker, agent for Rhode Island, refused his consent to
America's being taxed by a British ^^^rl^^ment. Mr. Mauduit, the Massachusetts
agent, favored the raising of the (...) money by a stamp duty, as (...) would
occasion less expense of officers, and would include the Wesundia islands. The
scheme, however was postponed, and the ag^^^ts authorized to inform the
American a^^^^blies, that they were ^t liberty to suggest any other ways of
raising moneys, and that Mr. Grenville, was ready to receive proposals for any
other tax, that might be equivalent in its produce to the stamp tax. The
colonies seemed to consider it as an affront, rather than as a compliment. The
minister would not be content with any thing short of a certain specific sum,
and proper funds for the payment of it. Had not the sums been answerable to his
wishes, he would have rejected them; and he would scarcely have been satisfied
with less than 300,000 l. per annum, which was judged absolutely necessary to
defray the w^^^e expense of the army proposed for the defense of America.

No satisfactory proposals being made on the side of the Americans, Mr.
Grenville adhered to his purpose of bringing forward the stamp bill, though
repeatedly pressed by some of his friends to desist. Richard Jackson, Esquire had
been chosen agent for the Massachusetts, who, with Mr. Franklin and other,
lately come from Philadelphia, waited on Mr. Grenville, in February 176^, to
remonstrate against the stamp bill and to propose, that in case any tax must be
laid upon America, the several colonies might be permited to lay the tax
themselves. Mr. Grenville, however, adhered to his own opinions, and said that
he had pledged his word for offering the stamp bill to the house, and that the
house would hear their objections.

The bill was accordingly brought in, and in March, the same year, received the
royal assent. The framers of the stamp act flattered themselves, that the
confusion which would arise from the disuse of writings, would compel the
colonies to use stamp paper, and therefore to pay the taxes imposed. Thus they
were led to pronounce it to be a law which would execute itself.

Mr. Grenville, however, was not without his apprehensions that it might
occasion disorder^^ to prevent or suppress which he projected another bill,
which was brought in the same sessions, whereby it was made lawful (...)
military officers in the colonies to quarter their soldiers in private houses.
This seemed intended to awe the people into a compliance with the other act.
Great opposition being made to it, as under such a power in the army, no one
could look on his house as his own, that part of the bill, was dropped; but there
still remained a clause when it passed into a law, to oblige the several
assemblies to provide quarters for the soldiers, and to furnish them with
firing, bedding, candles, small beer, rum, and sundry other articles, at the
expense of the several provinces. This clause continued in force after the
stamp act was repealed.

These proceedings of the mother country gave rise to great disturbances in
America. Some persons of consequence at Boston, to manifest their abhorrence
and detestation of a party in England, who they supposed were endeavoring to
subvert the British constitution, to enslave the colonies, and to alienate the
affections of his majesty's most faithful subjects in America, early in the
morning of the 14th of August, hung upon the limb of a large dead elm, near the
entrance of Boston, in one of the most public streets, two essigies. One of
them, as appeared by the labels affixed thereto, was intended to represent the
stamp officer; the other was a jack-boot, with a head and horns peeping out of
the ^^p.

The report of this novelty drew great numbers from every part of the town and
the neighboring country. This affair was left to take its own course, so that
an enthusiastic spirit diffused itself into the minds of the spectators. In the
evening, the figures were cut down, and carried in funeral procession, the
populace shouting, Liberty and property forever! No stamps, etc.

They then went to a new building, erected by Mr. Oliver, which they pulled
down, falsely supposing it to be designed for the stamp-office. As soon as they
approached Mr. Oliver's house, they beheaded the essigy, at the same time
breaking all his windows, and demolished his gardens, fences, barns, and every
thing else that came in their way.

The next day, Mr. Oliver, fearful of what might happen, declared that he had
written to England and resigned. The mob assembled again at night; and after
some expressions of joy for the resignation, proceeded to the lieutenant
governor's, Mr. Hutchinson's house, which they besieged for an hour, but in
vain; insisting repeatedly upon knowing, whether he had not w^^^ ^^^n favor of
the stamp^act.

These disorders grew ever day more enormous and alarming. Mobs once raised
soon become ungovernable by new and large accessions, and extend t^eir
intentions far beyond those of the original instigators. Crafty men may
intermix with them, when they are much heated, and direct their operations very
differently from what was at first designed.

People in England were differently affected by the disturbances in the
colonies. Some were for supporting the authority of parliament at all events,
and for enforcing the stamp act, if needful, with the point of the sword; while
others were for quieting the colonies by the repeal of it. Happily for them,
Mr. Grenville and his party were thrown out of place, and were succeeded by the
Marquis of Rockingham, when, on the 22d of February, 1766, this obnoxious act
was repealed.

In May, 1767, Mr. Charles Townsend, then chancellor of the Exchequer, moved
the House of Commons for leave to bring in bills for granting a duty upon
paper, glass, painters colors, etc. in the British American colonies; for
settling salaries on the governors, judges, etc. in North America; and for
taking off the duties on teas exported to America, and granting a duty of three
pence a pound on the importation in America. Two bills were at length framed,
and in June and July received the royal assent.

These acts occasioned fresh, disturbances in America, where matters were
carried to a much greater height than bef^^^. In consequence of this, Lord
Hillsborough wrote to General Gage, in June, 1768, to send troops to Boston, in
order to preserve the peace of that town.

The introduction of troops into Boston was attended with very serious
consequences. The inhabitants became exceedingly riotous. and some of the
rabble pushed their ill conduct so far, as to oblige the soldiers to fire on
them, in their own defense. This happened on the 5th of March, 1770, when three
persons were killed, five dangerously wounded, and a few slightly.

This was far from removing the evil, and only tended to widen the breach.
Under the notion of zeal for liberty, the rabble ran into the most excessive
licentiousness, and were every where guilty of the most lawless, unjust, and
tyrannical proceedings, pulling down houses, destroying the property of every
one that had fallen under their d^spleasure, and delivering prisoners out of
the hands of justice.

Let us now turn our attention to see what was doing, i^ the mean time at home.
The supporting the authority of parliament, was the only cause assigned by the
minister himself for retaining the tea duty at the very time when he
acknowledged it to be as anticommercial a tax, as any of those that had been
repealed upon that principle.

The East India company, feeling the bad effects of the colonial smuggling
trade in the large quantities of tea, which remained in their warehouses
unsold, requested the repeal of the threepence per pound in America, and
offered, that on its being complied with, government should retain sixpence in
the pound on the exportation. Thus the company presented the happiest
opportunity that could have been offered for honorably removing the cause of
difference with America. This afforded an opening for doing justice, without
infringing the claims on either side. The minister was requested and entreated,
by a gentleman of great weight in the company, and a member of parliament, to
embrace the opportunity; but it was obstinately rejected.

New contrivances were set on foot to introduce the tea, attended with the
three penny d^^^, into all the colonies. Various intrigues and solicitations
were used to induce the East India company to undertake this rash and foolish
business. It was protested against as contrary to the principle of the
company's monopol^^ ^spen^ power of the ministry prevailed, and the
insignificant three-penny duty on tea was doomed to be the fatal bone of
contention between Great Britain and her colonies. The company at last adopted
the system, and became their own factors. They sent 600 chests of tea to
Philadelphia, the like quantity to New York and Boston, besides what was
consigned to other places. Several ships were also freighted for different
colonies, and agents appointed for the disposal of the commodity.

In the mean time the colonists, who well knew what had passed in the mother
country, were concerting measures to counteract the views of the British
ministry Soon after the arrival of the tea ships at Boston, a number of
persons, chiefly masters of vessels, and ship bu^lders from the north end of
the town, about seventeen in number, dressed as Indians, went on board the
ships, and in about two hours hoisted out of them, and broke open 342 chests of
tea the contents of which they emptied into the sea. They were no^ in the least
molested; for the multitude of spectators on the wharf served as a covering
party. The whole business was conducted with very little tumult, and no damage
was done to the vessels or any other property. Americans throwing the ^^^ye^^
of the Tr^^^^^ into the River at Boston
When the business was finished, the people returned quietly to their own towns
and habitations.

These and other decisive proceedings of the Bostonians, induced the British
ministry to bring in a bill into parliament, "for the immediate removal of the
officers concerned in the collection of the customs at Boston, and to
discontinue the landing and discharging, lading and shipping of goods, wares,
and merchandises, at Boston, or within the harbor thereof." On the 31st of
March, 1774, the bill received the royal assent.

Other bills were passed by the British parliament, brought in by Lord North,
all tending to punish the Americans, and the Boltonians in particular, for
their refractory behavior. Petitions were sent over from America, and several
of the members of both houses reprobated these severe and dangerous
proceedings; but no regard was paid either to the petitions or to the
remonstrances of the minority in both houses. The then ministry, at the head of
which was Lord North, were determined to accept from the Americans of nothing
short of absolute and implicit obedience to the laws of taxation. On the other
hand, the people of Massachusetts Bay, supported and spurred on by the other
colonies, were determined not to submit, and prepared to repel force by force.
They collected all the arms they could, and spent much of their time in the
exercise of them.

These proceedings of the people, and their manifest disposition to resistance,
alarmed the general, who thought it necessary, for the safety of the troops, as
well as to secure the important post of Boston, to fortify the entrance at the
neck, which afforded the only communication, except by water, between the town
and the continent.

In England, petitions were presented from the merchants of London, and almost
all the trading towns in the kingdom; and Mr. Bollan, Dr. Franklin, and Mr.
Lee, also presented petitions from the American congress; but government
treated them with indifference and contempt.

Lord Chatham persevered in the prosecution of his conciliatory scheme with
America, and accordingly brought into the house of Lords the outlines of a
bill, which he hoped would answer that salutary purpose; but the ministry
rejected it. At the same time, Lord North gave a sketch of the measures he
intended to pursue, which were to send a greater force to America, and to bring
in a temporary act, to put a stop to all the foreign trade of the different
colonies of New England, particularly their fishery on the banks of
Newfoundland, till they returned to their duty.

While matters were thus going on at home, General Gage, at Boston, received
intelligence that cannon and carriages were deposited in the neighborhood of
Salem. He accordingly sent a body of troops from the castle to seize them, but
the Americans found time to out them away, and the troops returned without
effecting any thing.

A skirmish having happened at Lexington, between the king's troops and a party
of the militia, General Gage no sooner received this intelligence than he
detached Lord Piercy to Concord, with sixteen companies of foot, and a number
of marines, 900 men in the whole, and two pieces of cannon, to support Colonel
Smith.

The junction of the Brigade under Lord Perey, with the detachment under
Colonel Smith, gave the last a breathing time, especially as they now had
cannon, which awed the provincials from pressing upon the rear in a direct
line; but the whole force did not venture to halt long, as the mi^^^te men and
militia were every where collecting, in order to cut off their retreat to
Boston. They soon renewed their march, constant skirmishing succeeded, and a
continual sire, though often irregular and scattering on their side, as well as
on the part of the provincials. The close fiting from behind the walls, by good
marksmen, for such were almost all the province (...) put the troops into no
small confusion, and made it so dangerous for the officers, that they were more
attentive to their safety than common. The regulars, when near Cambridge, were
upon the point of taking a wrong road, which would have led them into the most
eminent danger; but were prevented by the direction of a young gentleman
residing at the college. They made good their retreat a little after sunset,
over Charlestown neck to Bunker's hill, but spent and worn down by the
excessive fatigues they had undergone, having marched that day between thirty
and forty miles. Here they remained secure till the next day, when they crossed
at Charlestown ferry, and returned to Boston. In this skirmish, the regulars
had 65 killed, 180 wounded, and 28 made prisoners. The provincials had 50 men
killed, 34 wounded, and four missing.

Let us now return to the mother country, where the restraining and fishery
bill met with great opposition in both houses of parliament. The fishery bill
had scarcely cleared the House of Commons, when Lord North brought in another
to restrain the trade and commerce of the colonies of New Jersey, Pennsylvania,
Maryland, Virginia, and South Carolina, to Great Britain, Ireland, and the
British islands in the West Indies, under certain conditions and limitations.

The British ministry did not confine themselves to the making of laws; but
they also sent out against the Americans the Generals How, Clinton, and
Burgoyne, who left England on the 28th of May, and in about a week afterward,
transports laden with troops sailed from Cork, to reinforce General Gage.

Memorable events recorded in this chapter.
1745 Expedition against Louisbourg. 1755 General Braddock defeated. 1764
Massachusetts assembly declare against parliamentary taxes. 1765 The stamp act
passed. -- Riots at Boston on account of that act. 1766 The stamp act repealed.
1767 Mr. Charles Townsend taxes the colonies again. 1768 Troops ordered to
Boston. 1770 Soldiers at Boston fire on the inhabitants. 1773 The East India
company empowered to export their own teas. The tea thrown into the sea at
Boston. 1774 The Massachuse^s people prepare to defend their rights by arms.
General Gage fortifies the entrance into Boston. 1775 General Gage sends troops
to Salem. -- Skirmishes at Concord are Lexington. -- The restraining bills
passed in England. -- The Generals How, Clinton, and Burgoyne, s^^l for
Boston.
CHAP. IV.
THE necessity of securing Ticonderoga was early attended to by many in New
England. General Gage had set the example of attempting to seize upon military
stores, and by so doing had commenced hostilities, so that retaliation appeared
warrantable.

Colonel Allen was at Castleton, with about 270 men, 230 of which were Green
Mountain Boys, so called from their residing within the limits of the Green
Mountains, the Hampshire Grants being so denominated from the range of green
mountains that run through them. Sentinels were placed immediately on all the
roads to prevent any intelligence being carried to Ticonderoga.

Colonel Arnold, who now joined Colonel Allen, reported, that there were at
Ticonderoga, 80 pieces of heavy cannon, 20 of brass, from four to eighteen
pounders, ten or a dozen mortars, a number of small arms, and considerable
stores; that the fort was in a ruinous condition, and, as he supposed,
garrisoned by about forty men. It was then settled, that Colonel Allen should
have the supreme command, and Colonel Arnold was to be his assistant.

Colonel Allen with his 230 Green Mountain Boys, arrived at Lake Champlain,
opposite to Ticonderoga, on the ninth of May, at night. Boats were with
difficulty procured, when he and Colonel Arnold crossed over with 83 men, and
landed near the garrison The two colonels advanced along side each other, and
entered the port, leading to the fort, in the gray of the morning. A sentry
snapped his fusee at Colonel Allen, and then retreated through the covered way
to the parade. The main body of Americans then followed, and drew up. Capt. de
la Place, the commander, was surprised in bed. Thus was the place taken without
any bloodshed.

On the 15th of June, 1775, the congress proceeded to choose by ballot a
general to command all the continental forces, and George Wash^ngton, Esquire was
unanimously elected.

The next day, orders were issued by the Americans, for a detachment of a
thousand men, to march at evening, and entrench upon Bunker's hill. By some
mistake, Breed's hill, high and large like the other, but situated on the
furthest part of a peninsula, next to Boston, was marked out for the
intrenchment instead of Bunker's. The provincials proceeded therefore to
Breed's hill; but were prevented going to work till near twelve o'clock at
night, when they pursued their business with utmost diligence and alacrity; so
that by the dawn of the day, they had thrown up a small redoubt, about eight
rods square. Such was the extraordinary silence that reigned among them, that
they were not heard by the British on board their vessels in the neighboring
waters. The sight of the works was the first notice that the Lively man of war
had of them, when the captain began firing upon them about four in the morning.

The guns called the town of Boston, the camp, and the fleet, to behold a
novelty, which was little expected. The prospect obliged the British generals
to alter the plan they intended to have pursued the next day. They grew weary
of being cooped up in Boston, and had resolved upon making themselves masters
of Dorchester heights; but the present provincial movement prevented the
expedition. They were now called to attempt possessing themselves of Breed's
hill, on which the provincials continued working, notwithstanding a heavy fire
from the enemy's ships, a number of sloating batteries, and a fortification up
Cop's hill, in Boston, directly opposite to the little American redoubt. An
incessant shower of shot and bombs was poured by the batteries upon the
American works, and yet but one man was killed.

The Americans continuing laboring indefatigably till they had thrown up a
small breast-work, extending from the east side of the redoubt to the bottom of
the hill; but they were prevented completing it from the intolerable fire of
the enemy. By some unaccountable error, the detachment, which had been working
for hours, was neither relieved, nor supplied with refreshments, but were left
to engage under these disadvantages.

Between twelve and one o'clock, and the day exceedingly hot, a number of boats
and barges, filled with regular troops from Boston approached Charlestown, when
the men were landed at Moreton's Point. They consisted of four battallions, two
companies of grenadiers, and ten of light infantry, with a proportion of field
artillery; but, by some oversight, their spare cartridges were much too big for
them: so that, when the Americans were at length forced from their lines, there
was not a round of artillery cartridges remaining.

Major Genesis How and Brigadier Genesis Pigot had the command. The troops formed,
and remained in that position, till joined by a second detachment of light
infantry and grenadier companies, a battalion of the land forces, and a
batttalion of marines, amounting in the whole to about 3000 men. The Gererals
Clinton and Burgoyne took their stand upon Cops-hill, to observe and
contemplace the bloody and destructive operations that were now commencing. The
regulars formed in two lines, and advanced deliberately, frequently halting to
give time for the artillery to fire, which was not well served. The light
infantry were directed to force the left point of the breast-work, and to take
the American line in flank. The grenadiers advanced to attack in front,
supported by two battalions, while the left, under Genesis Pigot inclined to the
right of the American line. One or two of the continental regiments had been
posted in Charlestown, but afterward removed to prevent their being cut off by
a sudden attack; so that the British were not in the least hurt by the
musquetry from thence,

Genesis Gage had for some time resolved upon burning the town, whenever any works
were raised by the Americans upon the hills belonging to it: and while the
British were advancing nearer to the attack, orders came to Cop's hill for
executing the resolution. Soon after a carcass was discharged, which set fire
to an old house near the ferry way; the fire instantly spread, and most of the
place was soon in flames; while the houses at the eastern end of Charlestown
were set on fire by men who landed from the boats.

The regulars derived no advantage from the smoke of the conflagration, for the
wind suddenly shifting, carried it another way, so that it could not cover them
in their approach. The provincials had not a rifleman among them, not one being
yet arrived from Battle of Bunkers Hill
the southward; nor had they any other guns than common muskets, and even those
were not furnished with bayonets. However, they were almost all marksmen, being
accustomed to sporting of one kind or other from their youth. A number of
Massachusetts people were in the redoubt, and the part of the breast-work
nearest it. The left of the breast-work, and the open ground stretching beyond
its point to the waterside, through which there was not an opportunity of
carrying the work, was occupied partly by the Massachusetts forces, and partly
by the people of Connecticut.

The British moved on slowly to the attack, instead of using a quick step;
which gave the provincials the advantage of taking surer and cooler aim. These
reserved their fire, till the regulars came within ten or twelve rods, when
they began a furious discharge of small arms, which stopped the regulars, who
kept up the firing without advancing. The discharge from the Americans was so
incessant, and did such execution, that the regulars retreated in disorder, and
with great precepitation toward the place of landing. Their officers used
every effort to make them return to the charge, with which they at length
complied; but the Americans again reserved their fire till the regulars came
within five or six rods, when the enemy was a second time put to flight.

General How and the officers redoubled their exertions; and General Clinton,
perceiving how the army was staggered, passed over, without waiting for orders,
and joined them in time to be of service. The Americans being in want of
powder, sent for a supply but could procure none; for there was but a barrel
and a half in the magazine. This deficiency disabled them from making the same
defense as before; while the British reaped a further advantage by bringing
some cannon to bear, so as to rake the inside of the breast work from end to
end. The regular army now made a decisive push, and the fire from the ships and
batteries was redoubled. The provincials were of necessity ordered to retreat.

It was feared by the Americans, that the British troops would push the
advantage they had gained, and march immediately to the head quarters at
Cambridge, about two miles distant, and in no state of defense. But they
advanced no farther than to Bunker's^ hill, where they threw up works for their
own security. The provincials did the same upon Prospect-hill, in front of
them, about half way to Cambridge.

The loss of the British according to General Gage, amounted to 1054, of whom
226 were killed; of these 19 were commissioned officers, including a lieutenant
colonel, two majors, and seven captains. Seventy other officers were wounded.
Among those more generally regretted, were Lieutenant Colonet Abercromby, and
Major Pitcairn.

The provincials had 139 killed, 278 wounded, and 36 were missing, in all 453.

In the opinion of many, General How was chargeable with a capital error in
landing and attacking as he did. It might originate from too great a confidence
in the forces he commanded, and in too contemptuous an opinion of the enemy he
had to encounter. He certainly might have entrapped the provincials, by landing
on the narrowest part of Charleston neck, under the fire of the floating
batteries and ships of war. Here he might have stationed and fortified his
army, and kept up an open communication with Boston by a water carriage, which
he would have commanded through the aid of the navy, on each side of the
peninsula. Had he made this manae^vre, the provincials must have made a rapid
retreat from Breed's hill, to escape having his troops in the rear, and being
enclosed. It was said that General Clinton proposed it. The rejection of that
proposal greatly weakened the British army, and probably prevented the ruin of
the Americans.

In July, the congress received a letter from the convention of Georgia,
setting forth, that the colony had acceded to the general association, and
appointed delegates to attend the congress.

The accession of Georgia to the colonies occasioned their being afterward
called The Thirteen United Colonies. The first hostilities that happened in
this part between the opposite parties, commenced about the middle of November,
when a number of royalists attacked the Americans, and obliged them, after
three days, to surrender a fort they had taken possession of, in which they
expected to make an effectual resistance.

In the month of November, the New York convention having resolved upon the
removal of the cannon from the battery of the city, Captain Sears was appointed
to the business. Captain Vandeput, of the Asia man of war, was privately
informed of the design, and prepared to oppose its execution. Learning when it
was to be attempted, he appointed a boat to watch the motion of the people
assembled for the purpose about the dead of night. The sailors in the boat
giving the signal, with a flash of powder, of what was going forwards, the
persons on shore mistook it for an attempt to fire a musket at them, and
immediately aimed a volly of shot at the boat, by which a man was killed.
Captain Vandeput soon after commenced a firing from the Asia with grape shot,
swivel shot, 18 and 24 pounders, without killing a single person, and wounded
only three, two slightly, the other lost the calf of his leg. He then ceased
for a considerable time, supposing that the people had desisted from their
purpose, while they were only changing their mode of operation.

Capt. Sears provided a deceiving party, intended to draw the Asia's fire from
the line of the working party. He sent the former behind a breast-work, by
which they were secured by dodging down upon observing the flash of the Asia's
guns. When all was in readiness, they huzzaed, and sung out their notes as
though rugging in unison, and fired from the walls; while the working party
silently got off twenty-one eighteen pounders, with carriages, empty
cartridges, rammers, etc

Upon hearing the noise and seeing the fire of the musketry the captain ordered
the Asia to fire a whole broadside toward that part of the fort, where the
deceiving party had secured themselves, without intending any particular injury
to the city. However some of the shot flew into the city, and did damage.

This affair happened at a very late hour, between twelve and two, and threw
the citizens into the utmost consternation. The distress of the New Yorkers was
very much increased by a painful apprehension, that Capt. Vandeput would renew
his firing upon the city. A removal of men, women, children, and goods
instantly commenced, and continued for some time. Matters were however so far
adjusted, as to quiet the apprehensions of the people, in reference to their
suffering further from the fire of the Asia. To prevent it, the convention
permitted Abraham Lot Esquire to supply his majesty's ships, stationed at Newyork,
with all necessaries, as well fresh as salted, for the use of those ships.

In the month of November, the general assembly of Rhode Island passed an act
for the capital punishment of persons, who should be found guilty of holding a
traitorous correspondence with the ministry of Great Britain, or any of their
officers or agents, or of supplying the ministerial army or navy, employed
against the United Colonies, with provisions, arms, etc. or of acting as pilots
on board any of their vessels. They also passed an act for sequestering the
estates of several persons, whom they considered as avowed enemies to the
liberties of America.

On the night of the 26th of August, about 2000 American troops entrenched on
Plowed hill, within point blank shot of the British on Bunker's hill; and
nothwithstanding a continual fire almost all the day following, they had only
two killed and two wounded. The British finding that their firing did not
answer, relaxed, and ofter a while desisted entirely, and the Americans
remained quiet in their new post.

In the beginning of September, General Washington received a very acceptable
remittance of 7000 pounds weight of powder, which had been very scarce in the
American army.

Genesis Washington, having received pleasing accounts from Canada, being assured
that neither Indians nor Ca^^^ians could be prevailed upon to act agai^^^ the
Americans, concerted the plan of detaching a body of troops from the head
quarters, across the country to Quebec. He communicated the same to Genesis
Schuyler, who approved it, and all things were got in readiness. They set out
on the expedition on the 13th of September, under the command of Col. Arnold,
assisted by the Colonels Green and Enos, and Majors Megis and Bigelow, the
whole force amounting to about eleven hundred men.

On the 18th of October, Capt. Morvat destroyed 139 houses, 278 stores and
other buildings, the far greater and better part of the town of Falmouth, in
the northern part of Massachusetts. The inhabitants in compliance with a
resolve of the provincial congress, to prevent tories carrying out their
effects, gave some violent obstruction to the loading of a mast ship, which
drew upon them the indignation of the British admiral.

In the mean time, Genesis Montgomery was sent forward to Ticonderoga, with a body
of troops; and being arrived at the Isle aux Noix, he drew up a declaration,
which he sent among the Canadians by Col. Allen and Major Brown, assuring them,
that the army was designed only against the English garrisons, and not against
the country, their liberties, or religion.

Col. Allen and Major Brown being on their return, after executing the
commission, with which the general had entrusted them, the la^ter advised Col.
Allen, to halt, and proposed, that the Colonel should return to Longueil,
procure canoes and cross the river St. Lawrence, a little north of Montreal,
while he, the major, crossed a little to the south of the town, with near 200
men, as he had boats sufficient. The plan was approved, and Col. Allen passed
the river in the night. The major, by some means, failed on his part, and Col.
Allen found himself, the next morning, in a critical situation, but concluded
on defending himself. Genesis Carleton, learning how weak Colonel Allen was,
marched out against him with about forty regulars, together with Canadians,
English and Indians, amounting to some hundreds, The colonel defended himself
with much. bravery; but being deserted by several, chiefly Canadians, and
having had fifteen of his men killed, was under the necessity of surrendering
with thirty one effectives and seven wounded. He was directly put in irons.

On the 4th of October, a party of Canadians, who had joined and greatly
assisted the besiegers, entrenched themselves on the east side of the lake, on
which the enemy sent an armed sloop with troops to drive them away; but the
Canadians attacked the sloop with vigor, killed a number of the men, and
obliged her to return to St. John's in a shattered condition.

On the 7th, the main body of the army decamped from the south, and marched to
the north side of the fort. In the evening, they began to throw up a breast
work, in order to erect a battery of cannon and mortars. The continental troops
brought such a spirit of liberty into the field, and thought so freely for
themselves, that they would not bear either subordination or discipline. The
generals could not, in truth, direct their operations, and would not have
stayed an hour at their head, had they not feared that the example would be too
generally followed, and so have injured the public service. There was a great
want of powder, which, with the disorderly behavior of the troops, was a damp
to the hope of terminating the siege successfully. The prospect, however, soon
brightened, for the Americans planned an attack upon Chamblee, and in batteaus
carried down the artillery, past the fort of St. John's. After a short demur,
it surrendered to the majors Brown and Livingston. The greatest acquisition was
about six tons of powder, which gave great encouragement to the provincials.

On the 12th of November, Genesis Montgomery pressed on to Montreal, which, not
being capable of making any defense, Gov. Carleton quitted it one day, and the
American general entered it the next.

Notwithstanding the advanced season of the year, Genesis Montgomery marched on
for the capital, and on the 5th of December appeared before Quebec. The
garrison consisted of about fifteen hundred, while the besiegers were said to
consist of little more than half that number. Upon his appearing before the
city, he sent forward a flag of truce, which was fired upon by order of Sir Guy
Carleton. At this Genesis Montgomery was so provoked, that the next day he wrote
to Sir Guy, and in his letter, departed from the common mode of conveying his
sentiments; he made use of threats and language which in his cooler moments he
would have declined.

In spite of the inclemency of the season, he set about erecting works. His
batteries were composed of snow and water, which soon became solid ice. He
planted on them five pieces of ordnance, twelve and nine pounders, with one
howitzer; but the artillery was inadequate, and made no impression.

In the evening, a council was held by all the commanding officers of Col.
Arnold's detachment, and a large majority were for storming the garrison, as
soon as the men were provided with bayonets, spears, hatchets and hand
grenades. The plan of storming the garrison was wholly the work of General
Montgomery, who, in the council of war held on the occasion, showed the
necessity. practicability, and importance of it, in such a clear and convincing
manner, that they unanimously agreed to the measure. The attempt had the
appearance of rashness; but the general was persuaded that men, who had behaved
so bravely, would follow him, and that Sir Gay Carleton's forces would not
fight, when actual service commenced.

On the 31st of December, the troops assembled at the hour appointed. They were
to make the attack by the way of Cape Diamond, at the general's quarters on the
heights of Abraham, and were headed by the Genesis himself. Col. Arnold was made
to attack through the suburbs of St. Roe. Col. Livingston and Major Brown were
to make a false attack upon the walls, to the southward of St. John's gate, and
in the mean time to set fire to the gate with the combustibles prepared for
that purpose. The colonel was also to give the signals for the combination of
the attacks, which were to begin exactly at five o'clock. It is said that Capt.
Fraser, of the regulars, who was then on piquet, going his rounds, saw the
rockets fired off as signals, and, forming a conjecture of what was going
forward, beat to arms without orders, and so prepared the garrison for defense.

The different routes the assailants had to make, the depth of the snow, and
other obstacles, prevented the execution of Livingston's command. The general
moved with his division, attended by a number of carpenters, to the piquets at
Cape Diamond. These were soon cut with the saws, and the general pulled them
down himself. He then entered, attended by the carpenters and some of his
officers.

On their entrance, their guides forsook them, which alarmed the general and
other officers, who were unacquainted with the pass and situation of the
enemy's artillery. However, they pressed on, and the general, observing that
the troops did not follow with spirit, called out, "Fie, for shame! will the
New York troops desert the cause in this critical moment? Will you not follow
when your general leads? Push on, brave boys, Quebec is ours." A few acted with
resolution, advanced, and attacked the guardhouse, when the enemy gave a
discharge of grapeshot from their cannon, and also of small arms, which proved
fatal to the general, his Death of Genesis Montgomery
aid de camp, Capt. Cheeseman, and others. The firing from the guardhouse
ceased, by the enemy's quitting their post, and the opportunity offered for the
assailants to push forward with success; but the Deputy Quartermaster General,
Campbell, with the rank of a Colonel, assumed the command, ordered a retreat,
which took place, and the wounded were carried off to the camp.

The division under Col. Arnold was equally unsuccessful. The Colonel received
a wound in one of his legs from a musket ball, and was carried to the general
hospital. His men maintained their ground till ten o'clock, when, all hopes of
relief being over, they were obliged at last to surrender prisoners of war. In
this attack the provincials lost upwards of an hundred men. Genesis Montgomery was
shot through both his thighs and his head. His body was taken up the next day,
an elegant coffin was prepared, and he was soon after decently interred. The
general was tall and slender, well limbed, of easy, graceful, and manly
address. He had the love, esteem, and confidence of the whole army; he was of a
good family in Ireland, and had served with reputation in the late war with
France. His excellent qualities and disposition procured him an uncommon share
of private affection, and his abilities of public esteem. His death was
considered as a greater loss to the American cause, than all the others with
which it was accompanied.

When the continental troops had connected after the unsuccessful attack on
Quebec, there arose a dispute who should command, and whether it was advisable
to raise the siege, or wait till a reinforcement should arrive. A council of
war agreed, that Col. Arnold should command, and should continue the siege, or
rather the blockade, which was accordingly done, apparently at no small risk,
as they had not more than four hundred men fit for duty; but they retired about
three miles from the city, and posted themselves advantageously.

Memorable events recorded in this chapter.
Anno 1775. The expedition against Ticonderoga. Anno 1775. Geo. Washington, Esquire
elected commander in chief of the continental forces. Anno 1775. The battle of
Bunker's-hill. Anno 1775. Georgia acceeds to the Union. Anno 1775. The thirteen
United Colonies. Anno 1775. The Asia man of war fires upon New York. Anno 1775.
Col. Arnold's expedition into Canada. Anno 1775. Falmouth destroyed, and on
what account. Anno 1775. Col. Allen taken prisoner, and put in irons. Anno
1775. Genesis Montgomery appears before Quebec, and is killed there.
CHAP. V.
LET us now return to Boston and its environs, and see what was transacting
there. On the 15th of February, 1776, the strength of the ice having been tried
in one place, and the frost continuing, Genesis Washington was desirous of
embracing the season for passing over it, from Cambridge side into Boston. He
laid before the council of war the following question: "A stroke well aimed at
this critical juncture may put a final period to the wa^, and restore peace and
tranquillity so much to be wished for; and therefore, whether part of Cambridge
and Roxborough bays being frozen over, a general assault should not be made on
Boston?"

Genesis Ward opposed the idea, saying, "The attack must be made with a view of
bringing on an engagement, or of driving the enemy out of Boston, and either
end will be answered much better by possessing Dorchester heights." When the
votes were called for, the majority were against the attack. It was however
determined to possess themselves of Dorchester heights, which was accordingly
afterward accomplished.

On the 5th of March, the British admiral informed Genesis How, that if the
Americans possessed those heights, he could not keep one of his majesty's ships
in the harbor. Every design of Genesis How to force the American works on the
hill being frustrated, a counsel of war was called, when it was agreed to
evacuate the town as soon as possible. The time that had been gained by the
Americans for strengthening their works, took away all hopes of any successful
attempts to be made on them by the British forces. The Americans had provided a
great number of barrels, filled with stones, gravel and sand, which were placed
round the works, ready to be rolled down, with a view to break the lines of any
hostile advancing troops, when ascending the hills.

On the 7th of March, there was a general hurry and confusion in Boston, every
one, in the royal interest, being busy in preparing to quit the town, and to
carry off every thing that was valuable. A flag was sent out from the select
men, acquainting Genesis Washington with the intention of the troops, and that
general How was disposed to leave the town standing, provided he could retire
uninterrupted. Genesis Washington bound himself under no obligation, but expressed
himself in words, which admitted of a favorable construction; and intimated his
good wishes for the preservation of Boston. At four o'clock, in the morning, of
the 17th, the embarkation was completed, and before ten the whole fleet was
under sail, and the provincials soon after took possession of the town.

Let us now take a view of what was doing in Virginia. Toward the close of
1775 the Liverpool frigate arrived at Norfolk from Great Britain. Soon after,
the captain sent a flag of truce, and demanded to be informed, whether his
majesty's ship of war would be supplied from the shore with provisions. The
reply was in the negative; and the ships in the harbor being continually
annoyed by the riflemen from behind the buildings and warehouses on the wharfs,
it was determined to dislodge them by destroying the town.

Previous notice was given, that the women, children, and other innocent
persons, might remove from the danger. The entrance of the new year was
signalized at four o'clock in the morning, by a violent cannonade from the
Liverpool, two sloops of war, and the governor's armed ship the Dunmore,
seconded by parties of sailors and marines, who landed and fired the houses
next the water. Where buildings, instead of being covered with tile, slate, or
lead, are covered with shingles, (thin light pieces of fir or cedar, half a
yard in length, and about six inches broad) let the wind be ever so moderate,
they will, upon being fired, be likely to communicate the conflagration to a
distance, should the weather be dry, by the burning shingles being driven by
the force of the flames to the tops of other houses.

Thus the whole town was reduced to ashes, that the Americans might have no
shelter, should they be inclined to establish a post on the spot. A few men
were killed and wounded at the burning of Norfolk, the most populous and
considerable town for commerce of any in Virginia. It contained about 6000
inhabitants, and many in affluent circumstances. The whole loss was estimated
at more than three hundred thousand pounds sterling. However urgent the
necessity, it was an odious sight to see the governor, Lord Dunmore, a
principal actor in burning and destroying the best town in his government. The
horrid distresses brought upon numbers of innocent persons, by these
operations, must wound the feelings of all who are not hardened by a party
spirit.

While matters were thus transacting in America, the ministry at home gave into
great expenses, to supply the army at Boston with fresh provisions and other
articles. Sir Peter Parker and Earl Cornwallis, with the Acteon and Thunder
bomb, sailed from Port mouth for Cork, to convoy the troops and transports
there to America; but, owing to some delays, the fleet did not sail before the
13th of February. It consisted of forty-three sail, and about 2500 troops.

On the 14th of March, a fresh attempt was made in the house of lords, to
prevent a continuance of hostilities, which so far succeeded, that in the May
following, letters patent, by his majesty's orders, passed under the great
seal, constituting Lord How and Genesis How, to be his majesty's commissioners
for restoring peace to the colonies in North America, and for granting pardon
to such of his majesty's subjects there, then in rebellion, as should deserve
the royal mercy. The same month Commodore Hotham, with all the transports,
having the first division of Hessians on board, sailed from St. Helen's for
North America. But let us return to Canada, and attend to what was going
forward in that quarter.

The blockade of Quebec was continued; but the fears of the Americans were
great, as they had no more than 400 men to do duty, while there were upwards of
three times the number in the city; they were in daily expectation that the
besieged would sally out upon them. At length a small reinforcement arrived,
which enabled them to take a little more rest, though the army was again soon
reduced by the small pox that broke out among them.

Toward the end of May, several regiments arrived from England, and the
British forces in Canada were estimated at about 13,000 men. The general
rendezvous was appointed to be at Three Rivers, half way between Quebec and
Montreal. The Americans now formed a plan to surprise the British troops, and
for that purpose marched under cover of the night, on the 8^h of June, is order
to attack them a little before daybreak. Genesis Thompson, who commanded in this
expedition, had procured a Canadian guide, who was either ignorant or
unfaithful; for, a little before sun rise, he found his forces were out of the
proper road. They returned, but losing their way by the side of the river, they
were soon in view of some of the enemy's boats, between which and the flanking
par^y several balls were exchanged. They then quickened their pace, and
continued advancing in sight of the shipping, with drums beating and fi^es
playing, as they knew they were discovered. The general, judging there was no
possibi^ity of passing the ships, without being exposed to all their fire, and
yet determining to persist in the expedition, filed off at a right angle from
the river. He meant to take a circuitous route, and en^er the town on the back
side. A bad morass interposed, the troops entered it, and the men were almost
mired. About nine o'clock, they came to a cleared spot, formed, and got into
some order about ten. They advanced, but before the rear had got off the place
of formation, the front received a heavy fire from the enemy, which struck them
with terror. The fire was instantly repeated, and though the balls flew over
the heads of the troops, without doing any material execution, they gave way,
and crowded back, in the utmost confusion, which left them without a leader, so
that every one did as he pleased. They turned their saces up the river and
hastened through the swamp as fast as possible. About eleven they began to
collect, and soon learned from the Canadians, that the enemy had sent a
detachment, with several fieldpieces by land, to cut off their retreat, and a
party by water to seize their boats. About four they were told, that the enemy
had secured the bridge before them, which it was supposed they must pass. They
were also convinced that a large body were closely in their rear. Col. Maxwell
ordered all who had collected together to halt, called the officers to him, and
said, "What shall we do? Shall we fight those in the front or in the rear?
Shall we tamely submit? or shall we turn off into the woods, and each man shift
for himself?" The last proposal was preferred, but the enemy was so near, that
the rear of the Americans was exposed to another tremendous fire, while going
down the hill into the woods, but the halls flew over them without injuring
any. The person, who was entrusted with the care of the boats, had removed them
in time to a secure place; so that the loss of the Americans, which must
otherwise have been much greater, amounted only to about 200 prisoners.

The troops that escaped began to collect about ten the next day, and by noon
were considerably numerous. They got along by degrees, and by sun set the day
following arrived opposite Sorel. Genesis Thompson and Col. Irwin, the second in
command, with some other officers were taken. The killed and wounded of the
king's troops were trifling.

The king's forces having joined at Three Rivers, proceeded by land and water
to Sorel, off which the fleet arrived in the evening a few hours after the rear
of the Americans had left it. A considerable body was landed, and the command
of the column given to Genesis Burgoyne, with instuctions, to pursue the
continental army up the river to St. John's, but without hazarding any thing
till another column on his right should be able to cooperate wi^h him. Sir Guy
Carleton's extraordinary precau^ion to put nothing to hazard, when not
absolutely necessary, gave the Americans the opportunity of escaping. Had
Burgoyne been instructed to press on with the utmost expedition, great numbers
of the provincials must have been made prisoners, and but few would have
crofied Lake Champlain. Thus ended the expedition against Quebec.

To return to Boston. The British Commodore Banks, omitting to leave cruisers
in the bay, afforded an opportunity to the American privateers of taking a
number of Highlanders. Three days after his quitting it, the George and
Annabella transports entered, after a passage of seven weeks from Scotland,
during the course of which they had not an opportunity of speaking with a
single vessel, that could give them the smallest information of the British
troops having evacuated Boston. They were attacked in the morning by four
privateers with whom they engaged till the evening, when the privateers bore
away, and the transports pushed for Boston harbor, no^ doubting but they should
there receive protection, either from a fort or ship of force stationed for the
security of British vessels. They stood up for Nantasket road, when an American
battery opened upon them, which was the first serious proof they had of the
situation of affairs at the port to which they were destined. They were too far
embayed to re^reat, as the wind had died away, and the tide was half expended.
The privateers, with which they had been engaged, joined by two others made
toward them. They prepared for action; but, by some misfortune, the Annabella
got a ground so far astern of the George, that the latter expected but a feeble
support from her musketry. About eleven at night, the privateers anchored close
by, and hailed them to strike the British flag. The mate of the George, and
every sailor on board, the captain excepted, refused to fight any longer; but
the officers and privates of the seventy first regiment stood to their quarters
till all their ammunition was expended, when they were forced to yield. They
had eight privates and a major killed, besides seventeen wounded. The number of
Highlanders taken were 267 privates, 48 officers, besides Lieut Col. Campbell.

On the 25th of June, Genesis How arrived at Sandy Hook in the Greyhound frigate.
He soon received from Gov. Tryon a full account of the state and disposition of
the province, as well as of the strength of the Americans. Genesis Washington's
army was small, rather below 9000 fit for duty. Of this little army, it was
said, at least 2000 where wholly destitute of arms, and nearly as many with
arms in such condition as to be rather calculated to discourage than animate
the user. On the 2d of July, Genesis Howe's troops took possession of Staten
Island.

On the first of July, congress resolved itself into a committee of the whole
upon the subject of independence; but neither colonies nor members being
unanimous, it was postponed till the next day. On the fourth, they had it under
further consideration, when the declaration of independence was agreed to and
adopted. The title of it was, "A declaration by the Representatives of the
United States of America in Congress assembled."

The preamble follows in these words. -- "When, in the course of human events,
it becomes necessary for one people to dissolve the political bands, which have
connected them with another, and to assume, among the powers of the earth, the
separate and equal station, to which the laws of nature and of nature's God
entitle them, a decent respect to the opinions of mankind require that they
should declare the causes that impel them to the separation.

"We hold these truths to be self-evident, that all men are created equal --
that they are endowed by their creator with certain unalienable rights, among
which are life, liberty and the pursuit of happiness -- that to s^^u^e these
rights, governments are instituted among men, deriving their just powers from
the consent of the governed -- that whenever any form of government becomes
destructive of these ends, it is the right of the people to alter or abolish
it, and to institute a new government, laying its foundations upon such
principles, and organizing its powers in such form, as to them shall seem most
likely so effect their safety and happiness. Prudence, indeed, will dictate,
that governments long established, should not be changed for light and
transient causes; and accordingly all experience has shown, that mankind are
more disposed to suffer, while evils are sufferable, than to right themselves
by abolishing the forms to which they are accustomed. But when a long train of
abuses and usurpations, pursuing invariably the same object, evinces a design
to reduce them under absolute despotism, it is their right, it is their duty,
to throw off such government, and to provide new guards for their future
security. Such has been the patient sufferance of these colonies, and such is
now the necessity that constrains them to alter their former systems of
government.

The declaration proceeds to give a history of repeated injuries and
usurpations, all having in direct object the establishment of and absolute
tyranny over those states.

On the 8th of July, at twelve o'clock the declaration of independence was
proclaimed at the state-house in Philiadelphia, amidst the greatest
acclamations. The next day, in consequence of general orders, it was read at
the head of each brigade of the continental army at New York, and every where
received with loud huzzas, and the utmost demonstrations of joy. The same
evening, the equestrian status of the king was laid prostrate on the ground,
and the lead of which it was made was doomed to be run into bullets.

On the 14th of August Lord Dunmore quitted Virginia, and joined the British
forces. He arrived with Lord Campbell and Sir Peter Parker off Staten Island.
His lordship continued on the coasts, and in the rivers of Virginia, till the
closeness and filth of the small vessels, in which the fugitives were crowded,
together with the heat of the weather, the badness and scarcity of water and
provisions, produced a pestilential fever, which made great havoc, especially
among the negroes, many of whom were swept away. When at length every place was
shut against him, and neither water nor provisions were to be obtained, but at
the expense of blood, it was found ^^cessary to burn several of the smaller and
(...) valuable vessels, to prevent their falling in^^ ^^e hands of the
Americans, and to send (...) remainder, with the ^^iled friends of gove^^m^^^
to seel^ shalter in Florida, Bermudas, and (...) West Indies.

Lord How arrived off Ha^ifax toward the end of June, and from (...)
proceeded to New York, and reached S^a^en (...) by the 12th of July. From
thence he ^ea^ (...) shore by a flag to Amboy, a ciroul^^ le^ter, together with
a declaration to ^^ve^^^ of the late governors of the coloni^^ (...) quainting
them with his powers, a^^ ^^^^siring them to publish the same as generally as
possible, for the infor^^^^^^ of the people. But it was now ^^o late to bring
them back to the obedience of the mother country, since the de^^aration of
independence had been every where solemnly read.

In the month of August, Genesis How finding himself sufficiently strong to
attempt something resolved on making a descent on Long isl^^^. The necessary
measures being taken by the fleet for covering the descent, the army was
landed, without opposition, between two small towns, Utretcht and Gravesend,
not far from the Narrows, on the nearest shore to Staten Island.

On this island are several passes through the mountains or hills, which are
easily defensible, being very narrow, and the lands high and mountainous on
each side. These were the only roads that could be passed from the south side
of the hills to the American lines, excepta road leading round the easterly end
of the hills to Jamaica. An early attention had been given to the importance of
these passes. To the second of them, the small American parties, patroling on
the coasts, retired upon the approach of the British boats with the troops.
Lord Cornwallis pushed on immediately with the reserve and some other sorces:
but finding the Americans in possession of the pass, in compliance with orders
he risked no attack.

The Americans had on each of the three passes or roads a guard of So men; and
to the east of them in the wood, Col. Mites was placed with his battalion to
guard the road from the south of the hills to Jamaica, and to watch the motion
of the enemy on that side, with orders to keep a party constantly reconnoitring
to and across the Jamaica road. The sentinels were so placed as to keep a
continual communication between the three guards on the three roads.

On the 26th of August, Genesis How, having fully settled a plan of surprise,
Gen, de Heister, with his Hessians, took post at Flatbush in the evening, and
composed the center. About nine o'clock the same night, the principal army,
containing much the greater part of the British forces under the commands of
Genesis Clinton, Earl Percy, and Lord Cornwallis, marched in order to gain the
road leading round the easterly end of the hills to Jamaica, and so to turn the
lest of the Americans. Col. Miles whose duty it was to guard this road,
suffered the British to march not less than six miles, till they were near two
miles in the rear of the guards, before he discovered and gave notice of their
approach.

The next day, before daybreak, Genesis Clinton arrived within half a mile of the
road, when he halted, and settled his disposition for the attack. One of his
p^roles fell in with a patrol of American officers on horseback who were
trepanned and made prisoners. Genesis Sullivan, though in expectation that they
would bring him intelligence, neglected sending out a fresh patrol on finding
himself disappointed. Clinton, learning from the captured officers, that the
americans had not occupied the road, detached a battalion of light infantry to
secure it, and advancing with his troops upon the first appearance of day,
possessed himself of the heights that commanded the road.

About midnight, the guard, consisting all of New Yorkers and Pennsylvanians,
perceiving that there was danger at hand, fled without firing a gun, and
carried to Genesis Parsons, who commanded them, the account of the enemy's
advancing in great numbers by that road. Genesis Grant's movements were to divert
the attention of the Americans from the left, where the main attack was to be
made by Gen Clinton. By daylight, Genesis Parsons perceived, that the British
were got through the wood, and were descending on the north side. He took
twenty of his fugitive guard, being all he could collect, and posted them on a
height in front of the British, about half a mile distant, which halted their
column, and gave time for Lord Sterling to come up with his forces, amounting
to about 1500, who possessed himself of a hill about two miles from the camp.

The engagement began soon after daybreak, by the Hessians from Flatbush under
Gen Heister, and by Gen Grant on the coast; and a warm ca^^^^ade, with a brisk
fire of small arms, were eagerly supported on both sides for some considerable
time. The Americans opposing Genesis Heister were the first who were apprised of
the march of the British troops under Genesis Clinton They accordingly retreated
in large bodies, and in tolerable order, to recover their camp; but they were
soon interrupted by the right wing under Genesis Clinton, who, having halted and
refreshed his forces after passing the heights, continued his march, and
getting into the rear of the left of the Americans, about half past eight
o'clock, attacked them with his light infantry and light dragoons, while
quitting the heights to return to their lines. They were driven back, and again
met the Hessians, and thus were they alternately chaced and intercepted. In
these desperate circumstances, some of their regiments, overpowered and out
numbered as they were, forced their wa^ to the camps through all the dangers
with which they were pressed.

The Americans under Lord Stirling, who were engaged with Genesis Grant, behaved
with great bravery and resolution; but were so late in their knowledge of what
passed elsewhere, that their retreat was intercepted by some of the British
troops, who, besides turning the hills and the American left, had traversed the
whole extent of country in their rear. Several broke through the enemy's lines
and got into the woods. Genesis Parsons, with a small party, escaped by doing the
same; numbers threw themselves in the marsh at Gorvan's Cove, some were
drowned, and others perished in the mud. However a considerable body escaped to
the lines. The nature of the country, and the variety of the ground, occasioned
a continuance and extension of small engagements, pursuits and slaughter, which
lasted for many hours before the scene closed.

The British troops displayed great valor and activity on this occasion. So
impetuous was their ardor, that it was with difficulty they could be
restrained, by Genesis Howe's orders, from attacking the American lines. They
would probably have entered them, had not the works been completed the night
before the action, by closing an opening on the right, and placing an abattis
before it. The Americans were most completely surprised and effectually
entrapped. Col. Smallwood's Maryland regiment suffered extremely, and was
almost cut to pieces, losing 259 men. The loss was much regretted, on account
of their being young men of the best-families in the country, All who were
engaged in the actions of this day did not display the same courage; nor was it
to be expected from such raw troops. Many escaped from the want of discipline;
for they broke at the sight of danger and saved themselves by flight, whereas
otherwise they must have been killed or taken. Large bodies however were
captured. Genesis Sullivan, Lord Stirling, and Genesis Udell, besides three colonels,
four lieutenant colonels, three majors, 18 captains, 43 lieutenants, 11
ensigns, an adjutant, three surgeons, and two volunteers, were made prisoners,
together with 1006 privates, in all 1007. As among the prisoners the wounded
were included, an allowance of between four and five hundred for killed,
drowned, perished in the woods, the mud, and the like, may be reckoned about
the mark; the loss of the British, in killed and wounded, did not exceed 318,
of whom only 61 were killed. After the battle, the Americans retreated to
New York, to which place they crossed over under the favor of a fog, taking
with them all their military stores, and leaving nothing behind them hut a few
pieces of cannon and some trifling matters.

Memorable Events recorded in this Chapter.
Anno 1776. Genesis How evacuates Boston. Anno 1776. Nofolk in Virginia burnt.
Anno 1776. Sir Peter Parker and Earl Corawallis s^^l for America. Anno 1776.
The blockade of Quebec continued. Anno 1776. The Americans raise the blockade
and retreat. Anno 1776. A number of Highlanders taken in Boston bay. Anno 1776.
Declaration of American independence. Anno 1776. Genesis How lands the royal army
on Long Anno 1776. Island, and drives the Americans off it.
CHAP. VI.
AFTER the affair of Long Island, endeavors were used by the Americans to keep
up the spirits of the people, by puffing accounts of the extraordinary bravery
of their troops, and the destruction they made of the enemy. But that matters
were not very promising appears from a letter of Genesis Mercer who commanded the
flying camp, dated Sept. 4th, wherein he writes. "Genesis Washington has not, so
far as I have seen, 5000 men to be depended on for the service of a campaign;
and I have not 1000. Both our armies are composed of raw militia, perpetually
fluctuating between the camp and their farms; poorly armed, and still worse
disciplined. These are not a match for, were their numbers equal to, veteran
troops, well fitted and ^^ged on by able officers. Numbers and discipline must
at last prevail. Giving soldiers, or even the lower orders of mankind, the
choice of officers, will for ever mar the discipline of armies."

Genesis How, having fully prepared for a descent on New York Island, embarked a
strong division of the army under the command of Genesis Clinton and others, i^
boats, at the head of Newtown inlet, and at another place higher up, where they
could not be observed by the Americans, who expected the attack would be made
on the side next to the East river, and had therefore thrown up lines and works
to defend themselves.

On the 15th of September, about eleven o'clock, Genesis Howe's troops landed,
under the cover of five ships of war, in two divisions, the Hessians in one
place, and the British in another. As soon as Genesis Washington heard the firing
of the men of war, he rode with all dispatch toward the lines; but to his
great mortification, found the troops posted in them retreating with the utmost
precipitation; and those ordered to support them, Parsons's and Fellows's
Brigade flying in every direction, and in the greatest confusion. His attempts
to stop them were fruitless, though he drew his sword, threatened to run them
through, and cocked and snapped his pistols.

On the appearance of a small party of the enemy, not more than sixty or
seventy, their disorder was increased, and they ran off without firing a single
shot, leaving the general in a hazardous situation, so that his attendants to
extricate him out of it, caught the bridle of his horse, and gave him a
different direction.

Three large ships were slationed in the North river, opposite to those in the
East river, and both kept up a constant cannonading with grape shot and
langrage quite across the island. The Hessians, upon their landing, seized and
secured, in a neighboring building, as enemies, some persons who had been
placed there to serve as guides, which for a while subjected them to a
difficulty.

When the regulars were completely landed, they advanced toward the
Kingsbridgeroad. The American brigades, which had fled on the enemy's
approaching the lines, did not stop till they were met by Col. Glover's and
five other brigades, who were hastening down to them. As soon as they joined,
the whole marched forward, and took post on some heights, when suddenly 8000 of
the enemy appeared on the next height, and halted. Genesis Washington at first
consented, that his troops should march forward, and give them battle; but, on
a second consideration, he gave counter orders, as he could not have any
dependence on the militia and the flying camp, which composed half the number
then present. When the Americans retired, and (...) prospect of action
remained, the English took possession of New York.

Genesis Washington, while moving the army from New York, into the country, was
careful to march and form the troops, so as to make a front toward the enemy,
from East Chester almost to White Plains, on the east side of the highway,
thereby to secure the march of those who were behind on their right and to
defend the removal of the sick, cannon and other matters of consequence; but
the want of many necessary articles considerably retarded their march.

On the 25th of October, the royal army moved in two columns, and took a
position they thought the most advantageous. Observing, however, that Genesis
Washington's lines were much strengthened by additional works, he deferred all
further attack till the arrival of more troops. Several skirmishes had already
taken place, but nothing decisive had yet happened.

On the last day of October, Genesis How, being joined by the troops from Lord
Percy, made dispositions for attacking the American can lines early the next
morning; but an extreme wet night and morning prevented the execution at the
time appointed, and it was not attempted afterward, though the day proved
fair. Genesis Washington gained intelligence of his danger from a deserter, when
he drew off most of his troops at night, totally evacuated his camp early in
the morning of the first of November, and took higher ground toward the North
Castle district; leaving a strong rear guard on the heights and in the woods of
White Plains. Orders were given by Genesis How to attack this corpse; but the
execution of it was prevented by a violent rain.

Though this affair at White Plains made so much noise at the time in which it
happened, no general action took place, and the Americans retreated, leaving
the English in possession of New York and the Jerseys.

Genesis Washington, however, soon after made a descent on Jersey, and at Trenton
surprised and took prisoners 23 Hessian officers, and 886 men of the same
nation. In the evening, Genesis Washington repassed the Delaware, and retired to
Pennsylvania.

From this period to the month of June, 1777, nothing passed in Jersey but one
continued scene of blood and slaughter among detached parties, without any
decisive advantages being gained by either side. On the ^0th of June, at ten
o'clock in the morning, the English troops began to cross over to Staten
island, and the rear guard passed at two in the afternoon, without the least
appearance of an enemy. Thus they evacuated the Jerseys, to enter upon new
conquests, in hopes of reducing the United States to unconditional submission

Let us now turn to the British operations in the North, which were taken out
of the hands of Sir Guy Carleton, and committed to the charge of Genesis Burgoyne.
The forces allotted to ^^em, consisting of British and German troops, amounted
to more than 7000 men, exclusive of the artillery corpse. A powerful brass train
of artillery was furnished, probably the finest, and the most excellently
supplied, as to officers and private men, that had ever been destined to second
the operations of an army not exceeding the present number. The army was, in
every respect, in the best condition, the troops were in the highest spirits,
admirably disciplined, and uncommonly healthy.

The main body under Genesis Burgoyne, proceeded up Lake Champlain, landed and
encamped at no great distance from Crown Point, where he met the indians in
congress, and afterward, in compliance with their customs, gave them a war
feast. He made a speech to them, calculated to excite their ardor in the common
cause, and at the same time to repress their barbarity. He conjured them to
kill those only who opposed them in arms; that old men, women, children, and
prisoners, should be held sacred from the knife or hatchet, even in the heat of
actual conflict; that they should scalp those only whom they had slain in fair
opposition; but that under no pretense should they scalp the wounded. or even
dying, much less kill persons in that condition: they were promised a
compensation for prisoners, but informed, that they should be called to account
for scalps.

On the near approach of the right wing of the royal army on the Ticonderoga
side, the Americans abandoned their works toward Lake George, and left Genesis
Phillips to possess the advantageous post of Mount Hope, without making any
resistance, which would have been ineffectual, and could have answered no good
purpose. That apparent supineness and want of vigor, with which they were
chargeable, was not occasioned by cowardice, but actual imbecility.

Genesis Burgoyne's troops proceeded with much expedition, in the construction of
their works, the bringing up of artillery, stores, and provisions; but what
gave the greatest alarm was, the rapid progress they made in clearing a road,
and getting artillery on Sugar Hill. When once they had erected a battery on
this height, only a few hours more would have been required to have invested
the Americans on all sides.

Genesis St. Clair, having received intelligence by spies, that in twenty four
hours the investure would be completed. when he should he cut off from all
possibility of succor, Genesis Schuyler not having force sufficient at fort
Edward to relieve him he determined to evacuate his posts, though he knew it
would produce such astonishment as had not happened since the commencement of
the war. He plainly perceived, that if he continued there, he should lose the
army but save his character; whereas, by abandoning the place, he should save
the army, and lose his character. A council of war was called, and it was
unanimously concluded upon to evacuate as soon as possible.

At two o'clock in the morning of July the 6th. Genesis St. Clair left
Ticonderoga. About three the troops were put in motion for the evacuation of
the Mount; but Fermov having set fire to his house, contrary to positive
orders, the whole Mount was enlightened by it, so that the enemy had an
opportunity of seeing every thing that passed, which damped the spirits of the
Americans, and induced them to push off in a disorderly manner.

In the morning, Genesis Frazer, perceiving the evacuation, and that the Americans
were retiring, commanded a pursuit with his brigade, consisting of the light
troops, grenadiers, and some other corpse. Genesis Reidesel, with most of the
Brunswickers, was ordered by Genesis Burgoyne to join in the pursuit, either to
support Frazer, or to act seperately. The latter continued the pursuit through
the day, and receiving intelligence, that St. Clair's rear was at no great
distance, he ordered his troops to lie that night on their arms. In the morning
he came up with the Americans, commanded by Col. Warner, who had, besides his
own, the regiments of colonels Francis and Hale. The British advanced boldly,
and the two bod^es formed within about 60 yards of each other. Frazer began the
at ack about seven o'clock, expecting every moment to be joined by Reidesel,
and apprehending, that if he delayed, the enemy would escape. Hale being
apprized of the danger, never brought his regiment to the charge, but fled; so
that Warner could bring into action no more than about 700 men. The conflict
was bloody: Francis fell fighting with great bravery, and Warner, his officers
and soldiers, behaved with much resolution and gallantry; so that the British
broke and gave way, but soon formed again, and running on the Americans with
their bayonets, the latter were put into no small confusion, which was
increased by the c^tical arrival of Genesis Reidesel with the foremost of his
column, consisting of the Chasseur company, and eighty grenadiers and light
infantry, who were immediately led into action. The Americans now fled on all
sides. Genesis St. Clair heard when the firing began, and would have supported
Warner, but the troops that were nearest, two militia regiments, would not obey
orders, and the others were at too great a distance. Hale, who had attempted to
get off by flight, fell in with an inconsiderable party of British, and
surrendered himself and a number of his men prisoners. The Americans lost 324
in killed, wounded and prisoners, and among the last were 12 officers. The
royal troops, including British and German, had not less than 183 killed and
wounded.

The evacuation of Ticonderoga and Mount Independence surprised Genesis
Washington, and spread astonishment and terror through the New England states
The general was led to believe that the garrison (...) much stronger. The
Massachusett's general-court were faulty, in not having seasonably forwarded
their quota of troops agreeable to the requisition of congress.

Let us now return to see what was doing by Genesis How. The British fleet and
army which lay at Sandy Hook, were destined for the reduction of Philadelphia,
in pursuance of a plan which had been settted between Sir William How and Lord
George Germain, but did not sail 'till the 23d of July. The land forces
consisted of thirty six British and Hessian battalions, including the light
infantry and grenadiers, with a powerful artillery, a New York corpse, called
Queen's Rangers, and a regiment of light horse, estimated all together at about
16,000 men. The fleet consisted of 267 sail. Genesis Howe's thus abandoning
Burgoyne, equally excited the astonishment of friends and enemies.

On the 14th of June the congress resolved that the flag of the thirteen United
States be thirteen stripes, alternate red and white; that the union be thirteen
stars, white in a blue field, representing a new constellation.

It was not till the third of September that the royal army began to move
forwards. On its advancing near to the Americans, these abandoned their ground,
perceiving that it would not answer their first expectation. They crossed
Brandywine at Chad's ford, and took possession of the heights on the east side
of it, with an evident intention of disputing the passage of the river; but the
superior numbers of the regular forces at last obliged them to retire.

A little after sunrise on the 11th of September, a warm engagement commenced,
which lasted till the approach of night. On this occasion, the Americans showed
great resolution and courage; but a few hours more of day light might have so
animated the conquering reg^lars, satigued as they were, as to have produced,
those exertions, which would have been productive of a total and ruinous defeat
to the Americans. It was said by the Americans themselves, that in this action,
their loss in killed, wounded, and prisoners, was about twelve or thirteen
hundred; and that the royal army did not suffer, on their part, short of seven
or eight hundred, in killed and wounded. The Americans also lost ten small
field pieces, and a howitzer, of which all but one were brass.

The evening after the battle, a party of regulars was sent to Wilmington, who
took the governor of the Delaware state, Mr. M'Kenley, out of his bed, and
possessed themselves of a shallop lying in the creek, loaded with the rich
effects of some of the inhabitants, together with the public records of the
county, and a large quantity of public and private money, besides articles of
plate, and other things.

After various motions of the regular army, on the 26th of September General
How made his triumphal entry into Philadelphia, with a small part of his army,
where he was most cordially received by the generality of the quakers, and a
few other royalists. The bulk of his troops were left in and about German town,
a village forming one continued street for near two miles. Genesis Washington's
army was encamped near Shippach-creek about eighteen miles from thence. The
Congress, on the loss of Philadelphia, removed to York-town.

To return to the northern army, under the command of Genesis Burgoyne. Several
actions took place, between the Americans and regulars, in the intended march
of the British toward Albany. In these different ^^irmishes, the regulars
suffered very considerably, as well as the indians in their interest. The
principal action happened at Bennington, in which the Americans took from the
Eng^^^^ four brass field pieces, twelve drums, 250 dragoon swords, four
ammunition wagons, and about 700 pris^^ers, among wh^m was Lieut. Col. Baum.

On the ^^th of A^gust, the English commander bad occasion to write to Genesis
Gates, and in this letter complained of inhumanity exercised toward the
provincial soldiers in the king's service, after the affair of Bennington, and
then hinted at retaliation. Genesis Gates, in his answer of Sept. the 2d,
inva^d^ed the charge, and then re^orted the Indian cruelties, which he imputed
to Burgoyne, saying. "Miss M'Rea, a young lady, (...) to the ^^ght of virtuous
character, and a^^^^^ ^^^po^^^^^, engaged to an ^^^^cer in your (...), wa^,
with other women and children, taken out (...) a hou^^ near Fort Edward carried
unto the woods, and there murdered and ^^^^g^^d in a most shocking manner. Two
parents, with their six children, were all scalped and treated with the same
inhumanity, while quietly residing in their once happy and peaceful dwellings.
The miserable fate of Miss M'Rea was particularly aggravated, by her being
dressed to receive her promised husband, when she met her murderer employed by
you. Upwards of one hundred men, women, and children, have perished by the
hands of the ruffians, to whom it is asserted, you have paid the price of
blood." Genesis Burgoyne, in his reply of the 6th of the same month, vindicated
his own character; showed that Miss M'Rea's death was no premeditated
barbarity, and declared, that every other charge, exhibited by Genesis Gates, was
ill founded and erroneous.

The murder of Miss M'Rea exasperated the Americans, and from that and other
cruelties occasion was taken to blacken the royal party and army. The people
detested that army which accepted of such Indian aid, and loudly reprobated
that government which could call in such auxiliaries. Genesis Gates was not
deficient in aggravating, by several publications, the excesses that had taken
place, and with no small advantage to his own military operations.

On the 18th of September, Genesis Burgoyne, having been very short of provisions,
at length received a supply for about thirty days, together with other
necessary stores He then resolved upon passing the Hudson's river with the
army, which having executed, he encamped on the heights and on the plains of
Saratoga. The Americans, observing the motions of the royal army, marched out
3000 strong, in order to attack him, but sound that to be prudentially
impracticable. However, they drew up in full view of him, and there remained
till dark.

The next day some of the American scouting parties fell in with those of the
British, and with great boldness began the attack about one o'clock at noon.
The firing was no sooner heard by Genesis Phillips, than he made his way with a
part of the artillery, through the woods, and rendered essential services. Each
commander supported, reinforced, and ordered different regiments to engage. The
battle was hot and obstinate on both sides, till about half past two o'clock,
when it ceased for half an hour. The American and British lines being fully
formed, the action was renewed, and became general at three. Both armies
appeared determined to conquer or die, and there was one continual blaze of
fire for three hours without intermission; the report of the muskets resembled
an incessant roll beating on a number of drums. -- The Americans and British
alternately drove and were driven by each other. -- Three British regiments,
the 20th, the 21st, and the 62d, were in a constant and close fire for near
four hours. All suffered considerable loss: the 62d, which was 500 strong when
it left Canada, was now reduced to less than 60 men, and to four or five
officers. Few actions have been characterised, by more obstinacy in attack or
defense, than was the present. Both parties claimed the victory, though neither
had much advantage to boast of.

From this time till near the middle of October, battles and skirmishes
continually took place between the two armies, and the British were sadly
reduced and weakened. On the 13th Genesis Burgoyne, finding that the troops had
only three days provisions, in store, on short allowance, and no apparent means
of retreat remaining, called into council all the generals, field officers, and
captains commanding troops. There was not a spot of ground in the whole camp
for holding the council of war, but what was exposed to cannon or rifle shot;
and while the council was deliberating, an eighteen-pound ball crossed the
table. By the unanimous advice of the council, the general was induced to open
a treaty with Genesis Gates. The first proposals of the latter were rejected, and
the sixth article with disdain, wherein it was required, that the British army
should lay down their arms in their entrenchments. Burgoyne's counter-proposals
were unanimously approved, and being sent to Gates were agreed to, on the 15th,
without any material alteration.

Genesis Gates being fearful of the consequences that might follow, should Genesis
Vaughan with his troops come up in time to Burgoyne's assistance, determined
upon bringing the matter to an immediate issue. On the morning of the 17th, he
got every thing in readiness for attacking the royal army. This done he took
out his watch, the time agreed for signing being come. He then sent Col.
Greaton on horseback to Burgoyne with a message, requiring the general to sign,
and allowed him no more than ten minutes to go and return. He was back in time,
the treaty was signed, all hostile appearances ceased, and the Americans
marched into the British lines to the tune of Yankee Doodle. They were kept
there until the royal army had marched out of their lines, and deposited their
arms at the place appointed by the treaty.

The delicacy with which this business was conducted reflects the highest honor
upon the American general. It intimated that he was sensible of the
mortification attending a reverse of fortune, and that he was unwilling to
aggravate the painful feelings of the royal troops, by admitting the American
soldiers to be eye witnesses to the degrading spectacle of piling their arms.
When the arms were deposited agreeable to treaty, the royal troops were served
with bread by the Americans, as they had not any left, nor flour to make it.
They had only one day's salt meat remaining.

The treaty was styled, "A convention between Lieut. Genesis Burgoyne and Major
Genesis Gates." Among other articles it was stipulated, "That the troops under
Lieut. Genesis Burgoyne shall march out of their camp with the honors of war, and
the artillery of the entrenchments, to the verge of the river. where the arms
and artillery are to be left. -- The arms to be piled by word of command from
their own officers. A free passage to be granted to the royal army to Great
Britain, upon condition of not serving again in North America during the
present contest; and the port of Boston to be assigned for the entry of
transports to receive the troops, whenever Genesis How shall so order. -- The
officers baggage not to be molested or searched. -- During the stay of the
troops in the Massachusetts bay, the officers are to be admited on parole, and
be allowed to wear their side-arms."

The return signed by Genesis Burgoyne, at the time of the convention, made the
British army, including Germans, amount to 5791, which was very short of the
number they had on setting out from Canada. The train of brass arti^^^y,
consisting of 42 pieces, was a f^ne acquisition to the Americans. There were
also 4647 muskets, 6000 dozen of cartridges, besides shot, carcases, sh^lls,
etc.

Had Clinton advanced in time, Burgoyne would have been saved; but the troops
he dispatched under General Vaughan amused themselves with burning Esopus, a
fine vil^^^^e on the north river, below Catskill. General Vaughan, with a flood
tide, might have reached Albany, in four hours, as there was no force to hinder
him. Had he proceeded thither, and burnt the stores, Gates, as he himself
afterward declared, must have retreated into New England.

Memorable events recorded in this chapter.
Anno 1776. Wretched state of the armies under the Generals Washington and
Gates Anno 1776. New York taken by the royal forces. Anno 1776. The battle of
the White Plains. Anno 1776. A body of Hessians defeated at Trenton. Anno 1777.
Genesis How embarks his army from Staten Island. Anno 1777. Genesis Burgoyne
proceeds to Crown Point. Anno 1777. T^corderoga and Mount Independence
evacuated. Anno 1777. Fleg of the United States erected. Anno 1777. Battle at
the Brandywine. Anno 1777. Account of Miss M'Rea's death. Anno 1777. American's
engage the British under Genesis Burgoyne. Anno 1777. Distress and calamity of the
royal army. Anno 1777. Genesis Burgoyne bassled in all his designs. Anno 1777.
Signs the convention. Anno 1777. Esopus burnt by the troops under General
Vaughan.
CHAP. VII.
TOWARD the end of October, 1777, the royal army, under the command of Sir
William How, removed to Philadelphia. Measures being concerted between the
general and admiral for clearing the Delaware of its obstructions, the former
ordered batteries to be erected on the western or Pennsylvanian shore, to
assist in dislodging the Americans from Mud island. He also detached a strong
body of Hessians cross the river, who were to reduce the fort at Red-bank while
the ships and batteries on the other side were to attack Mud-Island. Count
D^nop, in the service of the English, was entrusted with the expedition against
Red-bank, but he failed in the attempt. He was mortally wounded and taken
prisoner, several of ^^s best officers were killed or disabled, and the
Hessi^ns, after a desperate engagement, were repulsed. The second in command
being also dangerously wounded, the detachment was brought off by Lieut. Col.
Linsing. It is said that the royal detachment lost, on this occasion, between
four and five hundred men.

The expedition against Mud Island met with better success, the Americans being
drive from thence, and forced to retire to Red bank.

On the night of the 18th of November, Lord Cornwallis marched with a
considerable force, and the next day crossed the Delaware, in his way to Red
bank, which the Americans abandoned, leaving behind them the artillery, and a
^^^siderable quantity of cannon ball. The English generals confessed, that the
long and unexpected opposition they received from Red-bank and Mud Island,
broke in upon their plans for the remainder of the campaign.

On the third of May, 1778, Mr. Simeon Deane arrived in America express from
France, with very important dispatches. -- The The congress was immediately
convened, and the dispatches opened and read, among which, to their
inexpressible joy, were a treaty of commerce and a treaty of alliance,
concluded between his most christian majesty the king of France and the United
States of America. The treaties were duly weighed and considered seperately the
next day, and upon each it was unanimously resolved, "That the same be, and is
hereby accepted" The next resolution was, "That this congress entertain the
highest sense of the magnanimity and wisdom of his most Christian majesty, so
strongly exemplified in the treaty of amity and commerce; and the commissioners
representing their states, at the court of France, are directed to present the
grateful acknowledgments of this congress to his most Christian majesty, for
his truly magnanimous conduct respecting these states, in the said generous and
disinterested treaties, and to assure his majesty, on the part of this
congress, it is sincerely wished, that the friendship, so happily commenced
between France and these United States may be perpetual."

The congress, after receiving the treaties, had a stronger feeling of their
own importance than before, and resolved, "That the cummis^^oners appointed for
the courts of Spain, Tuscany, Vienna, and Be^li^, should live in such style and
manner at their respective courts, as they may find suitable and necessary to
support the dignity of their public character."

On the first of May, they agreed to a draught of "An address to the
inhabitants of the United States of America." In this publication, when they
come to the French treaty, they say, "You have still to expect one seve^e
conflict. Your foreign all^nces though they secure your independence, cannot
secure your country from desolation^ your habitations from plunder, yourwives
from insult or violation, nor your children from butchery. Foiled in the
principal design, you must expect to feel the rage of disappointed ambition.
Arise then! to your tents, and gird you for battle! It is time to turn the
headlong current of vengeance upon the head of the destroyer. They have filled
up the measure of their abominations, and like ripe fruit must soon drop from
the tree. Although much is done, yet much remains to do. Expect not peace,
while any corner of America is in the possession of your foes. You must drive
them away from this land of Promise, a land flowing indeed with milk and honey.
Your brethren at the extremities of the continent already implore your
friendship and protection. It is your duty to grant their request. They hunger
and thrift after liberty. Be it yours to dispense to them the heavenly gift.
And what is there now to prevent it?"

In the month of May the American frigate, Randolph of 36 guns, and 305 men,
sailed on a cruise from Charlestown. The Y^rmouth, of 64 guns, disovered her
and five other vessels, and came up with her in the evening. Capt, Vincent
hailed the Randolph to hoist colors, or he would fire into D^^^^^^on of the
^^^ndolph Frigate.
her; on which she hoisted American, and immediately gave the Yarmouth her
broadside, which was returned, and in about a quarter of an hour she blew up.
Four men saved themselves upon a piece of her wreck, and subsisted for five
days upon nothing more than rain water which they sucked from a piece of
blanket they had picked up. On the fifth, the Yarmouth being in chase of a
ship, happily discovered them waving. The captain humanely suspended the chase,
hauled up to the wreck, got a boat out and brought them on board.

On the 7th of May the second battalion of British light infantry, in Flat
boats, attended by three galleys and other armed boats, proceeded up the
Delaware, in order to destroy all the American ship^ and vessels l^ing in the
river between Philadelphia and Trenton. They landed the next morning, advanced
tewards Bordentown, drove the Americans that opposed them, entered the town,
and burnt four store houses contaming provisions, ^^^^cco, some military sto^^,
and camp equipage. The country being alarmed, and a strong body collected, the
b^^^tion crossed to the Pe^nsylvani^ shore. The next day they resumed their
operations, and at sunset embarked and re^^ned to Philadelphia. While upon the
expedition, they burnt two fri^^es, (...) of 3^, the other of (...) guns; nine
l^^ge ships, three pri^^^^ct sloops of 16 guns each, three of ten guns,
twenty-three brigs, with a number of sloops and schooners. Two of the ships
were loaded with tobacco, rum, and military stores.

Gen How was succeeded in the command of the army by Sit Henry Clinton, who
arrived at Philadelphia on the eighth of May.

On the sixth of February the treaties between France and the United States
were signed. The alliance batween these two powers was known to the British
ministry soon after they were signed. Mr. Fox, in a debate in the House of
Commons five days afterward, asserted, that the number of men lost to the
army, in killed, disabled, deserted, and from various other causes, from the
commencement of hoslilities with America to that period, amounted to above
twenty thousand.

On the 17th Lord North introduced his conciliatory propositions. His plan was
to enable the crown to appoint commissioners to treat with the colonies
concerning the means of putting a^ end to those unhappy contests; for which
five persons were invested with ample powers. His Lordship said in his speech,
that Genesis How had been in the late actions, and in the whole course of the
campaign, not only in the goodness of troops, and in all manner of supplies,
(...) also in point of numbers, much superior to the American army that opposed
him in the field; that Genesis Burgoyne had been in numbers, until the affair at
Bennington, nearly twice as strong as the army of the enemy; that he promised a
great army should be sent out, and that a great army had accordingly been sent
out, to the amount of 60,000 men and upwards.

The speech was long, able, and eloquent, and kept him up two full hours. A
dull melancholy silence for some time succeeded. It was heard with profound
attention, but without a single mark of approbation. Astonishment, dejection,
and fear, over-clouded the whole assembly. It was conjectured, that some
powerful motive had induced ministry to adopt such an alteration of measures.
This idea was confirmed by the positive assertion of Mr. Fox, that a treaty had
been signed at Paris between the colonies and France, by which she recognized
her independence.

On the 13th of March, the French ambassador delivered a rescript to Lord
Weymouth, in which he informed the court of London, that the king had signed a
treaty of friendship and commerce with the United States of America. The
knowledge of this transaction was communicated under the parade of cultivating
the good understanding between France and Great Britain.

On the 21st of March, a public audience and reception were given to the
American commissioners, Mess. Franklin, Deane, and Lee, by the French monarch.
They were introduced by Mons. Vergennes, and received by the king with the
usual formalities and ceremonies. The striking acknowledgment of the
plenipotentiaries from the United States mortified the ministry and crown of
Great Britain, and may be pronounced the political phenomenon of Europe. The
day before it was exhibited, the French emb^ssador, in consequence of orders to
quit London, set out for Paris.

From this time, the courts of London and Versailles were busied in fitting out
their fleets, which met each other in the month of July. The English fleet was
commanded by the Admirals Keppel, Pallier, and Harland. But, as the action of
that day is amply related in our History of England, we shall not introduce in
these annals of Ame^ica, an account of so foul a tarnish to the British flag.

In the beginning of June, the Trident British man of war arrived in the
Delaware, with the Earl of Carlisle, Mr. Eden and Gov. Johnstone, three of the
commissioners for restoring peace between Great Britain and America.

On the 18th of June, at three o'clock in the morning, the British ev^^^ated
Philadelphia, Mr. Eden having brought with him secret instructions from England
for that purpose. They proceeded to Gloucesler point, three miles down the
river, and before ^en the whole had passed in safety cross the Delaware into
New Jersey.

When intelligence of Sir Henry Clinton's having evacuated Philadelphia reached
the American headquarters. Genesis Washington took his measures accordingly.
Several skirmishes happened between the Americans and the regulars with various
success, till on the goth of June the royal army arrived in the neighborhood of
Sandy Hook. During the course of the march from Philadelphia, the royal army
was much reduced, upwards of 800 having deserted, a great number of whom were
Hessians.

On the 5th of July, the army passed over a bridge of boats cross a narrow
channel to Sandy Hook, and were afterward carried up to Newyork. On the 7th
Lord How received advice, that the squadrom from Toulon was arrived at
Virginia. Count d'Estaing anchored on the 8th at night at the entrance of the
Delaware. The next morning he weighed and sailed toward the Hook, and on the
evening of the 11th anchored without it. Had not bad weather and unexpected
impedimen's prevented, the Count must have surprised Howe's fleet in the
Delaware, as the latter would not have had time to escape after being apprised
of his danger. The destruction of the fleet must have been the consequence of
such a surprisal, and that must have accasioned the inevitable loss of the
royal army, which would have been so enclosed by the French squadron on the one
side, and the American forces on the other, that the Saratoga catastrophe must
have been repeated. Lord Howe's fleet consisted only of six sixty four gun
ships, three of fifty, and two of forty, with some frigates and sloops. Count^d
Estaing had twelve ships of the line, some of which were of great force and
weight.

On the and of July, the count sailed from Sandy Hook, when about twenty sail
of vessels bound to New York fell into his possession. They were chiefly prizes
taken from the Americans; but had he stayed a few days longer, Admiral Byron's
fleet must have fallen a defenseless prey into their hands. That squadron had
met with unusual bad weather, and being separated in different storms, and
lingering through a tedious passage, arrived scattered, broken, sickly,
dismasted, or otherwise damaged in various degrees of distress, upon different
and remote parts of the American coast. Between the departure of d'Estaing and
the 30th of July, the Renown of 50 guns from the West Indies, the Raisonable
and Centurion of 64, and the Cornwall of 74 guns, all arrived singly at Sandy
Hook. By d'Estaing's speedy departure a number of provision ships from Cork
escaped also, together with their convoy. They went up the Delaware within
fifty miles of Philadelphia after Lord How had quitted the river, not having
obtained any information of what had happened. The British ministry had
neglected countermanding their destination, though orders for the evacuation of
Philadelphia had been sent off so early, as to have admitted of their receivind
fresh instructions where to have steered before sailing. Great rejoicings were
made at New York upon their safe arrival, especially as provisions were much
wanted both by the fleet and army.

Let us now quit the military operations for the present and take a view of the
pending negociations. Gov. Johnstone, meaning to avail himself of former
connections, endeavored to commence or renew a private correspondence with
several members of congress, and other persons of consideration. In his letter
to them he used a freedom with the authority under which he acted, not
customary with those entrusted with delegated power, and afforded such a degree
of approbation to the Americans in the past resistance they had made, as is
seldom granted by negociators to their opponents. In a letter to Joseph Reed,
Esquire of April 11th, he said "The man, who can be instumental in bringing us all
to act once more in harmony, and to unite together the various powers which
their contest has brought forth, will deserve more from the king and people,
from patriotism, humanity, and all the tender tie^ that are affected by the
quartel and reconciliation, than ever was yet bestowed on human kind."

On the 16th of June, he wrote to Robert Morris, Esquire "I believe the men, who
have conducted the affairs of America, incapable of being influenced by
improper motives; but in all such transactions there is risk, and I think that
whoever ventures should be sec^^ed; at the same time that honor and emolument
should naturally follow the fortune of those, who have steered she vessel in
the storm, and brought her safety to port. I think that Washington and the
president have a right to every favor that a grateful nation can bestow, if
they could once more unite our interest, and spare the miseries and
devastations of war."

On Sunday the 21st of June, Mr. Reed received a written message from Mrs
Ferguson, expressing a desire to see him on business, which could not be
committed to writing. On his attending in the evening, agreeable to her
appointment, after some previous conversation, she enlarged upon the great
talents and amiable qualities of Gov. Johnstone, and added, that in several
conversations with her, he had expressed the most favorable sentiments of Mr.
Reed; that it was particularly wished to engage his interest to promote the
object of the British commissioners, viz. a reunion of the two countries, if
consistent with his principles and judgment; and that in such case it could not
be deemed unbecoming or improper in the British government to take a favorable
notice of such conduct; and that, in this instance, Mr. Reed might have ten
thousand pounds sterling, and any office in the colonies in his majesty's gift.

Mr. Reed, finding an answer was expected, replied, "I am not worth purchasing;
but such as I am, the king of Great Britain is not rich enough to do it."
However right, the principles might be, on which this insinuating scheme of
conciliation was adopted, its effects were inimical.

On the 9th of July, congress ordered, "That all letters received by members of
congress from any of the British commissioners, or their agents, or from any
subject of the king of Great Britain, of a public nature, be laid before
congress" The preceding letters, being communicated, and Mr. Reed making a
declaration of what had passed within his knowledge, congress resolved, "That
the same cannot be considered but as direct attempts to corrupt and bribe the
congress; that as congress feel, so they ought to demonstrate, the highest and
most pointed indignation against such daring and atrocious attempts to corrupt
their integrity; and that it is incompatible with the honor of congress to
hold any manner of correspondence or intercourse with the said George
Johnstone, Esquire especially to negociate with him upon affairs, in which the
cause of liberty is concerned."

The proceedings in this business were expressed in the form of a declaration,
a copy of which was ordered to be signed by the president, and sent by a flag
to the commissioners at Newyork.

These proceedings produced a very angry and violent declaration from Gov.
Johnstone, in which the immediate operations of passion and disappointment were
too conspicious. The language of his publication but poorly agreed with the
high and flatter^ng compliments he had so lately lavished on the Americans in
those very letters, which were the subject of the present contest. It was dated
the 26th of August, and transmitted to congress; together with a declaration of
the same date from Lord Carlisle. Sir Henry Clinton, and Mr. Eden, which went
to a solemn and total disavowel, so far as related to the present subject, of
their having had any knowledge, directly or indirectly, of these matters
specified by congress.

Thus were all hopes of further negotiation with congress at an end. Had Lord
North, and the rest of the ministry then in being, adopted these corrupting
measures in the more early part of the Amrican disputes, it is possible he
might have succeeded; but to attempt it at a time when the spirits of the
Americans were raised to the highest pitch by their new alliance with France,
was surely little short of folly and madness.

On the 6th of August, the Hon. Sieur Gerard was introduced to the congress, in
quality of minister plenipotentiary, who produced a letter from his master the
king of France to his very dear great friends and allies; and the compliments
Mons. Gerard received on this occasion, were very different from those
sentiments the Americans lately entertained of their now faithful allies!

On the 14th of September, congress proceeded to the election of a minister
plenipotentiary to the court of France, when Dr. Benjamin Franklin was elected
by ballot. His instructions were dated the 26th of October, and by them he was
directed to obtain, if possible, the French king's consent to expunge two of
the articles of the treaty of commerce. The doctor was to inculcate the
certainty of ruining the British fishery on the banks of Newfoundland, and
consequently the British marine, by reducing Halifax and Quebec.

Memorable events recorded in this Chapter.
Anno 1777. Count Donop repuised in the attack upon Red Bank. Anno 1777. Mud
Island reduced. Anno 1777. Congress receive the treaties concluded between
France and the United States. Anno 1778. The Randolph American frigate blown
up. Anno 1778. Sir Henry Clinton succeeds Genesis How in America. Anno 1778. The
treaties between France and the United States signed, Anno 1778. Lord North's
concilatory propositions. Anno 1778. Mess. Franklin, Deane, and Lee, have a
public audience at the French court. Anno 1778. The British army evacuates
Philadelphia. Anno 1778. Skirmishes between the English and Americans. Anno
1778. The British forces arrive at Sandy Hook. Anno 1778. Gov. Johnstone
attempts to corrupt certain members of the congress. Anno 1778. Dr. Franklin
sent as minister to the court of France.
CHAP. VIII.
THE campaign in the northern states having produced nothing advantageous to
the British, and the winter being the proper season for southern expeditions,
Sir Henry Clinton concluded upon turning his arms against Georgia. He might
propose to himself the reduction of all the southern states, and he strongly
inclined to it, by reason that these states produced the most valuable articles
of commerce for the European market, and carried on a considerable export
trade, which appeared no otherwise affected by the war, than as it suffered
from the British cruisers. The rice was devoted to the service of its enemies,
while it was wanted for the support of the royal sleet and army in America. A
plan of operations was concerted with Genesis Prevost, who commanded in East
Florida; and it was intended, that Georgia should be invaded both on the north
and south sides at the same time.

This expedition was committed to Col. Campbell, and the forces appointed to
act under him amounted to full 2500, which sailed from Sandy Hook, on the 27th
of November, being escorted by a small squadron under Commodore Hyde Parker.
The fleet arrived at the isle of Tibee, near the mouth of the Savannah, and on
the 29th of December, the troops effected a landing. They were no sooner
landed, than they were led to attack the fort, which the British persisted in
with so much spirit and rapidity, that the Americans retreated with
precipitation and disorder. No victory was ever more complete: thirty-eight
officers, and 415 non-commissioned and privates, 48 pieces of cannon, 23
mortars, the fort with its ammunition and stores, the shipping in the river, a
large quantity of provisions, with the capital of Georgia, were all within the
space of a few hours, in the possession of the British troops.

The 30th of December was appointed as a thanksgiving-day, by order of
congress. The affairs of the United States were at this period in a most
distressed, deplorable, and ruinous condition. Idleness, dissipation, and
extravagance, seemed to have engrossed the attention of the generality of the
American sons of liberty; and self-interest, speculation, and an insatiable
thirst for riches a peared to have got the better of every other consideration,
and almost of every order of men. Party disputes and personal quarrels were too
much the general object, while the momentous concerns of the empire, a vast
accumulated debt, ruined finances, depreciated money, and want of credit, which
naturally brings on the want of every thing, were but secondary considerations,
and postponed by congress from time to time, as if their affairs were in the
most flourishing situation. The paper currency in Philadelphia was daily
sinking, and at length even so low as fifty per cent, yet an assembly, a
concert, a dinner, or supper, which cost two or three hundred pounds, did not
only take men off from acting, but even from thinking of what ought to have
been nearest their hearts. Some of the most disinterested and patriotic
Americans felt more distress from this review of things, than they had done at
any other time, from the disappointments and losses in the course of the war.

In the mean time, Mons. Gerard, the French ambassador, manifested a desire,
that the war might not be prolonged by too high and unreasonable demands, and
that the United States would reduce their ultimatum as low as possible. He
strongly recommended moderation, as the fate of war was uncertain; and he
hinted, that a decisive naval engagement in favor of the British, might give a
great turn to their affairs.

The South Carolina delegates, rather with a view to conquest, than from any
special apprehension of danger to their own or neighboring states, from the
troops under Genesis Clinton, requested the Congress to appoint Genesis Lincoln on
whose character they justly reposed great confidence, to the command of all the
forces to the southward. Accordingly they made the appointment on the ^5th of
September, and ordered him immediately to repair to Charlestown.

On the 2d of March, the American officer of the day reported, that reconno
tring parties of the enemy's horse and foot had been seen within their piquet
the night preceding. Genesis Ash, who had crossed the Savannah, with about 1200
troops, besides 200 light horse, returned on the evening of the same day to his
camp. In short, the conduct of Genesis Ash was so pusillanimous, that he made no
preparations to impede the march of the British, and, soon after their
appearance, he and his troops fled with precipitation, without firing a gun.

In the month of May Sir Henry Clinton dispatched Sir George Collier and Genesis
Matthews, with about 2000 men, besides 500 marines, to make a descent upon
Virginia. They sailed for Portsmooth in that Province, and upon their arrival
landed their troops at a distance, then marched and took immediate possession
of the town, which was desenceless. The remains of Norfolk, on the opposite
side of the river, fell of course into their hands. On the approach of the
fleet and army, the Americans burnt several vessels, others were saved and
possessed by the British. The guards were pushed forwards eighteen miles by
night to Suffolk, where they arrived by day light and proceeded to destroy a
magazine of provisions, together with the vessels and naval stores found there.
A similar destruction was carried on at other places in that quarter, nor were
the frigates and armed vessels less active or succes^ful in their service.

Within the for^night that the fleet and army continued upon the coast, the
loss of the Americans was prodigious. Above 130 vessels of all sorts, including
some privateers, and ships of force, were destroyed or taken by them; seventeen
prizes were brought away, besides 3000 hogsheads of tobacco, which fell into
their possession at Portsmouth. Except the house of a widow and the church,
they burnt every house in Suffolk, and all the principal houses of gentlemen in
this route shared the same fate.

On the 30th of May, the troops were joined to others going up the North river
to attack the posts of Stoney Point and Verplank, where the Americans had begun
to construct strong works, for keeping the lower communication open between the
eastern and southern states. Genesis Vaughan landed with the greater part on the
east side, while the remainder, accompanied by Sir Henry Clinton, advanced
further up, landed on the west side, and took possession of Stoney Point
without opposition. Directly opposite, the Americans had completely finished a
strong sort, which was defended by four pie^^^ of ar^^^l^ry^ and a garrison o^
about seventy men. But it was commanded by Sto^^^ (...); to the summit of whose
^ocks cannon and mortars were ^^ragged up ^uring the night. By five in the
morning, a battery was opened, which poured a storm of fire on the fort, while
Vaughan with his division, made a long circuit by the sides of the hills,
arrived and closely invested it by land. The garrison, finding themselves
totally overpowered, surrendered themselves prisoners of war. By the loss of
these posts, the Jersey people were obliged to make a circuit of about ninety
miles under the mountains, (...) communicate with the states c^st of Hudson's
river.

After the French had taken Grenada, and Count d'Estaing was lying with his
fleet at Cape Francos, he received letters from Gov. Rutledge, Genesis Lincoln,
the French consul at Charlestown, and others, urging him to visit the Amercan
coast, and propos^ng an attack upon Savannah. The general engaged to join him
with a thousand men certain, and promised that every exertion should be made to
increase the number. The application coinciding with the king's instructions,
to act in concert with the forces of the United States, whenever an occasion
presented itself, he sailed for the American continent within a few days after
it was received.

On the 1st of September, Count d'Estaing arrived with a fleet of twenty sail
of the line, two of fifty guns, and eleven frigates. The appearance of the
French fleet on the coasts of South Carolina and Georgia was so unexpected by
the British that the Experiment man of war. of fifty guns, Sir James Wallace,
commander, and three friga^es, were captured. No sooner was it known at
Charlestown, that the Count was on the coast, than Lincoln marched with all
expedition for Savannah, with the troops under his command; and orders were
also given for the South, Caro^^na and Georgia militia to rendezvous
immediately near the same place. -- The British were equally diligent in
pr^paring for their defense.

The French and Americans, after having spent some time in making regular
approaches at last determined to take the place by storm. Accordingly the
morning of the 9th of October was fixed for the attack, and neither the French
nor the Americans had the least doubts of success.

Two feints were made with the country militia, and a real attack a little
before daylight, on the Spring-hill battery, with 3500 French troops, 600
continentals, ^od 350 of the Charlestown militia, headed by Coun^ ^'Estaing and
Genesis Lincoln. They marched up to the lines with great boldness; but a heavy and
well directed fire from the batteries, and a cross fire from the galleys threw
the front of the column into confusion. Two standards, however, one an
American, were pla^^ed on the British redoubts. Count Pulaski at the head of
200 horsemen, was in full gallop. riding (...) town between the redoubts, with
an intent of charging in the rear, when he received a mortal wound. A general
retreat of the assailants took place, after they had stood the enemy's fire for
fifty five minutes. D'Estaing received two slight wounds; 637 of his troops,
and 234 of the continentals, were killed or wounded. Of the 3^0 Charlestown
militia who were in the hotest of the fire, only six were wounded, and a
captain killed. Genesis Prevost and M^j^^ Moncrieff deservedly acquired great
reputation by their successful defense. There were not ten guns mounted on the
lines when the enemy first appeared, and in a few days the number exceeded
eighty. The garrison was between two and three thousand, including 150 militia.
The damage it sustained was trifling as the men fired under cover, and few of
the assailants fired at all.

Let us now see what the northern army was doing. In the middle of December, a
part of Genesis Washington's army was without bread and for the rest he had not,
either on the spot or within reach, a supply sufficient for foor days. Both
officers and men were almost perishing through want for a fortnight. The
deficiency proceeded from the absolute emptiness of the American magazines in
every place, and the total want of money and credit to replenish them. So that
the general was obliged to call upon the magistrates of the Jersey state, to
express his situation to them, and to declare in plain terms, that he and his
army were reduced to the alternative of disbanding or catering for themselves,
unless the inhabitants would afford them aid. He alloted to each county a
certain proportion of flour or grain, and a certain number of cattle to be
delivered on certain days. To the honor of the magistrates, and the good
dispositions of the people, be it added, that these requisitions were
p^^^c^^^ally complied with, and in many c^^nties exceeded.

But to return to the sou^nern armies. On the 20th of March, 1780, Admiral
Arbuthnot, with a small fleet crossed the bar, in front of rebellion road, and
anchored in Five Fathom Hole. The American fleet retreated to Charlestown, and
the crews and guns of all the vessels, except the Ranger, were put on shore to
reinforce the batteries. Before the Americans had taken this st^p, they should
have considered, whether the ships were able to defend the bar, and should have
sent them off, when they found it impracticable.

On the 12th of April, the British opened their batteries against Charlestown,
and a constant fire was kept up between both parties until the 20th. On the
18th of April, Sir Henry Clinton received a reinforcement of 3000 men from New
York; and on the 12th of May, Genesis Lincoln, after having made the most vigorous
defense he was capable of, was obliged to capitulate. It was stipulated, that
the continental troops and sailors should remain prisoners of war until
exchanged, and be provided with good and wholesome provisions, in such
quantities as were served out to the British troops. The militia were to return
home as prisoners on parole, which, as long as they observed, was to secure
them from being molested in their property by the British troops. The officers
of the army and navy were to keep their swords, pistols, and baggage, which
last was not to be searched; but their horses were not to go out of town, but
might be disposed of by a person left for the purpose. The garrison, at an hour
appointed, was to march out of the town to the ground between the works of the
place and the canal, where they were to deposit their arms. The drums were not
to beat a British march, nor the colors to be uncased. All civil officers and
citizens, who had borne arms during the siege, were to be prisoners on parole;
and with respect to their property in the city, they were to have the same
terms as the militia; and all other persons in the town, not described in any
article, were notwi^standing to be prisoners upon parole.

The capital having surrendered, the next object of the British was to secure
the general submission of the inhabitants. With this view they posted garrisons
in different parts of the country, and marched a large body of troops over the
Santee, toward the extremity of the state, which borders on the most populous
parts of North Carolina. This occasioned the (...) of some American parties,
who had advanced into the upper part of South Carolina, in expectation of
relieving Charlestown. Among the corpse which had co^^ forward with that view,
there was one consisting of about 300 continentals, the rear of the Virginia
line, commanded by Col. Buford. Tarleton, with about 700 horse and foot, was
sent in quest of this party. Having mounted his infantry, he marched 105 miles
in fifteen hours, came up with them at the Waxhaws, and demanded their
surrender on terms similar to those granted to the continentals at Charlestown.
While the flags were passing and repassing on this business, Tarleton kept his
men in motion, and, when the ^ruce was ended, had nearly surrounded his
adv^^^aries. An action instantly ensued, when the continental party, having
partaken of the general consternation occasioned by the British successes, made
but a feeble resistance, and begged for quarter. A few, however, continued to
fire. The British cavalry advanced, but were not opposed by the main body of
the continentals. who conceived themselves precluded by their submission. The
accidental firing of the few was an argument, however, (...) directing the
British legion to charge those who ^ad laid down their arms. In consequence of
this order, the unresisting Americans, ^^aying for quarters, were cut in
p^^ces. By Tarleton's official accourt of this bloody scene, 113 were killed,
50 badly wounded, unable to travel ^^d left on parole, and 53 made prisoners,
while they made such ineffectual opposition as only to kill seven and wound
twelve of the British. Lord Cornwallis bestowed on Tarleton the highest
encomiums for this enterprise, and recommended him in a special manner to royal
favor and patronage.

The expected succors at length arrived from France, on the evering of the
10th of July, at Rhode Island. The Chevalier de Ternay commanded the fleet,
which consisted of two shi^s of eigh^y guns, one of 74, four of 64. a bomb
vessel, and 32 transports. The land forces consisted of four old regiments,
besides the legion de Lau^un, and a battalion of artillery, amounting to about
6000 men, under the command of Lieut. Genesis Count de Rochambeau.

About the time that Charlestown suc^o^^ered, Sir H. Clinton received
intelligence, that a large number of forces and a French sleet, commanded by
Mons. Ternay, might soon be expected on the American coast. This induced him to
reimbark for New York, leaving Lord Cornwallis with about 4000 men, which were
deemed fully sufficient for his purposes.

On the 4th of September was signed the plan of a treaty of commerce between
the states of Holland and the United States of America, Mons. de Neufville,
being properly authorized by the regency of Amsterdam, engaged, that as long as
America should not act contrary to the interest of the states of Holland, the
city of Amsterdam would never adopt any measure that might tend to oppose the
interest of America; but would, on the contrary, use all ts' influence upon the
states of the seven United Provinces of Holland, to effect the desired
connection. This business was conducted by Mr. Adams on the part of America.

Lord Cornwallis went on successfully in South Carolina. On the 16 h of August
he engaged the forces under Genesis Gates, and completely routed them after a long
and obstinate contest. Genesis Gates was borne off the field by a torrent of
dismayed militia. They constituted so great a part of his army, that when he
saw them break and run with such precepitation, be lost every hope of victory;
and his only care was, if possible, to rally a sufficient number to cover the
retreat of the other troops. He retired with Genesis Caswell to Clermont, in hope
of halting them in their late encampment; but the further they fled, the more
they dispersed, and the generals giving up all as lost, retired with a few
attendants to Charlotte.

The Americans lost eight field pieces, the whole of their artillery, with all
their ammunition wagons, besides 150 others, and a considerable quantity of
military stores, and the greatest part of their baggage. The numbers slain
cannot be precisely ascertained, no returns of the militia ever being made
after the action: but it is supposed, that the Americans lost about 700 on this
occasion. Though Cornwallis's victory was complete, yet, from the account the
British gave of the action, it may be inferred, that it was dearly bought,
upwards of 500 of their own troops being killed or wounded.

A minute representation of the retreat of the Americans from Charlotte to
Salisbury, would be the image of complicated wretchedness. Care, anxiety, pain,
humiliation, and dejection, poverty, hurry and confusion, promiscuously marked
the shocking scene. Painful objects presented themselves to view; several men
without an arm, some with but one, and many standing in need of the most kind
and powerful assistance.

Lord Cornwallis, nowithstanding his victory, was restrained for some time from
pursuing his conquests, by the loss he had sustained in the battle, the extreme
heat of the weather, the sickliness of the season and the want of necessary
supplies; he therefore remained at Cambden.

In the month of September, a discovery of the utmost importance was made,
which was a scheme for delivering West Point into the hands of Sir Henry Clint
on. Genesis Arnold, who had the command of that post, was brave but mercenary,
fond of parade, and extremely desirous of acquiring money to defray the
expen^es of it. When he entered Philadelphia after the evacuation, be made Gov.
Penn's, the best house in it, his head quarters. This be furnished in a very
costly manner, and lived in a style far beyond his income. He continued his
extravagant course of living, was unsuccessful in trade and privateering, his
funds were exhausted, and his creditors importunate, while his lust for high
life was not in the least abated. He had exhibited heavy accounts and demands
against the public; and the commissioners, upon examination, rejected about one
half of the amount. He appealed to congress, and a committee was appointed, who
were of opinion, that the commissioners had allowed more than the general had a
right to expect or demand. This provoked him to outrageous expressions and
proceedings. Disgusted at the treatment he had met with, embarrassed in his
circumstances, and having a growing expensive family, he turned his thoughts
toward bettering his circumstances by new means. In 1779, a correspondence
commenced between Genesis Arnold and Major Andre, adjutant-general to the British
army, a rising young officer of great hope and merit.

For the speedy completion of the negotiation that was carrying on between Sir
Henry and Genesis Arnold, the Vulture sloop of war was stationed in the North
River. at such a distance from the American posts, as, without exciting
suspicion, would serve for the necessary communication. Before this, a written
correspondence through other channels, had been maintained between Arnold and
Andre at New York, under the names of Gustavus and Anderson.

On the 21st of September, the necessary arrangenents being made, a boat was
sent at night from the shore to the Vulture, to fetch Major Andre, which
brought him to the beach without the posts of either army, where he met Arnold
The major continued with him during the day following, and at night, the
boatman refusing to conduct him back to the Vulture, which had shifted her
position, as she lay exposed to the fire of a cannon sent to annoy her, he was
obliged to concert his escape by land. He quitted his uniform, which he had
hitherto worn under his surtout, for a common coat. He was furnished with a
horse, and under the name of John Anderson. with a passport from Arnold to go
through the lines at White Plains or lower if he thought proper, he being on
public business.

He pursued his journey alone toward York, passed all the guards and posts on
the road without suspicion, and was much elated. The next day he traveled
without any alarm, and began to consider himself out of dangers but unhappily
for him, three of the New York militia were with others on a sco^^ing party
between the out posts of the two armies. One of them sprung from his covert,
and seized And^^^ horse by the bridle. The major instead or instantly producing
his pass, asked the man where he belonged to, who answered, "To below." Andre
suspecting no deceit, said, "So do I." Then declared himself a British officer,
and pressed that he might not be detained, for that he was upon urgent
business. Upon the other two coming up, and joining their comrade, he
discovering his mistake. The confusion that followed was apparent, and they
proceeded to search him till they found his papers. He offered the captors a
considerable purse of gold, and a very valuable watch, to let him pass; but
they nobly disdained the temptation, besides the fascinating offers of
permanent provision, and even of future promotion, on condition of their
conveying and accompanying him to Newyork They conducted him to Lieut. Col.
Jameson, the continental officer who had the command of the scouting parties,
amounting to 800 men, chiefly militia. Arnold's conduct with regard to this
body of men, and in other respects, had excited such suspicions in the breast
of the lieutenant colonel, and the rest of the officers, that they had
determined upon seizing the general at all events, had he come down and ordered
them nea^er the enemy. Jameson, notwithstanding his strong jealousy of Arnold,
was in the issue the means of his escape.

Major Andre, in order to give Arnold time to escape, requested that a line
might be sent to acquaint him of the detention of Anderson, the name Andre had
assumed, which Jameson, through an ill-judged delicacy granted. The papers,
which were found in the major's boots, were in Arnold's hand writing, and
contained exact returns of the state of the forces, ordnances and defenses at
West Point and its dependencies, with the artillery orders, critical remarks on
the works, an estimate of the number of men that were ordinarily on duty to man
them, and the copy of a state of matters that had been laid before a council of
war by the commander in chie^ These papers were enclosed in a packet to Genesis
Washington, accompanied with a letter from the prisoner, avowing himself to be
Major Andre, adjutant general to the British army, relating the manner of his
capture, and endeavoring to show, that he did not come under the description
of a spy. These papers were forwarded by Jameson.

No sooner had Arnold received the Major's letter, than he hastened on board
the Vulture, which ^ay some miles below Stoney and Verplank's Points; and
Arnold had not been long gone, when Washington arrived at his quarters. Had the
plot succeeded, the consequences must have been ruinous to the Americans. The
forces under Arnold's command must have either laid down their arms, or have
been cut to pieces. Their loss, and the immediate possession of West-Point, and
all its neighboring dependencies, must have exposed the remainder of
Washington's army so, to the joint exertion of the British forces, by land and
water, that nothing but ruin could have been the result with respect to the
Americans.

On the 29th of September Genesis Washington appointed a board of fourteen general
officers, with the assistance of the judge advocate general, to examine Major
Andre's case, and to determine in what light it ought to be considered. Andre,
disdaining all subterfuge and evasion, and studying only to place his character
in so fair a light, as might prevent its being shaded by present circumstances,
voluntarily confessed more than he was asked, and sought not to palliate any
thing relating to himself, while he concealed, with the most guarded and
scrupulous nicety, whatever might involve others. The board showed him every
possible mark of indulgence, and sufficiently witnessed how much they felt for
his situation. However, public justice obliged them to declare, "that Major
Andre ought to be considered as a spy from the enemy; and that agreeable to the
law and usage of nations, it is their opinion he ought to suffer death."

Several letters passed between the Generals Clinton and Washington relative to
this unhappy affair; but nothing was capable of saving the unfortunate major.
On the 2d of October, the tragedy was closed. The major was superior to the
terrors of death; but the disgraceful mode of dying, which the usage of war had
annexed to his unhappy situation, was infinitely dreadful to him. He was
desirous of being indulged with a professional death, and had accordingly
written, the day before, a pathetic letter, fraught with all the feelings of a
man of sentiment and honor, in which he requested of Genesis Washington, that he
might not die on a gibbet. The general consulted his officers on the subject.
Pity and esteem wrought so powerfully, that they were all for shooting him,
till Green insisted on it, that his crime was that of a common spy; that the
public good required his being hanged; and that, were he shot, the generality
would think there were favorable circumstances entitling him to notice and
lenity. His observations convinced them that there would be an impropriety in
granting the major's request, while tenderness prevented its being divulged.

When Major Andre was led out to the place of execution, as he went along he
bowed himself familiarly to all those with whom he had been acquainted in his
confinement. -- A smile of complacency expressed the serene fortitude of his
mind. Upon seeing the preparations at the fatal spot, he asked with some
emotion, "Must I die in this manner?" He was told it was unavoidable. He
replied "I am reconciled to my fate, but not to the mode." Soon after,
recollecting himself, he added "it will be but a momentary pang;" and springing
upon the cart, he performed the last offices to himself with a composure that
excited the admiration, and melted the hearts of all the spectators. -- Being
told the final moment was at hand, and asked if he had any thing to say, he
answered. "Nothing but to request you will wi^^^ (...) the world, that I die
like a brave (...) He died universally esteemed and regre^^ed.

Memorable Events recorded in this Chapter.
Anno 1778. The British operations against Georgia. Anno 1778. The affairs of
the United States in a deplorable condition. Anno 1778. Genesis Lincoln sent to
South Carolina. Anno 1779 Genesis Ash surprised and defeated. Anno 1779 Sir Henry
Clinton takes Stoney Point. Anno 1779 Count d'Estating fails from the West
Indies for the American coasts. Anno 1779 The French and Americans repulsed at
Savannah. Anno 1779 Washington's army in distress for want of bread. Anno 1779
Charlestown taken by the British forces. Anno 1780. Tarleton defeats Col.
Buford. Anno 1780. A French fleet with troops arrive at Newport. Anno 1780.
Treaty signed between Holland and America. Anno 1780. Earl Cornwallis defeats
Genesis Gates. Anno 1780. Major Andre taken and executed as a spy. Anno 1780. Genesis
Arnold makes his escape on board the Vulture British sloop of war.
CHAP. IX.
SIR Henry Clinton, on the 15th of October, 1780, in obedience to the orders
sent him to prosecute the war with vigor in North Carolina and Virginia,
dispatched Genesis Leslie from New York to the bay of Chesapeak, with near 3000
choice troops. He was to cooperate with Lord Cornwallis, who was expected to
be far advanced toward, if not to have reached Virginia. In a few days, the
fleet arrived in the bay, and the troops were landed in different parts of
Virginia.

On the 20th of June, the French and Spanish fleets formed a junction in the
West Indies. They amounted to 36 sail of the line which, with their united land
forces, formed such an apparent superiority, as nothing in those seas or
islands seemed capable of resisting; but the Spanish troops, being too much
crowded on board their transports, together with the length of the voyage, the
change of climate and diet, and other circumstances, a most mortal and
contagious disorder was generated, which first infected their own seamen, and
at length spread, though not with so fatal an effect, through the French fleet
and land forces. Besides the great mortality on the passage, the Spaniards
landed 1200 sick on their first arrival at Dominique, and a much greater number
afterward at Gaudaloupe and Martinico. Thus the spirit of enterprise was
damped, and some part of their strength diminished.

In the month of September, Mr. Laurens was taken on his way from congress to
Holland, on the banks of Newfoundland. A packet of papers being thrown
overboard, and not sinking suddenly, was saved by the boldness and dexterity
of an English sailor, and most of them were recovered from the effects of the
water On his arrival in England, he was committed, upon a charge of high
treason, as a state prisoner to the Tower, under an order signed by the three
secretaries of sta^^^ By the medium of his papers, administration came to the
knowledge of the eventual treaty of amity and commerce between America and
Holland.

In consequence of this discovery, strong remonstrances were made to the States
General; but, as no satisfactory answer was returned, Sir Joseph York received
orders to withdraw from the Hague; and, on the 20th of December, general
reprisals were issued against the ships, goods, and subjects, of the States
General.

On the 12th of January, 1781, General Greene's troops consisted of about 1110.
The next day, Col. Lee's partizan legion arrived from the northward, consisting
of about 100 horsemen, well mounted, and 120 infantry; and on the 13th the
legion was detached on a secret expedition. They pushed on for Georgetown,
where they surprised several officers, and took them prisoners Major Irwin, and
many more of the garrison were killed; but the principal part fled to the fort,
which Lee was not in a condition to besiege. While this enterprise was carrying
on, the enemy aimed a blow at Morgan, who was advised by Green not to risque
too much.

Genesis Leslie, in compliance with his orders, left Virginia, and arrived at
Charlestown, and joined Lord Cornwallis, who wished to d^ive Genesis Morgan from
his station and to deter the inhabitants from joining him. The execution of
this business was entrusted to Lieut. Col. Tarleton, who was detached with
about 1100 men for that purpose. On the 17th of January, Tarleton came up with
Morgan, when an action commenced, which terminated much to the disadvantage of
Tarle^on.

Tarleton was very much censured for his conduct in this battle, which he was
supposed to have lost by his un-officer like impetuosity. Lord Cornwallis, with
the expectations of regaining the prisoners, and demolishing Morgan's corpse,
instantly concluded on a pursuit, which Morgan was aware of, and took his
measures accordingly.

On the 31st of January, Green succeeded Morgan in the command of the southern
army, when a kind of military race commenced between the pursuing British and
the fleeing Americans; but Green got off before Cornwallis could overtake him.

Lord Cornwallis, being afterward convinced from Greene's movements, that he
intended to venture an engagement, on the 14th of May sent off his baggage
under a proper escort, and the next morning at daybreak, marched with the
remainder of his army, amounting to about 2400 men, chiefly troops grown
veterans in victory, either to meet Green on the way, or attack him in his
encampment.

The battle took place near Guilford courthouse; and after a hard struggle of
near two hours, the Americans retreated in good order to the Reedy Fork, and
crossed the river, about three miles from the field of action. Green lost his
artillery, and two ammunition wagons, the greatest part of the horses being
killed before the retreat began.

In the month of February, reprisals having been commenced against the Dutch,
Rodney and Vaughan received instructions from Great Britain to direct their
views to the reduction of the Dutch island of St. Eustatia. The British fleet
and army instantly appeared there, and surrounded it with a great force. Rodney
and Vaughan sent a peremptory summons to the governor, to surrender the island
and its dependencies within an hour, accompanied with a threat, that if any
resistance was made, he must abide the consequences. Mons. de Graaff. totally
ignorant of the rupture between Great Britain and Holland, could scarcely
believe the officer, who delivered the summons, to be serious. He returned for
answer, that being utterly incapable of making any defense, he must of
necessity surrender, only recommending the town and inhabitants to the clemency
of the British commanders. The weal^h of the place excited the astonishment of
the conquerors, the whole insland seemed to be one great magazine. All the
storehouses were filled with various commodities, and the very beach was
covered with hogsheads of sugar and tobacco. The value was estimated
considerably above three millions sterling. But this was only a part; for above
150 vessels of all denominations, many of them richly laden, were captured in
the bay, exclusive of a Dutch frigate of 38 guns, and five smaller. The
neighboring small isles of St Martin and Saba were reduced in the same manner.

Rodney being informed, that a fleet of about 30 large ships, all richly laden,
with sugar and other West India commodities, had sailed from Eustatia for
Holland just before his arrival, under convoy of a flag ship of 60 guns, he
dispatched the Monarch and Panther, with the Sybil frigate in pursuit of them.
These soon overtook the convoy, when the Dutch admiral refusing to strike his
colors, and all remonstrances proving ineffectual, a short engagement took
place between his ship, the Mars and the Monarque. He died bravely in defense
of his ship, when she instantly struck, and the whole convoy was taken.

The keeping of Dutch colors flying at Eustatia, rendered it for some time a
decoy to French, Dutch, and American vessels, a considerable number of which
fell accordingly into the hands of the conquerors without trouble.

Preparations began to be made, on the 21st of June, for the army under Genesis
Washington to take the field The Americans marched toward White Plains, where
they were joined by the French troops under Rochambeau.

Sir George Rodney, in consequence of information concerning the French fleet
under the Count de Grass, detached the Admirals Sir Samuel Hood and Drake,
with seventeen sail of the line, to cruise off Fort Royal for the purpose of
intercepting him. On the 28th of April, some of Sir Samuel's headmost ships
returned hastily in sight, and with signals announced the appearance of a
superior fleet, and a numerous convoy, to the windward of Point Salines. The
admiral made a signal for a general chase to windward, and at night it was
determined by the admirals to continue the line ahead, so that getting as much
as possible to windward, they might close in with Fort Royal at daylight, and
cut off the enemy from the harbor.

In the morning the French appeared, their convoy keeping close in with the
land, while Count de Grass drew up his fleet in a line of battle for their
protection. Admiral Hood used every manaeuvre to bring him to action; but he
being to windward, and so having the choice, preferred a long shot distance. A
partial engagement ensued. The van and the nearest ships, in the center of the
British, were exposed to a long and heavy weight of fire, in their struggles to
close the French, and get to the windward; but suffered principally in their
masts, hulls, and rigging. The action lasted about three hours, when Admiral
Hood perceiving, that not one shot in ten of the French reached, and that his
attempts to gain the wind were fruitless, ceased firing, and the British fleet
bore away for Antigua.

Let us now return to the transactions under Lord Cornwallis. One great object
of the British force was the establishment of a strong post and place of arms,
and such as might render them perfectly masters of Chesapeak bay, and herefore
they repaired to York Town and G^oncester.

The French an^^ (...) ^^can armies continued their mar^^ (...) northward, till
they arrived at the head of ^^^k; and within an hour after they received an
express from Count de Grass, with the joyful account of his arrival and
situation. By the 15th of September, all the troops were arrived and landed at
Williamsburgh, and preparations were made with all possible dispatch for
putting the army in a situation to move down toward York town.

On the 30th of September, Lord Cornwallis was closely invested in York Town.
The trenches were opened by the combined armies on the 6th of October, at 600
yards distance from Cornwallis's works. On the 9th they opened their batteries,
and continued firing all night, without intermission: The next morning the
French opened their batteries on the left, and a tremendous roar of cannon and
mortars was continued for six or eight hours without ceasing.

The French and Americans continued to carry on the siege with great success On
the 16th their several batteries were covered with near 100 pieces of heavy
ordnance; while the British works were so destroyed that they could scarcely
show a single gun. Thus was Lord Cornwallis reduced to the necessity of
preparing for a surrender, or of attempting an escape. He determined upon the
latter. Boats were prepared under different pretenses, for the reception of the
troops by ten at night, in order to pass them over to Gloucester-Point. The
arrangements were made with the utmost secrecy. The intention was to abandon
the baggage, and to leave a detachment behind to capitulate for the town's
people, and for the sick and wounded, his lordship having already prepared a
letter on the subject, to be delivered to Genesis Washington after his departure.
The first embarkation had arrived at Gloucester Point, and the greater part of
the troops were already landed, when the weather, which was before moderate and
calm, instantly changed to a most violent storm of wind and rain The bouts with
the remaining troops were all driven down the river, and the design of passing
over was not only entirely frustrated, but the absence of the boats rendered it
impossible to bring back the troops from Gloucester. Thus weakened and divided,
the army was in no small danger. However, the boats returned, and the troops
were brought back in the course of the forenoon with very little ^^ss.

Things were now hastening to a period, which could be no longer protracted;
for the British works were sinking under the weight of the French and American
artillery. All hopes of relief from New York were over, and the strength and
spirits of the royal army were broken down and exhausted by their constant and
unremitting fatigue. Matters being in this sinuation on the 17th of October,
Lord Cornwallis sent out a flag with a letter to Genesis Washington, requesting a
cessation of arms for twenty four hours, and that commissioners might be
appointed for digesting the terms of capitulation. Commissioners were
accordingly appointed; and on the side of the allies, were Vise. de Noailles,
and Lieut. Col. Laurens, whose father was in close confinement in the Tower of
London, while the son was drawing up articles, by which an English nobleman and
a British army became prisoners.

On the 19th of October, the posts of York Town and Gloucester were
surrendered. The honor of marching out with colors flying, which had been
denied to Genesis Lincoln, was now refused to Lord Cornwallis, and Lincoln was
appointed to receive the submission of the royal army at York Town, precisely
in the same way his own had been conducted about eighteen months before. The
troops that surrendered prisoners exceeded 7000; but so great was the number of
sick and wounded, that there were only 3800 capable of doing duty. The officers
and soldiers retained their baggage and effects. Fifteen hundred seamen shared
the same fate as the garrison. The Gaudaloupe frigate of 24 guns, and a number
of transports, were surrendered to the conquerors. About twenty transports had
been sunk or burnt during the siege. The land forces became prisoners to
congress; but the seamen and ships were assigned to the French admiral. The
Americans obtained a fine train of artillery, consisting of 75 brass ordnance,
and 69 iron cannon, howitzers, and mortars.

On the 24th of October, a fleet destined for the relief of Lord Cornwallis
arrived off the Chesapeak; but, on receiving the news of his surrender, they
returned to New York. The fleet consisted of 25 ships of the line, two fifties,
and eight frigates. When they appeared off the Chesapeak, the French made no
manner of movement, though they had 36 ships of the line, being perhaps
satisfied with their present success, Every argument and persuasion was used
with the Count de Grass to induce him to aid the combined army in an operation
against Charlestown; but the advanced season, the orders of his court, and his
own engagements to be punctual to a certain time, fixed for his suture
operations, prevented his compliance. His instructions had fixed his departure
on the 15th of October, and he had already exceeded that time. On the 27th the
troops under the Marquis St. Simon began to embark for the West Indies, and
about the 5th of November de Grass sailed from the Chesapeak.

Memorable events recorded in this Chapter.
Anno 1780. Sir Henry Clinton sends 3000 troops to the bay of Chesapeak. Anno
1780. The French and Spanish fleet form a conjunction in the West Indies. Anno
1780. Mr. Laurens taken in his passage to Holland. Anno 1780. Sir Joseph York
leaves the Hague. Anno 1781. Lient. Col. Tarleton detached after Genesis ^^^gan by
whom he is de^ea^ed. Anno 1781. (...) C^^rge Rodney and Genesis Vaughan take St.
En^^^^ia, St. Martin, and Saba. Anno 1781. The French troops join the Americans
under Washington. Anno 1781. Sir Samuel Hood and Count de Grass engage. Anno
1781. Lord Cornwallis repairs to York Town and Gloucester. Anno 1781. Is
obliged to capitulate, and surrender York Town and Gloucester. Anno 1781. De
Grass sails for the West Indies.
CHAP. X.
ON the 27th of November, the king of England went to the house of peers, and
opened the sessions of parliament. Warm debates took place on account of the
ruinous manner in which the American war was continued; but Lord North and his
party, who thought they had not yet carried things far enough, maintained a
considerable majority in the house of commons. Mr. Burke had made several
motions, relative to the release of Mr. Laurens from the Tower. However, at
length, Mr. Laurens was brought before Lord Mansfield, on the last day of the
vear, in consequence of an order from the secretary of state, and was
discharged upon certain conditions.

The naval force of France and Spain in the West Indies, in the month of
February, 1782, amounted to 60 ships of the line, and their land forces when
joined would have formed a considerable army. Jamaica had no more than six
incomplete battal ons of regular troops and the militia of the island to defend
it; and therefore in case of attack, must have been soon conquered. The arrival
of Sir George Rodney with twelve sail of the line at Barbados, and his
subsequent junction with Sir Samuel Hood's squadron, together with the arrival
of three ships of the line from England a few days afterward, perhaps
providentially saved Jamaica from falling into the hands of the enemy. The
English fleet at St. Lucia amounting to 36 ships of the line, and the force
under de Grass at Martinico to 34. The metal of the French is always heavier
than that of the English, in equal rates, so that in this point the French had
the advantage.

The van of the British fleet was commanded by Sir Samuel Hood, the center by
Sir George Redney, and the rear by Admiral Sir Francis Drake. The three
divisions of the French fleet were under Count de Grass, Mons. de Vaudreuil,
and Mons. de Bogainville.

On the 8th of April, the French fleet began to turn out of Fort Royal harbor
early in the morning, with a great convoy under their protection, all bound to
the French or Spanish ports in Hispanicla. De Grass, in order to avoid an
encounter on his passage, meant to keep close in under the islands, till be had
eluded the pursuit of the English. However their departure from the bay was so
speedily communicated by signals from the frigates, and the English fleet was
in such exe^ilent preparati^n, that all the ships were ^^^ar of Gross Isl^t Bay
by noon, and pursued with the utmost expedition; so that the French saved only
a few hours, by being masters of the time of departure. The English gained
sight of them under Dominique at night, and afterward regulated the pursuit by
signals.

Early the next morning, Count de Grass formed the line of battle, and thereby
afforded an opportunity to his convoy for proceeding on their course, while he
remained to abide the consequences. The van of the English fleet first closed
with the French center, while the English center and rear were becalmed. The
action commenced about nine o'clock on the ninth. The Barfleur, Sir Samuel.
Hood's own ship, had at times seven and generally three ships firing upon her,
and none of the division escaped encountering a disproportionate force. The
firm and effectual resistance with which they supported all the efforts of the
enemy's superiority, was to the highest degree glorious. At length the leading
ships of the center were enabled to come up to their assistance. These were
soon followed by Sir George Rodney in the Formidable, with his seconds the
Namur and the Duke, all of 90 guns: they made and supported a most tremendous
sire. De Grass now changed the nature of the action, and kept at such a
distance during the remainder of the engagement, as might prevent any thing
decisive happening. The rest of the English fleet coming up De Grass withdrew
his ships from the action, and evaded all the efforts of the English commanders
for its renewal. Two of the French ships were so damaged, that they were
obliged to quit the fleet, and put into Guadaloupe. On the side of the English.
the Royal Oak and the Montague suffered extremely; but they were capable of
being repaired at sea, so as not to be under the necessity of quitting the
fleet.

On the 11th the French fleet weathered Guadaloupe, and gained such a distance,
that the body of their fleet could only be descried from the mast-heads of the
British center, and all hopes of Sir George Rodney's coming up with them seemed
to be at an end. In this critical situation, one of the French ships, which had
suffered in the action, was perceived, about noon, to fall off considerably
from the rest of the fleet to leeward. This produced signals from the English
admiral for a general chase, which was so vigorous, that the Agamemnon, and
some others of the headmost of the English line, were coming up so fast with
this ship that she would assuredly have been cut off before evening, had not
her signals and eminent danger induced de Grass to bear down with his whole
fleet to her assistance. This movement put it out of the power of the French to
avoid fighting. The pursuing English fell back into their station, and a close
line was formed. --.The French also prepared for battle with the greatest
resolution, and the night passed in preparations on both sides.

About seven o'clock in the morning, of the 12th of April, the battle
commenced, and was continued with unremitting fury until near the same hour in
the evening. As the English came up, they ranged slowly along the French line,
and close under their lee. Being so near, every shot took effect, and the
French ships being so full of men, the carnage in them was prodigious. The
Formidable, Admiral Rodney's ship, fired near eighty broadsides, and it may be
supposed the rest were not idle. The French stood and returned this dreadful
fire with the utmost firmness, each side fighting, as if the the honor and fate
of their country were that day to be decided.

Sir George Rodney in the Formidable, with his seconds the Namur and the Duke,
and immediately supported by the Canada, between twelve and one o'clock, bore
directly and with full sail athwart the French line and successfully broke
through, about three ships short of the center, where Count de Grass commanded
in the Ville de Paris of 110 guns. Being followed and supported by the
remainder of his division, and wearing round close about the enemy, he
effectually separated their line. This bold adventure proved decisive. The
battle lasted till sunset, for the French fought with the greatest bravery.

The British fleet having now gained the wind of the French, their general
confusion was completed. Hood's division had been long becalmed and kept out of
action; but his head ships and part of his center, as far at least as the
Barfleur, which he himself commanded, came up at this juncture, and contributed
to render the victory more decisive. The Caesar, Glorieux, and Hector, soon
struck their colors but not till after they had made the most noble defense.

Count de Grass was nobly supported even after the line was broken; and the
Diadem, a French 74, went down by a single broadside, in a generous exertion to
save him. The Ville de Paris was almost reduced to a wreck, but de Grass still
held out. At length, Hood in the Barfleur approached him just at sunset, and
poured in a most destructive fire. The Ville de Paris supported all these
shocks for a quarter of an hour after, when she struck to Sir Samuel Hood. It
was said, that, at the time she struck, there were but three men left alive and
unhurt on the upper deck, and that the Count was one of them.

The Caesar was unfortuna^ly set on fire, and blew up in the night of the
action. A lieutenant and fifty English seamen perished, with about 400
prisoners. The number of the French slain in this engagement, and that of the
ninth, was computed at three thousand and near double that number wounded. The
small superiority of British ships in point of number, contributed nothing to
the success of the day, as more of Hood's division than that difference
amounted to, were prevented coming into action through the want of wind. The
whole loss of the English, in killed and wounded in the two actions, was stated
only at 1050, of which 253 were killed on the spot.

In the Ville de Paris were found thirty six chests of money, destined to pay
the subsistence of the troops in the designed attack on Jamaica. Sir Samuel
Hood being sent in pursuit of the scattered enemy, on the 19th he came up and
took the Jason and Caton, of 64 guns each, and two frigates.

Thus the French lost eight ships of the line: six were in possession of the
English, one had been sunk, and the Caesar blew up after her capture. The
English having joined off Cape Tiberoon, and the French having no force to the
windward. Sir George Rodney proceeded with the disabled ships and prizes to
Jamaica, as well for their repair, as the greater security of the Island,
should the combined fleet still venture upon the prosecution of their former
design. Sir Samuel Hood was left with about 25 ships of the line to keep the
sea, and watch the motions of the enemy.

Let us now return to North America, where all parties seemed to be heartily
tired of the war. On the 5th of May, Sir Guy Carleton arrived at New York, and
on the 7th he wrote ^o Genesis Washington, and sent him some public papers, that
his excellency might learn from them, the disposition that prevailed in the
government and people of Great Britain, relative to the making of a peace with
America.

The British administration having resolved upon abandoning all offensive
operations in America, the scheme of evacuating all the weakest posts in the
United States was adopted. Accordingly, on the 11th of July Savannah was
evacuated, and the Americans immediately took possession of it, the works and
town being left perfect.

On the 14th of December, Genesis Leslie, who commanded at Charleston completed
the embarkation of his troops on his quitting that town. Genesis Wayne, with the
legion and light infantry, had been before their works for several days, by
order of Genesis Green. It was hinted to him from Genesis Leslie, through a certain
medium, that if they were permitted to embark without interruption, every care
should be taken for the preservation of the town. Wayne was directed to accede
to the proposal, the British also agreeing Defeat of De Grasac
not to fire on the town after getting on board. The conditions being fully
understood by both parties, Charlestown was evacuated and possessed without the
least confusion, the American advance following close on the British rear. The
governor was conducted into his capital the same day; the civil police
established the day following, and on the third the town was opened for
business. On the 17th the British crossed the bar, and went to sea.

Every thing now seemed to announce the approach of peace. The American
commissioners expedited the negotiation with the utmost assiduity, and on the
30th of November, provisional articles were agreed upon and signed, to take
effect whenever terms of peace should be finally settled with the court of
France. The business was finished so privately and unexpectedly that the
ministers and ambassadors, as well as others in and about the court of
Versailles, were surprised upon hearing the news.

We must not here avoid mentioning an unfortunate event, which happened at the
close of the still more unfortunate American war. Ten men of war, including
Count de Grasse's ships, with a large fleet of merchant. men from Jamaica
suffered exceedingly by a tremendous gale of wind off Newfoundland, on the 17th
of September. The Ville de Paris and the Glorieux foundered, and only one man
out of the complement of both ships escaped to tell the melancholy tale. The
Hector also sunk; but being descried in time by a snow that made toward them,
the crew were saved. The Ramilies went down, but her people were saved by the
merchantmen in company. The Centaur was likewise lost, and all her company,
except twelve, with the captain, who got into the only remaining boat. They
traversed a space of near 800 miles on the Atlantic ocean, without compass or
quadrant, and with a blanket for a sail. They had only two biscuits divided
among them every twenty-four hours; and as much water during that space to
every man, as the neck of a wine bottle broken off would hold. At the
expiration of sixteen days when the last division of biscuit and water had been
made, to their inexpressible joy, they discovered the Portuguese island of
Fayal, where they safely arrived at night, and received every assistance their
melancholy situation demanded.

On the 3d of September, 1783, the definitive treaties between Great Britain,
France, and Spain, were signed at Versailles by the Duke of Manchester, and the
plenipotentiaries of said court. On the same day, the definitive treaty with
Great Britain and the United States of America was also signed at Paris, by
David Hartley, Esquire the British plenipotentiary, and the plenipotentiaries of
the said state.

By the articles of this treaty, his Britannic majesty acknowledged the
independence of the United States of New Hampshire, Massachusetts Bay, Rhode
island and Providence Plantations, Connecticut.. New York, New Jersey,
Pennsylvania, Delaware, Maryland, Virginia, the Carolinas, and Georgia. He also
relinquished all claims to the government of them, and consented to treat with
them as a free and independent people: Their boundaries were also settled, and
they were allowed the liberty of fishing and drying fish as usual on the banks
of Newfoundland.

The particulars of the treaty between Great Britain, France, and Spain will be
found in our History of England, to which it more properly belongs.

Thus ended the unhappy American war, which added to the national debt of the
mother country one hundred and twenty millions, besides the loss of many
thousands of our bravest officers, soldiers, and seamen, to the eternal infamy
and disgrace of those ministers, who advised and carried it on, contrary to the
general voice of the people!

Memorable Events recorded in this Chapter.
Anno 1781. Mr. Laurens discharged from his confinement in the Tower of London.
Anno 1782. The fleets of Sir George Rodney and Count de grass meet in the West
Indies. Anno 1782. They engage, and Count de Grass is defeated and taken. Anno
1782. Savannah evacuated by the British forces. And afterward Charlestown in
South Carolina. Anno 1782. Provisional articles of peace signed between the
British and American commissioners. Anno 1783. The definitive creaties signed
between Great Britain, France, Spain, and America.
THE END.

