AN ORATION, DELIVERED IN PORTLAND, JULY 4th, 1793, IN COMMEMORATION OF THE
INDEPENDENCE of the UNITED STATES of AMERICA.

BY SAMUEL DEANE, D. D.

PORTLAND: PRINTED BY THOMAS B. WAIT. -- 1793.

AT the desire of many of the numerous audience, and at the particular request
of the respectable Committee, appointed to conduct the affairs of the joyous
Festival of the 4 th day of July, 1793, the following Oration, delivered before
them, is submitted to the inspection and candor of the public.

AN ORATION.
Friends and Fellow Citizens,
REVIVED from the ashes of our ruinous conflagration, can we behold the
anniversary of that important day, when we escaped from our subjugation to a
transatlantic government, without singular pleasure, or without triumphant joy?
Or can we be devoid of a heart felt gratitude to him, who, with respect to
nations as well as individuals, has the power, and the right, to create and to
destroy?

Seventeen times has the globe on which we tread measured its annual orbit,
since our worthy Delegates, in Congress assembled, after detailing the
intolerable grievances we suffered, under a foreign domination, declared these
United Colonies of America free and independent States. The return of the
fourth day of July shall, therefore, ever be hailed as the birth day of
freedom, in these American climes.

How illustrious was that band of patriots? how worthy to be had in everlasting
remembrance? firm was their courage -- sublime their wisdom. The pertinence,
the weight and energy of the addresses of their excellent predecessors to men
of different countries, while they had the highest influence on the colonial
sufferers, had convinced mankind of the righteousness and importance of our
cause; those only excepted who were blinded by their imaginary interest. We
rewarded them with our sincerest praises. But in them was not placed all our
confidence. While we strove to prepare for an arduous and dreaded conflict, we
devoutly cried to him for aid, who is infinitely superior to all terrestial
monarchs. We trusted that the justice of Heaven would not see us crushed by the
sword of vengeance, drawn by pride against the weak and helpless; nor our
equitable claims confounded.

What indeed, on this side heaven, had we, on which we could place any rational
hope of succor? Almost totally destitute as we were of the implements of war,
and more destitute of men who had experience in martial service; do we not look
back with astonishment to the season, when this people dared to engage in the
unequal conflict? Awfully were human probabilities thought to be against us,
when we rose up in opposition to that nation of Europe, which was most inured
to battles and conquest; whose burnished arms have seldom had any considerable
respit from the horrid scenes of war. These we presumed to oppose in the field,
although they were seconded and assisted by a formidable host of the mercenary
Hessian murderers, and by the blood thirsty savages of the American wilds.
Great was the enthusiasm which flamed in the breasts of the oppressed
colonists; and next to miraculous the unity of all ranks, in opposition to
arbitrary and tyrannick rule.

Heaven commiserated our distress; inspired our citizens to rise in arms; and
in mercy provided a generous and illustrious leader to our armies, no less
eminent in council than intrepid in the field. Provident of the lives of his
troops, and anxious to promote their happiness; he knew how to annoy and weary
our invaders, without risking too much. May his vigorous, persevering, patient
and successful services be written in indelible characters on the hearts of
grateful Americans. And, at the head of this nation, may he worthily preside,
till he shall behold it no longer in its infancy, but one among the most
flourishing and oppulent in the world. This he will consider as his sufficient
reward.

I must not dare to shed a damp upon the joy of this festal day, by calling
your attention to any of the mournful tragic scenes which the war presented.
-- But may the dear memory of those numerous patriots long live in our breasts,
who watered the plant of Liberty with their richest blood. And may the warm
gratitude of the nation be manifested, by the most substantial tokens, to their
dearest connections, so long as they are not beyond the reach of our
beneficence.

Rich and manifold are the advantages and blessings attending our liberation
and independence; of some of the principal of them you will permit me to remind
you.

Instead of being bound by laws enacted by a legislative body on the eastern
side of the broad atlantic, where the people are necessarily ignorant of our
local circumstances, and who were fond of alleviating their own burdens by
increasing ours; we are taxed and governed, by rulers of our own electing, who
naturally care for our welfare, and who must expect to bear their part of the
public charges, in proportion to their comparative ability. Laws will be
accommodated to the exigencies of the whole Union, and of the distinct
Commonwealths. Government will be administered, not by those hungry harpies
from Europe, put into office by a foreign monarch, to stop their importunate
solicitations, without regard to merit or demerit: but by those who are well
known and approved by the people, and to them responsible. In cases of
dangerous invasion, our defense will not be the secondary concern of a court
separated from us by an ocean of a thousand leagues; but the primary attention
of the most approved politicians and defenders selected from the midst of
ourselves.

When we speak of our advantages, that important one should not be forgotten,
our being a nation so locally detached from every other civilized part of the
world, and from all the powerful nations, that we can perceive little danger of
ever being annoyed by their forces. The difficulty of carrying on the
operations of war at a great distance from home, may be considered as our
safety.

While connected with Greatbritain, the miseries of war were often our lot;
because they were often the lot of that kingdom. In our new situation, we may
already observe the advantage of being unconcerned in the police of Europe.
Scarcely a nation in that quarter of the world can navigate at all, without
danger of falling a prey to their declared enemies; while the thirteen stripes
can traverse the ocean with perfect security, as we are not at war with any
nation.

We may add, that the immense duties and encumbrances on our trade, were
formerly severe deductions from the gains of industrious Americans; and
impositions unjust, and scarcely supportable. But similar duties, now more
wisely and equally laid; are comparatively but little felt; and are the means
of supporting our excellent form of national government.

The time is arrived, when the sons of Columbia can glory in a national
character, respected by mankind. Instead of being afflicted colonies, despised
and insulted by their parent state; we are a people as much enlightened, and
perhaps as wisely governed, as any now existing on the globe. Our liberties,
civil and sacred, are perfectly exercised. These rights of men were never
before so happily understood and enjoyed by any nation.

Devout gratitude to heaven should burn within us, while we commemorate these
blessed advantages. -- And doubtless we ought with pleasure to recollect the
friendship of that powerful nation, and of that unfortunate monarch, who made
our cause their own, in our late struggle for our rights: who generously made
us important loans, at a time when our need was greatest; and when it was
uncertain whether we should ever be able to repay them; who furnished
formidable fleets and armies gratis, to cooperate with our feeble arms; and to
whom we owe, if not our independence itself, yet, at least the shortening of
the calamities of a horrid war. Their ships and troops assisted at the taking
of the second whole British army which fell into our hands; the consequence of
which was a speedy peace. If animosity against the people of a neighboring
island was a motive to this extraordinary beneficence, it was not the less
serviceable to us; nor does it less demand our gratitude to heaven.

O Louis! Little did thou realise what was foretold by some, that thy
subjects, fighting by our side to obtain for us the rights of men, would embibe
the spirit of Americans; and so be led to conspire to strip thee of thy
despotick rule. Happy had it been for thee -- happy, perhaps, for themselves,
had they been content with their first revolution. Though degraded from the
highest seat of arbitrary power, to the condition of an officer at the head of
the executive department; still thou had some chance for happiness; which
ought by thee to have been more wisely cultivated. But, like Haman's, thy fate
was feared, when thou had begun to fall.

Not that we mean to justify the bloody measures machinated against thee, and
many others, by a selfcreated assembly; a club which has had, it seems, too
much influence over the delegated rulers of France; contrary to the dictates of
conscience; contrary to those of political wisdom, and of common sense.

Unhappy Republic! thy sufferings excite our deep commiseration. If it were
possible, how gladly would we deliver thee from persecution, confusion and
blood! But alas, thou have not had the wisdom, or else not the power, to follow
those entirely who have afforded thee a good example in changing their
government. While we execrate the hostile conduct of despots around thee, and
highly approve thy design of gaining and securing the rights of men; we blush
at the sanguinary and barbarous proceedings of some of thy citizens. Could
nothing appease their rage against thy ci devant King, nor against others who
were suspected to be averse to thy noble design! Nothing short of the lamp iron
and the guillotine? Are they aware how this furious conduct, should thou
finally prevail, will weaken the hands of those nations, which, in future,
shall wish, and groan, to be freed from the galling fetters of tyrants? Having
thy history before them, will they not be tempted to hug their chains, rather
than risk such horrible scenes as attend thy emancipation? -- But I forbear.
Whatever we say of individuals, the faithful historian must, in future, enable
us to judge how far we may safely censure, or applaud, thy national conduct.

The introduction of a new government in this country ought to be reflected on
with the greater satisfaction, as we did not, so much as in one instance, stain
it with the blood of our fellow citizens. Needless and useless severities
against enemies ought ever to be avoided. Nor ought political heresy in
sentiment, any more than theological, to receive capital punishment: nor
perhaps any other.

Behold, ye citizens, the genius of Columbia standing triumphant -- "fair as
the moon, clear as the sun, and terrible as an army with banners." Justice and
clemency are in her train -- her motto this, Parcere subjectis, et debellare
superbos. Forbear the humble and subdue the proud.
She holds the land of liberty -- the glory of the western hemisphere -- the
asylum and resort of the persecuted sons of freedom through the world.

But what will avail our excellent plan of government, our freedom, and our
boasted privileges, if we have not the wisdom and the virtue which are
requisite to secure and perpetuate them? We must not expect to enjoy political
happiness in spite of ourselves. That which is born must be carefully nursed,
if we wish it to arrive to maturity and masculine vigor.

Our form of government, is said, and not without reason, to be fit only for an
enlightened and virtuous people. Then, while we sedulously court the Muses, and
encourage erudition, be it the ambition of each of our citizens to cultivate in
himself and others every virtue, which strengthens and adorns humanity. Let the
laws be religiously obeyed, though they are ordinances of man, for the Lord's
sake; and in every respect, that universal righteousness, which exalts a
nation, steadily pursued and practiced.

Instead of adopting the dissipated and enervating customs of older nations, it
is our wisdom to strive to excel in economy, industry and frugality. Thus shall
our fair inheritance continue unimpaired, and improving by time, be handed down
with advantage remote posterity.

If we glory in our independence, surely it becomes us to conduct ourselves
like an independent people. Does it need to be said, that this is not to pursue
the insipid fashions, and ape the follies, of those distant nations who live in
comparative thraldom? It is not to neglect the advantages given us by God and
nature, and strive to shine and glitter in those plumes, which are the marks of
slavery.

We should rather be content with the products of our native country, and even
glory in arraying ourselves in manufactures of our own. Our various soils
should receive a more judicious and spirited cultivation; which will be found
capable of producing, not only the necessaries of life in abundance, but most
of those curious fruits and luxurious productions, to procure which we
imprudently transmit too much of our wealth to remote parts of the globe.

But how are we completely prepared to support and retain our rights, unless
care be taken, that our respectability and prowess, as a martial people, be not
exchanged for pusilanimity and contemptible weakness? Such debility in our
nation would invite the continued hostilities of the savage aboriginals, from
whose incursions our ancestors, in former times, and many of our nation of
late, have so severely suffered. And if any thing could, this would tempt some
of the transatlantick nations to insult or invade us.

The use of arms should, therefore, be encouraged, and the military art learned
by the young. I flatter myself there is not at present a total neglect of this,
in any of the States. There surely is not in that, of which we are a part. The
officers of our regiment of militia enjoy the pleasure of observing, that at
least one of its companies are laudably and zealously improving themselves in
military skill. As in honor of the day they are present, it is presumed the
audience will not take it amiss, if we bestow on them a word of congratulation
and applause. Struck with the uniformity of your neat and brilliant appearance,
and pleased with your exact maneuvres, we cordially wish prosperity to your
band. While others consume too much of their time in mere trifling and play, we
trust you will proceed with your manly exercises, in your hours of leisure,
till you arrive to the greatest perfection. We anticipate for you, in our
expectation, the character of Ancient and Honorable. Animated by the noblest
patriotick motives, may you be prepared for important service, that if
providence should ever call you to defend your country's rights, you may acquit
yourselves with ability and honor.

But, while we contemplate and celebrate those temporal good things, with which
we find ourselves or our nation blessed; we are to remember, that there are
blessings to be had, which are far more worthy of our ardent pursuit; as far
superior as heaven is higher than this humble clod of earth; blessings which
stand in the nearest connection with our endless felicity. The means of grace
and salvation are of incomparably greater importance to us, than the best means
and prospects of political happiness. What then shall we say of salvation
itself? -- While, therefore, we conduct ourselves in life as good citizens of a
free and flourishing nation, let us seriously consider that it is from the
father of lights that all temporal favors come down to us. And as for these
our praise ascends to his throne, let us principally strive to secure to
ourselves a citizenship in the new Jerusalem above. So, when all terrestial
things shall pass away, like the clouds after rain, we may hope to possess that
building of God; the house not made with hands, eternal in the Heavens.


