THE REMARKABLE DELIVERANCE OF ROBERT BARROW, WITH DIVERSE OTHER PERSONS, FROM
THE DEVOURING WAVES OF THE SEA, AMONG WHICH THEY SUFFERED SHIPWRECK; AND ALSO
FROM THE CRUEL DEVOURING JAWS OF THE INHUMAN CANNIBALS OF FLORIDA: GOD's
PROTECTING PROVIDENCE, MAN's SUREST HELP AND DEFENSE, IN TIMES OF GREATEST
DIFFICULTY, AND MOST EMINENT DANGER.

FAITHFULLY RELATED BY JONATHAN DICKENSON, ONE OF THE PERSONS CONCERNED THEREIN.

Psalm. xciii.4. The Lord on high is mightier than the noise of many waters;
yea, than the mighty waves of the sea.

-- lxxiv.20. The dark places of the earth (...) full of the habitations of
cruelty.

DOVER: Printed by ELIPHALET LAD^^ M,DCC,XCII.

THE PREFACE
INGRATITUDE toward men, after signal favo^ received, is, amongst all
civilized people, looked upon with a just detestation; insomuch the the moral
Gentiles, in ages past, thought they could give no worser character of a
person, than to call him ungrateful: How much more then are christians
(especially in a time of such light as now shines) engaged to shun this sin of
ingratitude toward their GOD, whom they sensibly know to be the fountain of
all their mercies? And surely, next to the infinite mercy showed them for
Christ's sake, in causing the day spring fromon high to visit their souls,
remarkable outward deliverances ought, in a more than commonly remarkable
manner, to be the objects of their gratitude to their great deliverer. I must
confess, Thanksgiving (which is what we poor mortals can return, for the
manifold favors we daily receive from him) has its rise in the heart; and as
out of the abundance of the heart the mouth speaks, how can ^^ose who are
truly thankful in heart, but ^ender (...) calves of their lips, in telling to
their friends (...) acquaintance, how great things GOD h^d done (...) them!
nay, they are so affected with such eminen^ appearances of the protecting hand
of providence for their help, preservation and deliverance, that they are not
willing to confine it to them only, but to publish it to the world, that the
fame of their GOD may be spread from sea to sea, and from one end of the earth
to the other.

The following relation being large, I shall endeavor to be short; only, some
of the things which seem to be most remarkable, I would more particularly
recommend to the reader's observation.

1. The hearts of all men are in the hands of GOD, he can turn them as he
pleases. When these men-eaters was at height, their knives in one hand, hand
and the poor shipwrecked peoples heads in the other, their knees upon their
shoulders, and their looks dismal; on a sudden, the Savages were struck dumb,
and their countenances changed, that they looked like other people; the
Cassekey (or King) becoming as a safeguard to the distressed, from the injuries
of his own men: Yea, such confidence put he in them, that he would trust them
to remove the money he had taken from themselves, before he would trust his own
people. When they were got from these to another place, where they expected
more safety, they found themselves disappointed, fresh dangers presenting
themselves as dismally as before; yet GO^ prevented any further mischief, than
the stripping them of those poor rags the other had left them, and some other
abuses, which by that time were grown familiar to them, and were looked upon as
light afflictions: The Cassekey's wife being made an instrument for their
delivery, she, and some others, having something of tenderness of heart in
them, though among such an inhuman crew.

2 Many were the particular deliverances, upon occasion of injuries offered:
Once an arrow shot at them, narrowly escaped them: Another time, some going to
shoot arrows at them, certain of their own company caught hold of their bows
and arms; yea, though some of them shot, yet their arrows mist. Not to mention
the frequent dangers they were in, upon every slight suspicion of their being
English; of which, more anon. And well might these poor sufferers be in
continual fear of their lives, since about a twelvemonth before, a parcel of
Dutchmen who had likewise suffered ship-wreck, had been killed and devoured;
and moreover, of the many vessels supposed to be lost on that coast, these are
the first company that were known to have escaped. Neither is it so wonderful,
that they are thus cruel to strangers, since they are unnatural to their own
aged people; they having no more compassion on them, than to make them slaves
to the younger. Yet are these men-eaters as cowardly as cruel; when the
Spaniards came up the sight of a rusty musket presented toward them, would
make several of them fly.

3 The dangers they were delivered from, arose not only from men, but the
elements also, which God permitted to threaten and afflict them. One time
rowing in their boat, the sea swelled so that it was dangerous continuing there
all night, and as dangerous to endeavor for the shore; yet providence failed
them not, but conducted them safe ^hither, as though there had been a lane made
through the breakers. Another time, by reason of a great flood, they were
forced to remove their lodgings several times, and for diverse days were in a
continual apprehension of being drowned; at length they were preserved on an
oyster hill. Not lo mention the frequent dangers they were in, by reason of the
extreme cold, too tedious to touch on here; wherein this however is remarkable,
that God can both administer strength in the midst of weakness, and also take
away strength, and cause weakness to seize, whenever he pleases: Here was an
old man, a woman with a sucking child, and another with child, persons
seemingly very unlikely to encounter such hardships, all escaped; and yet
diverse Negroes, used to more hardships, perished.

4 As to lodging, I shall say little; any discreet person may imagine how hard
it was to people well brought up, to lie on a floor swarming with abundance of
many sorts of creeping things, occasioned by throwing the berry-stones on the
floor, and letting all the nastiness they made, lie there, which bred these
vermin; and yet perhaps might be accounted good lodging, in comparison of the
cold ground whereon they often lay afterward unsheltered, exposed to the bleak
blasts of the rigid north-west wind.

5 Their food most scanty, the best of it such, as (I am ready to think) the
meanest Negro here would not touch with his lips; sometimes the gills and guts
of fish picked off a dung hill; sometimes the scraps the Indians flung away,
and the water they boiled their fish in, though never so undecently handled. At
first their sorrows were so great and their alarms so many, that they could not
eat, afterward their diet so uncouth, they could not away with it; until, at
length, hunger had so far prevailed over them, that they could eat with an
appetite the palmetto-berries: the taste whereof was once irksome, and ready to
take away their breath; yea so fond were they of them, that the getting of
about a bushel accidentally, was looked on as a great prize.

6 Their being forced to mask themselves under the name of Spaniards, though
few of them could speak any Spanish, was an other hardship* mostly because the
natives often suspected them to be English, and thereby they were continually
in danger of their lives. Whether their cruelty against the English proceeds
from their being under no apprehension of danger from them, and so may think
themselves lawless in what they do against our nation; or whether it proceeds
from any particular disgust offered them by ^^me English, I shall not
determine: Howeve^, it would do well for those that are not under their power,
to avoid giving them any just cause of offense, lest their neighbors suffer for
their faults. One of these Savages could complain, That some years past, he had
been taken off by some of our English sloops, from whom he escaped by swimming;
and was therewith disgusted, insomuch, that could ^e by his sifting, have found
out that they were English, it might have proved of ill consequence to them.

7. The courtesy of the Governor of Augustine, who clothed these naked
people, fed their hungry stomachs, and caused them to be conducted safely to
Carolina, is not to be passed by without due notice; especially being a man of
another nation, as well as of a different religion; and what is more of such an
one as does not teach its votaries so much compassion toward those they count
Heretics: Neither let me forget the Governor of Carolina, whose generosity
completed what the Governor of Augustine had begun, in assisting and
cherishing these our afflicted friends and country folks; with which I shall
conclude these remarks to treat more particularly concerning that faithful
servant of the Lord, Robert Barrow, who was one of this company.

This man of GOD, whose habitation was in one of the northern counties of
England, was early convinced of the blessed truth of GOD, professed by the
people called Quakers, and soon after had a dispensation of the gospel
committed to him. -- He lived in his native country, in esteem amongst his
neighbors, for his godly conversation, and honored in the church of GOD, as an
elder, who had abode faithful in his testimony, both in preaching the gospel,
suffering for the same, and behaving himself answerable thereto. And in the
year 1694, the spirit of GOD (from whom he first had his commission) requiring
him to come over into these parts, to preach the gospel here also, he was not
disobedient to the heavenly call, but gave up to do the will of GOD, though in a
cross to his own, as appeared by an expression of his before he left England,
which was to this effect: That he had rather immediately have laid down his
natural life there, if by so doing he could have kept his peace with GOD, than
to have crossed the seas to America. Well, hither he came; and after he had
thoroughly visited these parts, he took ship for the West India Islands; and at
length, was returning from Jamaica to this town of Philadelphia -- when these
calamities, mentioned in the ensuing Journal, befell him: How he behaved himself
under them is therein expressed, with what patience he was carried through
them, with what faith he overcame, even the very worst of men; so that it may
be said, he was more than a conqueror over those blood thirsty Cannibals,
looking to him who was invisible, and by his grace seeing beyond them and their
cruelty; by prayer wrestling with GOD for a blessing, even the blessing of
being deli^^red out of their barbarous hands, and laying his bones amongst
faithful friends; and so effectual were his fervent prayers, that they
prevailed with GOD, and so gracious was his GOD to him, that he sealed an
assurance upon his spirit, that his prayers were heard, and should in due time
be answered, before he was yet off his knees. And doubtless he was made a
strength and a comfort to his companions in affliction, whose remembrance will
not be easily blotted out of their minds.

One remarkable passage I cannot well omit, which demonstrates he had well
learned of him who is a God of truth, to speak the truth upon all occasions,
though with the hazard of his life. For, as the reader may observe in the series
of this following relation, these poor people, for the safeguard of their
lives, had assumed the name of Spaniards; some on that account, asserting what
was wrong, others concealing the truth, yet this honest-hearted man, being
directly asked the question, Nickaleer, Nickaleer? (their word for Englishmen)
could do neither, but in simplicity answered, Yes: Being asked so concerning
another, he again answered, Yes. Yet, though for his plain dealing, he was
stripped of his clothes, which till then he had saved, God suffered not these
savages to touch his life or the lives of any of his company.

Thus he passed through this afflicting trial, and at length arrived at this
place on the 1st day of the second month, 1697, though in much weakness, having
been taken very ill of the belly-ach and flux at Augustine, of which he never
recovered, but still grew worse and worse to his dying day. It was about the
8th hour in the evening when the Barkentine he was passenger in, arrived at
this place, and diverse Friends went on board, in order to get him ashore, but
he being in a very weak condition, they could not remove him at that time. He
declared, his great satisfaction that the Lord had granted his request, that he
might lay down his bones in this place -- that his heart was strong, and he
hoped he might first see Friends again at the meeting. He made mention of the
goodness of God to him, and that his presence had attended him in all his
exercises.

The next morning, being the 2d of the 2d m^^^^ diverse Friends went on board to
help the vessel (...) to a wharf, in order to get him on shore; in which time
he spoke as before related, God's power attending him. About the 7th hour,
diverse Friends carried him in a Hammock (being wrapped up in a blanket and
clothes to keep him warm) to the house of Samuel Carpenter, where he declared
the goodness of God to him, and that his heart was yet strong and his memory
and understanding good. After which he was shifted and then slept some time.

On the same day, some Friends coming into the room to visit him, at the sight
of them he seemed to rejoice, and putting forth his hand, was ready to embrace
them in much love, and in a very tender frame of spirit. The Friends expressed
their gladness to see him; but said, they were sorry to see him so very weak:
To which he replied, Although my body be weak, my mind is sound, and memory
good. And further said, The Lord has been very good to me along to this very
day, and this morning has sweetly refreshed me. And further added, The Lord
has answered my desire, for I desired content, and that I might come to this
place to lay my bones amongst you. And afterward said, It is a good thing to
have a conscience void of offense, both toward God, and toward men.

On the 4th day of the second month, being the first day of the week, about the
fifth hour in the morning, he desired a Friend to write for him to his dear
wife. To remember his dear love to her, and to let her know of his travels, and
being here, (...) that the Lord was with him, that his outward (...) were
settled, and that she had wherewithal (...) on. He further said, diverse Friends
being present, that the Lord was with him, and all things were well; and that
he had nothing to do but to die: And accordingly on this day he departed; and
on the 3d day following, being the 6th day of the second month was buried in
Friends burying-ground, in this town of Philadelphia.

And now, having brought my relation concerning this good man to the last
period of his life, I might have very well have put a period to my preface: but
that I foresee, some persons may be ready to say, Here is an account of very
strange passages, but of what credit is the relator? May we depend upon his
authority, without danger of being imposed upon? To such I answer, He is a man
well known in this town, of good credit and repute; on whose fidelity and
veracity, those who have any knowledge of him, will readily rely, without
suspecting fallacy. But, that in the mouth of two or three witnesses every
thing may be established, besides him and his wife, a person whose residence
(when at home) is in this town, Joseph Kirle, the master of the Barkentine in
which they suffered shipwreck, a man of an honest character amongst his
neighbors, had the perusal of it before it went to the press, and approved it.
With which I shall conclude, wishing my reader much satisfaction in the reading
of it, but never the unhappiness of experiencing, in person, the truth of it.

A JOURNAL OF THE TRAVELS and SUFFERINGS of several persons, who were
Shipwrecked in the Gulf of FLORIDA.
THE persons on board, were Joseph Kirle, commander of the Barkentine
Reformation; Richard Limpeney, mate; Solomon Cresson, Joseph Buckley, Thomas
Fownes, Thomas Jemmet, Nathaniel Randal, John Hilliard the master's boy, and
Ben the master's negro, mariners; Jonathan Dickenson, Mary Dickenson, Jonathan
Dickenson a sucking child of six months old, Robert Barrow and Benjamin Allen,
passengers; with Peter, London, Jack, Caesar, Negro men; Cajoe a child; Hagar,
Sarah, Bella, Susanna, Quensa, Negro women, and Venus an Indian girl, all
belonging to Jonathan Dickenson.

The 23d day of the sixth month called August, 1696, being in company with
twelve or thirteen sail of merchantmen, under convoy of the Hampshire frigate,
Capt. Fletcher, commander, we sailed from Portroyal in Jamaica, being bound for
Pennsylvania.

The 24th day. About noon came a sloop from Portroyal, meeting us off Portland,
and gave an account of the French fleet being at Cape Antonio.

In the evening we lay by, off Black-river mouth in order to go the next
morning to Blewfields, but it being calm for many days following, the current
drove us to the westward of the island.

The 31st day. This evening we lost sight of the Hampshire frigate, and then
beat to windward again.

The 1st day of the seventh month, called September, we anchored to the
westward of Savannala-mar, and lost our anchor.

The 2d day. This day we got into Blewfields road to water.

The 4th day. This morning we sailed from Blewfields, intending our passage
through the gulf.

The 14th day. About noon we were abreast with Cape Antonio, and about a league
to the eastward of the Cape was a fire making a great smoke -- at length some
people appeared on the bay, making signs for us to put on shore; but having a
fresh gale, and not knowing who they were, our master would not.

The same day we made the table land of the Havanna, and in the evening stood
over for Cape Florida: but about eight or nine at night we saw two lights about
a mile from us, and we fearing we had got among the French fleet, tacked and
stood for the haven.

The 18th day. This morning no sail appearing, and being most of the day calm,
we lay about four leagues off the Havanna, where we designed to go and enquire
concerning the French fleet; but in the afternoon came a tornado from the land,
and our master being on the quarter deck, our boom jybbing knocked him down and
broke his leg, which accident was gr^vious to him and us; but having things
suitable with a little experience, we set it again. At this time I had four of
my family very sick, one whereof was an Indian girl, who just as I had bound up
the master's leg, was taken with fits, which continued some hours, and then she
died. In the evening we stood over for Cape Floaida, having the wind north
easterly.

The 19th day. This morning the wind not being fair, we stood up for Cuba, and
about sunrising espied those sails that we saw before, they standing as we
stood; therefore we supposed them to be some of our company: We wronged them in
sailing, and by noon lost sight of them. About four in the afternoon we espied
another ship to the eastward of us (we being about four leagues off shore and
about fifteen leagues to the eastward (...) the Havanna) and supposing her to
be a Frenchman, we stood in for the shore, but she gained on us: Then a tornado
sprang up, and a great shower of rain followed which hid us. Hereupon we tacked
and stood over for Florida, and when night came on we saw no more of that sail,
having the wind fair

The 20th day. This morning we were in the gulf, having a fair wind and saw
again the two ships following us, which we believed to be of our company.

The 21st day. This morning the wind at east and shifting notherly.

The 22d day. This day the storm began at the north-east.

The 23d day. About one o'clock in the morning we felt our vessel strike some
few strokes, and then she floated again for five or six minutes, before she ran
fast aground, where she beat vehemently at first. The wind was violent, and it
was so very dark, that our mariners could see no land and the sea broke over
us, so that we were in a quarter of an hour floating in the cabin: We then
endeavored to get a candle lighted, which in a little time was accomplished.

By this time we felt the vessel not to strike so often; but several of her
timbers were broken, and the seas continued breaking over us, and no land to be
seen. We concluded to keep in the vessel as long as she would hold together,
and about the third hour in the morning, we supposed we saw land at some
considerable distance; at which time we found the water began to run out of
her, and at daylight perceived we were upon the shore, on a beach lying on the
breach of the sea, which, at times, as the surges reversed, was dry. In taking
a view of our vessel, we found that the violence of the weather had forced many
sorts of sea-birds on board of her some of which were, by force of the wind
blown into and under our hen-coops, and many remained alive. Our hogs and sheep
were washed away, and swam on shore, except one of the hogs which remained in
the vessel.

We rejoiced at this our preservation from the raging seas, but at the same
instant feared the sad consequences that followed; yet having hopes still, we
got our sick and lame on shore also our provisions, with spars and sails to
make a tent. I went with one negro to view the land, and seek the most
convenient place for that purpose; but the wilderness country looked very
dismal, having no trees, but only sand hills covered with shrubby palmetto, the
stalks of which were prickly so that there was no walking amongst them: I at
last espied a place, almost a furlong within the beach, being a bottom to which
I with my Negro soon cut a passage, but the storm and rain continued. Thither I
got my wife and sick child, who was but six months and twelve days old; also
Robert Barrow an aged man, who had been sick about five or six months; our
master, who some days before had broke his leg, and my kinsman Benjamin Allen,
who had been very ill with a violent fever for most part of the voyage: These
with others, we got to the place under the shelter of some few bushes, which
broke off the wind, but kept none of the rain from them, but I got a fire made;
and the rest of our people were getting the provisions ashore; but our chests,
trunks and clothing, were all very wet and cold.

About the eighth or ninth hour came two Indian men (being naked except a small
piece of plaited work of straws, which just hid their private parts' and
fastened behind like a horse tail in likeness, made of a sort of a silk grass)
from the southward, running fiercely and foaming at the mouth, having no
weapors but their knives, and forthwith not making any stop, violently seized
the two first of our men they met with, who were carrying corn from the vessel
to the top of the bank, where I stood to receive it and put it into a cask;
they used them not ill, as the men resisted not; but taking them under the arm
brought them toward me. Their countenances were very furious and bloody; they
had their hair tied in a roll behind in which stuck two bones shaped, one like
a broad arrow, the other a spear head; and the rest of our men coming from the
vessel, asked me, what they should do? Whether they should get their guns to
kill these two? But I persuaded them otherwise and desired them to be quiet,
showing their inability to defend us from what would follow, but to put our
trust in the Lord, who is able to defend to the uttermost.

I then walked toward the place were our sick and lame were, (the two Indian
men following me) and I told them the Indians were come and coming upon us; and
whilst the two Indians stood with a wild furious countenance looking upon us, I
thought within myself to give them some tobacco and pipes, which they greedily
snatched from me and making a snuffing noise like a wild beast, turned their
backs on us and ran away.

We communed together, and considered our condition, being among a barbarous
people, such as were generally accounted men-eaters, and believed that these
two were gone to alarm their people. We sat ourselves down, expecting cruelty
and hard death, except it should please the almighty God to work wonderfully
for our deliverance. In this deep concernment some of us were not left without
hopes; blessed be the name of the Lord in whom we trusted.

As we were under deep exercise and concernment a motion arose from one of us,
that if we should put ourselves under the denomination of Spaniards (it being
known that that nation had some influence on them) and one of us, named Solomon
Cresson speaking the Spanish language well, it was hoped this might be a means
for our delivery; to which most of the company assented.

Within two or three hours after the departure of the two Indians, some of our
people being near the beach or strand, returned and said, The Indians were
coming in a very great number, all running and shouting. About this time the
storm was much abated, the rain ceased and the sun appeared which had been hid
from us several days; and most of the Ind^ans went to the vessel, casting forth
whatever they could lay hold on, except Rum, Sugar, Molasses, Beef and Pork;
but their Cassekey (for so they call their King) with about thirty more, came
down to us in a furious manner, having a dismal aspect, and foaming at the
mouth; their weapons were large Spanish knives, except their Cassekey's who had
a bayonet that belonged to the master of our vessel; they rushed in upon ^s,
and cried Nickaleer, Nickaleer? We understood them not at first; but they
repeating it to us often, at last they cried Espania, or Spaniard? By which we
understood them, that at the first they meant English; but they were answered
to the latter in Spanish, Yea; to which they replied, No, Espania, no; but all
cried Nickaleer, Nickaleer: We sitting on our chests, boxes, and trunks, and
some on the ground, the Indians surrounded us, but we stirred nor moved not,
but sat all, or most of us, very calm and still, and some of us in a good frame
of spirit, being freely given up to the Will of God.

Whilst we were thus sitting as a people almost unconcerned, these
bloody-minded creatures placed themselves behind each one, kicking and throwing
away the bushes that were nigh, or under their feet -- the Cassekey had placed
himself behind me, standing on the chest which I sat upon, and they all had
their arms extended, with their knives in their hands ready to execute their
bloody design, some taking hold of us by the heads, with their knees set
against our shoulders, and in this posture they seemed to wait for the Cassekey
to begin: They were high in words, which we understood not; but on a sudden, it
pleased the Lord to work wonderfully for our preservation, and instantly all
these savage-men were struck dumb, and like men amazed, for the space of a
quarter of an hour; in which time their countenances fell, and they looked like
another people. They then quitted their places they had taken behind us, and
came in amongst us, requiring to have all our chests, trunks and boxes
unlocked, which being done, they divided all that was in them. Our money the
Cassekey took to himself, privately hiding it in the bushes; then they went to
pulling off our clothes leaving each of us only a pair of breeches or an old
coat, except my wife and child, Robert Barrow, and our master, from whom they
took but little that day: Having thus done, they asked us again Nickaleer,
Nickaleer? But we answered, by saying Pennsylvania.

We then began to enquire after St. Augustine, also we would talk of St. a
Lucea, which was a town that lay about a degree to the northward; but they
cunningly would seem to persuade us, that they both lay to the southward; and
we talked of the Havanna, that lay to the southward. These places they had
heard of, and knew which way they lay.

At length the Cassekey told us how long it was to St. a Lucea, by days travel,
but cared not to hear us mention St. Augustine. They would signify by signs, we
should go to the Southward. We answered, that we must go to the Northward for
Augustine. When they found they could not otherwise persuade us, they
signified, that we should go to the Southward for Havanna, and that it was but
a little way.

We gave them to understand, that we came that way, and were for the Northward;
all which took place with them. We perceived that the Cassekey's heart was
tendered toward us, for he kept mostly with us, and did the remaining part of
that day keep off the petty robbers, which would have had our few rags from us.
Some time before night we had a shower of rain, on which the Cassekey made
signs for us to build some shelter; whereupon we got our tent up, and some
leaves to lie upon

About this time our vessel lay dry on shore, and the Indians gathered
themselves together, men and women, some hundreds in number, and having got all
the goods out of her, and covered the bay for a large distance, they opened the
stuffs and linen, and spread them to dry. They would touch no sort of strong
drink, Sugar nor Molasses, but left it in the vessel. They shouted and made
great noises in the time of plunder; but night coming on, the Cassekey put
those chests and trunks which he had reserved for himself, into our tent; which
pleased us, and gave us a^ expectation of his company, for he was now become a
defender of us from the rage of others. The Cassekey went down to the
waterside amongst his people, and returned with three old coats that were wet
and torn, which he gave us; one whereof I had. We made a fire at each end of
our tent, and laid ourselves down, it being dark, but hearing hedious noises,
and fearing that they were not satisfied, we expectnd them upon us. The chief
Indian (or Cassekey) lay in our tent upon his chests; and about midnight we
heard a company of Indians coming from the vessel toward us, making terrible
shouts and coming fiercely up to the tent; but the Cassekey called to them,
which caused them to stand. It seemed they had killed a Hog and brought him; --
so the Cassekey asked us, if we would eat the Hog? Solomon Cresson by our
desire, answered him, that we used not to eat at that time of the night;
whereupon they threw the Hog down before the tent, and the Cassekey sent them
away. -- They went shouting to the sea shore, where there were some hundreds of
them revelling about our wreck.

The 25th of the seventh month, being the sixth day of the week.
This morning, having purposed to endeavor for liberty to pass to the
northward, Solomon opened the matter to the Cassekey, who answered, we must go
to his town to the southward. This occasioned us to press him more urgently, to
let us go for St. a Lucea, (this place having a Spanish name, we supposed to
have found it under the government of that nation, from whence we might expect
relief.) But the Cassekey told us, that it was about two or three days journey
thither: and that when we came there, we should have our throats and scalps
cut, and be shot, burnt and eaten. We thought that information was but to
divert us, so that we were more earnest to go; but he sternly denied us,
saying, we must go to his town.

About eight o'clock this morning the Cassekey came into our tent, and set
himself amongst us, asking the old question, Nickaleer, Nickaleer? And
directing his speech to one in particular, of us, he in simplicity, answered
yes: which caused the Cassekey to ask the said person, if another, which he
pointed to, was Nickaleer? He answered, yes: then he said, Totus (or all)
Nickaleer, and went from among us; but he returned in a short time, with some
of his men with him, and afresh they went greedily to strip my wife and child,
Robert Barrow, and our master, who had escaped till now.

Thus were we left almost naked, till the feud was somewhat abated, and then we
got some things from them, which displeased some of them -- and we then cut our
tent in pieces, and got the most of our clothing out of it, which the Indians
perceiving, took the remains from us: We men had most of us Breeches, and
pieces of Canvas; and the whole company interceded for my wife, that all might
not be taken from her. About noon, the Indians having removed the plunder off
the bay, and many of them gone, a guard was provided, armed with bows and
arrows, with whom we were summoned to march, and a burden provided for every
one to carry, that was any ways able. Our master, with his broken leg, was
helped along by his negro Ben, and my wife was forced to carry her child, they
not suffering any of us to relieve her; for if any of us offered to lay down
our burden, we were threatened to be shot. Thus were we forced along the beach
barefooted.

We having saved one of the masters Quadrants, and seamen's calender, with two
other books, as we walked along the bay, (the time suiting) our mate Richard
Limpeny took an observation, and we found ourselves to be in the latitude of
twenty seven degrees and eight minutes: Some of the Indians were offended at
it, and when he held up his Quadrant to observe, one of them drew an arrow to
shoot him; but it pleased GOD hitherto to prevent them from shedding any of our
blood.

One passage I have omitted, viz. two of our mariners, named Thomas Fownes and
Richard Limpeny, went forth this morning from our tent, down to the bay where
the Indians were, and viewing them at some distance, an Indian came running
upon them, with his knife in his hand, and took hold of Thomas Fownes to stab
him; but Thomas fell on his knees, using a Spanish ceremony, and begged him not
to kill him; whereupon the Indian desisted, and bid him be gone to the place
from whence he came; and the said Thomas, at his return, acquainted us how
narrowly he had escaped.

After we had traveled about five miles along the deep sand, the sun being
extreme hot, we came to an inlet, on the other side whereof was the Indian
town, being little wigwams made of small poles stuck in the ground, which they
bend one to another making an arch and covering them with thatch of small
palmetto leaves; here we were commanded to sit down, and the Cassekey came to
us, and with his hand scratched a hole in the sand, about a foot deep, and then
came to water, which he made signs for us to come and drink of, and we being
extremely thirsty, did, but the water was almost salt.

Whilst we ^ate here we saw great fires making on the other side of the inlet,
which some of us thought were preparing for us; but after an hour's time being
spent here, at length came an Indian with a small canoe from the other side,
and I, with my wife and child, and Robert Barrow, were orderto to go into it,
(the canoe was but just wide enough for us to sit down in) and over we were
carried, and being landed, the man made signs for us to walk to the wigwams,
which, we did; but the young Indians seemed to be frightened and fly from us.
We were directed to a wigwam, which afterward we understood to be the
Cassekey's; it was about a man's height to the top, and herein was the
Cassekey's wife* and some old women sitting on a cabin made of sticks about a
foot high, covered with a mat, and they made signs for us to sit down on the
g^ound, which we did. The Cassekey's wife having a young child sucking at her
breast, gave it to another woman, and would have my child, which my wife was
very loath to suffer, yet she would not be denied, but took our child and
suckled it at her breast, viewing and feeling it from top to toe, and at length
returned it to my wife.

By this time another parcel of our people were come over, and we sitting down
by the wigwam side, an Indian brought a fish boiled, on a palmetto lea^* and
set it down amongst us, making signs* for us to eat; but our exercise was too
great for us to have any inclination to receive food: At length all our people
were brought over, and afterward the Cassekey, who as soon as he came to the
wigwam, set himself to work got some stakes, and stuck them in a row joining to
his wigwam, and tied some sticks, whereon were small palmettoes tied and
fastened them to (...) stakes about three feet high, and laid two or three mats,
made of reeds down for shelter; which is seems he made for us, to break the
wind off, and ordered us to lie down there; which we did as many as the mats
would hold, and the rest lay on the ground by us. The Cassekey then went into
his wigwam, and seated himself on his cabin cross legged, having a basket of
palmetto berries brought him which he eat very greedily; after which came some
Indians in to him, and talked much.

Night being come, and the moon being up, (...) Indian, who performed their
ceremonies, stoo^ out looking full at the moon, making a hideous nois^ and
crying out acting like a mad man for (...) space of half an hour, all the
Indians being (...) till he had done; after which they made a fearful noise,
some like the barking of a dog, wolf, and other strange noise; after this one
got a log an^ set himself down, holding the stick or log uprigh^ on the ground,
and several others got about him making a hideous noise, singing to our
amazement -- at length their women joined to the consort, and made the noise
more terrible, which they continued till midnight, Toward morning there was
great dews, and our fire being expended we were extreme cold.

The 26th of the seventh month, being the seventh day of the week.
This morning, the Cassekey looking on us with a mild aspect, sent his son with
his striking staff to the inlet, to strike fish for us, which was performed
with great dexterity; for some of us walked down with him, and though we looked
very earnestly when he threw his staff from him, we could not see a fish at the
time he saw it, and brought it to shore on the end of his staff Sometimes he
would run swiftly pursuing a fish, and seldom mist when he darted at him, In
two hours time he got as ma^y fish as would serve twenty men. There were others
fishing at the same time, so that fish was plenty; but the sense of our
condition stayed our ^ung^y stomachs, for some amongst us thought they would
feed us to feed themselves.

The Cassekey went this morning toward our vessel, but in his absence the
other Indians looked very untowardly upon us, which created a jealousy of their
cruelty yet to come.

In the afternoon we saw a great fire nigh the place of our vessel, and we
concluded that our vessel and our boat were burnt whereupon we were almost
confirmed, that they designed to destroy us; but about sunsetting the Cassekey
came home, and we speaking to him he answered us, and seemed very affable,
which we liked well. Night drawing on, and the wind shifting northward, we
removed our shelter, and added the mats to it to break the wind off, which
blowed cold, and laid ourselves on the sand. About an hour within night came a
parcel of Indians from the southward, being armed with bows and arrows, and
coming near our tent, some of us espied them, whereupon they squatted down: --
This seemed a fresh motive of danger, and we awakened those of us who were
fallen asleep, and bid them prepare, for things seeming dangerous, we supposing
they were come to forward our destr^ction, or to carry us to the southward;
they sat thus a considerable time, but at length they distributed themselves to
the wigwams. Thus would danger often appear to us, and almost swallow us up*
but at times we were set over it, having a secret hope that GOD would work our
deliverance, having preserved us from so many perils.

Some time before night, Robert Barrow was exhorting us to be patient, and in a
godly manner he expounded that text of scripture, Because thou have kept the
word of my patience, etc. Rev. iii.10. After which, he ended with a most
fervent prayer, desiring of the Lord, that whereas he had suffered us to be
cast amongst a barbarous and heathenish people, if that it was his blessed
will, he would preserve and deliver us from amongst them, that our names might
not be buried in oblivion, and that he might lay his body amongst faithful
friends: And at the close of his prayer he seemed to have an assurance, that
his petition would be granted; in all which, some of us were livingly refreshed
and strengthened.

The 27th of the seventh month, being the first day of of the week.
This morning we again used ou^ endeavors with the Cassekey, that we might go
to the northward for Augustine; but his answer was, we should all be killed: At
length ^e prevailed, and he said on the morrow we should go. Hereupon he took
three negro men (one of Joseph Kirle's, and two of mine) and with a canoe went
up the sound.

This day the Indians were busy with what they had taken out of our vessel, and
would have employed all of us to do, some one thing, some another for them; but
we not knowing the consequence, endeavored to shun it, and would deny their
demands: But some of our men answered their desires in making and sewing some
cloth together, stringing our beds, mending the locks of the chests, etc.
Whatever they thought was amiss they would be putting upon us to mend, till we
wholly refused; at which time I heard a saying that came from one of the chief
Indians, thus, [English Son of a Bitch] which words startled me; for I did
believe they had some of our nation in their possession, of whom they had heard
such an expression: I passed away from the Wigwam with much trouble.

This day, being the first of the week, and we having a large bible, and a book
of Robert Barclay's some one or other was often reading in them; but being most
of us sat together, Robert Barrow desired our people to wait upon the Lord; in
which time Robert had a word in season to us, and afterward went to prayer,
the Indians standing about us, when some of the younger sort would be mocking,
but not to our disturbance; the elder sort stood very modestly the whole time:
After prayer was ended, they all withdrew quietly; but some of them (especially
the Cassekey's eldest son) would take great delight in our reading, and would
take the bible or the other book, and give it to one or the other of us to
read; the sound of which pleased them, for they would sit quietly and very
attentively to hear us.

The Cassekey having been gone the most part of the day, with three negroes in
our boat, he at last came over the bar into the inlet, and we rejoiced to see
our boat again, for we thought she had been burnt. Our negroes told us, they
went up the sound with the Cassekey, and landed near the place where our tent
had been: His chief business was to remove the money from one place to another,
and bury it, This old man would trust our people but not his own* After that
was done they went to the place where our vessel was burnt: they launched our
boat in which the old Cassekey put his chests, wherein was our linen and other
of our trade. Also they got a small rundlet which they filled with wine out of
a quarter cask that was left, and brought sugar out of the wreck which was not
consumed by the fire. By this time came up the Cassekey and he told us, on the
morrow we should go with our boat; which was cheerful news to us: And some
Indians having been out and brought home some oysters, the Cassekey gave us
some, bidding us take what we had a mind to. A little before night, the
Cassekey opened his chests and boxes, and his wife came and took what was i^
them from him; but he seemed very generous to my wife and child, and gave her
several things which were useful to her and the child.

Our boat being very leaky, we got her into a creek to sink her, that the water
might swell her.

The 28th of the seventh month, being the second day of the week.
This morning we waited an opportunity to get leave to depart which was granted
us: Whereupon we asked for such things as they did not make use of, viz. a
great glass wherein was five or six pounds of butter, some sugar, the rundlet
of wine, and some balls of chocolate; all which was granted us also a bowl to
heave water out of the boa^; but the Cassekey would have a negro boy of mine,
named Caesar, to which I could not tell what to say, but he was resolved on it.
We got down to the water side and set all our people over that were to travel;
and Joseph Kirle, Robert Barrow, I, my Wife and child, with two of our
mariners, went in the boat, and rowed along shore northwards, but the Cassekey
would have had us to have gone with our boat up the sound: We supposed the
sound was a great river, and therefore were not willing to take his advice,
having no knowledge; but his counsel was good as we found afterward, for the
convenience of passage.

The Cassekey and some other Indians went with our people toward our wreck, we
rowing along shore and our boat very leaky, so that one person had ^mploy
enough to heave out the water.

Just before we left the Indian town, several Indians were for taking the
little clothes and rags we had got; but we calling out to the Cassekey he would
cause them to let us alone.

Solomon Cresson was mightily in one Indian's favor, who would hardly stir
from his wigwam, but Solomon must be with him, and go arm in arm -- which
Indian amongst his plunder had a morning gown, which he put on Solomon, and
Solomon had worn it most of the time we were there; but when the time of our
departure came, another Indian unrob'd him, and left him only a pair of
breeches and seemed very angry.

It was nigh noon when we left our wreck (she being burned down to her floor
timbers which lay in the sand) and set forward, some in the boat, the rest
traveling on shore; and a little before sunset our people came up with
abundance of small fish that had been forced on shore as we may suppose, by the
storm that we had met with, (they lying far from the water, being much tainted)
covering the shore for nigh a mile in length, of which our people gathered as
many as they could carry: About sunset we put on shore to refresh ourselves,
and take a small respite; also to take my kinsman Benjamin Allen into the boat,
^or this afternoon in his travel, he was taken with a fever and ag^e, and we
had much trouble to get him along, he having been sick nigh unto death (being
first taken the day before we left Blewfields road) till about a week before we
were cast away.

One of my negroes had saved a t^nder box and flint, and we had reserved two
knives, by which means we got a fire, though with much difficulty, for our tinder
was bad, and all the wood salt water soaken; which being accomplished we
broiled our fish, feeding heartily on some of them, and the rest we kept, not
knowing when we should be thus furnished again, for which, some of us were
truly thankful to the GOD of our mercies.

Having a large fire, many of us got under the lee of it, and others buried
themselves in the sand, in hopes to get a little sleep, that we might be
somewhat refreshed, and thereby be the better enabled, some to travel and some
to row, the remaining part of the night; but the sand-flies and muskettoes were
so extreme thick, it was impossible: the moon shining, we launched our boat,
and I, my wife and child, the master, Robert Barrow, my kinsman Allen, Solomon
Cresson, Joseph Buckley and the master's negro, went in her, the rest
traveling along shore: About midnight, or a little after, our people came by
an Indian town, and the Indians came out in great numbers, but offered no
violence, more than endeavoring to take from them what little they had; but
they making some small resistance, the Indians were put by their purpose: They
were very desirous to have us come on shore, and would hale us, but our people
would have us keep off: We were got among a parcel of breakers, and so had much
ado to get out to sea.

The 29th of the seventh month, being the third day of the week.
This morning about sunrising we stood in for the land, and looking out for
our people, but could not see them, therefore we lay by for the space of two
hours, and at length we saw them coming along, with a great many Indians, with
them. When they came abreast with us, the Indians wafted us on shore. but we
refused, perceiving they were wickedly bent: they would be ever and anon
snatching one thing or other, at which time our people would point to us in the
boat; but perceiving they could not get us on shore, in some few hours they
left them.

This day about noon, Joseph Kirle having his quadrant and calender, took an
observation, being in the latitude of 27 degrees. 45 min. About one o'clock we saw
two Indians with bows and arrows, running to meet our people, who when they saw
them, at first they made a halt, and afterward retreated, at which the Indians
let fly an arrow, which narrowly escaped one of them, whereupon, they stopped;
the Indians looked strangely, on them, but our people set forwards, and the
Indians with them, till they came to the Indian town: We saw our people go into
the wigwams, but they staid a very short time, for the Indians were for taking
those pieces of canvas from them which they had. They got some water and set
forward ^gain, the two Indians still following them. About this time we saw a
sail to the eastward, and supposing it at first to be a brigantine, agreed to
follow her but in ^ small time we made it to be a canoe or boat with two masts
and sails, she stood in for the shore, but as soon as they espied us she bore
away; and when she saw we made not after her, she stood ashore again for the
Indian town. Hereupon a jealousy got amonst us, that she might go on shore, and
get strong with men, and then come after us; whereupon we rowed very hard, and
kept an offing for some hours -- but finding they come not out, we stood
toward the shore again.

This day extreme hot, and we had no water since we left the Indian town to the
southward of our wreck, called by the name of hoe-bay, therefore we were
desirous to get on shore, but when we endeavored it we could not, for the sea
swelled very much, and came rolling from the eastward, so that it run very
hollow, and broke almost a mile from the shore, our master said, it was
impossible to get on shore alive; but I being under some exercise, was desirous
to be on shore, and thereupon did express myself to the rest of our people, but
they started the danger: All which I was as sensible of as they, yet I could
not rest, but insisted upon going ashore: the master and men said We should not
save our lives: But I gained so that they attempted, and were got within half a
mile of the shore, when the seas came on us so large and hollow, that one sea
had like to have overwhelmed us but we just got a top of it before it broke:
There was then no persuading them to go further, therefore we stood off, and
designed to keep off all nig^t; and our people being weary, and the sun
setting, we divided one half to get some sleep, and the other to watch, and
keep the boats head to the sea. The Weather looked as though it would be bad,
and the sea increased, whereupon I began a fresh to persuade them to go on
shore; all were very desirous, but thought (...) impossible: At length we
resolved to venture, and so committing ourselves to the protection of the
Almighty GOD, we stood in for the shore, and made signs to our people that we
designed it. And it pleased God to order it so, that we went on shore, as
though there had been a lane made through the breakers, and were carried to the
top of the bank, where we got aged Robert Barrow, my wife and child, out of the
boat, before ever the (...) came to fill us, which did as soon as they were got
out; but we got our boat up from the wash of the sea.

The two Indians who followed us, were for taking off our clothes (which would
not cover our bodies) but we not being willing to yield, they would snatch a
piece from one, and a bit from another, and run away with that, and then come
again and do the like. These two Indians took away what was given my wife and
child, which we knew not how to help, but we exercised patience^

We enquired how far it was to St a Lucea, (one of them speaking a little
Spanish) and by signs we understood it was not far. They then made signs, that
when we came there we should be put to the most cruel death, but we (...)
otherwise.

At this place, within the land, and over the sound, our people said, before it
was d^^k they sa^ two or three houses which looked white, as though they were
plaistered with lime, which put us in hopes that there were Spaniards there; so
we set forwards, as the Indians directed, for St. a Lucea, and they made signs
that we should come to an inlet of the sea, and on the other side was St. a
Lucea. We traveled about four miles, and came to the inlet, but saw no
settlement on the other side, so we concluded to lie there all night. We saw
the track of a large bear, and other wild beasts, whereupon we set to work to
get wood, and then a fire. Abundance of muskettoes and sand flies hindered our
rest; to remedy which, we dug holes in the sand, got some grass, and laid it
therein to lie upon, in order to cover ourselves from the flies, which most of
us did; but it being extreme cold, and firing scarce, we had little comfort.

About midnight we sent our people to see if they could get off our boat and
bring it into the inlet, that we might get over to the other side: They went
and launched her, but the sea was so rough, (...) there was no possibility of
getting her off, for she was soon filled and put to swim, and they, boat and
all were driven on shore again.

Whilst our people were gone for our boat, we espied some Indians in a canoe,
with their torch, a fishing; we sent for Solomon, (who was gone to launch the
boat) expecting they would come seeing fires, and we should not tell what to
say to them, but they did not. Here we lay watching, for no rest could be taken.

The 30th of the seventh month, being the fourth day of the week.
This morning, by break of day, we saw a small canoe from the other side put
off shore, with two Indians in her, going up the river (or sound) a fishing: We
hailed them in Spanish, and as soon as they heard and saw us, they made to the
shore with all speed, and away to their town they run. We perceiving they were
shy of us, began to doubt of their amity, which we had so much depended on,
whereupon we counseled our people how to deport themselves, especially our
negroes. About sunrising we saw the Indians coming, running in a very great
number, with their bows and arrows, to the inlet, where having five or six
canoes, the^ got into them, as many as those canoes could ho^^* and others took
to the water, and swam over to (...) where ^^ey came in the greatest rage that
possib^^ a barbarous people could. Solomon began to spea^ Spanish to them but
they answered not till they came on shore, some distance from us, and then
coming running upon us, they cried out Nickaleer Nickaleer? We all sat still,
expecting death, and that in a most barbarous manner, for they that did speak
unto them could not be heard; but they rushed violently on us, rending and
tearing those few clothes we had; they that had breeches, had so many about
them, that they hardly touched the ground till they were shaken out of them;
they tore all from my wife, and espying her hair lace, some were going to cut
the hair away to get it, but like greedy dogs another snatched and tore (...)
off. As for our poor young child, they snatched from it what little it had as
though they would have shaken and torn it limb from limb.

After they had taken all from us but our lives, they began to talk one to
another, vehemently foaming at the mouth, like wild boars, and taking their
bows and arrows, with other weapons, cried out Nickaleer, Nickaleer? Solomon
spoke in Spanish to them and said, We are Spaniards; but they would not hear
him, and continued crying out Nickaleer, Nickaleer? Withal drawing their arrows
to the head; but suddenly we perceived them to look about and listen, and then
they desisted from prosecuting their bloody design, and one of them took a pair
of breeches and gave them to my wife. We brought our great bible and a large
book of Robert Barclay's to this place; and being all stripped as naked as we
were born, and end^avoring to hide our nakedness these Cannibals took the
books, and tearing out the leaves, would give each of us a leaf to cover us,
which we took from them at which time they would deride and smite us, and
instantly another of them would snatch away what the other gave us, smiting and
deriding us withal.

Robert Barrow, with myself, Wife and child, were ordered to go into a canoe,
to be carried to the other side of the inlet, being a furlong over, four
Indians being in the canoe to paddle; when we came to the other side within a
canoe's length or two of the shore, a number of Indians with their bows and
arrows, came running into the water, some to their knees, some deeper, having
their bows and arrows drawn up, crying out, Nickaleer, Nickaleer? which they
continued without ceasing. The Indians that brought us over leaped out of the
canoe, and swam ashore, fearing they should be shot; but in this juncture, it
pleased GOD to tender the hearts of some of them toward us, especially the
Cassekey's wife, and some of the chiefest amongst them who were made
instruments to intercede for us, and stop the rage of the multitude who seemed
not to be satisfied without our blood. The Cassekey then ordered some to swim
and fetch the canoe ashore; which being done, his wife came in a compassionate
manner and took my wife out of the canoe, ordering her to follow her, which she
did some distance from the inlet side, and stood till all our people were
brought over, which in a little time was done: But the rage of some was still
great, thirsting to shed our blood, and a mighty strife there was amongst them;
some would kill us; others would prevent it; and thus one Indian was striving
with another.

All being got over, we were to walk along the seashore to their town, and in
this passage we most of us felt the rage of some of them, either by striking or
stoning, and diverse arrows were shot; but those that were for preserving us,
would watch those that were for destroying, and when some of them would go to
shoot, others of them would catch hold of their bows or arm. It was so ordered
that none of us was touched with their arrows, but several of us were knocked
down, and some tumbled into the sea; we dared not to help one another, but help
we had by some of them, being made instrumental to succor us. My wife received
several blows, and an Indian came and took hold of her hair and was going
either to cut her throat, or something like it, having his knife nigh her
throat, but I looked at him, making a sign that he should not, so he desisted;
at which time another Indian came, with a handful of sea-sand, and filled our
poor child's mouth.

By this time the Cassekey's wife came to my wife seeing her oppressed, and
pulled the sand out of our child's mouth, and kept by my wife till we got to
the Cassekey's house, which was about forty feet long, and twenty five feet
wide, covered with Palmetto leaves, both top and sides. There was a range of
cabins, or a Barbecue, on one side and two ends; at the entering on one side of
the house a passage was made of benches on each side, leading to the cabbins;
on these benches sat the chief Indians, and at the upper end of the cabin was
the Cassekey seated. A kind of debate was held amongst them for an hours time;
after which Solomon and some others were called to the Cassekey, and were
seated on the cabin, where the Cassekey talked to Solomon in the Spanish
language, but could not hold a discourse. In a little time some raw deer-skins
were brought in, and given to my wife and negro woman; and to us men such as
the Indians wear, being a piece of plaitwork of straws, wrought of diverse
colors, and of a triangular figure with a belt of 4 fingers broad of the same
wrought together, which goes about the waist and the angle of the other having
a thing to it coming between the legs, and strings to the end of the belt, all
three meeting together, are fastened behind with a horse tail, or a bunch of
silk-grass, exactly resembling it, of a flaxen color; this being all the
apparel or covering that the men wear, and thus they clothed us,

A place was appointed for us on the floor of the house, where we were ordered
to lie down, but the place was extreme nasty; for all the stones of the berries
which they eat, and all the nastiness that was made amongst them, lay on their
floor, so that the place swarmed with abundance of many sorts of creeping
things, as a large black hairy spider, which has two claws like a crab,
scorpions, and a numberless number of small buggs. On these matts we lay, with
these vermin crawling over our naked bodies; to brush them off, was like
driving muskettes off from one, where they are extreme thick.

The Indians were seated as aforesaid, the Cassekey at the upper end of them,
and the range of cabbins was filled with men, women, and children, beholding
us: At length we heard a woman or two cry, according to their manner, and that
very sorrowfully; one of which I took to be the Cassekey's wife, which
occasioned some of us to think, that something extraordinary was to be done to
us -- we also heard a strange sort of a noise, which was not like the noise
made by a man, but we could not understand what, nor where it was, for
sometimes it sounded to be in one part of the house, sometimes in another, to
which we had an ear: and indeed our ears and eyes could perceive or hear
nothing but what was strange and dismal, and death seemed to surround us; but
time discovered this noise to us: The occasion of it was thus:

In one part of this house, where the fire was kept, was an Indian man, having-
a pot on the fire, wherein he was making a drink of the leaves of a shrub,
(which we understood by the Spaniards, called casseena) boiling the said leaves
after they had parched them in a pot; then with a grourd, having a long neck,
and at the top of it a small hole, which the top of ones finger could cover,
and at the side of it a round hole of two inches diameter; they take the liquor
out of the pot, and put it into a deep round bowl, which being almost filled,
contains nigh three gallons; with this gourd they brew the liquor, and make
it froth very much; it looks of a deep brown color. In the brewing this
liquor was this noise made, which we thought strange; for the pressing of the
gourd gently down into the liquor, and the air which it contained, being forced
out of the little hole at the top, occasioned a sound, and according to the
time and motion given, would be various. This drink when made and cool to sup,
was in a shell first carried to the Cassekey, who threw part of it on the
ground, and the rest he drank up, and then would make a loud hem; and
afterward the cup passed to the rest of the Cassekey's associates, as
aforesaid; but no other man, woman, or child must touch or taste of this sort
of drink; of which they sat sipping, chatting, and smoking tobacco, or some
other herb instead thereof, for the most part of the day.

About noon some fish were brought to us on small palmetto leaves, being boiled
with scales, head ands gills, and nothing taken from them but the gutts; but
our troubles and exercises were such that we cared not for food.

In the evening, we being laid on the place aforesaid, the Indians made a drum
of a skin, covering therewith the deep bowl in which they brewed their drink,
b^ating thereon with a stick, and having a couple of rattles made of a small
gourd, put on a stick with small stones in it, shaking it; they began to set up
a most hideous howling, very irksome to us, and some time after came many of
their young women, some singing some dancing: This was continued till midnight,
after whih they went to sleep.

The 1st of the eighth month, called October, being the fifth day of the week.
This day the Cassekey, looking on us pleasantly made presents to some of us,
especially to my wife -- he gave her a parcel of shell fish, which are known by
the name of clamms, one or two he roasten, and gave her showing that she must
serve the rest so, and eat them. The Indian women would take our child and
suckle it, for its mother's milk was almost gone, that it could not get a me^^
-- And our child, which had been at death's doo^ from the time of its Birth,
until we were cast away, began now to be cheerful, and have an appetite to
food; it had no covering but a small piece of raw deer-skin, not a shred of
linen or woolen to put on it.

About the tenth hour we observed the Indians to be on a sudden motion, and
most of the principal of them betook themselves to their houses: the Cassekey
went to dressing his head, and painting himself, and so did all the rest: When
they had done, they came to the Cassekey's house, and seated themselves in
order. In a small time after came an Indian with some small attendance into the
house, making a ceremonious motion, and seated himself by the Cassekey, and the
persons that came with him seated themselves amongst the others: After some
small pause, the Cassekey began a discourse which held him nigh an hour, after
which the strange Indian and his companions went forth to the waterside to
their canoe lying in the sound, and returned presently with such presents, as
they had brought, delivering them to the Cassekey, and those sitting by giving
an applause, the presents were some few bunches of the herb they made their
drink of, and another herb which they use instead of tobacco, and some plated
balls stuffed with moss, to lay their heads on instead of pillows: The ceremony
being ended, they all seated themselves again, and went to drinking Casseena,
smoking and talking during the strangers stay.

About noon some fish were brought to us* and our hunger was grown stronger
upon us, but the quantity given was not much more than each a mouthful, which
we eat; the Cassekey ordered the master Joseph Kirle, Solomon Cresson, my wife
and me, to sit upon their cabin to eat our fish, and they gave us some of
their berries to eat -- we tasted them, but not one amonst us could suffer them
to stay in our mouths, for we could compare the taste of them to nothing else
but rotten cheese steeped in tobacco juice. Some time after we had eaten, the
Indians asked us, if we were Spaniards? Solomon answered them yes. -- Then some
of them would point to those whose hair was black, or of a deep brown, and say
such a one was a Spaniard of the Havanna, and such of Augustine: but those
whose hair was of a light color, they were doubtful of; some would say they
were no Spaniards.

About the third hour in the afternoon the strangers went away, and some small
time after, they having satisfied themselves that most of us were Spaniards,
told us, that we should be sent for to the next town; and also said, that there
was a Nickaleer off, which we understood (Englishmen of Bristol) to the number
of six men and a woman, and that they were to be put to death before we should
get thither. We were silent, although much concerned to hear that report; they
also told us, that a messenger would come for us, to direct us to the next
town, and from thence to Augusti^e. Night coming on, they betook themselves to
their accustomed singing and dancing.

About the 10th or 12th hour in the night, before the singing and dancing was
ended, came in a stranger armed with bow and arrows; the Cassekey and his
companions entertained him with half an hours discourse, which being ended, we
were on a sudden ordered to get up, and hurried away with this stranger, they
not giving us time to see if we were altogether: and a troop of young Indian
men and boys followed us for about four miles; all which way they pelted us
with stones: At length they all left us, except two and our guide; but we
missed Solomon Cresson and Joseph Kirle's boy, and negro Ben, which was no
small trouble to us.

We had not traveled above five miles, before our guide caused us to stop, and
at some small distance there was an Indian town, which I supposed our guide
belonged to, for Indians came from thence with fire and water for him, and with
Palmetto leaves they made a blast of fire; here we staid nigh two hours: The
flies were very thick, and the night very cold, so that our naked bodies were
not able to endure it, but with grief. At length we left this place, but the
whole night following we were troubled with two young Indians, who at times
would be abusing one or other of us, singling them out, and asking if they were
not Nickaleer, or English? If they said nay, then they would hit them a blow or
more with a truncheon which they had, and said, they were. We traveled all
night without stopping, from the aforesaid place.

The 2d of the eighth month, being the sixth day of the week.
After sunrising we came up with the wreck of the vessel that we heard was
cast away, and she was staved all to pieces, for her keelson was driven on
shore. We saw Sugar hogsheads, Ginger, and Logwood, which gave us to suppose
that it was one of our fleet, and we thought it to be either Burrough's or
Smith's, belonging to Bristol. A mile or more from hence we came to an inlet,
and (...) guide told us we must swim over, except my (...) and Robert Ba^row;
but we signified that we could not: He then carried Robert Barrow, Joseph
Kirle, me, my wife and child over first, and at length the whole company, for
it was a great way over. By that time we were all got over the da^ was hot, and
my wife quite tired and faint, (...) Robert Barrow and Joseph Kirle, whose leg
was grown so painful that it overcame him. We got under a grape bush for
shelter from the sun, and I sent one of my negroes to seek for water for them,
but there was none to be had; he got some sea grapes, which with resting,
refreshed the weak and lame.

Our guide was for forcing us forward, so we traveled about four or five miles
further, and met with the Cassekey of the town, who was commander of the
northern part of this coast: He was an ancient man his beard and hair gray, and
he ^nquired for the Captain; so our people pointed to Joseph Kirle, whom he
went to, and embraced him; then he asked for our mate or pilot. This man could
speak Spanish better than any we had met with yet, but not so well as to
discourse, only to ask some questions, and we had three or four amongst us
could make a shift to answer him, for Solomon was kept behind. This old
Cassekey seemed to have compassion on us, and said, that those people who had
served us thus, in stripping of us, were rogues; but we were his comrades or
friends. Withal he said, in a few days, he would carry us to Augustine; and
thereupon he told us of six Englishmen and one woman being at (...) town. We
enquired if he intended them for ^^^gustine? He shook his head, and pointed to
the southward, saying, Nickaleer no Camerade, (Englishmen were not his friends)
which words were unpleasant to us.

These people kept us company till we c^^e within a mile or two of their town,
and then (...) left us, and going faster got in before us. Their town stood
about half a mile from the seashore, within the land on the sound, being
surrounded with a swamp, in which grew white Mangrove trees, which hid the town
from the sea. We were directed to the Cassekey's house, which was large and
filled with Indians, and then ordered to sit down. The old Cassekey fetched
some water, and washed Robert Barrow's feet and my wife's -- after which he got
some canvas and crocus ginger bags, which they had got out of the vessel that
was cast on shore, which were distributed amongst us; Joseph Kirle had a coat
given him, which they had taken from the people of the other vessel, but it was
rent down the back; my wife had two pieces of sail canvas given her, and I*
with others, had a crocus ginger bag; they also gave a piece of an old linen
shirt, in bigness of a small handkerchief, to cover our child; and these were
all our clothing. Robert Barrow and my wife were quite spent with traveling
barefoot on the hot sand, having bruised her feet against stumps stones and
prickles: especially Robert Barrow, whose feet had holes in them, that one
might have put the top of one's thumb in; but we were directed to lie down on a
cabin.

The other vessel's company that was cast away, were John Smith, master of the
Nantwich, a barque belonging to Bristol, which came out of Jamaica with us,
with five men and one woman, viz. Andrew Murray merchant, Andrew Barnes, mate,
Hugh Allen, John Osler, John Shears and Cornelius Toker, two boys, with a woman
passenger named Penelope. We took an opportunity to discourse with them, and
they told us, they were cast away the same night we were, and their vessel
being forced by the storm (they not being able for two days before to carry any
sail) on shore, they got into their boat, and so on shore, and in a small time
was a great part of their wreck driven on shore, amongst which was a barrel or
more of water, some barrels of beef or pork, with their chests, and many other
things which they got.

On the morrow following, they designed to have traveled to the northward; and
Andrew Barnes their mate having been a long time afflicted with a flux, which
had wasted his body to skin and bone, so that he was not able to help himself,
they left behind, and traveled a mile or more, when they came to an inlet
which they could not pass -- whereupon then returned back again to take their
boat, but at their return, before they could get away with their boat, they
espied the Indians coming on them, who soon got to them, and asked in Spanish,
what nation they were? If Spaniards, English, or French? And the Indians made
signs to give them their clothing, which they readily did. But still they
enquired, of what nation? At first, they answered Spaniards; but the natives
looked so furiously: that they soon answered them Englishmen: thereupon every
one had it Nickaleer, Nickaleer? And then they very eagerly stripped them of
all they had on them; after which, they drove them away to the northward to
their own town; but Andrew Barnes, not being able to stand or go, was left
behind, after they had stripped him on the land naked, when they were driven
away.

Before they got to the town, the Indian Cassekey gave them some clothing, and
no violence was offered to their persons, and they had plenty of fish and
berries to the time of our coming: -- John Smith and Andrew Murray had their
lodging in the Cassekey's house, and the woman named Penelope; the rest of
Smith's people lodged in other Indian houses: On our coming, the old Cassekey
told them, they must turn out, and make room for the Spaniards; but Smith and
Murray would not go, and the Indians did not force them.

In some time after we had been in the house, came in Indian women, loaded with
basket^ of berries, mostly of the palm, some seaside coco plums, and seaside
grapes: O^ the two latter we would eat, but of the palm berries we could not
bear the taste in our mouths: We then laid ourselves on the cabin, on that
part which was appointed us, and on the other part the young Cassekey lay,
being parted by a chest that stood thereon. Before night there was a parcel of
large fish, called drumms, brought in, and the old Cassekey told Joseph Kirle,
that those were for the Spaniards, and bid him let somebody dress them, he also
ordered us a pot. They were soon dressed and we eat them; and night being come,
the old Cassekey enquired after our losses: which we, as well as we could, gave
him to understand, that in our vessel was a great deal of clothing and money,
which the Indians at Hoe bay had taken from us. He understood so much of the
matter, that he grew covetous, and said, he would go and get some of it from
them.

About midnight came Solomon Cresson in a canoe with two Indians: The old
Cassekey began to examine him concerning our vessel, goods and money, or plate;
of which Solomon rendered a fuller account to him than we could; which caused
him to resolve on the morrow to provide men and boats, and to go down the sound
to Hoe-bay, to have part from them. He would have had Solomon to have gone with
him but Solomon refused.

We enquired of Solomon concerning his stay, and of the negro Ben, and Joseph
Kirle's boy: He said, that he was stayed by force, but the negro and the boy
were asleep in another house, when we were driven away. They had a design in
staying of Solomon, which he could not rightly understand, but supposed that
they doubted that we were all Spaniards; for the Indians of St. a Lucea would
say to Solomon, that he was a Spaniard, and some others, but the most of us
were not Spaniards, and that we had stolen Solomon; but Solomon denied it.

The 3d of the eighth month, being the seventh day of the week.
This morning the old cassekey, with two canoes and ten Indians with him, went
from hence for Hoe bay, and he promised, that as soon as he returned, he would
carry us for Augustine, which he supposed would be in six days, if he had good
weather. But this day the wind was got northeast, and it looked as though the
weather would be stormy; the wind increased, and toward evening the water in
the sound did rise, so that it began to cover the land, and came into the
houses -- but we had little or no rain till night, when the wind increased, and
rain also.

The 4th of the eighth month, being the 1st day of the week.
This morning the wind was violent with rain; the King's house was knee deep
with water, and like to continue rising; I removed with my wife, child, Robert
Barrow and Benjamin Allen, to an Indian house that stood on a hill of oyster
shells, in this house we remained the whole day. ^he wind continued at north
east very violent, and by reason of much rain, the water arose every hour, and
the Indians began to put their dry berries into their canoes, and to seek which
way to secure them. Several Indians betook themselves to their boats, and
carried what they had to some high land a considerable distance, where a place
was made for their Cassekey, or King; but before day the house we were in was
afloat, and the Indians were for turning us out, bidding us to take an old
canoe that had a hole in the side of her, almost at the bottom, big enough for
a man to put his hand through, so that she was full of water? in this canoe
they would have had us shifted for ourselves, but we were not willing to go;
the Indians made signs for us to be gone diverse times, and at length they grew
angry, and took my kinsman Allen into the canoe and carried him away; in a
little time after they returned with the canoe, and bid me and Robert Barrow be
gone. By this time day appeared, but the wind and rain continued still violent.
I then saw an house on another oyster hill, that the water was not got over
yet, to which I went, and asked, by signs, If I might be there? The Indians
seemed willing; so thither I got my wife, child, and Robert Barrow, and
remained there.

All this Day the wind was violent raining much and the flood continued; we
imagined that the sea was broke in upon the land, and that we should be
drowned. The houses were almost blown to pieces, and the Indians were often a
tying and mending them. The chief man of the house wherein I was, caused his
wife to suckle our child, for it was almost famished, its mother having no milk
in her breasts, for we had received no sustenance since the storm began; and
fresh water was not to be had, the land being covered with the sea; The Indians
offered us some of their berries, which we endeavored to eat, but could not,
the taste was so irksome, and ready to take our breath from us when we tried to
eat them; but we expected, that if the flood continued longer, we should not
need for water; yet nevertheless, we enjoying health and strength, and hunger
growing, we would be tasting the berries, though we could reap no satisfaction.

The 5th of the eighth month, being the second day of the week.
This morning the flood began to come up into our house also, and the Indians
seemed much concerned; the storm of wind and rain; held till about midday, at
which time the wind shifted southward with the rain; but in some few hours the
flood began to abate.

The 7th of the eighth month, being the fourth day of the week.
By this day noon the water fell many feet, and I went out to see our people
whom I left in the King's house, and I found them where I left them. All the
Indians had left the house, and our people remained on the Cabin, which was
about 4 f^et from the floor. The flood had risen within 2 or 3 inches of the
top of the cabin, and they said, They expected to die there. We began to
express our hunger and thirst to each other, but there was no help as ye^ for
either; we went to the springs, but they were all salt as the sea, and we would
be striving with the berries but they were so offensive to us, that we could
reap no satisfaction from them. We went then a begging at times to the Indian
women to suckle our child, which they would seldom deny.

The eighth of the eighth month, being the fifth day of the week.
This day we got some water to drink, but it was very brackish, and at best not
very good.

The 9th of the eighth month, being the sixth day of the week.
This day the young Cassekey returned to his house, with his chests and other
things.

The 10th of the eighth month, being the seventh day of the week.
This day we got a meal of fish, the greatest plenty we had received since we
were there; but we longed for the old Cassekey's return, and feared that the
bad weather would lengthen the time.

The 11th of the eighth month, being the first day of the week.
This morning early came a messenger, giving an account, that the old Cassekey
was within some few leagues of the town, and that we might expect him this
forenoon: Within that time he came in sight, and we all drew down to the water
side to receive him; we perceived he came in state, having his two canoes
lashed together, with poles athwart from the one to the other, making a
platform, which being covered with a mat, on it stood a chest, which was
belonging to us, and my Negro boy Caesar (which the Cassekey of Hoe-bay took
from me) whom he had got from the Indians; upon this chest he sat cross legged,
being newly painted red, and his men with poles, setting the canoes along to
the shore: On seeing us he cried [ Wough] and looked very sternly at us.

He was received by his people with great homage, holding out his hands (as
their custom is) to be kissed, having his chest carried before him to his
house, whither he went, and the house was filled with Indians. The old Cassekey
began and held a discourse for some hours, giving an account, as we suppose,
what he heard and saw; in which discourse he would often mention Nickaleer;
which caused us to fear that all things were not well. After he had told his
story, and some of the elder Indians had expressed their sentiments thereof, they
drank Casseena, and smoaked till evening: The house then being clear, the old
Cassekey looked very unpleasantly, showing to us several things which he had
got, as a hatchet, a knife, the chest, and many other things; asking us, If
they were not ours? Which we owned: Whereupon he would say, they were Nickaleer
(or English) We signified, that we had them of the English, but our money was
Spanish.

Toward the Evening, Joseph Kirle, myself and Solomon, got an opportunity to
discourse with him -- we began to urge his promise of carrying us for
Augustine. At first he started his hardships and labor to Hoe-bay and back,
and that he must have time to rest before he could go out again; then he told
us, the way was long, and would be tedious, and that at several places we must
draw the canoes over land for a great distance; he also mentioned how many
towns there were between this and Augustine, in number ten. But nigh the
conclusion he setting an angry countenance upon us, told us, that at Hoe-bay he
was informed, that we should say, we were all Englishmen: After he had said
this in an angry manner, he turned from us and went away.

This laid all our hopes in the dust, and we soon perceived the Indians grew
jealous, of us, for they would now be daily asking us, if we were not
Nickaleer, or English? And would not seem satisfied with a denial. Many days
were spent, and the time drew nigh, that we understood the old Cassekey was
intended for Augustine; hereupon we applied ourselves to him, requesting that
if all might not go, he would carry some of us; but he told us, He would carry
but one. This put us on querying which of us should be that one? The generality
was for me; but I and Joseph Kirle were for Solomon, because he could speak the
Spanish language well and no other of us could: And should any other of us have
gone and come amongst those Indians to the northward, who, we supposed, could
speak the Spanish language well, we should be discovered to be what those
people supposed we were therefore it might overthrow all our expectations.; but
Solomon might pass all those objections. -- These reasons did not satisfy our
people, so that some of them grew choleric; of which the old Cassekey took
notice, and told Solomon, that if they made such a stir, he would not carry
one; if he did it should be either Solomon, Joseph Kirle, or me. Whereupon we
prevailed with him that Solomon mightgo, and accordingly made preparations: The
Cassekey appointed the number of Indians to go with him; also a cano^ was sent
for, which when it came, we found it to have belonged to the English by the
make of her. This cano^ had a great hole in the head nigh the bottom, with many
great rents and holes in her, but Joseph Kirle and I were required to mend her,
which with much ado we accomplished, the canoe, being much decayed and rotten
where the rents were.

The 18th day of the eighth month, being the first day of the week.
This morning the old Cassekey, with Solomon and six Indians in a canoe, set
out for Augustine; the Cassekey carried a small chest, in which was nigh one
hundred pieces of eight, as some of our people supposed, with some other things
that were got from our vessel. The weather was likely for rain, which caused us
to fear, should the weather prove bad, that Solomon would hardly live to get to
Augustine, for he had nothing to cover him, except a pair of Indian breeches,
and a small piece of skin that covered his breast.

We understood by the old Cassekey, that it would be a month or next new moon,
before we could expect their return; All which time we spent in much trouble
and hardship. The weather began to grow cold, and provisions very short that is
palm berries, coco, plumbs and sea grapes, (which are the three sorts before
expressed) the time of these fruits bearing being over, they having no sort of
fruit till the next Spring.

These people neither sow nor plant any manner of thing whatsoever, nor care
for any thing but what the barren sands produce: Fish they have as plenty as
they please, but sometimes they would make it scarce to us, so that a meal in a
week was most commonly our portion, and three meals a rarity.

After the old Cassekey's departure our hardships increased, especially my wife
and child's, for want of food of any sort; my wife's milk was gone, and our
poor child was in great want; the Indians now and then would give it suck, but
scarcely to satisfy it, for there was a woman or two of their own which had
young children, and no breast to suckle them. Our extremity was such, that any
manner of thing would go down with us, the gills and guts of a fish picked off
a dunghill was acceptable, the scraps the Indians threw a way, and the water
they boiled their fish in, we were thankful for, though never so indecently
handled by them. And though my wife had hardly any milk for our child yet an
Indian woman, who was lately delivered of a child, and had no milk in her
breast, would have had her suckled her child which my wife consented to; and
this was a means of her and our child's reaping a benefit, for the Indians
would give her fish, which means helped to increase milk for our child.

Many were our exercises, both in body and mind, among this people. Sometimes
they would look upon us as though they had some ill intent toward the whole of
us; at other times they would tell us (who were nominally Spaniards) how and in
what manner those of Smith's company should be put to death. And thus were we
daily exercised in sorrow and grievous troubles. -- Sometimes doubts would
arise among ourselves, concerning what would be the end of us, and what manner
of deaths we should pass through; and whomsoever these doubts did appear in, it
would be hard for another to help with counsel: But some there were whose hopes
never failed, they trusting in the Lord to work for our deliverance. One thing
did seem more grievous to me and my wife, than any other thing; which was, that
if it so happened that we should be put to death, we feared that our child
would be kept alive, and bred up as one of those people: When these thoughts
did arise, it wounded us deep.

It now being the time of the moon's entering the first quarter, the Indians had
a ceremonious dance, which they began about eight o'clock in the morning: In
the first place came in an old man, and took a staff about eight feet long,
having a broad arrow on the head thereof, and thence half way painted red and
white, like unto a barber's pole; in the middle of this staff was fixed a piece
of wood shaped like unto a thigh, leg and foot of a man, and the lower part
thereof was painted black: And this staff being carried out of the Cassekey's
house, was set fast in the ground, standing upright: This being done, he also
bro'^ out a basket, containing six rattles, which were taken out thereof, and
placed at the foot of the staf^ -- then another old man came in, and set up an
howling like unto a mighty dog, but beyond him for length of breath, withal
making a proclamation; This being done and most of them having painted
themselves, some red, some black, some with black and red, with their bellies
girt up as tite as well they could girt themselves with ropes, having their
sheath of arrows at their backs, and their bows in their hands, being gathered
together about the staff, six of the chiefest men in esteem amongst them,
especially one who is their Doctor, and much esteemed, took up the rattles, and
began an hideous noise, standing round the staff with their rattles and bowing
without ceasing to the staff for about half an hour; whilst these six were thus
employed, all the rest were staring and scratching, pointing upwards and
downwards, on this and the other side, every way, looking like men frighted, or
more like furies: Thus they behaved themselves till the six had done shaking
their rattles. Then they all began a dance violently stamping on the ground for
the space of an hour or more, without ceasing; in which time they sweat in a
most excessive manner, so that by the time the dance was over, what by their
sweat and the violent stamping of their feet, the ground was trodden into
furrows, and by the morning, the place where they danced was covered with
maggots: Thus often repeating the manner, they continued till about three or
four o'clock in the afternoon, by which time many were sick and faint: And
then, they gathered into the Cassekey's house, they sat down, having some hot
Casseena ready, which they drank plentifully of, and gave great^r quantities
thereof to the sick and fainty than to others: Then they eat berries. On these
days they eat not any food till night.

The next day about the same time, they began their dance as the day before;
also the third day they began their dance at the usual time; At which time came
many Indians from other towns, and fell to dancing, without taking any notice
one of the other.

This third day they were stricter than the other two days, for no woman must
look upon them; but if any of their women went out of their houses they went
veiled with a mat.

The 25th of the eighth month, being the first day of the week.
This day was a day of plenty to us, for we had as much fish and berries as
would serve us two days.

The 26th of the eighth month, being the second day of the week.
This day we observed that great baskets of dried berries were brought in from
diverse towns, and delivered to the King, or young Cassekey, which we supposed
to be a tribute to the king of this town, who is chief of all the towns, from
St. a Lucea to the northward of this town of Jece.

The 27th of the eighth month, being the third day of the week.
This day there was a bag of berries (the bag made of grass) given to us, which
we eat in t^o or three days, and then we fasted as many before the young
Cassekey would give us more.

About this time, John Smith and Andrew Murray were sharply seized with a fever
and ague; when the fit of the ague was on them, the Indians would mock and
deride them: This we well observed, that these people had no compassion on
their aged declining people, when they were past their labor, nor on others of
their own, which lay under any declining condition; for the younger is served
before the elder, and the elder people, both men and women, are slaves to the
younger.

In this place we saw many tokens of some of our nation's having fallen into
the hands of these people: As two English canoes, one of cedar* the other of
cotton tree, like those of Jamaica; several blocks and sheevers of lign^m
vitae; several tools and knives; and more particularly a razor, on the haft of
which was writ the man's name, thus, THOMAS FOSTER. Some of these things looked
as though they had been several years amongst them, some but a few; but we
never dared to enquire, for we thought they brought some things in our view to
try us.

Here was a man in this town, who, some years before had been taken off by some
of our English sloops, for a diver on a wreck to the eastward of Cuba, where he
was for some time; but the vessel putting into Cuba for water, this Indian swam
on shore and got to the Havanna, from thence to Augustine, and so to his native
town. The greatest charge this man had against the English, was for taking him
away; not but that he was well used amongst them: This Indian would often call
Joseph Kirle, Solomon Cresson, and some of us, into his house, seeming very
cheerful, and asking if they would not eat? Withal asking the names of the
berries, expecting we would call them after the English manner (plumbs) but we
perceiving his drift, and having learned the name of them, as the Spaniards
call them (uvaes) he would then tell us, that the English called them (p^^mbs)
such sort of discourse we had at times, for he would be striving to trap us,
viz. Joseph, Solomon and me, in words; but he never had an advantage, for when
Solomon was gone, we shunned all his invitations and arguments.

The 31st day of the eighth month, being the seventh day of the week.
This day came in a canoe loaded with fish, and it was free for those that
would, to take as much as they pleased. The Indians put us to go and take, for
it was a kind of a scramble amongst us and the young Indian men and boys: All
of us got fish enough to serve us two or three days.

The second of the ninth month, called November, being the second day of the
week.
This morning about the sun rising came two strange Indians, who had run so
hard that they sweated extremely, of whom we understood that the Spaniards were
coming with their old Cassekey* which news surprised us, doubting the truth of
it, for Solomon had been gone but 16 days and we understood that they must have
an extraordinary passage to be back in a month: We had not long to consider of
the matter, for in an hour's time we heard four muskets discharged, and
immediately we looked out, and the Spaniards in their Perre-augoe were in
sight. The Indians were like a people amazed and overcome with fear, and we
perceived the noise of a gun was terrible to them.

The Spaniards landed being in number twelve, S^bastian Lopoz commanding ten
soldiers, with one Indian an interpreter. The Spaniards embraced us very
cheerfully, and expressed their being glad to find us alive; but we were not
able to discourse with each other, though we had so much Spanish as to (...)
questions, and answer some part of what they asked us. One of the Spaniards
saying, they could not speak English; nor could we speak Spanish enough to
understand each other sufficiently; this the Indians perceived, and immediately
cried out Nickaleer, Nickaleer, and looked enviously on us, so that could they
have had their wills, we believed they would not have suffered us to have lived
many hours; but the Spaniards awed them.

We received a letter from Solomon, which he writ when he met with Capt.
Sebastian Lopoz, signifying the Governor of Augustine's great care for our
preservation of what nation soever we were -- but how these persons or the
Governor of Augustine, had knowledge of us, we could not understand, for they
had been 14 days from Augustine, which was nigh the time Solomon went from
hence, and they met Solomon about half way, and sent him for Augustine with
other guides, bringing the old Cassekey and his people with them: We observed
that the old Cassekey seemed much dejected; we supposed the Spaniards had taken
from him the money and what other things he had carried with him, or that he
was vexed he should be so deceived in taking us for Spaniards.

The Spaniards were extraordinary kind to us, so that we had occasion to
rejoice, and thank the Lord for this part of our deliverance by their means:
They were also a terror to the Indians, for they searched their houses, and
took all from them that ever they could find, even to the stub of a nail, which
aggravated them, and increased their disaffection to usward, so that we dared
not to stir from a Spaniard. The Spanish Captain made enquiry were we were cast
away, and what was saved out of our vessel? We gave him an account as well as
we could to make him understand us; which account made him very desirous to go
down thither; but he looking over a paper often, which we supposed was the
Governor's order and instructions to him, we understood they would not (...)
him to prosecute his design; besides we made him (...) of the danger we should
be in, if he and his men should go and leave us amongst these people who were
so bitterly incensed against us.

They then enquired, what became of the boats that belonged to Smith's vessel
and ours; we told them that the Indians had taken Smith's boat and sunk her
some where in the sound, but ours was at St. a Lucea: The Spaniards made the
Indians go and show where they had sunk Smith's boat, and help our people to
get her up, which being done, she was brought to the town, and the Spaniards
were mightily pleased with her, and proposed that they in their canoe, and our
people in that boat should go to Hoe-bay, whereby they might get all from the
Indians which they had got from us, but we would not countenance the matter: We
were for as speedy a departing from amongst these people as we could, since it
had pleased GOD to open a way for our deliverance.

The 3d of the 9th month, being the 3d day of the week.
This morning the Spanish Captain made the Indians provide two canoes which he
caused to be lashed together, at some distance, with sticks across and matted
on the top; which being done, with 4 Indians, Joseph Kirle, John Smith, Robert
Barrow Andrew Murray, Benjamin Allen, Nathaniel Randal, John Shears, Cornelius
Toker, Joseph Kirle's boy, John Hilliard, four Negroes, viz. Jack, Caesar,
Sarah, and Quenza, were sent away for Augustine; but not one morsel of
victuals, except a very few berries, had they with them, no^ (...) Spaniard to
guard them, but were put under the government of those four Indians. About an
hour after Joseph Kirle was gone, the Spanish captain ordered Smith's boat to
be got ready, with two Spaniards and four of our men, to row to the place where
the drift of Smith's vessel was, to look for Logwood or old iron: When they
returned, there was not any thing of value; but our people said, that as they
were searching about they found the bones of Andrew Barnes, his skull and jaw
bone being broken, which occasioned us to suspect, that he was knocked on the
head by the Indians after they had driven away Smith and his people.

We told the Spanish Captain, that Joseph Kirle's negro Ben had been absent
ever since the day after Solomon Cresson went from hence, being gone with the
old Cassekey's wife, but we knew not whither. The Captain made enquiry of the
Indians whither he was gone? They said, for Hoe-bay: Then he ordered them to
send for him, for he would not leave him behind: The Indians said he would be
here within a day or two.

The Spaniards were continually searching for what they could find, of such
things as the Indians had got from us and others, and when they could find no
more they would offer to buy with tobacco what they could persuade the Indians
to bring to light. A leaf or half a leaf of tobacco would purchase a yard of
linen or woolen, or silk, from the Indians; such admirers of tobacco are they
that they este^^ it beyond any other thing.

An (...) of this town some time before the Spaniards came, having a
considerable quantity of ambergrease, boasted that when he went for Augustine
with that he could purchase of the Spaniards a looking glass, an axe, a knife
or two, and three or 4 mannocoes (which is about 5 or 6 pounds) of tobacco the
quantity of ambergrease might be about five pounds weight.

The fourth of the ninth month being the fourth day of the week.
This day we made oars for Smith's boat, of sticks, and the cantle pieces of
sugar hogsheads, which were got on the beach, where the drift of Smith's vessel
came on shore and this evening came the old Cassekey's wife with Joseph Kirle's
negro Ben, and Joseph Kirle's boat, which was of great advantage to help to
carry us. We worked all this night to fit the boat and oars to her, intending
to go away as soon as we could complete this job.

The Spaniards had brought little provision with them, so that there was not
much to spare for us, having not above a row of corn, and a little Nova Spain
bread, which was so b^d, that it was more dust and dead weavels than bread, an
handful of it was an acceptable present to us. We would mix it with a little
water, making it to a paste, which would eat pleasantly; but hunger was no
stranger to us, and we knew not that we should have any victuals on our
journey; but our deliverance seemed to over balance all. The Indians would not
give us any berries, but our people watched an opportunity, and took on^ of the
Cassekey's baggs of berries, which might ^ontain about a bushel, which was all
that one and thirty of us had to depend on.

The 5th of the ninth mon^h, being the fifth day of the week.
This morning, about three hours before day, we departed from this town of
Jece, and the weather being grown cold, we had nothing wherewith to cover our
bodies, besides what the Indians gave us at first, except my wife, for whom the
Spaniards got an old jacket (which had been one of Smith's men's) and gave it
her to wear; also a small piece of cloth to cover our poor child; but it
pleased GOD to strengthen us in this our condition, so that we row^d all the
day without ceasing till three hours after it was dark, by which time we got to
an Indian town: Here we met with Joseph Kirle, Robert Barrow, and the others,
who got thither no^ above an hour or two before us. They had not received any
sustenance from the time they left (...), till they got some berries of us,
having lain one night of the (...) in a swamp; but they were as cheerful as men
could be in this strait.

Since they left us, amongst their other hardships Joseph Kirle had like to
have lost his life several times; the first was thus; whilst the two canoes
were lashed together, having a few berries that were designed to have been
shared amongst them, the Irish boy Cornelius Toker, would ever and anon be
taking some of them, who being often reproved by Joseph Kirle and others, would
not desist; whereupon Joseph Kirle, with the paddle he paddled the canoe along
with, struck him; thereupon an Indian took his bow and arrow, and was going to
shoot Joseph, who seemed little concerned, whether he lived or died; withal
saying, the Spaniards would justify him.

Another time, when he was spent with paddling the canoe, and desired John
Smith, Andrew Murray, and others of them, as well able as himself, to give him
a spell, which they refused, and he being not able to paddle any further, laid
down his paddle; whereupon the Indians commanded him to paddle, but he refused
saying, they might kill him if they would, opening his breast for them to
execute their wills; which they seemed as though they would have done, but
after great threatening they desisted.

Another time, the wind being h^gh, and the seas rough, that they were forced
to unlash their canoes by Joseph Kirle's persuasion, and to go single, Joseph
Kirle taking one canoe to his own management, having Robert Barrow, his boy, my
kinsman, Nathaniel Randal and the negroes in her which being thus single from
the other company, was more satisfactory to him than before, though there were
none to help but Nathaniel Randal: My negro woman named Sarah, having beaten
and abused a girl named Quenza, and being reproved often by him and Robert
Barrow, she therefore abused them in an extraordinary manner; Whereupon Joseph
struck her with his paddle, at which, one of the Indians, in the other canoe,
took his striking staff and darted at him, narrowly missing him.

The 6th of the ninth month, being the sixth day of the week.
This morning Joseph Kirle, with those who were with him, were by the Spanish
Captain ordered away by the break of day, he not taking any care to give them a
little sustenance; and about an hour or two after we followed rowing all the
day, without ceasing, till an hour or two within night, by which time we got to
an Indian town, where not any thing was to be had but water; and about two
hours after us came Joseph Kirle. The Spanish Captain would not let them come
on shore, but ordered them to keep on, that we might get next night to the
place where we must haul our boats over land, from one sound to another.

The 7th of the ninth month, being the seventh day of the week.
This morning we set forward very early, and rowed hard: About noon we got to a
parcel of marshy islands, amongst which we were to go up creeks, but the
passage was very difficult to find; at length when we had got nigh an Indian
town, the Spaniards hollowed and an Indian came out into the marsh, but was
very loath to come near us; at last he came wading to us to be our pilot: We
then set forward, and in an hour's time or more we got to the place where
Joseph Kirle and those with him were; but the Indians that were with Joseph,
would not let them proceed further, till we came up with them. In half an
hour's time we got to the place where we were to haul our boats over land,
being about a quarter of a mile from sound to sound, at which place the sea was
half a furlong from us. The Spanish Captain gave the Indian we last took in, a
piece of a leaf of tobacco, commanding him to go with all speed, and bid his
Cassekey, with all his able men, to come and help to haul our boats over land;
but we set to work, and had them over by that time the Indians came. The
Spanish Captain gave the Cassekey a leaf or two of tobacco for himself, and
discharged them; only ordered the Cassekey to send some men a fishing for him,
which they did, and before night they brought a stately parcel of fish, but
none of our people had any part of it, except my wife and Penelope; what they
did not eat, they kept to carry with them.

A little before night there sprang up a storm of wind at north-east, and it
seemed likely to be a dismal night of wind and rain; we were got (...) place
where there was not a tree or bush, or any manner of shelter, and the wind so
cold, that we thought we should not live till next day. We had no wood to make
a fire with, and what to do we could not tell; but we were resolved to try to
get some, and in order thereto, some of the ablest of us went along the bay to
search for drift wood and found a little; but rain came with the night, and no
shelter to be had but our boats, which the Spaniards would not suffer us to
meddle with to turn them bottom upwards for shelter, which seemed very hard,
for they had made themselves some shelter with mats. We were then forced to
exercise patience, and with what salt water wood we had, made as good a fire as
we could, and laid ourselves down on the sand by it, and it pleased God we had
a comfortable night, beyond our expectation notwithstanding the cold was very
sharp.

The 8th of the ninth month, being the first day of the week.
This morning we set forward, but the water was so low that we were forced to
wade, and thrust the boat along for some miles; at length we got into a deep
channel, where was nothing to be seen but marsh and water, and no fast land nor
trees. About ten o'clock we heard three or four muskets fired a little ahead
of us, in the channel we were in, and our Spaniards presently answered them
with the like, and in a little time we met. This was a perreaugoe to join with
that which came for us, having orders to go to the place where we were cast
away, and get what was to be had from the Indians; but she turned back with us,
for there was no place to go on shore; and in an hour or two's time we got into
the other sound, where the land was not to be seen from side to side in some
places: The like was in that we came through.

About an hour before sunset we got to an Indian plantation (this was the first
place we saw any thing planted) being full of pompion vines, and some small
pompions on them, but the Spaniards were too quick for us, and got most of them
before us; nevertheless we got a few as big as one's fifth. We made a fire
there, yet had not patience to dress them as they should be, but put them into
the fire roasted them, and eat them; but the Spaniards used a great deal of
cookery with their pompions. The Perreaugoe that came from Augustine had
brought bread, corn, and strung-beef, but it was kept from us, except a piece
of strung beef the Captain of the Spaniards gave my wife, as big as a stick of
sealing wax, which we treasured up, expecting it must be harder with us when we
left these people.

Here Captain Sebastian Lopoz drew up a writing, and would have had me and
Joseph Kirle to sign it, which we refused; for we perceived he had a design,
especially against me, to oblige me to give him some of my negroes. We answered
him short, that I reckoned myself and negroes at the Governor of Augustine's
disposal, and we would sign no writing. We borrowed a pot, and boiled pompion
leaves, having nothing to put them in but water, which was satisfactory; but
this night was more terrible than the last, the wind being at north west: it
did not blow hard, yet it was very cold, and we lying in an open field, without
any shelter, one side of us would scorch, while the other was freezing. Our
negro woman Hagar's little boy, named Cajoe, was seized with convulsion fits
about two in the morning, which was chiefly occasioned by the cold, and want of
food; but help there was not from us. The Spanish captain came to see the
child, and supposing that it would die, asked if the child was a christian? He
was answered, as good an one as he could make it. But he called for water,
putting some of it on the crown of the child's head, and crossing it, called
him Francisco. This action pacified his father and mother.

The 9th of the ninth month, being the second day of the week.
This morning we were to go forward, and the Spaniards were to return to the
place where we were cast away; but our two boats could not carry us all,
therefore we had the Spaniards great perry augoe to carry us one day's journey
further to an Indian town, and four Spaniards with us, three of which were to
bring the perry-augoe back, the other was to be our guide for Augustine. We
departed, but met with an intricate passage; for sometimes we should be
a-ground on oyster-banks, or shoals, and almost out of sight of land. About two
or three in the afternoon we had no water to go any further, and the wind being
north-westerly drove the water out of the sound; but being nigh the shore,
where had been an Indian town, we went thither, and found some ripe berries on
the palm shrubs, which we were very earnest after, till such time as a storm of
wind, with rain, began to come upon us, and night nigh at hand; whereupon we
all got together, considering what we should do, since there was no possibility
of getting shelter here. Our Indian guide said, we might get to a town about
two leagues off, which we were glad to hear, for it rained hard: So we, with
our guide, set forward, and walked over a parcel of scraggy, shrubby hills, to
the sea shore, along which we traveled till we came to the Indian town, where
we got plenty of berries for our supper. It rained much till toward morning.

The 10th of the ninth month, being the third day of the week.
This morning the Indians not being willing to stay any longer, we were by our
guide required to depart, which we did, and a great many young Indian men
followed us several miles along the bay, and offered violence to Robert Barrow,
and some others, but they were easily stopped, by showing them a rusty musket
presented toward them, and so they left us. We had an untoward passage from
the seashore, athwart the land, to the Indian town, the ground being swampy,
and scraggy hills, which to our bare feet was very troublesome; but when we
came to it, it was a large town, and there was another large town about a mile
distant, in sight, to which part of our company was sent to be quartered: At
this town, about a twelve month before, a parcel of Dutchmen were killed, who
having been cast away on the Bohemian shoals, they, in a flat which they built,
escaped hither, and were devoured by these cannibals, as we understood by the
Spaniards. -- The flat, or boat, our people saw; but they seemed kind to them,
giving them fish and berries to eat. We remained at these two towns till next
morning. The Indians of the town I was at, were not so kind as those at the
other town had been. Some of our people were for selling their rags to the
Indians for fish; but we thought it was necessary, of the two extremes, to
defend against the the cold, for every day grew colder than the other, and we
feared, that if we were much longer exposed to it, we should not live it out.

The 11th of the ninth month, being the fourth day of the week.
This morning we embarked in our two boats, and those of our people, that were
at the other town, were to have a large canoe to carry them from thence, and
were to meet us in the sound: We rowed several leagues, but did not meet them,
it being then about ten o'clock, so the Spaniard would go on shore, and travel
back by land to see after them: and we being by an inlet of the sea, which was
a mile over, the Spaniard ordered us to go on the other side, and there stay
for him; which we did for many hours. At this place we all went upon the
search, to see if any thing was to be had for the belly, some on the land, some
in the Water: The land yielded nothing, but in the water we got a sort of shell
fish, called water soldiers, which we eat. At length the canoe with our people
came, the Spaniard not being with them, but in about half an hours time he came
with another small canoe. This was the place where Solomon met the Spaniards.
The canoes had each two Indians to set them along, and w^ had one Indian for
our guide named Wan Antonia, who the Spaniard said was a christian, but an
inhabitant of the town where the Dutchmen were killed. We set forward in our
two boats, and the two canoes, and rowed till night, being nigh a place of
thickety wood which we made choice of to lodge at for this night -- Here was
wood enough, and we made large fires were pleased with the place, and lay down
to rest.

About midnight I had a great loss; having a quart of berries whole, and as
much pounded to mix with water, to feed our child with, the fire being
disturbed, the cloth which we had our food in was burnt, and all was lost, and
nothing was to be had till we could get to the Spaniards, which was two days
march at least. About an hour after this the wind rose at north-west and it
began to rain; but having small Palmetto, which grew nigh, Joseph Kirle and I
set to work and made a shelter which would keep ten or more of us from the
weather: We had no sooner, completed our work, but it rained hard. In this
shower of rain the four Indians got from among us, took their canoes, and away
they went back again; when day appeared, we missed them; upon which we went to
the water side, where we found the two canoes gone. And now we were in a great
strait; but the Spaniard said, that those that could travel best must go by
land. The persons pitched upon were Richard Limpeny, Andrew Murray, Cornelius
Toker, Joseph Kirle's boy, John Hilliard and Penelope; with seven negroes,
named, Peter, Jack, Caesar, Sarah, Bella, Susanna, and Quenza; the Spaniard and
the Indian Wan-Antonia, went with them to direct the way, carrying them over
land to the seashore, and then directing to keep the seashore along to the
northward; after which they returned to us, and we with our boats rowed all day
without ceasing, till sunset, and when we put on shore, the place was an old
Indian field, on a high bleak hill, where had been a large Indian house, but it
was tumbled down; of the ruins of this house we made a shelter against the
northwest wind, which began to blow very bleak, and the Spaniard went to the
sea, which was not two miles off, to see if our people had past, and at his
return he said they were gone by. We asked if they could reach to any house or
Indian town for shelter? For we supposed, should they be without fire this
night, they could not live: He said, they must travel all night. Night came on,
we had fire and wood enough, and had gathered a great heap of grass to lie on,
hoping to have got some rest, but the north west wind increased, and the cold
was so violent, that we were in a lamentable condition, not being able to rest:
for as we lay or stood close to the fire that it would scorch us, the side from
it was ready to freeze; so we had no other way but to stand and keep running
for the most part of the night, and we all thought we had never felt the like:
The Spaniard that was clothed was as bad to bear it as we that were naked. At
length day appeared, and we must go.

The 13th of the 9th month, being the 6th day of the week.
This morning we were loath to part with our fires but to stay here it could not
be; so we went to our boats, wading in the water till it was ready to benumb
us, and we put forward, rowing about 2 leagues, then came to an old house,
where the Spaniard told us we must leave the boats and travel by land; we had a
boggy marsh to wade through for a mile to get to the seashore, and had about 5
or 6 leagues along the bay or strand, to the Spanish centinel's house. The
north west wind was violent, and the cold such, that the strongest of us
thought we should not outlive that day. Having got through the boggy marsh, and
on the seashore our people, black and white, made all speed, one not staying
for another, that could not travel so fast none but I, with my Wife and child,
Robert Barrow, my kinsman Benjamin Allen, and my negro London, whom I kept to
help carry my child, keeping together; the rest of our company had left us, not
expecting to see some of us again, especially Robert Barrow, my Wife and child,
but we traveled after them as well as we could, and having gone about 2 miles,
the cold so seized on my kinsman Benjamin Allen, that he began to be stiff in
his limbs staggered and fell, grievously complaining that the cold would kill
him. Our negro having the young child, I and my wife took our kinsman under
each arm, and helped him along; but at length his limbs were quite stiff, his
speech almost gone, and he began to foam at the mouth. In this strait we knew
not what to do, if we staid with him, we must perish also, but we were willing
to strive as long as we could, therefore we carried our kinsman and laid him
under the bank he not being yet dead, and I resolved to run after our people,
some of them not being out of sight; which I did, and left my Wife and child,
with the negro to follow as fast as they could. I ran about two miles, making
signs to them, thinking if they should look behind and see me running, they
mould stop till I got up with them: I was also in hopes, that if I could have
accomplished this my design, to have got help to have carried my kinsman along;
but they stopped not, and I ran till the wind pierced me so, that my limbs
failed me, and I fell, yet still I strove, and getting up, walked backward to
meet my wife: As I was returning, I met with the Spaniard coming out of the
sand hills, and Joseph Kirle's negro Ben; I made my complaint to the Spaniard,
but he not being able to understand me well, went forward; I then applied
myself to the negro, making large promises if he would fetch my Kinsman; he
offered to go back and use his endeavor, which he did. At length my wife and
child came up with me: She was almost overcome with grief expressing in what
manner we were forced to part with our kinsman, and expecting that she and the
child should go next.

Poor Robert Barrow was a great way behind us, and I feared we should never see
him again. I used my endeavor to comfort my wife, entreating her not to let
grief overcome her, I had hopes that the Lord would help us in this strait, as
he he had done in many since we were in this land; and if it pleased God that
we should lay down our lives in this wilderness, that we might beseech him to
enable us to do it willingly. Thus striving in a deep exercise of body and
mind, we traveled on, admiring God's goodness in preserving us thus far
through so many imminent dangers; in the sense of which, a secret hope would
arise (though involved with human doubts and fears) That the Lord would yet
preserve us.

I took my child from the negro and carried him and having an Indian mat, with
a slit in it, through which I put my head, hanging over my breast upon my
waist, under this I carried my child, which helped to break the wind off; but
the poor babe was black with cold from head to foot, and its flesh as cold as a
stone, yet is was not froward. Its mother would take it now and then, and give
it the breast, but little could he get at it; besides, we dared not to stop in
the least, for if we did, we should perceive our limbs to fail.

About two o'clock in the aftetnoon we came up with our negro woman Hagar, with
her Child at her back almost dead, and a little further we came up with our
negro girl Quenza, being dead, as we thought, for she was as stiff as a dead
body could be, and her eyes set; but at length we perceived her to breathe, but
she had no sense nor motion, and we carried her from the water side under the
bank. This increased my wife's sorrow, and she began to doubt she should not be
able to travel much further; but I endeavored to encourage her not to leave
striving as long as any Ability was left.

All our people were out of sight, except four, and those we had gained upon: I
sent my negro to overtake them, and desire them to slacken their pace till we
got up with them, being in hopes, that gaining their company would cheer up my
wife, but they would not; so the negro stopped for us. We had lost sight of
Robert Brarow by this time.

Soon after we overtook John Smith, who was one of the four, and he began to
fail, and his companions left him; whereupon he made grievious complaints,
which I reproved him for, lest he should discourage my wife.

The sun was nigh setting, and we began to look out for the sentinel's post,
and my negro at times got upon several of the highest sand hills to look out,
but could not see any house, nor the smoke of fire; this was terrible to us
all, for the (...) being so cold, the night much more, and we not able to
travel without rest, being a starved people, both within our bodies and
without; and if we ceased from traveling, we should instantly be benumbed and
move no further.

In the midst of these reasonings and doubtings we were got into, I espied a
man, as I thought, standing on the bank, but at a great distance; I wa^ afraid
to speak, lest it should prove otherwise, but he was soon seen by the whole
company, and at length we espied him walking toward the land; this confirmed
us, and so we betook to the hills again to look out, yet we could not see the
house from thence; but on the next hill we saw it -- This was joy to us, though
we began to have a sense of our tiredness; for our resolution abated after we
had got sight of the house.

When we got to the house we found four sentinels, and the Spaniards our
guides, with three of our men, viz. Joseph Buckley, Nathaniel Randal, and John
Shears, and the Spaniards bid us welcome, making room for us to sit down by the
fire. The chiefest man of the sentinels took a kersey coat, and gave it my wife
to cover het, and gave each of us a piece of bread made of Indian corn, which
was pleasant to us, and afterward we had plenty of hot Casseena drink. It was
dark, but we endeavored to prevail with the Spaniards to go and seek for Robert
Barrow and my kinsman offering them considerable; but they seemed not fully to
understand me, yet I could make them sensible that my kinsman was almost dead,
if not quite, and that the old man was in a bad condition: They made me to
understand, that the weather was not fit to go out, but they would watch if
Robert passed by.

About an hour or two after, one of the Spaniards being walking nigh the bay,
met with Robert, and brought him into the house, at which we rejoiced to see
him, and inquired concerning our kinsman, and the Negro Ben: He said, our
kinsman was striving to get up, but could not: he came to him, and spoke to him
and he could not answer, but cried, and he could not help him; but coming
along, at some considerable distance, he met negro Ben, who said, he was going
for Benjamin Allen, so he past him: And some miles further, he saw negro Jack
drawing himself down from the bank, his lower parts being dead, and crying out
for some fire that he might save his life; but he did not see the negro girl
whom we hauled out of the way.

We were under a great concern for our kinsman; the Spaniards we could not
prevail on to go and fetch him, or go and carry wherewith to make a fire; which
had they done, and found them living, it might have preserved them; but we
hoped negro Ben would bring our kinsman.

The Spaniards would have had most of us to have gone to the next Sentinel's
house, which was a league farther, but we all begged hard of them to let us lie
at their house, in any place on the ground, for we were not able to travel
further: Besides, the cold would kill us; for we were in a trembling shaking
condition, and so full of pain from head to foot that it is not to be
expressed. At length the Spaniards consented that Robert Barrow, I, my wife and
child, and John Smith, should lie in the house; but to Joseph Buckley,
Nathaniel Randal, John Shears, and my negro London, they would not grant that
favor; so one of the Spaniards taking a firebrand, bid those four go with him,
and he directed them to a small thicket of trees, and ordered them to gather
wood and make large fires, and sleep there. These poor creatures lay out, and
it proved a hard frosty night. When the Spaniard returned, he said they were
got into a wood, and had fire enough; but we were silent, fearing they would
hardly live till morning.

After they were gone, the Spaniards took a pint of Indian corn and parched it,
and gave part to us, which we accepted cheerfully; also they gave us some
Casseena to drink; but we were in extraordinary pain, so that we could not
rest, and car feet were extremely bruised, the skin being off and the sand
caked with the blood, so that we could hardly set our feet to the ground, after
we had been some time in the house.

The night proved extreme cold: Though we were in the house and by the fire, we
could not be warm, for the one side did scorch while the other was ready to
freeze; and thus we passed that night.

The 14th of the 9th month, being the 7th day of the week.
This morning we looked out, and there being a very hard frost on the ground,
it was terrible to go out of doors. Our people returned from the wood, but
complained heavily of their hardship in the night. They had not been an hour in
the house, before the Spaniards gave us all a charge to be gone to the next
Sentinel's house: This was grievous to us all, but more especially to my wife
who could not raise herself when down; but go we must; for though we entreated
hard for my wife and Robert Barrow, we could not prevail that they might stay
till we could get a canoe. As we were all going, one Spaniard made a sign for
me and my wife to stay, which we did, and it was to have a handful of parched
corn; as soon as we had received it, they bid us be gone to the next
Sentinel's, where was victuals enough for us. The sun was a great height, but
we could not feel any warmth it gave, the North-wester beginning to blow as
hard as it did the day before; and having deep sand to go through, made our
traveling this one league very hard, especially to my wife and Robert Barrow;
but the Spaniards lent my wife a blanket, to be left at the next Sentinel's
house.

At length we came to an inlet of the sea, on the other side whereof was the
Look-out and Sentinel's house: Here were all our people sitting, waiting to be
carried over, and in a little time came one of the Sentinels with a canoe and
carried us over.

This Sentinel would not suffer us to come into his house, but caused us to
kindle a fire under the lee of his house, and there sit down: About half an
hour after, he bid us be gone to the next Sentinel's, which was a league
further, giving us a cup of Casseena, and two quarts of Indian corn for us all,
bidding us go to our company at the next house, and get our corn dressed there.

I understood that our negro woman Hagar, got hither late the night before,
having her child dead at her back, which the Spaniards buried.

One of the Spaniards went with us to the next inlet, carrying a stick of fire,
to light some trash to make a signal for them on the other side to fetch us
over, the inlet being very wide. When the canoe came over for us, our guide
took the blanket from my wife; but the negro, which brought over the canoe,
lent my wife one of his coats, so we got over well; but before we got to the
house, we had a shower of hail. At this house we were kindly received, having
such a mess of victuals as we had not had in a long time before, which was very
pleasant to our hunger-starved stomachs.

Our people went from hence this morning for Augustine, having a guide with
them; but John Hosler and Penelope were left here, not being able to travel,
and we remained here till the next day, but the night was so extreme cold that
we could not rest.

The 15th of the 9th month, being the first day of the week.
This morning the Spaniards bid us prepare to travel, for they were not able to
maintain us; and we understanding that it was five or six miles to Augustine,
could not travel so far, being all of us lamed and stiff; therefore we
entreated them to let us go in a canoe, but they denied us, we then entreated
for the two women and Robert Barrow, and at length we prevailed, that they
should go up in a canoe; for the canoe was to go, whether we went or not.

While all this discourse was, came in a couple of Spaniards, one being the
sentinel that went with our people the day before: the other was a person the
Governor had sent with a canoe and four Spaniards to fetch us. This was
cheerful news; for had we gone to have traveled without a guide, we should
have perished. The man that came for us, brought two blankets, one for my wife,
the other for Penelope, and he desired us to be going. About a league distance
from the place he left the canoe, which we parted with very unwillingly, for
some of our people, had they had a mile further to have gone, could not have
gone it. The wind still continued at northwest, and blowed very fiercely, and
extreme cold it was: We had such a continual shivering and pain in our bones,
that we were in violent anguish.

Our poor child was quiet, but so black with cold and shaking, that it was
admirable how it lived.

We got to Augustine about two hours before night, and being put on shore, we
were directed to the Governor's house, where we were had up a pair of stairs,
at the head whereof stood the Governor, who ordered my wife to be conducted to
his wife's apartment.

I and John Smith went into a room, where the Governor asked us a few
questions; but seeing how extreme cold we were, he gave us a cup of Spanish
wine, and sent us into his kitchen to warm ourselves at the fire.

About half an hour afterward, the Governor sent for John Smith and me, and
gave each of us a shirt and sliders, a hat and a pair of silk stockings,
telling us, he had no woollen clothes as yet, but would have some made: We put
on the linen, and made all haste into the kitchen to the fire. Robert Barrow
was quartered at another house.

Several persons came to the Governor's house, and took such as they were
minded to quarter in their houses, but Joseph Kirle, John Smith, I, my Wife and
child, lodged at the Governor's house.

All our people that came up with Joseph Kirle came to see us, and we perceived
the people's great kindness, for they were all well clothed from head to foot,
with the best the people had.

Joseph Kirle then began to tell us of his travels, after he left us on the
bay, and how that they all concluded, that they should never see my wife and
child, and Robert Barrow, any more, if they did my kinsman and me. Richard
Limpeny, and those that went with him, had a hard travel for thirty six ho^rs
without ceasing, in which three of our negroes, that went with them, were lost,
viz. Jack, Caesar and Quenza, by sitting down to rest themselves, who were in a
little time so benumbed that they could not go, and there perished, so that we
lost five in that day's travel, and began to doubt that negro Ben perished also.

Joseph Kirle said, that he thought he should have lost some of our people in
their travel from the last sentinel's hither, for they were much tired, and the
cold violent; and the latter part of that day's journey, they waded for many
miles through much water, and deep sand hills, and when they was in sight of
Augustine, they staid for boats to fetch them, in which time some were benumbed
with the cold.

Joseph Kirle had applied himself to the Governor on our behalfs, to send us
help, for he doubted whether we were all living, and the Governor readily
assented, and forthwith sent for a person fit for his purpose, charging him to
get a perry-augoe, and go forthwith to fetch us, but the tide fell out so, that
he could not go till midnight: The Governor was so concerned, that he would not
go to bed till they were gone, and when the tide served, we went to the water
side, and saw the men put off, giving them a strict charge.

Solomon Cresson then began to tell us of his travels from Jece, having for
most part of the way much rain: The Indians were very kind to him, till they
came to the Indian town where the Dutchmen were killed, at which place, some of
the Indians made a discovery of his being no Spaniard: They said nothing to him
thereof, but were very dogged, giving him no food, and causing him to lie on
the ground amongst virmin.

On the next day he was to go with his (...) company, who were grown so extreme
bitter and envious against him, that when they did but look upon him, they were
ready to smite him; and having gone till about midday, passing an inlet, the
weather being extreme bad with wind, rain, and much cold, they put on shore
(this was the place where we put on shore, and got water-soldiers, and staid
for the Spaniard, when he went back to look for our people that were to follow
us in a conoe) but the rage of these people was such, that he expected to die:
being on shore, they readily kindled a fire, about which time he heard a noise
of a boat and oars, and presently the Spanish Perre-augoe put on shore upon
them: The Indians were extraordinarily surprised, and stood amassed, but Solomon
was glad to see them, and they him. The Spaniards took the old Cassekey's
chest, and whatever he had from him, commanding them to return to he Indian
towns from whence they came. Staying here all night, the next morning the
Spaniard sent Solomon, under the conduct of two Indians belonging to these
towns, who were commanded by the Spaniards to carry Solomon to the sentinel's
house -- but these two Indians carried him a little beyond the place where we
put on shore to travel, and they seemed as though they had mischief in their
hearts against him; he asked, if they would go forward? But they looking
untowardly on him, answered him not; So he went himself, and was glad when he
saw they did not follow him.

Now we were desirous to know, how the Spaniards had knowledge of us* which it
seems was thus:

When we got to Jece, where Smith and his company were, and we going under the
denomination of Spaniards, and the other English, the report of us run from
Indian town to Indian town to the northward, even to the northernmost town, at
which town were two or more Indians who were converted to the Romish says:
These, or one of these, went to the next Spanish sentinel's, and gave an
account, that he heard that there were two vessels cast away to the southard of
Jece, one being a Spaniard, the other an English vessel; and the Spaniards
having two vessels going for the Havanna, to seek for supplies, feared they
were those vessels; and the same day as this news came to the Governor of
Augustine, came also news of one of their friars being murdered by some of the
cape Indians; and after this manner we understood it, viz.

Three friars being under a vow to go amongst the Indians on the Cape to
convert them, they went to a certain town to the northward, off which we were
cast away, but it lay within the sound. The Cassekey of that town they gained
on to embrace the Roman faith, but his people were much incensed against the
Friars, and therefore would have their Cassekey renounce his faith, and put the
friars to death, but he would assent to neither; therefore they killed him and
one friar, the other two escaped. Hereupon was a perre-augoe forthwith sent for
us, of what nation soever we might be; also a party of Spaniards and Indians
were sent against that town where the friar was killed.

After having thus related our several travels, we had a plentiful supper,
provided, and we fed like people that had been half starved; for we eat, not
knowing when we had enough, and found our palates so changed by eating of the
berries, that we could not relish the taste of salt, no more than if it had no
saltness in it, we had also lodging provided, but few beds.

The 16th of the ninth month, being the second day of the week.
This morning we had ice half an inch thick, and it had been so for some
mornings past but as the sun arose, it desolved.

The Governor came in this morning to our apartment, enquiring how we did? And
we having had chocolate for breakfast, he asked if we would have any thing else
that his house could afford? If we would but ask, is should be brought us: But
we modestly answered that this was sufficient; although our appetites were not
to be satisfied. The Governor then stated the poverty of the country to us.

This place is a garrison, maintained one half by the King of Spain; the other
half by the church of Rome. The male inhabitants are all soldiers, every one
receiving pay according to his post; a sentinel's pay is 150 pieces of eight a
year; and all their supply of bread, clothing and money, comes from the Havanna
and Porta Vella, and it was going on of three years since they had a vessel
from any place whatsoever, which made their wants very great, all things being
expended except ammunition and salt, of which they said they had enough -- but
the Governor offered us the freedom of what his house afforded, withal, he gave
us a charge to be careful in going abroad, especially of some persons that did
not affect our nation, and we promised to be ruled, and submit to the Governors
pleasure for our liberty.

Our people coming in, we told them of the Governor's caution; but they said,
they had been all over the town, and in many houses, where they were kindly
received, and such as the people had they would give them. They also told us of
some English that lived here, and they had been at their houses; the chiefest
in esteem was one William Carr, of the Isle of Ely, who about thirty years
before was in a vessel bound for South Carolina, but they missing their port,
were cast away near Augustine, and many were drowned; but he and some others
being brought hither by the Indians, some of them got away in Spanish vessels,
and others died here. This man turned Roman Catholic, and married a Spanish
woman, by whom he had seven children, and is an officer in the garrison; he was
our chief interpreter.

This day came Joseph Kirle's negro Ben, and he gave us an account, that after
we had sent him back, and he having looked, and not finding my kinsman, he went
to seek for a place to shelter himself from the cold, and a place he found to
creep in, where he lay down, and continued all night, but by the morning was so
stiff with cold that he could not use his legs, but hauled himself toward the
bay; when the Spaniard, our guide from the first sentry house, the morning
after we went from thence returning along the bay, to see if any of our people
were living, found them all dead except negro Ben, for whom he made a fire, by
which he was recovered and got the use of his limbs.

William Carr the interpreter acquainted us, that the Governor and two royal
officers would examine us, concerning our being cast away and what goods and
moneys was lost in our vessel, and concerning our hardships among the Florida
Indians etc. which was done and every one did sign it. -- This took up two or
three days time to complete it; but after it was done, the Governor told us,
that he expected Capt. Sebastian Lopez in a few days, and after his arrival he
would provide for our going to Carolina, with canoes and men to guard us.

This week my wife was taken with a Fever and Ague, which held her three days,
and then lef^ her. The Governor ordered his own doctor to administer such
things as were helpful, and his kindness to us all was extraordinary; for he
would daily enquire of us if we wanted any thing which he had of which he gave
us an account, and we eat no worse than he did daily.

The town we saw from one end to the other; it is about three quarters of a
mile in length not regularly built, nor the houses very thick, they having
large orchars, in which are plenty of Oranges, Lemons, Pome-Citrons, Limes,
Figs and Pe^ches: The houses are most of them old buildings, and not half of
them inhabited, the number of men being about three hundred, who belong to the
government, and many of them are kept as sentinels at their look-outs. At the
Northend of the town stands a large fortification, being a quadrangle with
bastions, and each bastion will contain thirteen guns; but there was not past
two thirds of fifty-two mounted. In the curtin they cannot mount any guns,
being only for small arms. The (...) of the fortification is about thirty feet
high, ^uilt of sawed stone, such as they get out of the sand, between the sea
and the sound. This stone is only sand and small shells connexed together,
being not very hard till exposed to the sun. The Fort is moated round; they
would not admit us to come near the fort, but Joseph Kirle took an opportunity
and walked round about it.

The 23d of the ninth month being the 2d day of the week.
This day Joseph Kirle and I, considering that the latter end of the week was
talked of, for our setting forward toward Carolina, (which the Spaniards call
St. George's) we concluded to endeavor to provide ourselves if we could, with
clothing, considering we should be exposed to all the weather that might
happen, and have no shelter but what we carried with us; therefore we were
inclined to sell some of our negroes, to provide us clothing and provisions. We
addressed ourselves to the Governor, and withal offered him, if he pleased, to
accept the choice of our negroes; but he denied our offer. We then stated the
matter to him, and asked, if we might dispose of our negroes? He said, No* we
should not; neither could we sell them to any person but himself for the King's
account, without a special license; therefore he would consult the two royal
officers, and give us his answer.

The 24th of the ninth month, being the 3d day of the week.
This day the Governor sent for us, and told us that he would give us credit
for what we and the rest of the company wanted. I told him that my wife and
child would require some warme^ clothing; also Joseph Kirle and myself should
want some, if to be had. He ordered us to give in an account of what we should
want, and, if to be had we should have it; and that Joseph Kirle and I should
give our obligation, to pay the Governor of Carolina what the sum amounted to,
which we were willing to do; and then we desired that our people should give us
their obligation, for what we were engaged for on their account, which the
Governor thought reasonable. I gave in an account of particulars for Joseph
Kirle, Robert Barrow, myself and family: also the quantity of Indian corn,
pease, stringed beef, salt and earthen pots, for the whole company; but
clothing was not to be had, except as much stuff as made a suit for my wife and
child, and a few skins for Joseph Kirle and I; I got also seven blankets,
though the price was great, and these served Joseph Kirle Robert Barrow, myself
and family. We had five roves of ammunition bread so full of weavels that corn
was far better, twenty roves of strung beef, sixty roves of Indian corn, ten
roves of pease, one rove of salt, Jars for water, and earthen pots to boil our
victuals in.

The 25th of the ninth month, being the 4th day of the week.
This day the Governor sent for Joseph Kirle and me, to certify, that all that
was to be got he had provided for us; and he further signified to us, that he
did expect Sebastian Lopez before this time, and he would not have us go till
he came* for whatsoever he could get of our money and goods we should have it
every do it; but we said, we desired not to be detained on that account for we
had given that already over for gone from us; and as it had pleased GOD to make
them the instruments of our preservation, so we did freely give any thing of
that which was, or may be deemed ours, to the Governor, and those persons that
were sent for us. The Governor said, he would not have any thing to do with it;
for whatever he did was for charity sake. Then we desired the Soldiers might
have it if any should be got, which we doubted. And hereupon we considered that
should those poor men get nothing, we ought to alllow them something in
general; therefore Joseph Kirle and I offered the Governor, that we would give
Captain Sebastian Lopez and his men one hundred pieces of eight, for bringing
us up from amongst the Indians. The Governor was pleased with our offer, and
said, they should have it.

About this time Robert Barrow was taken with a grievous belly-ach, and
afterward he fell into a violent flux. Several of our people also were taken
with the belly-ach, and a great scouring, all which was chiefly occasioned by
our unreasonable eating, and not governing ourselves therein. Our chief diet
was hommony, herbs and pompions, having not much meat, which mean diet was our
preservation; for had it been all flesh, we should have destroyed ourselves;
but we had the best the place afforded.

The 26th of the ninth month, being the fifth day of the week.
This day we signed our obligation for four hundred pieces of eight, and we
were to be gone the 29th instant: After which, our people signed their
obligation to us, to pay their proportion of what was provided for them in
provisions, and their part of what should be paid for their passage from hence
to Carolina; whereupon we made the best provision we could: I had got some wine
and brandy for myself and family, and some small necessaries for our child,
with great resolution to go through.

The 29 day of the ninth month, being the first day of the week.
This day after we had dined, canoes being got ready, our Captain Francisco de
Roma, with six soldiers was to go as our conduct, and the Governor walked down
to see us embark, and taking our farewell, he embraced some of us, and wished
us well, saying, we should forget him when we got amongst our own nation; and
also added, that if we forgot, God would not forget him: And thus in a
courteous manner we parted, which was about two or three o'clock in the
afternoon.

Taking our departure from Augustine, we had about two or three leagues to an
Indian town called St. a Cruce, where, being landed, we were directed to the
Indian warehouse; it was built round, having sixteen squares, and on each
square a cabin built, and painted, which would hold two people, the house
being about fifty feet diameter; and in the middle of the top was a square
opening about fifteen feet. This house was very clean, and fires being ready
made nigh our cabin, the Spanish captain made choice of cabbins for him and
his soldiers, and appointed us our cabbins. In this town they have a friar, and
a large house to worship in, with three bells; and the Indians go as constantly
to their devotions, at all times and seasons, as any of the Spaniards. -- Night
being come, and the time of their devotion over, the Friar came in, and many of
the Indians, both men and women, and they had a dance, according to their way
and custom. We had plenty of Casseena drink, and such victuals as the Indians
had provided for us, some bringing corn boiled, others pease; some one thing,
some another: of all which we made a good supper, and slept till morning.

The 30th of the ninth month, being the second day of the week.
This morning early we left this town, having about two leagues to go with the
canoes, and then we were to travel by land; but a cart was provided to carry
our provisions and necessaries, in which those that could not travel were
carried. -- We had about five leagues to a sentinel's house, where we lay all
night, and next morning traveled along the sea shore about four leagues to an
inlet -- Here we waited for canoes to come for us, to carry us about two miles
to a town called St. Wan's, an Indian town, being on an island. We went through
a kirt of wood into the Indian plantations, for a mile. In the middle of this
island is the town of St. Wan's, a large town, and many people; they have a
friar, and a worship-house. -- The people are very industrious, having plenty
of hogs and fowls, and large crops of corn, as we could tell by their corn
houses. The Indians brought us victuals, as at the last town, and we lay in
their warehouse, which was larger than that at the other town.

The 2d of the tenth month, called December, being the fourth day of the week.
This morning the Indians brought us victuals for breakfast, and the Friar gave
my wife some loaves of bread made of Indian corn, which was somewhat
extraordinary: also a parcel of fowls.

About ten o'clock in the forenoon we left St. Wan's, walking about a mile to
the sound, where were canoes and Indians ready to transport us to the next
town: We did believe that we might have come all the way along the sound, but
the Spaniards were not willing to discover the place to us.

An hour before sun set we got to the town called St. Mary's: This was a
frontier, and a garririson town; the inhabitants are Indians, with some Spanish
soldiers. We were conducted to the Warehouse, as the custom is, for every town
has a Warehouse: Or, as we understood, these houses were either for their
times of mirth and dancing, or to lodge and entertain strangers. The house was
about 81 feet diameter, built round, with 32 squares, in each square a cabin
about 8 feet long, of a good height, being painted and well matted. The center
of the building was a quadrangle of 20 feet, being open at top, against which
the house is built: thus in this quadrangle is the place they dance, having a
great fire in the middle: One of the squares of this building is the gateway or
passage in. The women natives of these towns, cloth themselves with the moss
of trees, making gowns and petticoats thereof, which at a distance, or in the
night, look very neat. The Indian boys, we saw, were kept to school in the
church, the friar being their school master. This was the largest town of all,
and about a mile from it was another town called St. Phillip's. At this town of
St. Mary's were we to stay till the 5th or 6th instant; where also we were to
receive our sixty roves of corn, and ten roves of pease; and while we staid, we
had one half of our corn beaten into meal by the Indians, the other we kept
whole, not knowing what weather we should have, for the friar of this town,
some years before, was at Charlestown in South Carolina, and he had a month's
passage in going, about this time of the year: This news was very unpleasant,
to think of lying out a month at this season, having been so weather beaten
before: but we endeavored to shun looking back, considering how great our
preservation had been hitherto.

While we staid here, we were willing to make all the provision we could for
back and belly: We got of the Indians plenty of garlic and long pepper, to
season our corn and pease, both which were griping and windy, and we made us
wooden trays, and spoons to eat with: We got rushes, and made a sort of platted
rope thereof; the use we chiefly intended it for, was to be serviceable to help
us in building huts or tents with, at such times as we should meet with hard
weather.

The time drawing on that we were to leave this town, we had seven large canoes
provided to carry us, being in all about sixty persons; eighteen of us, six of
Smith's company, seven Spaniards, and thirty odd Indians, which were to row the
canoes, and be our pilots. We had some Indians from all the towns, and two
Cassekeys.

We understood that the Carolina Indians, called the Yammasees, which are
related to these Indians (...) here about a month before trading for deer-skins.

I have omitted one considerable passage that happened at Augustine: The woman
named Penelope, being big with child, she, by the Spaniards persuasion, staid
with them; also Joseph Kirle's boy named John Hilliard, was detained by the
Spaniards Joseph Kirle strove hard with the Governor, that he might have his
boy, but the lad was conveyed out of town and not to be found. The Governor
promised, that he would send him after him if possible, but the boy came not to
us, and we were to depart hence on the morrow.

The 6th of the 10th month, being the first day of the week.
This morning we embarked, and departed this place, and put into the town of
St. Philip's, where the Spanish Captain invited us on shore to drink Casseena,
which we did; and the Spaniards having left something behind, we staid here
about an hour, and then set forward.

About two or three leagues from hence, we came in sight of an Indian town
called Sappataw, but we went about a league to the northward of it to a
sentinel's house, where we put on shore, and had Casseena brought us, making no
stay; but we went from hence, rowing till next morning, and in the night we had
lost our way, but got to rights in a little time.

The 7th of the 10th month being the second day of the week.
This morning we put on shore, having past an inlet of the sea, and here we
dressed some victuals, and got a little sleep, till the tide served. Some of our
Indians went out a hunting for deer and hogs, of both which, the Spaniards
said, there was plenty; and when the tide served, we were to go to the
northernmost end of this Island, and stay for the hunters. One of the Indians
brought a deer, which he throwed down amongst the other Indians, and went out
again to hunt, to the north end of the Island, where we were to rendezvous for
this night. We set foward about ten o'clock, and got to the place appointed an
hour or two before sunset, it being a fine lofty wood, where we employed
ourselves in getting firewood for the night, and moss to lie on, of both which
we got plenty, having a large oak to lie under.

The Idians brought in several hogs and deer, of which we had part, so that we
fared richly, and having a pleasant night's repose, we got up to be gone, about
an hour before day.

The 8th of the Tenth month, being the third day of the week.
This day, having rowed from the last place till two hours before sunset we
got on shore at a place where had been an Indian settlement, it being a high
bank, from whence we had a prospect of the sound. Here we employed ourselves to
go and fetch bushes, to make shelter against the wind and dews of the night,
and cutting of dry grass to lie on, and getting of wood, which was at a
considerable distance; but we resolved to have it if labor would purchase it.
Those that were not employed in these services, were providing of water and
victuals, for we had always enough to do. We had a pleasant night, and rested
well.

The 9th of the tenth month being the fourth day of the week.
This morning about sunrising we saw a canoe of Carolina Indians going to the
southward a hunting, they kept the western side of the sound, being fearful of
us; but we had a canoe manned with Indians and Spaniards, to go after them, to
speak with them, being desirous to get them to carry letters to inform of our
coming, not knowing but we might alarm the out settlements of Carolina.

This canoe of ours pursued the other, but the Carolina Indians put on shore,
run into a marsh, and fired at our people; the Spanish Indians who could speak
the Yammaw's language, called to them, and told them their business, withal,
entreating them to come to them; but they answered, that they were going a
hunting for the season, therefore desired them to be gone, for they would not
come near them: Thus our people returned to us, and the Carolina Indians went
their way, and we prepared to go forward. We having the Cassekey of St. Wans
with us, sent him away the night before to see if he could meet any of the
Yammawsee-Indians of Carolina, he being acquainted with, and related to them;
but this canoe had passed him. We set forward, and rowed all the day till about
an hour before sunset, and then we put on shore at an Indian field, which was
overgrown with sedge, it being low, wet land; here we made our accustomed
provision for lodging, lying this night in a wood; and having dressed victuals
for this time and the next day, and having rested well about day break or
sooner, we left this place.

The 10th of the 10th month, being the 5th day of the week.
This day about ten o'clock, we crossed an inlet but the tide being against us,
we put on shore at an old Indian field* at which place, under the shelter of
some trees, we met the Cassekey of St. Wans; and here we staid and drank some
Casseena. There was abundance of rabbits, but (...) made no stay. The Cassekey
was sent from (...) before to make discovery, and we followed, (...) till an
hour before sunset; by which time we (...) to a place called St. Catalena,
where had been (...) great settlement of Indians, for the land has been
cleared for planting for some miles distant. Her^ also we met the Cassekey, and
also with a canoe o^ Carolina Indians, being a man, his wife and children,
having his dogs and other ^^nting implements for to lie out this winter season.
The Spanish Captain by his interpreter, discoursed with him about carrying our
letters which he readily assented to, whereupon the Spanish Captain set himself
to writing to the Governor of Carolina.

We had a large field to lie in, and no manner of shelter but what was a mile
distant or more; but we spared not pains, for some fell to cutting of boughs
and brush, at that great distance, some to carrying it to the place, some to
get firewood, so that by night we had a brave shelter.

The Spanish Captain sent for me, to write to the Governor of Carolina, which I
did; and I wri^ also to a person of my acquaintance there. The letters being
finished, and night coming on, I delivered my letters to the Captain, and
returned to my company. By this time they had completed our booth, which we
thought was sufficient if no rain fell. We then provided our victuals for our
supper, and for our next day's travel, as also some dry grass to lie on, in
hopes of resting well this night. About ten at night the Carolina-Indians went
with our letters for Carolina.

The 11th of the 10th month, being the 6th day of the week.
This morning, about two hours before day, we had a gust of wind at the
northwest, and the sky was overcast, and looked as though we should have
abundance of rain; in a little time the rain fell, against which we had no
shelter but our blankets, and it held till break of day, at which time the
northwest wind began to blow violent hard and cold. Our shelter was fronting
the north west, and we fell to work to shift our booth, and to getting more
boughs, brush and grass; the grass was to fill and keep up a bank of earth
which we raised, about three or four feet high, to break the wind from us; all
this day were we employed in enlarging our booth, and getting of wood for
firing: The north-west blew extreme hard, and the night being very cold, we
could get but little rest.

The 12 of the tenth month, being the seventh day of the week.
This day the wind continued without ce^sing. We began to mend what the fire
had put out of order by night, and heaved up more earth on our booth, and made
some enlargement; for we were not negligent by day to provide for the night,
which pinched us with cold, especially aged Robert Barrow, who having a violent
flux, that (...) held him from Augustine hither, and by (...) cold being grown
on him, so that he could not govern his weekness, nor get his natural rest; he
was so extremely racked with the cold that, in this juncture of hardship we
could get no warmth in him; but he was contented with our mean help, although
he received little benefit by it. -- This day, at times we went out to get
wood, having along way to go in an open field, and the cold almost benumbing
us, by that time we could get to the booth. This evening the wind was somewhat
abated, and we were in great hopes it was over, but it blowed fiercely the
latter part of the night.

The 13th of the tenth month, being the first day of the week.
This morning the wind was somewhat abated, and the sun gave forth a little
warmth; Joseph Kirle borrowed a gun, powder and shot of the Spaniards, and went
to kill some wild geese, or what other game he might come up with, but he had
no success, coming home without any game; and we were well content with a
dinner of Indian corn and strung beef. The Spanish Indians hunted all these
three days and killed several deer, but they eat them as fast as they killed
them, having little or no other provision, their corn being spent.

The latter part of this day the wind was very moderate, and we hoped to be
going the next morning, whereupon we provided for the next day's (...).

The (...) of the tenth month being the second day of the week.
This morning we embarked, and set forward, having fair weather, and the wind
down, we rowed all day till three o'clock, being come to a great inlet of the
sea, but the weather looked as though we should have wind and rain; and to
cross the inlet would be dangerous, it being about two leagues over, and little
wind making a rough sea: So we put on shore, it being high land, and lofty
woods, mostly pine and live oaks:

Here we made all the expedition we could to get shelter against the weather.
The Indians set to work to build themselves little huts or wigwams, which they
had not done till now. They got small palmetto leaves, and covered their
buildings, but ours were covered mostly with boughs, which wo^d not keep out
much rain. By night we had a great deal of rain and wind. And it being the
evening of the Spaniards Christmas, they used some of their ceremonies, with
tinkling on a piece of iron, and singing, begging for somewhat for the day
following; they begged of the Indians, and the Indians in like manner begged of
the Spaniards, and what the Indians gave the Spaniards, that was returned to
the Indians.

The 16th of the tenth month, being the fourth day of the week.
This morning was very foggy, and proved a rainy day, but we kept rowing till
two in the afternoon; the rain being hard, and the wind increased at
north-east. We put on shore, but the captain told us we should not stay here
long, he intending to go further, and if the weather permitted, would go all
night, but the weather was likelier to be worse than better, and so we sat in
the rain till night was come, when we entreated the Captain, that we might stay
there all night, and that we might provide against the weather; but he
pretended the weather would break up, and he would be gone; but there was no
likelihood of it, for the rain increased, and we were all wet and starved with
cold; at length he assented to stay: Then were we hard put to it (being night)
to provide shelter; but in the dark did we work till we had made us a shelter
that would keep the rain from us. Having fires, we put off our wet clothes and
dried them as well as we could, and toward morning the rain broke up.

The 17th of the tenth month, being the fifth day of the week.
This morning at sunrising we set forward, and rowed till noon, at which time
we came to an inlet and put on shore; where we staid all the afternoon, and
dried our blankets, and what was not dried last night; we also dressed
victuals, and as soon as it was dark went from hence, designing to row all
night: but having an intricate passage amongst marshes, where were diverse
creeks and ways, that we rowed sometimes in a wrong one, then back again, and
rowed in another: About midnight our pilots were at a loss, not knowing which
way to go, nor where to find any dry land, that we might go on shore; but three
of our boats rowed till we found a dry knap to get on shore, where we lay till
day, having good fires. -- As soon as it was light, we got our boats, and went
to look for the rest of our company, whom we found, having made their canoes
fast to the sedge, and sitting therein till we came to them.

The 18th of the tenth month, being the sixth day of the week.
The night was extreme foggy, and so was this morning; but we searched about,
and found our passage, being a little channel, just broad enough for our boats
to pass, and about a mile in length. After we past this, we came into a great
sound, which went down into a large inlet, that the land could not be seen from
the one side to the other: Into the sound comes down a great river, called the
Sabina river, which, when we got into the course of, the water was fresh,
though in this great sound: the Spaniards called it the cross-bar, or St. a
Cruce. About noon we got over the sound, and here we rowed out to sea, for two
leagues, to get into another sound; About three o'clock, the wind began to blow
at north-east, and it looked very black, so that we feared a storm. We desired
to get on shore to provide against it, but the captain said, about a few
leagues further we should get near Port Royal; but in the interim we saw a
canoe on the shore, and we made to her, and there we found some Indian wigwams:
Here we went on shore. This was a canoe laden with skins, that belonged to
merchants at Carolina having four Indians in her; but three of them run away,
fearing the Spaniards.

The Indian wigwams were in a bad condition, not fit to keep out the weather,
so we set to work to mend them, and here being plenty of palmetto leaves, we
covered them, and made addition to them; but the storm of wind and rain came
violently before we could complete our work, and held all night; yet we lay
indifferent dry, though the storm was very great.

The 19th of the tenth month, being the seventh day of the week.
This morning the storm of wind continued at the northeast with rain, and we
being likely to stay some time here, enlarged our wigwams, fearing a
north-wester, which, about ten o'clock this day, began to blow fiercely, with
snow, for some hours -- the wind was so violent, that we feared lest the tall
pines should be blown on us. We sent the Carolina-Indian out, to bring his
three mates in, but they would no^. The Spanish Indians made great complaint
for food, and we gave amongst them four roves of corn, being unwilling to spare
any more not knowing how long we should be detained by the weather: Some of our
people had almost eaten up their shares, and we expected should we be detained
long, we must supply them with what we had to spare.

The 20th of the tenth month, being the first day of the week.
This day the wind continued at north-east and extreme cold it was; but we, in
our wigwams were well enough secured from the cold. About noon our mariners
wigwam got fire, and was burnt; theirs was the leeward most of all (for we had
eight wigwams) otherwise the whole had been in danger. We understood that we
were not above two or three day's journey from the English settlements; but the
Spanish-Indians told us that it was more, till we were better informed by this
Indian who belonged to that place.

The 21st of the tenth month, being the second day of the week.
This day early we set forward, and passed Port Royal Sound, being some leagues
over, and about two o'clock in the afternoon we put on shore the tide being
against us: Here was a close wood, where we lay indifferent well all night.

The 22d of the tenth month, being the third day of the week.
This morning early we set forward, and rowed till one o'clock in the
afternoon, at which time we got to the first settlement in Carolina, belonging
to one Richard Bennet, who received us kindly, and provied plentifully for us,
of good food, and good drink, showing the Spariards all kindness possible he
could, for our sakes, which the Spaniards did acknowledge, and we staid here
all night.

The 23d of the tenth month, being the fourth day of the week.
This morning having eaten plentifully, and drank also, we went from hence in
company with some of the inhabitants, about ten o'clock, and rowed till two
hours within night; having passed by several plantations, we put on shore on a
point of land, to wait a tide, having a wood to shelter in, and making good
fires, we staid till midnight, at which time we went from thence, and rowed
till an hour or two before day, by which time we got to Governor Blake's house.

The 24th of the tenth month, being the fifth day of the week.
This morning when the Governor arose (...) sent for Joseph Kirle, John Smith
Andrew Murray and me, making inquiry of us concerning our passage and on what
account the Spaniards came with us? We rendered him an account of the Governor
of Augustine's generosity toward us and that he sent us freely, without any
demands except what we had freely contracted: The Governor sent for the Spanish
Captain in, and received the letters that were sent from the Governor of
Augustine, also our obligation, which the Governor accepted. The Governor
showed a great deal of kindness to us, and made enquiry into all our
conditions. Robert Barrow he sent to his neighbor Margaret Bammer's, who he
said, would be careful and nurse him: She was an ancient Friend, who lived
about two miles distant, so he went on horseback. The Governor clothed Joseph
Kirle, John Smith, Andrew Murray, me, my wife and child; to the rest of our
people he gave each of them a duffel blanket, which would keep them warm, and
plenty of victuals and drink was provided: We obtained leave of the Governor to
permit the Spaniards to go to Charleston with us, being willing to gratify them
according to our abilities.

The 25th of the 10th month, being the sixth day of the week.
This day, in the afternoon, Joseph Kirle, John Smith, I, my wife and child,
went to Margaret Bammer's where Robert Barrow was, and stayed with him till the
next morning, when the Spaniards called for us as they came by water.

The 26th of the 10th month, being the seventh day of the week.
This morning we went from hence with the Spaniards, for Charleston, where we
arri^^d about an hour within night.

The gentlemen of the town appointed a public house, of good credit, to
entertain the Spaniards with meat and drink, and lodging; which was done to the
Spaniards admiration, and they staid here eight days. We got our people
together and agreed jointly to give the Spaniards one hundred pieces of eight,
which Joseph Kirle and I divided amongst them according to their degrees; we
two adding to the sum.

The 4th of the 11th month, called January, being the second day of the week.
Joseph Kirle and I provided a small present to send to the Governor of
Augustine: And this day we went with the Spaniards to Governor Blake's, staying
there one day; the Governor treated the Spaniards, and having completed his
letters, gave the Spanish Captain a considerable present, and sent him
homewards, ordering them to call on the Yammase-Indians, where they might have
as much Indian corn as they pleased, to carry home with them, the towns of
these Indians being about two or three days rowing from Charlestown.

The 9th of the 11th month, being the 7th day of the week.
This day I returned, with my wife and child to Charlestown, leaving Robert
Barrow in a weak and low condition with Margaret Bammer. I, my wife and famil^
with Joseph Kirle, were entertained by (...) James Ribee, the time of our stay
in (...). Our s^amen were mostly employed, some in one vessel, and some in
another that belonged to the port.

The 6th of the twelfth month, called February, being the second day of the
week.
Joseph Kirle went from hence to the island of Providence, in hopes of gaining
speedy passage for Pennsylvania, the place of his abode.

Toward the beginning of this month, Robert Barrow was brought to Charlestown,
being extreme weak, and was lodged at the house of Mary Cross, who nursed him.

The 18th of the first month, called March, being the fifth day of the week.
This day, I, with my family, and Robert Barrow, embarked, and set sail, for
Pennsylvania, and had fourteen days passage to Philadelphia.

The 4th of the second month, called April, being the first day of the week.
This day, in the evening, Robert Barrow, departed this life, and was buried
the 6th following, having passed through great exercises, in much patience; and
in all the times of our greatest troubles, was ready to counsel us to patience,
and to wait for what the Lord our God would bring to pass, and he would often
express, that it was his belief, that our lives should be spared, and not be
lost in that wilderness, and amongst those people, who would have a prey of us.
And so this go^^ man, having finished his course with joy, laid dow^ his body,
and is with him who rewards the just.

Thus, having completed our hard passage hither, wherein God's great mercy,
and wonderful loving kindness has been largely extended to us, in delivering
and preserving us to this day and time, I hope that I, with all those of us,
that have been spared hitherto, shall never be forgetful nor unmindful of the
low estate we were brought to; but that we may double our diligence in serving
the Lord God, is the breathing and earnest desire of my soul. Amen.

JONATHAN DICKENSON.

FINIS.
JUST PUBLISHED, And to be sold by the Printer hereof DAVIDEIS, The Life of
DAVID King of Israel, A sacred Poem. Price 3 s.

-- ALSO -- FOTHERGILL's Five Sermons, Price 1s 8. ALSO A SERMON delivered by
RACHEL WILSON. Price 9d.


