CHIPMAN's PRINCIPLES OF GOVERNMENT.

SKETCHES OF THE PRINCIPLES OF GOVERNMENT; BY NATHANIEL CHIPMAN, JUDGE OF THE
COURT OF THE UNITED STATES, FOR THE DISTRICT OF VERMONT.

VERMONT, RUTLAND: FROM THE PRESS OF J. LION: PRINTED FOR THE AUTHOR: JUNE,
M,DCC,XCIII.

[Published agreeably to Act of Congress.]

PREFACE.
FROM the time of Plato and Aristotle, to the present, the subject of
government has employed the pens of some of the first philosophers of every
age. Much is due to the labors of those sages, especially to some of the
Moderns. They have taught the world, that the science of government does not
consist in an assumption of principles, merely arbitrary, or in the reveries of
metaphysics. And yet, I do not know, that any writer, ancient or modern, has
attempted to analyze the social nature of man, and from the relations, thence
resulting, to derive the principles, which ought to be pursued in civil
institutions. It will, I believe, however, be readily perceived, that this is
the only certain ground of investigation, the only mode, in which any general,
consistent, practicable principles in the science of government can be
established. This mode of investigation has been attempted in the following
sketches. How far I have succeeded, how far I have been able to discover any
new principles, or more clearly to illustrate such as had been already
discovered, I submit to the candor of the public.

I have endeavored at the investigation of natural principles, and to pursue
truth wherever it led, uninfluenced by the weight of authority on the one hand,
or a spirit of opposition on the other. I have several times, in the course of
the following work, been induced to differ from the opinions of some writers of
the first abilities and reputation. Though I have examined these opinions with
the freedom of philosophical discussion, I have all along aimed to treat the
writers with that decent respect, which they merit from every lover of science.

The title will advertise the reader, that he is not to expect in this little
work, a system completed and illustrated in all its parts. I have attempted
only SKETCHES of the PRINCIPLES of GOVERNMENT. I have chosen this title, as
most expressive of the limits of the design, as well as of the manner of
execution.

^land. June 25, 1793.
ERRATA.
The following errors were occasioned, principally, by the avocations of the
Author, while some of the sheets were at press which rendered it impossible for
him to inspect the proof. (...) is hoped the reader will pardon and correct
them.

Page Line from for read 15 5 top before society, insert civil. 57 17 top
fictitious factitious. 58 10 bottom consequential consequent. 60 11 top
indathyrsees Indathyrsus. 60 15 top the Prince thee, Prince, etc. 61 2 note
cele, r. celle. L. 3, for euse, r. eux. 63 2 top Cressop Cresap 64 2 top his
their 69 7 top condufion conclusion 70 and 73 Beccari Beccari^ 78 6 bottom
assented asserted. 140 11 bottom, after house of 146 15 top interest interests.
154 6 top dele against. 154 11 bottom, after appear, add, to be the ^^se. 155
12 bottom According In addition to. 156 9 top constituent constitutional. 161 6
b^t. decision decisions. 163 1 top, and in note, for amicable, 1. amiable. 1^5
4 and 6 top, unam cable unamiable 166 8 top, after trial, add in. 166 7 bot.
text, interest interests. 190 3 top are is. 212 2 bot. in some cop^es, f.
causes r. cases, and dele in cases. 237 9 top, after only, add systematic. 240
15 top example examples.

CONTENTS.
SKETCH I. INTRODUCTORY. Page 13 SEC. I. The subject proposed. Page 13 SEC. II.
Of the sense in which, principle, and principles of government, are used in the
following sketches, Page 16
SKETCH II. OF MAN, AS FORMED FOR THE SOCIAL STATE. Page 22 SEC. I. Of the
first rude state -- Whether this is, to MAN, the scene of virtue and happiness,
in preference to a state of improvement, Page 22 SEC. II. Of the appetite for
society. -- The hoarding appetite. -- The appetite which leads to the
propagation of the species. -- Ambition. -- Sympathy, Page 33 SEC. III. Of
hatred and revenge. -- Of envy, malice, and some other dissocial passions, Page
41
SKETCH III. OF MAN, AS FITTED FOR CIVIL GOVERNMENT, AND THE NATURE OF THAT
NECESSITY BY WHICH HE IS LED TO ITS ADOPTION, Page 51 SEC. I. Of the moral
sense. -- Active and passive powers. -- Sense of accountability. -- The social
sense, -- and patriotism, -- as they relate to civil society, Page 51 SEC. II.
Of a sense of property, Page 64 SEC. III. Of the coincidence between natural
and civil liberty, Page 70 SEC. IV. Considerations on a disposition in Man, to
abuse the powers of government, with which he is entrusted, Page 78 SEC. V. Of
the necessity of civil laws and government, Page 91
SKETCH IV. OF THE CONSTITUTION AND ORGANIZATION OF GOVERNMENT, Page 98 SEC. I.
Different degrees of improvement, introduce different forms of government. -- A
source of false reasoning -- Brief view of the rights of Man. -- An inaccuracy
of Mr. PAIN, in treating of this subject, Page 98 SEC. II. Few governments
formed by an actual compact. -- Instability of ancient governments. -- Social
compact, in the formation of legitimate government. -- Civil powers. --
Division and limitation, Page 113 SEC. III. Of a balance constituted by an
opposition of powers. -- LOCKE'S constitution of Carolina. -- Of other checks,
Page 127 SEC. IV. Of the election of members of the legislature. --
Qualifications of electors, and candidates. -- Accountability of the
legislature. -- How secured, Page 142 SEC. V. Of the appointment and
accountability of the executive and judiciary, Page 153 SEC. VI. Of juries,
Page 163
SKETCH V. OF EQUALITY, Page 172 SEC. I. In what sense men are born equal --
And in what sense they are said to have equal rights, Page 172 SEC. II. Of the
nature of equality in republics, Page 177 SEC. III. Of the right and equality
of descents, Page 182
SKETCH VI. OF THE RIGHTS OF PUNISHMENT, AND TAXATION, Page 190 SEC. I. Of the
right of punishment, Page 190 SEC. II. Of the right of taxation, Page 202
SKETCH VII. OF THE MORAL OBLIGATION OF CIVIL LAWS, Page 216 SEC. I. Judge
Blackstore's opinion examined. -- Civil laws are binding on conscience, when
they accord with the principles of a free government, and the present state of
social improvements, Page 216 SEC II. Different modes, in which obligation is
sometimes discovered -- have concurred to introduce a distinction between moral
and civil obligation, Page 227 SEC. III. That punishments will have little
effect in the prevention of crimes, unless the laws are so calculated, that
civil and moral obligation coincide, Page 230 SEC. IV. Of principles of
government, as they affect the moral obligation of laws. -- Their difference in
this respect -- The British government. -- The government of the United States,
Page 233
SKETCH VIII. OF THE GOVERNMENT OF THE UNITED STATES OF AMERICA, Page 239 SEC.
I. Political situation of the States, previous to the establishment of the
present federal government, Page 239 SEC. II. Difficulties in forming an
efficient federal government. -- Summary view of the two principal forms, which
have heretofore been adopted, that of ancient Greece, and the United Provinces
of the Netherlands, with their defects. -- A concise view of the present
federal government of the United States of America, Page 248 SEC. III.
Organization and powers of the federal government. -- Limitation of its powers
-- Principles of accountability. -- Brief view of its effects in practice, Page
256 SEC. IV. Observations on the tendency in government to a corruption of its
principles, degeneracy, and dissolution. -- Plan of reformation incorporated in
the federal government. -- Probable effect in perpetuating the government, Page
281

SKETCH I. INTRODUCTORY.
SECTION I. The Subject proposed.
A THEORY has been adopted, by some European Philosophers, ^s^ and of e^ -- The
A^b^ (...)
of no small note, that the first rude state of society, which, among civilized
nations, is usually denominated the savage state, is the only natural state of
man; that, in this state alone, he is capable of attaining the achme of
perfection in virtue and happiness. They have supposed, that, what are
generally called social improvements, serve only to deprave, and either
inevitably generate a wicked disposition in man, or, at least, invigorate an
original propensity to vice, which lay dormant, in what they so emphatically
style, the state of nature. They have further supposed, that from this wicked
disposition, thus become predominant, and from various clashing interests,
unknown in the state of nature, arises a war of all against all; that civil
laws and government are an invention of man, to restrain these evils. Hence
they derive the necessity of government, ultimately, from the original or
adventitious wickedness of men.

Others have espoused an opinion, that true virtue, genuine benevolence, in
man, would, in every stage of society, supersede the necessity of municipal
laws, and civil subordination. With the former, they hold, that wickedness,
alone, has imposed the necessity of civil governments. Both appear to imagine,
that civil polity is not to be derived from the nature of man; but that it is a
system of rules, contrived to meet his wicked disposition, and to restrain the
violence of individuals, by the violence of laws. According to them, it was not
so much designed, by the author of our nature, to lead men to happiness, in
society, as to prevent the misery, which they are ever ready to inflict on each
other; in short, that man has a necessity for civil government, but not an
adaptation of his nature to that state.

Some political writers, of great eminence, Lock, Beccaria, and many others.
have admitted, that man was originally designed for civil government, and that
he is under a certain necessity of nature to adopt it. At the same time, they
have maintained, that on entering into civil society, he, of necessity, gives
up a certain share of his natural liberty, of his natural rights. By these
expressions of natural liberty, and natural rights, are to be understood that
liberty, and those rights, to which man is entitled by the laws of his nature,
as constituted by the Author of his being. This implies, that man, by the laws
of his nature, is but partially sitted for society. Impelled, however, to adopt
that state, from a necessity, which is admitted to arise from some part of his
nature, he sacrifices a part of his natural rights, to secure the remainder,
and even to acquire those, to which, by the laws of his nature, he was not
originally entitled.

I propose, in the following SKETCHES, to enquire, How far MAN, by the laws of
his nature, is fitted for society and civil government -- Whether his happiness
does not require social improvement, and laws, which are the result of his
whole nature, lead to civil government -- Or whether he is compelled to adopt
the latter, by a single, and that a vicious principle in his nature, in
opposition to others -- Whether, considered as a physical and moral being, the
laws of his nature have indulged him any liberty, which he may not enjoy under
civil laws and government.

The principal view in these enquiries, will be to endeavor to find the leading
Principles of Government, in the laws of social nature, and to trace them into
exercise, in the establishment of civil institutions.

In the United States of America, political opinions, though considered as
merely theoretical, cannot be wholly inconsequential. In these States,
government is, professedly, founded in the rights of man. It derives all its
energy in the prevention of evil, all its efficacy in the production of
happiness, from the sentiments of the people. The opinions entertained of
government, of the necessity of laws, of the end to be attained by them, and
the means of attaining that end, will have an influence on the sentiments of
the people, and the reasonings of the legislator. They will, in some measure,
form the features of the government, and give a complexion to its laws.

SECTION II. Of the sense in which, Principle, and Principles of Government,
are used in the following Sketches.
BEFORE I proceed to the subject proposed, I shall take the liberty to premise
a few observations on the use of these terms, as they occur frequently in the
following work. -- From Montesquieu, the term principles, when applied to
government, has been used in a more appropriate sense, than in other sciences.
In other sciences, it always signifies something fundamental, some leading
rule, law, or maxim. Thus we speak of the principles, on which any thing is
constructed, as a watch. The term principles here, comprehends, not only the
laws of mechanics, but those rules, by which the relative proportions of the
several parts are determined, to direct the motions to a certain end. These are
properly called the principles of construction.

There are also rules, by which the moving force is applied, and made to
operate on the machine, with a view to the end proposed. These we call the
principles of operation.

The term is frequently used to signify a mere passive power; that power, by
which a subject is fitted to exhibit, in consequence of the operation of
particular agents upon it, certain effects, agreeably to certain laws. Thus we
speak of the principle of fluidity, the inflamable principle, the principle of
malleability; and thus we say of man, that the principles of society and
government are implanted in his nature; by which we mean, that he is sitted for
that state, or, at least, that his nature requires it.

In the science of government, there are the principles of construction, by
which government is constituted and organized -- the operative principles, by
which its activity and efficiency are produced and directed -- the passive
principles -- or the passive powers of man, to which the operative principles
are adapted, to produce the end intended, obedience to the laws. The operative
and passive principles, in any government, are determined by the constructive
principles employed, or the nature of the constitution. They will, therefore,
be different, according to the different constitutions of government. These,
which I have called the operative and passive principles, Montesquieu, with a
view chiefly to the latter, has, by way of eminence, called the principles of
government. He seems to be too fond of simplifying, in this instance.

The principles of a government are not capable of being perfectly simplified,
much less of being reduced to a single principle. Far from it, they are often
very complex, and subject to a great variety of modifications, from the
admission of different, and sometimes opposite principles. They retain,
however, in each kind of government, their general and predominant
characteristics. The same may be said of all the principles of government, as
well as those of Montesquieu. He has defined the principles of government to be
the human passions, which set it in motion. It would, perhaps, have been more
accurate to have said, that the human passions are the passive powers of man,
by which he is prepared to be operated upon, and to be put in motion to various
ends, and in various modes, according to the choice, application, and direction
of the means, or of the operative principles.

He has introduced three different principles, which he tells us are peculiar
to the three principal forms of government; the Despotic, Monarchical, and
Republican. Fear, he tells us, i^ the principle of a despotic government. This,
in his sense of the term, is undoubtedly just. The instruments of despotism,
are a military force at the beck of the Sovereign, which, by the terror of
punishments, or rather of vengeance, secures obedience to his mandates.
Inveterate habits of superstition, frequently, come in aid of the military
force, and clothe the messenger of the Prince with the power of armies.

Fear is that passion of human nature, to which the measures of this government
are, principally, addressed, and without which the despot could procured
obedience, only by the constant and present application of force, in each
particular case.

Honor, he tells us, is the principle of a monarchy. This, taken in his own
sense, is very deficient. That passion of emu^ation, a desire of excellence,
which is natural to man, and which, by cultivation, is capable of an infinity
of directions, good and evil, is, with the higher orders in monarchy, modified
into what is called the principle of honor. But its direct effect in securing
obedience to the sovereign, is confined, principally, to those orders. The
multitude are under a complicated despotism. The nobles, in conjunction with
the military order, are the instruments employed to awe the people to
obedience. Religion, transformed into a gloomy superstition, is, usually,
employed to the same end.

The principle of a Republic, or rather a Democratic Republic, he calls virtue.
-- We are liable to be missed by the use of this term, in a sense so different
from that, in which it is commonly received. He defines it to be a mere
sensation, a faculty of the mind, a love of the laws and our country. In
analogy to his other principles, I have ventured to call it a sentiment of
attachment to the community, its constitution and laws. I will not take upon me
to say, that this is altogether just, or that it is sufficiently comprehensive.
It is, however, just to the principal purpose, for which it is intended. In a
democratic republic, the law is, or ought to be, an expression of the will of
the society, being the aggregate of the individual wills. Now, if the will of
the aggregate coincide precisely, in all cases, with each individual will, an
observance of the law must be as necessary as the power of willing. But this,
perhaps, can, in no instance, be the case. The will of the whole, that is the
law, is the result of mutual concessions, a compromise of the individual wills.
Hence a necessity, not only of a general approbation of the result, but an
attachment to the general good of the community, as constituted under
government and laws, to secure the obedience of each individual member. In this
kind of government, no force can be applied, in the execution of the laws, but
what depends on this principle. It certainly is no more entitled to be called
virtue, than any of the social passions common to man; but it has this
preeminence over the other principles mentioned above, that it is, when rightly
informed, perfectly in harmony with all the moral and social virtues, and is
best promoted by them.

In the following Sketches, the term Principle, and Principles of Government,
is sometimes used in the appropriate sense of Montesquieu, as above explained;
but more frequently in the same sense, in which it is used in other sciences.

SKETCH II. OF MAN, AS FORMED FOR THE SOCIAL STATE.
SECTION I. Of the first rude state -- Whether this is to MAN the scene of
virtue and happiness, in preference to a state of improvement.
THAT the savage state is a state of nature to man, cannot, with truth, be
denied. There is not, at this day, a people on earth, who may not trace their
origin to a race of savages; some, indeed, more, and some less rude. The Jews,
as the writings of Moses and their subsequent historians prove, are far from
being an exception. The question is not, whether a rude, unpolished state, be
ever a natural state to man; but whether, in the original constitution of his
nature, he is so formed for happiness in this state, as to exclude any general
benefit to be derived from progressive improvement. We are at a loss at what
period, in the progress of society, to fix the precise state of nature which is
intended. Shall we go back to the rude state of the inhabitants of New-Holland,
who have learnt to draw no part of their subsistence from the earth, by
cultivation? Or shall we choose the still more rude state of the inhabitants of
Terra-del-Fugo, whose sole dependence for food is on the shell fish found in
the sands, at the ebb of the tide? Neither of whom have any notion of honesty,
or the rights of property, beyond the circle of their several tribes. -- Shall
we make a little farther advance, and place it among the savages of
North America? They are simple, they are honest, as far as the circle of their
several tribes. They take their food from the river or the forest, furnished by
the hand of nature. The little deficiencies are supplied from the cultivation
of the earth. The skins of the chase furnish them with coarse, but comfortable
clothes, or are exchanged for the product of European looms. They are not
goaded by ambition, to attempt the acquisition of power, which, when acquired,
has generally proved the scourge of the human race. They are content, or
resigned to the present, and are little anxious about the future. All this is
true of the North-American natives, and yet it gives us hardly a glimpse of
their character. The savages of America, like other men, have their predominant
passions. They esteem war and hunting almost the only pursuits worthy of a man.
Address in these, constitutes their highest point of honor. Every other labor
of life is relegated to their women, who are little better than slaves. Hence
they derive an excessive ferocity of manners. Their resentment is keen, and
revenge their most darling gratification. This arises from their state of
society, in which every man is left to judge in his own cause, and to avenge
his own wrongs. As they never forget a favor, so they never forgive an injury.

Among their different tribes, the injuries of an individual are resented as
national. The possession of a hunting ground is, to them, the possession of an
empire. These are sources of frequent wars, waged with the most savage
ferocity. The butchering and scalping of old men, women, and children, the
torturing and burning of prisoners, in cold blood, with the most shocking
circumstances of cruelty, are among their pastimes. These are not secret acts
of violence. They are by none considered as wrong. They are public
transactions, performed, under what is, to them, the law of nations.

As they are not anxious about the future, they are, for the same reason,
almost wholly improvident. When not engaged in their favorite pursuits of war,
or hunting, they are too indolent to think of making an adequate provision
against the inclemency of the season, or, indeed, against any future want. As
they have fewer vices, so they have fewer virtues than more civilized nations;
and both are more prominent, more distinctly marked. This arises from the
paucity of the objects, with which they are conversant. With them, numerous
passions, correcting and restraining each other, are not, as in a state of
civilization, equally excited by a multiplicity of objects. When any object
rouses their attention, the whole force of the mind, the whole vigor of the
soul, is collected, and exerted upon one point.

Hospitality is a virtue, almost peculiar to a savage people, and the sinest
trait in their character. When we contemplate this virtue, among such a people,
it strikes the mind with all the advantage of vivid sentiment, singularity of
impression, and contrast of manners. Every recollection is accompanied with an
enthusiastic admiration, that makes us regret the loss of those manners, which
were alone capable of this sublime virtue. Will it still be thought strange to
assert, that this virtue derives its origin, and takes its principal luster
from the barbarous manners of the age? And yet so is the fact. It does not,
however, consist with the rudest state of society and of manners. Some advance
in civilization, some progress in the arts of life, is necessary to give a
relish for hospitality, and to supply the means of indulging it. Among a people
in the hunter state, it makes but little figure. Depending upon the fortune of
the chase, or the gleanings of the forest, they find but a scanty, and
precarious subsistence. With neither the foresight, nor the means, of making a
secure provision for the future, they are frequently in want of necessary
sustenance. Among such a people, the pressing demands of nature leave little of
their scanty stores for the uses of hospitality. They have little curiosity,
and no conception of any knowledge, which can be of use, beyond that of forming
the bow, or some instrument of the chase. In this situation, what can, with
them, compensate for an additional tax upon their already half famished
appetites? The North-American natives have never been equally noted for the
practice of this virtue, with the ancient Germans, or the more ancient
inhabitants of Greece. They draw but a small share of their subsistence from
the earth. All the care of their tillage, consisting in that of maize, beans,
and some few edible roots, is left to the women. The labor of these, spared
from their attendance on the men in the chase, and other drudgeries of a
domestic nature, without the assistance of domestic animals, and with such rude
implements as they can either form or procure, must yield a very scanty supply,
for one part of the year; the other is, for the most part, as scantily
supplied, by the fortune of the chase. They appear to have little relish for
any new arts of life, unless they have some relation to their principal
occupations of war and hunting; and very little curiosity for any information
to be derived from an intercourse with strangers. Instances, however, are not
wanting, in which they have discovered all that fidelity to their guests, all
that warmth of attachment, which gives such a charm to the patriarchal times.
Although the instances are less frequent, they bear the same genuine character
of heroic integrity.

The shepherd state secures a more ready and abundant supply of food and
domestic conveniences. Men more at ease, conversation begins to acquire a
charm. More arts become necessary. The useful, and convenient engage the
attention. New objects afford gratification to an awakened curiosity. Still
they are generally divided into small tribes. Their domestic manners are
sincere, but rough. To foreigness they are fierce, cruel, and faithless. So
universal is the state of war among such a people, that in almost every
language, the same word, originally, signified both foreigner and enemy.
Disputed boundaries are often the occasion of wars. They are often waged to
avenge a private quarrel. To surprise and plunder the neighboring tribes of
their herds, is the principal object of their hostile enterprises. Their whole
history is a continued scene of war, pillage, and reprisal. So frequent were
these predatory expeditions among the petty tribes of ancient Greece, that they
were early honored with a particular appellation. (...). Abactio bovum. Praeda
-- Taking cattle a prey.
In such a state of society and of nations, the use of coin is unknown. Their
whole commerce consists in an exchange of commodities in kind. These are,
usually, bulky, and unfit to attend the person of the owner, to answer his
occasions in traveling; nor could they attend him, with any degree of
security, among a people, who reckon the plundering of foreigners a lawful mean
of acquisition. Inns for the accommodation of travelers are unknown. Were it
not for the hospitality of individuals, there could be no passing from one
country to another. There is something in the practice very congenial to the
frank, rough, and generous manners of a rude people. Their generosity, however,
in this favorite instance, rises, as it were, through a cloud. We find by
Homer, that strangers, usually, applied to their intended hosts, in the posture
of suppliants, and entreated the rights of hospitality, as for their lives. His
instances may, indeed, be considered as poetic fictions; but they were,
undoubtedly, relative to the manner of the age. To grant the rights of
hospitality, was, to grant protection. The host, or patron, was considered as
the protector of his guest. This office suited with a martial spirit. It gave
the host consequence in his own estimation, and in the estimation of others.
The practice of this virtue, among rude nations, affords not only a
gratification to curiosity, but an opportunity of indulging in the exercise of
humanity to a stranger, without incuring the imputation of a want of attachment
to the tribe. The advantages are national and reciprocal. In no other way can
they acquire a knowledge of foreign nations, their arts and manners. Like the
safety of heralds, it passes into their law of nations. In ancient writers, we
frequently read of the rights of hospitality, of the laws of hospitality, and
of wars to avenge the violations of those rights. Indeed, it is rather to be
considered as a national, than a private virtue. In the present state of
improvement, among civilized nations, almost every reason, which concurred,
among savages, to the establishment of hospitality, has ceased, and the
practice has ceased of course. The arts of writing and printing have furnished
almost innumerable vehicles of intelligence, always at command. Knowledge of all
the arts of life is diffused, with facility, safety, and accuracy, as far as
the use of letters is known. The cultivation of the gentle passions, an
improved sense of the duties of humanity, a knowledge of its rights, and the
protection afforded to those rights by the law of nations, and by the civil
laws of most countries, have superseded the necessity of individual protection.
Public accommodations have become much more convenient for travelers, than
private hospitality. The universal introduction and currency of money, has
given men the command of a kind of property, which may, with ease and safety,
attend their persons, and provide for them, in all their peregrinations.

Most men who travel, at this day, are engaged in pursuits of interest, or
gratifications of a private nature. In this state of things, hospitality, in
the ancient practice, would be unnecessary, unjust, and intolerably burdensome.
And why should we regret its loss? Let those who entertain such an enthusiastic
veneration for hospitality, and other ancient virtues of the same origin,
reflect, that they cannot have the effect without the cause; and that those
precious gems of savage virtue would lose their luster and estimation, without
the foil of savage vices.

This short sketch is sufficient to prove, that the first rude state of man,
or, if we choose the expression, the first simple state of society, does not
most abound in virtue and happiness. I have given, indeed, a short, but, I
believe, a true sketch of every equally uncivilized tribe on earth. Shall I be
forgiven the censure, if I say, this opinion of a preference of the savage to a
civilized state of society, has been propagated, by the glowing pens of some
writers, whose love of virtue exceeded their information? Had they attended to
the science of human nature, the developement of the human mind, the powers,
faculties, passions, and appetites of man; had they studied, attentively, the
history, not of battles and sieges only, the intrigues of statesmen, and the
revolutions of empires; but the history of man in society, the natural history
of the human mind, they would have found reason for correcting their opinion.

This science, so important to man, has, till very lately, been hardly
attempted by any writer. In the first ages of society, none are capable of
making or recording proper observations. One half of the progress has,
generally, passed unnoticed. In following ages, historians, hurried away by the
more splendid events of history, have mostly neglected those facts, which serve
to mark the progressive improvement of the mind; and readers have been,
equally, inattentive to the few, which have been recorded. In America, the best
opportunity, which ever presented, for supplying these deficiencies, by
observations on real life and manners, has been suffered to escape, with very
little improvement.

SECTION II. Of the appetite for society -- The hoarding appetite -- The
appetite which leads to the propagation of the species -- Ambition -- Sympathy.
WE will now briefly enquire, how far man, without any consideration of mutual
wants, or a necessity of mutual defense, arising from a sense of weakness, or
wickedness, is fitted for society. That surely is his natural state, to which
the laws of his nature, general and particular, all tend. Here let me premise,
that with man, a state of improvement is not opposed to a state of nature.
Perhaps as good a definition as any, which has been given of man, in this view,
is, that he is a being capable of improvement, in a progression, of which he
knows not the limits. Deity has implanted, in his nature, the seeds of
improvement, furnished him with powers and faculties for the cultivation, and
to these, superadded a sense, that the cultivation is a duty.

The first thing which strikes the mind, in the course of our enquiry, is an
appetite for society. Man desires to associate with man, and feels a pleasure
at the approach of his kind. The appetite is so universally prevalent, that it
can not well be denied to be the work of nature. The same appetite, under the
name of instinct, produces all those associations, which are found to prevail
among all gregarious animals of the brute creation. With them, it is allowed to
be natural. Why not allow it to be so with man, to whom it is so much more
extensively necessary and useful?

It has been made a question, whether the social appetite be limited, in the
number of its objects? I think this question will admit, though not of a
precise, yet of a satisfactory answer. It is adapted to the occasions, the
powers and faculties of man, and admits of an equal extention by improvement:
Accordingly, in the early and unimproved stages of society, while the powers
and faculties of the human mind were in their infancy, we have every where seen
men associating in small, independent tribes. If at any time, larger
associations have been formed, in that state, like some of the great empires of
antiquity, they were not the effect of choice, but of superior force. Agreeably
to this opinion, we find, that the parts were very loosely connected, and every
where crumbled in pieces, as soon as that force was removed.

As mankind increase in knowledge, as their powers and faculties are extended,
and the comprehension of the mind enlarged, they, voluntarily, extend their
associations. To determine, therefore, the limits of the social appetite, we
must determine the limits of social improvements.

This appetite is accompanied with other appetites, with passions and
instincts, which have no use, no gratification, no object, but in society.
Hardly can we find one, which terminates wholly in self, not one, which stands
opposed to society. Of compassion, sympathy, and all the train of benevolent
passions and emotions, society is, clearly, the ultimate object. Others tend to
the preservation of the species, or of the individuals. Such is the hoarding
appetite, and the passion for riches, to which it gives rise; the appetite,
which leads to the propagation of the species, and its consequent passions --
even these are not solitary. They do not terminate, wholly, in self. -- No, not
the hoarding appetite, which, if any, might be thought an exception. Here self
often predominates; but in general, the passion for riches, stripped of every
view to society, becomes very faint, if not totally extinct.

The man who is intent upon gain, has some connection, some friend, whom he
wishes to benefit by his acquisitions. He views the acquisition of riches as a
mean, not an end; a mean of future support and personal indulgence, it is true;
but, at the same time, a mean of benefiting some, and of acquiring esteem,
confidence, and influence among all. Some instances have indeed been known of
solitary misers, who have made the amassing of riches the sole end of their
pursuits. Some individuals have, likewise, conceived an aversion to man, and
have secluded themselves from society. These are considered as deviating from
the common sense of their species, the common standard of man. They are
instances of the abuse of natural passions; or they are anomalies of the race.
There are other anomalies; but from such we do not take the common nature of
man.

The appetite, which leads to the propagation of the species, is, perhaps, in
its origin, a vague, indeterminate impulse to gratification. The principal end
of this appetite, doubtless, is the continuation of the species, by a perpetual
re-production. In this view it is the constant revivifying principle of
society; but the author of our being, whose all-comprehensive plan is adjusted,
in the most perfect harmony, has made it further subservient to the purposes of
social happiness. Nature, by making it the source of a specific passion,
accompanied with sentiments of delicacy and tenderness, corrects the vagueness
of the appetite. This forms one of the strongest bonds of society, and gives
the most enchanting softness to the tout ensemble.

Ambition, when in balance with other passions and appetites, is far from being
opposed to society. Far from being detrimental, it is highly useful to man. By
this passion, many actions, the noblest and most beneficial to society, are
produced. It is only in the extreme, that the passion becomes hurtful; when the
acquisition of power or influence is no longer considered as a mean of doing
good; when the passion aims, solely, or principally at its own gratification.
But this is doing violence to the laws of nature, which result from the whole
nature of man. It is a sacrifice of one part of his nature to another.

The passions of hatred, revenge, and some other passions, and emotions, the
effects of which, are, not unfrequently, very pernicious in society, will be
reserved for another section. In the remainder of this section, we will attend
to some emotions, purely of a social tendency.

Sympathy is an ingredient in the social nature of man, deserving of very
particular attention. The modus agendi, or how the emotion of sympathy is
produced; whether it be wholly mental; the reflection of a sentiment; or
whether it be partly organical, partly mental, is, perhaps, one of the secrets
of nature; but the effect is evident, and the final cause illustrious. It is
one of those nice adjustments in the nature of man, which give us the most
exalted idea of the wisdom and benevolence of its author. In the smaller
circles of life, its influence is more immediate, more direct; but its
influence extends to whole nations and empires. -- Sympathy is produced through
the medium of an organic impression. We perceive something in the countenance,
the movement, the whole figure of the person, which we take for the expression
of a sentiment, or a particular state of mind in that person. We
instantaneously, seemingly by a direct impression, without time for reflection,
find excited in ourselves a corresponding tone of mind, corresponding
sentiments, producing similar expressions. The emotion, though we have a sense
of pain and distress in the object, is not repulsive. On the contrary, we feel
a powerful attraction to objects of distress. Thus man is sweetly prepared, by
nature, to mourn with those who mourn, and rejoice with those who rejoice. The
emotion of sympathy, not only prevents a thousand discords, but produces, in
society, a kind of instinctive harmony.

There is another impression of sympathy, which seems to be mostly organic, or
an effect on the nerves only. One person yawning in company, will produce a
spontaneous yawn in all present, at least, in all who see him in the act. When
we see a person suddenly hurt, or hear of one being wounded in any particular
part, or of the amputation of a limb, we feel a particular affection of the
nerves in that part, which thence thrills through the whole frame, conveying,
at once, to the heart, a sense of the pains supposed to be endured by the
patient. This may be a reason, why when we hear of a person being wounded, we
are anxious to learn the manner, and par^icular place of the wound. While our
information is general, the affection is general. We endure something like a
state of suspense. This is a sitation of, apparently, greater uneasiness, than
when the sensation is reduced to the corresponding part.

Lord Kaims has beautifully unfolded the sympathetic emotion of virtue,
Elements of Criticism, v. 1. chapter ii. p. 1. sec. 4.
but it ought not to be omitted here. When we are witnesses, or hear of the
performance of any great, noble, and benevolent action, we find, excited in
ourselves, a strong disposition to perform the same kind of action. The mind
swells with an ardent desire to find a proper opportunity, or a proper object.

These emotions of sympathy, are not the effect of reasoning: they rather
resemble instinctive impulses. Sympathy, without the intervention of words,
blends the thoughts, the sentiments, and even the virtuous disposition of
individuals. It diffuses joys of the heart, from countenance to countenance,
commands relief in distress, and consolation in affliction. Montesquieu alludes
to this principle in human nature, when he observes, that, "people are,
generally, able to communicate their ideas to their children; but they are
still better able to transmit their passions." This disposition to sympathy
well accounts for all that similarity of sentiments, character, and even of
features, which is observable in families, societies, and nations; the less
perfect, indeed, the more extensive the connection.

SECTION III. Of Hatred and Revenge -- Of Envy, Malice, and some other
dissocial Passions.
THE passions of Hatred and Revenge, are not, in their nature, opposed to
society, though, from abuse, they become, at times, very pernicious. On a
candid enquiry, it will be found, that those passions do not arise from any
malignity in the nature of man. They are given for wise and good purposes. They
are necessary to a being capable of right and wrong in his actions; capable of
injuring as well as benefiting others, and liable to be, himself, the subject
of injuries from those of his own species.

Men are intuitively conscious of a freedom of action, of a choice in what they
do. We know, at the same time, that man is not a perfect being. He has many
weaknesses. There fall in his way motives to action infinitely various.
Sometimes his choice is influenced by ignorance, by error, by the prevalence of
particular passions, or appetites, a present desire of gratification.
Sometimes, he is confounded with an intricate combination of circumstances, the
result of which, he wants the power, or the patience to evolve. He is
frequently tempted to a deviation from justice, by an opposition of interests,
originating, not in a direct intention of the parties, but the want of an early
foresight in each of the other's intended pursuits. To a being thus
circumstanced, powerful moral restraints are necessary. Such restraints are
provided for man, which come in aid of the moral sense, and are made to arise
from the consequence of his actions. It is evidently a constitution of
Providence, that vice shall produce misery, to the agent, and that virtue shall
produce happiness, as a consequence, connected in both, by the relation of
cause and effect. The passions of hatred and revenge will be found to accord
with this constitution.

The more fully to investigate this subject, it will be necessary to take a
nearer view of human nature. Man, in an unimproved state, is very little
acquainted with the operations of his own mind, the extent of his powers and
faculties, and the result of their various combinations. For their
developement, he is furnished with senses, internal and external, accompanied
with the powers of reason and investigation. It is here, as in physics, no
reliance can be had on reasonings, a priori. Experience alone can decide. Man,
therefore, fully to discover the direction and extent of his powers and
faculties, and the right tendency of his whole nature, must, with sufficient
attention and presence of mind, to mark the result, pass through such a variety
of situations, as will bring all into exercise, and put all to the test, in
every variety of combination. It is a matter of great difficulty, to make just
and accurate observations on a subject, so evanescent, as are the operations of
the mind, and always in transitu. They are past, ere there is time for
reflection. On the most important occasions, the whole mind is wrapped in
attention to some external object. Add to this, subjected as man is, though for
wise purposes, to the influence of habit, his observations will be, frequently,
partial, and his conclusions warped by some present prevailing bias. It is
evident, therefore, that, farther than the direct perception of the moral
sense, in its most simple state, the progress of knowledge, in moral and social
combinations, will be slow; how slow, a slight attention to the history of the
human mind, will evince. We are taught, by reason and experience, that the less
man is able to discern agreements and tendencies, the more liable he is to do
wrong; the more liable, from partial views, instead of seeking a compromise, to
sacrifice to his own, the interest of others; at the same time he is less able
to devise and enforce those social rules, which might remedy the evil.

In the first rude stages of society, men have no idea of general rules, or
public punishments, for the prevention of private injuries. They are unable to
connect private injuries with the common concerns of the nation. The redress
and prevention of these, are left to the care of each individual. In a
situation like this, hatred and revenge are the only possible external checks.
These passions go to the nature of each individual. Hatred is a rooted aversion
of one man to another, on account of a real, or supposed, fixed and intentional
opposition to his interest, or happiness. Revenge, is a desire in one person,
to inflict an evil on another, for a real, or supposed injury received. Hatred
dictates the avoidance of its object, as disagreeable or noxious. Revenge
pursues its object, and is gratified, only with retaliating the injury. Such
conduct is dictated by the law of self-preservation, and is the more necessary,
as there is no other external restraint, no other mean of escaping, or
preventing future injuries. Thus limited and directed, they are both necessary
for the prevention of a licentiousness in injuries, unrestrained by any fear of
the consequences.

In the progress of improvement, an extension of social intercourse, the
invention of arts, the change of manners, the separation of property, the
multiplication of desires, and objects of gratification, form a scene too
intricate, a combination of interests too complicated for the former simple
mode of society. Liability to injuries is increased in proportion. The passion
of revenge, almost constantly in exercise, would, in this state, if laid under
no restraint, become a most cruel scourge. Nature is always equal to her
occasions. Active enterprise, and extensive pursuits, invigorate and enla^ l^
(...) powers of the mind, and render m^ (...) the task of a more extensive
legislation. They are led, by degrees, in some measure, to comprehend their
situation; to evolve the combination of their various interests; to form those
laws, which may have a tendency to prevent a direct opposition; to provide a
reparation for injuries, and punishments for the restraint of wanton violence.
Still, the progress is slow. It is long before men can be persuaded to accept
only a reparation for injuries, and submit to society, the sole right of
punishing for prevention, which comes in the place of revenge.

The right to revenge private injuries, in the most improved state of society,
in the highest refinement of manners, never wholly ceases. Nor is it demanded.
-- There will exist many little oppositions, many little injuries, to which the
law cannot descend, and which, if neglected, become the source of greater
violences. The exercise of hatred and revenge, by the party injured, is still
the only restraint, in these cases. In a state of refinement, however, these
passions are stripped of their violence. An avoidance in company, a look of
contempt, a silent glance of indignation, may prove a sufficient restraint to a
person, at all susceptible of the nicer feelings. In this state, they are
hardly known for the same passion^ Still, they are the same, only chastised and
accommodated to a more improved state of society. Before, they acted a primary
p^ as sovereign in the distribution of punishments. Now they act a subordinate
part, coming in aid of the law, in matters of smaller moment. They are, indeed,
liable to great abuses; and what is exempt from abuse, in the hands of a
fallible being? We should be but ill fitted for society, in any state, without
them. In an improved and well regulated society, the abuse can never be very
extensive, in its consequences. Let us not rashly attempt to correct the wisdom
of Deity. Much better is it for us, that we suffer the abuse of them, than the
total extinction.

Envy, malice, and avarice, have been accounted instances of natural passions,
which are dissocial, and tend to prove, that man is little fitted for happiness
in society. I will not contend about the term, natural. It is true, that man is
capable of these passions, and of many other vicious passions and habits. A
little reflection, however, will discover, that these are not original in his
nature. They have their origin in the abuse of those natural passions, which
are necessary to his happiness, both as a social being, and as an individual.

Envy is generally said to be Emulation carried to excess. This is undoubtedly
true; but, in exercise, it certainly partakes of the passion of Revenge.
Emulation is a desire to excel others, in the public estimation. The passion is
not, directly, either social or dissocial, but is, in its consequences,
frequently, very beneficial to society. While a person strives, by the
acquisition of superior excellence, to deserve a preference, in the public
opinion, it may be, emphatically, called the strife of virtue. The happiness of
society is interested in the contest. When a person deserts the prime object,
the acquisition of real excellence, and strives, by the depression of a
competitor, to enjoy the public estimation unrivalled, it has degenerated into
envy. It is now the contest of vice. A person, under the dominion of this
passion, is prone to exaggerate every little fault, in a competitor, and to
convert, even his virtuous actions into vices, by attributing them to corrupt
motives. Every excellence, in a rival, is viewed, as hostile; every advance, a
personal injury. To complete the turpitude of the passion, and fill up the
measure of vice, the passion of revenge is called in to its aid.

Malice is a disposition to inflict evil on others, without just cause. The
disposition is inflamed into a passion, whenever a proper object is presented.
It may be called a perpetual anger. It is equally irrational with that passion.
Some persons appear to derive, from their organization, an irritability of
mind, which easily admits this disposition. In general, malice prevails most
among a people of fierce and rough manners, where the common tone of the mind
borders upon anger. It is more rare in an improved state of society and
manners, and where it is discovered, may, generally, be traced to its source,
in a series of disappointments, insults, and hard usage, which have habituated
the mind to a state of irritation. In all these cases, it is easily perceived,
that a malicious disposition, is, originally, no part of the common nature of
man. It is wholly adventitious. It is a vicious habit of mind admitted and
confirmed, by a too easy indulgence of the irritable feelings.

Avarice is the excess of that passion, which accompanies the hoarding
appetite, as mentioned, in a former section; the passion, which prompts man to
provide for his future necessity, or conveniences. It is the foundation of all
his providence. He could not even subsist without it. Like other passions, it
is liable to abuse; to be converted into avarice, and become, indirectly, an
incentive to the most horrid vices.

There are passions, which originate in habit. Every habit gives ^se to an
attendant passion, which impels to the indulgence of the habit. vicious habits
are attended with vicious passions, many of which have the most pernicious
consequences in society. Such passions have no pretense of being natural, or,
original in the mind of man. The habits, from which they are derived, are
formed in the mind, through the neglect, or abuse of some natural power,
faculty, or propensity. They may, like every vice, be admitted or excluded, at
the election of the mind. They may, therefore, with exact propriety, be
denominated artificial.

That any of the passions, faculties, or propensities of man may be abused,
proves only, that he is a moral agent, capable, in his actions, of choosing
between good and evil; or that he is imperfect, and liable to deception, and
sometimes aberrations from virtue, without designing the consequences. Were it
an objection to any passion, propensity, power, or faculty, that it might be
ab^d to the injury of mankind, not one would escape condemnation. The faculty
of reason would not be exempt. Generosity itself must be accounted an evil,
because it sometimes mis-judges, and sometimes turns to prodigality.

Upon a candid view of the subject, I think we may fairly conclude, that man
is, by the laws of his common nature, as constituted by the author of his
being, fitted for a state of society, and of social improvements; that his
happiness depends on the right use of his passions, appetites, powers, and
faculties, agreeably to the laws of social nature; that, as a moral being,
capable of vicious, as well as virtuous actions, he may deviate from his
destination, violate the laws of his nature, and disturb his own happiness, and
the happiness of society.

SKETCH III. OF MAN, AS FITTED FOR CIVIL GOVERNMENT, AND THE NATURE OF THAT
NECESSITY BY WHICH HE IS LED TO ITS ADOPTION.
SECTION I. Of the Moral Sense -- Active and Passive Powers -- Sense of
Accountability -- The Social Sense -- and Patriotism -- as they relate to Civil
Society.
IN the preceding sketch we have seen that Man, as far as depends on his
natural passions, appetites, and instinctive emotions, is fitted and intended
for the social state. We shall now enquire how far he is, by his nature, sitted
for government: for civil institutions and laws.

Man is furnished with a moral sense, By the Moral sense is not to be
understood any thing like a moral instinct. It is used to express that mental
faculty, by which we perceive moral relations, comprehending the feelings,
which, in the mind, accompany the perception. The same may be said of the sense
of accountability, and of all the internal senses. They are faculties of
perceiving certain relations. They are called senses, from a supposed analogy
to the external senses. It has been usual to consider them, as existing,
distinctly, in the mind. But I think this is not just. The distinction, from
which they have derived their different denominations, is, probably, to be
found in the objects of perception only, not in the mind itself. Be that as it
may, whether they exist, distinctly, in the mind, or are denominated from the
different objects of perception, the distinction will be equally necessary, and
the conclusion, to all the (...)
by which he perceives the right, and the wrong of his actions. This sense is
faint and limited at first; but is invigorated, and extended, in the course of
social improvement. It is the final arbiter of justice, veracity, and all the
moral virtues, of all the moral actions of the man, whether social, or selfish.
When he perceives his actions to be right, or productive of good, agreeably to
the order of his nature, he is conscious of a virtuous approbation; when he
perceives them to be wrong, he suffers the painful emotion of disapprobation.
Hence arises his love of justice, veracity, and all the social, all the moral
virtues. What he is conscious of in himself, he expects to find in others. This
is the foundation of his confidence in the justice of others, and his reliance
on human testimony. That he sometimes violates those virtues, is no proof, that
he does not love, and admire them. Justice, for instance, is the result of
action, of moral action; or rather, it is the result of certain reciprocal
relations between the action, the agent, and the object. It is often,
therefore, not a little complex. A little more, or less comprehension of these
relations, may, wholly, vary the result, as to the moral quality of the action.
Viewing things through the medium of prejudice, or of some predominant passion,
or appetite, man is liable to err, as well in the association, as in the
application; and while he loves virtue, in general, to admit vice in
particulars.

Considered as to his mind, man has active as well as passive powers. He is
capable of deliberation and choice. He is, likewise, capable of various
impressions from external objects. These impressions introduce a change in the
mind, which is the subject. A difference in the subject, gives a difference to
the effects produced by the same cause. Hence it is, that, not only different
men, but frequently the same man, at different times, may be very differently
affected by the same object, and the same motive have a different influence.
Hence comes a fluctuation of choice. This fluctuation is corrected by the moral
sense, by the force of habit and of reason, which place a choice of objects, or
the admission of the causes of such impressions, in the power of the mind. Were
man unassailable by external impulses; were the influence of motives excluded,
did his nature admit one line of conduct, only, without any modification, he
would be, wholly, unaccommodating, a being wholly unaccountable. Laws might as
well be promulgated to a machine. Sanctions and punishments could add no
inducement to the observance. To an omniscient and all-perfect being, this
might, perhaps, be a desirable state; but it is ill suited to the imperfections
of man.

Thus, by a little attention, we discover, that the very constitution, which on
a cursory view, seemed hardly to admit of government and laws, is nevertheless,
well adapted to that state. It is no objection to say, man is imperfect; it is
only to say, he is man. His imperfections, to a certain degree, fit him to be a
subject of government. We shall see, hereafter, that they render it
indispensibly necessary.

Man has, likewise, an appetite for the approbation of others, which
contributes not a little to his sense of accountability. The sense of
accountability is a very principal ingredient in the moral nature of man. When
he has done well, he is conscious that he is deserving of approbation; when
ill, of punishment. In the same manner, he judges of the actions of others. See
more upon this subject in sec. 4 of this sketch.
Thus he is made to perceive the justice of punishment, and the moral necessity
of submiting to laws, which comport with his moral nature.

There is one sense, which I will venture to call the social sense. Though its
effects have been often noticed, I do not recollect, that it has been
distinctly handled by any writer on society. When a man considers himself, as
connected with any society, he is, if I may use the expression, perceptively
conscious of a kind of individuality of himself with the aggregate. The
perception is more, or less distinct, as the connection is more, or less
intimate. This sense, if it be not the germ of every social attachment,
certainly, gives strength to the attachment, and vigor to patriotism itself. It
is a very necessary part of the social nature of man, and of great importance
to government. It is not only the soul of individuality to the whole
government, but, as there will be numerous subordinate connections in the same
government, it makes all the individuals of the same connection, in some
measure sponsors for the actions of each. They perceptively enjoy the virtues,
both of the individuals of the connection, and of the aggregate. Each feels, as
of right, the reproach of the other's crimes, and the justice of their
punishment. I think the existence of the social sense will not be doubted by
any, who will carefully attend to the operation of their own minds.

The perceptions of this sense have, indeed, given rise to a principle, which
has been grossly abused to the oppression of mankind. In many governments, the
horrid practice has prevailed of involving, in the punishment of offenders, all
of the same family and connection, however remote. It has prevailed, mostly, in
despotic states. It, there, coincides with the principles of the government,
which make it a crime for a man to be placed, even by nature herself, in a
situation, in which he might dare to think himself injured, by the actions of
the Prince. The principle, by no means justifies the practice; but it, in some
measure, accounts for its origin. It, likewise, accounts for the practice of
retaliation, reprisals, and many other practices, adopted in the law of
nations. And, here, humanity might vindicate her rights, and assert, that the
practice is, too often, carried further than the principle will warrant.

Patriotism, or love of country, makes an illustrious figure in civil
institutions. It is indispensibly necessary to any degree of security, or
prosperity in a nation. The whole community is the object of this passion. In
its effects, it unites the individual members, in the pursuit of public
measures, and on necessary occasions, gives a common preference of public to
private good. To the common interest, in the defense and prosperity of the
nation, it adds an affection, great as the object, on which it is exerted.

It has been made a question by some, whether this passion be among the natural
passions of man. The Abbe Raynal has asserted the contrary. Speaking of the
inhabitants of Brazil, he says, "They show no paticular attachment to their
native place. The love of country, which is a ruling passion in civilized
states; which, in good governments, rises to enthusiasm, and in bad ones, grows
habitual; this love of our country is but a f^ctitious sentiment arising from
society; but unknown in a state of nature." Hist. of the Indies.
Let us carefully examine this opinion. At this day, facts, and not names, give
a currency to opinions.

Though in speaking of the Brazillians, the Abbe mentions only their want of
attachment to their native soil; yet, in his general position, he comprehends
all the most distinctive properties of that love of country, which is,
generally, denominated patriotism. In this sense, the love of country, is the
love of the community. An attachment to the soil collects, limits, and fixes
the passion, and gives a locality to its object; but is not necessary to its
existence. Take from the country the community, all its inhabitants, the object
ceases.

Were this passion not discovered, in the first rude state of society, no
conclusive argument could, in this point, be drawn from that circumstance.
Most, or all the passions of man, are, originally, capacities only. Capacities
may, and do exist, antecedent to the objects, to which they are adapted. They
can be discovered in exercise only, and they cannot be exhibited in exercise,
until they meet a proper subject for their exertion. Many of them are like
plants in the germ. They exhibit not their species, until they are expanded by
a proper cultivation. Shall we say, the oak is not a tree of nature, because,
in its first state, it is but a germ in the acorn? Shall we say, the appetite,
which leads to the propagation of the species, and its consequenti^l passions,
are not natural, because they are not discovered in the infant of a day?

If we rely on facts, history has not recorded, or modern researches
discovered, a single people, in this state of nature, a state, in which the
love of country, an attachment to the community, does not make a conspicuous
figure. The ancient barbarians of the north, from whom the modern inhabitants
of Europe are, mostly, descended, furnish, every where, proofs of the existence
of this passion; of vigorous national attachments. It is true, that their
attachment to the soil was not so strong. This attachment is fixed,
principally, by the cultivation of the earth for subsistence, which collects
the interest and attention to one spot, and gives a locality to conveniences.

It is not, however, true, that savages have, in general, but feeble
attachments to the soil of their country. On the contrary, in this respect,
they are, in a great measure, capable of the same habits, passions, and
sentiments, as the man of civilization. They occupy, with their habitations,
but a small part of what they call their country. The greater part is reserved
for pasture, or for hunting ground. It is the great farm of the tribe. They
readily remove from one part of this to another; but war, famine, or some more
powerful cause, is necessary to compel them to a total emigration.

The ancient Scythians, from whom the modern Tartars are descended, were a
nation of herdsmen. Their riches consisted principally in horses, which
supplied them with both food and carriage. Their habitations were booths, or
tents of easy construction. In a country of great extent, they prefered only
those places, which afforded the greatest plenty of fresh pastures. In search
of these, they made frequent and distant removals.

We find, that among this people, as early as the reign of Darius, the son of
Hystaspes, the love of country was a vigorous passion. Their national
attachments were strong, and they were attached to the soil of their country,
not so much because it afforded them subsistence by cultivation, as because it
contained the tombs of their ancestors. According to Herodotus, Indathyrs^^s,
who was a prince, or a head warrior in that country, sent the following message
to Darius, then attempting the conquest of Scythia: -- "If I fly before the^
Prince of the Persians, it is not because I fear thee. What I do now, I am used
to do in times of peace. We Scythians have neither houses nor lands to defend,
if thou have a mind to force us to come to an engagement, come and attack the
tombs of our fathers, and then thou shall find what manner of men we are." Such
a people could be no strangers to patriotism.

The savages of North America are a living instance of the vigor of this
passion among a rude, uncultivated people. The European writers have been
greatly abused in their information concerning the American natives. Buffon has
asserted, that, "Among them, paternal love, and filial affection are very
faint. The most intimate connection, that of family, has but feeble ties. There
is no society between one family and another; of course there is no national
union, no republic, no social state." -- ils aiment foiblement leurs peers and
leurs enfans; la societe la plus, intime de toutes, cele de la meme famille,
n'a donc chez eu^^ que de foible liens; la society d'une famille a l'autre
n'en a point de tout: des lors nulle reunion, nulle republique, nulle etat
social. xviii. 146.


The Abbe Raynal, in his observations on America, has copied many things from
Buffon, and probably, here, he found that state of nature, to which he alludes
in the passage above recited. Happily, such a state of nature does not exist.
In the same account of the inhabitants of Brazil, the Abbe speaks of their
ancient mode of living, in that country. What but an attachment to the soil
could have been the cause of the continuance of this people, in the same
country, through a succession of ages? to what but a national attachment shall we
attribute their national manners, and the national resentment of which he there
speaks?

In another place he gives an instance, which contradicts every part of the
social character given of the American natives, by Buffon, and militates,
strongly, against his own opinion, that in what he calls a state of nature, the
love of country is unknown. The French wanted to persuade some of the savages
of Canada to remove to a distance from their native soil. On this occasion, one
of their Chiefs made the following speech: "We were born (said he) on this
ground. Our fathers lie buried in it. Shall we say to the bones of our fathers,
Arise, and come with us into a foreign land?" Is this the language of a people,
who are almost void of parental and filial affection? who have no national
attachments? no republic? no social state?

Logan, a Mingo Chief, in his speech, J^ (...)
sent to the Governor of Virginia, at the close of an Indian war, in the year
1774, discovers the same sentiments of patriotism. The reader will not be
displeased to see the whole of this beautiful passage. It is equal to volumes
on the character of that people. "I appeal to any white man," says he, "to say,
if ever he came to Logan's cabin, hungry, and he gave him not meat; if he ever
came cold and naked, and he clothed him not. During the course of the last,
long, and bloody war, Logan remained idle in his cabin, an advocate for peace.
Such was my love for the whites, that my countrymen pointed as they went, and
said, Logan is the friend of white men. I had even thought to have lived with
you, but for the injuries of one man. Col. Cressop, last spring, in cold blood,
and unprovoked, murdered all the relations of Logan, not sparing even my women
and children. There runs not a drop of my blood in the veins of any living
creature. This called on me for revenge. I have fought. I have killed many. I
have fully glutted my vengeance. For my country, I rejoice at the beams of
peace: -- But do not harbor a thought that mine is the joy of fear. Logan
never felt fear. He would not turn on his heel to save his life. Who is there
to mourn for Logan? Not one."

Where shall we find the love of country more emphatically, more beautifully
expressed? The people of the United States, who have had frequent occasion to
transact business with the American natives, both as individuals, and in their
national councils, know the strength of their national attachments.

The farther we go back, with men, toward the state, so fondly, and partially,
deemed the only true state of nature, the more vigorous we find that passion,
which attaches them to their little communities. What then is the result? Why,
clearly, that the author of existence, to fit men for society and civil
government, has strongly incorporated this passion in (...) nature.

SECTION II. OF A SENSE OF PROPERTY. The reader will please to remember what
was said in a note to the preceding section, concerning the internal senses, of
which I reckon the sense of property one.

THE rights of property make so great a figure in the laws of every government,
it may not be amiss to give a little attention to man, in relation to those
rights. Much has been said, by writers on law and government, concerning the
origin of the right of property, and many enquiries have been made, whence man
comes by the idea of that right, so universally prevalent. I have met with but
one opinion, which can give any satisfaction on the subject. Lord Kaims has
employed several essays in its illustration. Essays on Morality and Natural
Religion. 66. Sketches of the History of Man. Book I. Sk. 3.
The reader will readily discern, how far I am indebted to that excellent
author, for some of the following observations.

It is now, I believe pretty generally agreed, that man is furnished with
internal, as well as external senses. The objects of the internal senses are,
mostly, moral relations. Among these, is a sense of property; a sense, by which
the mind perceives, intuitively, without the intervention of reasoning, a right
of property. Whether it be a distinct sense, or a branch of the moral sense, is
not material to enquire. This is to be observed, that the perception is only of
relations, from which results the right of property. As a distinct sense, it
does not extend to the modes of acquisition, but leaves them to the cognizance
of the moral sense.

The relation, in which consists the right of property, seems not to be a moral
relation, nor wholly a corporal relation, as of parts. The relation between me
and the table, on which I write at present, by which it is mine, seems to have
nothing of a moral quality in it, without the intervening relation of some
other person. It is, doubtless, very simple. It has never yet been defined,
otherwise, than by the mode of acquisition; as, this piece of land is A's. He
purchased it. It was given to him. It came to him by descent. Indeed, to simple
objects of perception, whether substances, or relations, names are necessary,
but definitions are useless, and impract^cable. Nature has denied them, in
every instance. The discovery, therefore, of simple objects, or simple
relations, is not from reason, but intuition. This sense, though limited, at
first, and, like the other faculties, subjected to a course of improvement, is
discoverable in the early stages of life. The infant has, clearly, a sense of
the right of property, though not of the modes of acquisition. He seems, before
he is capable of consequential reasoning, as clearly to discern his right to
his rattle-box, as the adult to his horse, purchased with his money, or his
labor, and vindicates his property with as much apparent consciousness of that
right. The perception extends, however, little farther than his own right; it
can hardly be said to extend to the rights of others.

Many brute animals, to whom we have denied the powers of reason and
investigation, appear, evidently, to have a sense of property. Give a bone to a
dog, he takes it boldly as his own. Let another attempt to rob him of it, he
stands boldly in its defense, with a seeming consciousness of his right of
property; while the aggressor approaches with an apparent consciousness of
guilt. The ox claims a right to his stall, and the dog, again, to his wonted
corner. Instances have been given of a sense of this right in the ape, the
beaver, the stork, and some other animals, which have not fallen under my
observation. I, therefore, omit them. It would be strange if Providence had
been less kind to man, than to the brute creation -- man, to whom property is
so extensively useful, and which, in a state of society, becomes the object or
the instrument of most of his moral actions.

It was observed above, that the perception is only of the right, or of the
relation, which constitutes property, but extends not to the modes of
acquisition. These modes, according to the state of society, may be very
various. In the early stages of society, or, what is frequently called a state
of nature, the objects of property, are almost as few, and the modes of
acquisition nearly as simple, as among many tribes of the brute creation. The
objects of property are only those things, which are barely necessary to
support existence. The modes of acquisition are, mostly, confined to prime
occupancy, and some trifling productions by labor. The simple modes of gift and
exchange are soon added. In the progress of society, men learn to apply to
their use, either for their necessities, or their pleasure, most of the
numerous productions of nature. By the assistance of art, as the powers of the
mind expand, they vary, and multiply these, without end. In proportion as men
enlarge their views of what is useful or agreeable, the hoarding appetite gains
strength. They become eager of the present, and provident of the future. The
objects of property become equally numerous with the objects of desire. In such
a state, the modes of acquisition are greatly diversified, and are made the
subject of a great variety of laws and regulations. The whole business of
property now appears to be an artificial system; but the modes of acquisition
only are the subjects of artificial regulations. The right itself, of property,
is substantially founded in the relations of nature, and is discovered by a
natural sense, an intuitive perception. The business of acquisition, serves
only to bring the subjects of property within the compass of those relations.

Here let me observe, that from this view of the right of property, we clearly
discover, that it is not, as many writers have asserted, the creature of the
civil law only. The consequences, therefore, which they have drawn from this
position, "that on a dissolution of government, all property is annihilated;
and that every revolution of government, or radical reformation, is destructive
of the right itself of property," are by no means just. Civil protection only
is lost. The security of enjoyment is endangered. The right itself, founded in
the primary relations of nature, remains unchanged. But to return.

Without this perception, the right of property could be but weakly guarded by
the moral sense. Were it a discovery of reason, a conclusion to convenience
only, it must wait a considerable maturity of the reasoning powers. It must be
wholly unattainable to children; and, certainly, no persons, until they had, in
one way or other, attained the perception, could feel any obligation of
restraint. Force alone could prevent a constant violation of the rights of
property. Prohibitory laws would be considered as so many arbitrary
impositions. How much better is the plan of Providence! Who can forbear to
admire the wisdom and goodness displayed by the Author of our being, in thus
adjusting the nature of man to that social and civil state, which he has ever
found necessary, not only to his happiness, but to any tolerable existence in
life? Deity has implanted in the nature of man, the germ of every necessary
qualification, and left to him the cultivation. More, it is probable, could not
be indulged to a moral agent.

SECTION III. Of the Coincidence between Natural and Civil Liberty.
THAT Man, on entering into civil society, of necessity, sacrifices a part of
his natural liberty, has been pretty universally taken for granted by writers
on government. They seem, in general, not to have admitted a doubt of the truth
of the proposition. One feels as though it was treading on forbidden ground, to
attempt a refutation of what has been advanced by a Lock, Look on Civ. Gov.
221. 245.
a Beccari, Bec. on Crimes and Punishments. Chapter 1. and 8.
and some other eminent writers and statesmen. "Individuals entering into
society, must give up a share of liberty to preserve the rest. The magnitude of
the sacrifice must depend, as well on situation and circumstances, as on the
object to be obtained. It is at all times difficult to draw, with precision,
the line between those rights, which must be surrendered, and those which may
be preserved." Letter from the Convention for forming the Federal Constitution,
to the President of Congress, of the 17th of Sept. 1787.
But while we venerate them as men, who have extended and improved the most
important science, the science of government, we shall do them no injustice to
suppose, that, in so vast a field of enquiry, they may have left some part not
sufficiently explored. The revolution in America has opened new avenues to the
science of government.

We have already seen, that the laws of nature, as they relate to man, are the
laws of social nature; and that they have a particular relation to the civil
state. Indeed, it would be strange to suppose, that the God of all order, had,
in the very nature of man, implanted the seeds of incongruity and
contradiction. That from an undue cultivation, which is the work of man,
incongruities and contradictions should arise, is not a subject of wonder. The
abovementioned writers, and after them, the learned Judge Blackstone, Black.
C^. V (...).
have asserted, that man, on entering into society, sacrifices a part of his
natural rights, a part of his natural liberty, the better to secure the
remainder. They speak of it as arising from the original laws of his nature,
and the necessary nature of civil institutions. The position sounds very harsh,
that, to the enjoyment of civil society, man must give up a part of his natural
liberty; but it is always closed with this consolation, that, he, thereby,
gains a greater security for the remainder, and is, in point of happiness, a
great gainer by the exchange. The pursuit and attainment of happiness, is
agreeable to the laws of man's nature, and dictated by them. If this be true,
is it not sufficient to suggest a doubt, whether the state, in which that end
is most perfectly answered, be not the true state of nature? Whether those
natural rights, which are said to be given up, the principal of which, are, the
right of judging in his own cause, and of taking satisfaction, or rather
revenge, at his pleasure, are rights, which any man is qualified to exercise,
in all cases, consistently with his own happiness, or that of others? Whether,
in an unimproved state of society, the infancy of the human powers and
faculties, an incapacity of developing the whole laws of his nature, and
consequently, of carrying them into full effect, these rights are not given to
man, as a temporary provision of necessity? And that, when he is arrived at a
maturity to be capable of civil combinations, and a better provision for
carrying into effect the laws of his social nature, as far as such provision
can be made, they cease to the individual of course? This subject is farther
examined in the first Section of Sketch IV.
It surely affords a much more agreeable reflection to suppose, that, arising
from human nature, taking in a capacity for improvement, which makes a part of
the constitution, there is no such opposition between natural and civil rights.
That, in some governments, men are deprived of their natural rights, is true;
but it is equally true, and equally comprehensive to say, they are deprived of
their civil rights. Such governments, either in their constitution, or
administration; from weakness on the one side, corruption or wickedness on the
other, have deviated from the true principles of nature.

The Americans should know, from experience, that little more is necessary to
the discovery of the coincidence of natural and civil rights, than the removal
of ancient prejudices, or to their reconcilement in practice, than the removal
of powers and biasses not warranted by the laws of nature. From the progress,
which has already been made, they have good reason to believe, that the
weaknesses only, which are incident to human nature, not any opposition of
principles, prevent the attainment of this end in the highest perfection.

The Marquis Beccari speaks of a sacrifice of that universal liberty of action,
common to all sensible beings, and limited only by our natural powers. Essay on
Crimes and Punishments. Chapter 8.
May not this liberty be as well predicated of a machine? When we speak of the
liberty common to man, liberty, and a right to act, are convertible terms. Man
has a natural, that is, a mere physical power, to injure both himself and
others. But is a liberty to do this accorded to him by the laws of his nature?
that is, a right to do wrong. Power, and liberty, are not of equal extent in
signification. Power is, in a strict sense, that, by which we are enabled to
exercise our liberty; not the liberty itself, when considered as a right. In a
larger sense, it comprehends, both the right, and the power. Civil liberty is
generally taken in this sense. It will not be suggested, that liberty and moral
obligation are at variance. I think, therefore, it will be more just to say,
that, liberty of action, common to sensible beings, is limited by their natural
powers, by the obligations of morality, in a word, by the laws of their whole
nature. To give up the performance of any action, which is forbidden by the
laws of moral and social nature, cannot be deemed a sacrifice.

It may be said, that all men have a right, individually, to pursue their own
interest and happiness; and that, in the commerce of civil society, there will
arise oppositions, which will, frequently, oblige one to sacrifice his
interest, or happiness, to that of another. I answer, 1. The more men are found
in a state of individual independence, and the less they direct their conduct
by mutual laws, the more frequently, will such oppositions arise, and
sacrifices necessarily be made, and that under circumstances of violence. -- 2.
Man, as a being, sociable by the laws of his nature, has no right to pursue his
own interest, or happiness, to the exclusion of that of his fellow men. -- 3.
The laws resulting from the reciprocal social relations of men, dictate, that,
when, from a want of foresight, or from the nature of the objects of pursuit,
an opposition arises, there should be an amicable compromise. Beyond this,
nature may have given power, but she has accorded no liberty, no right to man.

This is the true principle of all commerce and exchange amongst men; of the
accommodation of all civil claims and privileges, and the mutual submission of
private opinion to public sentiment. It is true, that men, in their private
intercourse, often lose sight of this principle, and that, in public bodies, it
is too much neglected. The interests of the minority, which, upon a right of
mutual compromise, are entitled to a proportionable regard, are too often
neglected, or wholly sacrificed to the more powerful interests of the majority.
Still, the principle, however neglected, exists in the immutable relations of
nature. If the neglect, or violation of any rule, natural, political, or
revealed, were sufficient to prove, that it was not binding, that it was
inapplicable, or that it was abrogated, what one rule would have remained for
the conduct of man?

Montesquieu, in treating of a subject, which led him to make a comparison
between a state of independence, the supposed state of nature, and a state of
civil government, says, "Liberty consists in not being forced to do a thing,
which the laws do not oblige. People are, in this state, only as they are
governed by civil laws; and because they are governed by civil laws, they are
free. It follows from hence, that Princes, who live not among themselves under
civil laws, are not free; they may continually force or be forced." Sp. L. B.
26. Chapter 20.
Sovereign Princes are, in respect to each other, in what is called a state of
natural independence. In another place he observes, "As men have given up their
natural independence, to live under political laws, they have given up the
natural community of goods, to live under civil laws; by the first they
acquired liberty, by the second, property." B. 26. Chapter 15.
However defective the above definition of liberty may be, it appears from
these passages, that Montesquieu differed from other writers, in his opinion of
the liberty enjoyed in the two states. He clearly supposes, that man, on
entering into society, makes an acquisition of liberty, without any sacrifice;
or rather, that he thereby secures, to himself, free from the danger of
deprivation, by force, the common rights of his nature. If I am not deceived,
what has been said in this section, proves the opinion to be well founded, and
that all the rights of man are relative to his s^cial nature. They exist only
in a coincidence with the rights of the whole, in a well ordered state of
society and civil government.

When, therefore, we find an infringement of the natural rights, or liberties
of the people patronized by the constitution of the state, or admitted in the
administration, we ought not to excuse ourselves from searching the cause, and
applying a remedy, under a persuasion, that the people, from a certain
necessity of nature, consented, in their civil compact, to sacrifice a part of
their natural rights, the better to secure the remainder. At the same time, we
ought to be cautious, how we disturb the happiness of the community, by an
attempt to exercise those rights, which, in the infancy of society, an
incapacity to discover, arrange, and give effect to the more general laws of
social nature, were lent to man, as a provision of necessity only.

SECTION IV. Considerations on a Disposition in Man, to abuse the Powers of
Government, with which he is entrusted.
THE question, whether Man be originally depraved -- whether a disposition to
evil, a relish for vice, as such, be a part of his nature, in the present
state, I leave to be discussed by the moralist, and the divine. I am, here, to
consider his natural powers, his disposition and actions, as they relate solely
to his political state. Moral writers have gone upon different, and opposite
systems, respecting the origin of moral evil, and the natural disposition of
man, as affected to virtue and vice. Political writers have, uniformly, agreed.
From Machiavel to Dr. Price, all have affected, that, in a political character,
when entrusted with power, man is totally depraved, wicked, and corrupt; that
the utmost perverseness, in power, is inherent in his very nature; that he is
never good, but through necessity. Hence mutual checks, restraints, and
opposition of powers are found necessary to guard against the oppression of
rulers.

This, if true, militates directly against, what I have all along been
endeavoring to establish; that man, by the original constitution of his nature,
is fitted for civil government; or, as I have elsewhere expressed it, that
Deity has implanted in him the germ of every necessary qualification, for that
state. Little, however, is man fitted for civil government, if no one is fit to
be entrusted with the execution of its powers. Before we admit an opinion,
which so much vilifies the nature of man, and would, if believed, almost tempt
one to call in question the goodness of its author, let us heartily consider
the reasons, upon which the opinion is founded.

It is said, and truly, that every page of history is pregnant with instances
of the abuse of power. The long line of Roman Emperors, with very few
exceptions, were scourges of the earth. All the Kings and Nobles of ancient and
modern times, not excepting the philosophic Frederick of Prussia, The late King
of Prussia, was undoubtedly one of the best of modern absolute Monarchs. He was
a man of letters and philosophy. He did much, in time of peace, to improve the
condition of his subjects. The wisdom of his civil regulations have long been a
theme of panegyric. Yet he was guilty of the most flagrant abuses. His savage
treatment of Baron Trenck, would have condemned, even a Monarch, less
illustrious, to eternal infamy, "While his army was in Great Poland, in 1771;
he obliged the inhabitants, under the severest penalties, to take in payment,
for forage, provisions, corn, and horses, the money offered by his Commissaries
and troops. The money was either silver bearing the impression of Poland, and
worth exactly one third of its nominal value; or ducats, struck in imitation of
Dutch ducats, seventeen per cent. inferior to the real ducats of Holland. With
this base money he bought up corn and forage enough, not only to supply his
army for two whole years, but to stock magazines in the country itself, where
the inhabitants were forced to come and repurchase corn, for their daily
subsistence, at an advanced price, and with good money, his Commissaries
refusing to take the same coin they had paid. By this honest and masterly
maneuver, it is said he gained, at the lowest calculation, seven millions of
dollars!!!" -- A crime much less mean and base, would have gibbeted one of his
subjects.

His attack upon the city of Dan^zick, in the year 1769, can be reckoned only a
piece of Royal villainy. "The share, which the same Monarch had in the
partition of Poland, must stamp his character, notwithstanding the encomiums
bestowed upon him by the minions of kingly power, with indellible infamy and
disgrace." -- See the life of Frederick III. King of Prussia, in the Literary
Magazine for the year 1791. Vol. VI.


have given full and convincing proofs of the danger of entrusting to men any
degree of power, to be exercised in their own right, without control. An
effect so universal, it is said, must have a universal cause in the nature of
man. All this is true; and yet I will venture, at the hazard of being thought
singular, to dissent from the common opinion, respecting the real cause. I
apprehend the effect is not so generally produced, by any malignity, any
culpable disposition in the nature of man; but that it is mostly the effect of
situation. I do not doubt the universality of the effect, or rather, if you
please, of the event, of a constant abuse of power, in certain situations. I
doubt only of the cause. I think the cause is of a nature very different from
that, which has usually been assigned. I suspect, that it is a little more
complex, and, that it is the effect of other causes; some existing in the
nature of man, others arising from the nature of the power, and the usual mode
of betrustment. It will, perhaps, be thought, if the effect, in all the extent
and uniformity contended for, be allowed, it is of little consequence, to the
science of government, what the particular causes are. The same checks, the
same opposition of powers, will be necessary, to guard against the abuse. But
let it be remembered, that, in applying a remedy to an evil, little success can
be expected, if the cause of the evil be unknown, or mistaken. It is much more
eligible, where there is a possibility, to remove or prevent the cause, than to
be obliged to maintain a constant struggle against the effect, or to be
perpetually employed, in palliating, or diverting its malignity. According to
our different apprehensions of the cause, the remedy applied will be different,
and the event more or less successful.

It must be remembered, that man is a complex being. He is by nature
constituted with a great variety of passions, appetites, powers, and faculties;
senses, external and internal, adapted to the perception of objects, and
relations, physical and moral. Some of these have a more immediate relation to
his individual being and happiness; yet not so as to stand opposed to society.
Others have a more immediate relation to society; yet not to the exclusion of
self. He was not made for independence but for mutual connection, mutual
dependence, and to this, every thing in his nature is, more or less relative.
On the right discernment of moral relations, either singly, or in their various
combinations, arising from objects, situation, and circumstances, depends the
justness of his moral perceptions; on marking the result with precision,
depends the knowledge of his duty, a knowledge of the laws of his nature. He is,
from the constitution of his nature, capable of impressions from an infinite
variety of objects, both external and internal. For the opperations of the
mind, by reflection, become objects, and again have their impressions. These
impressions give an equal variety to the modifications of his passions,
appetites, powers, and faculties, not only singly, but in all their various
combinations. The result of all these, constitutes the temper, disposition, and
character of the man; and from the various modifications, arises, in some
measure, the various influence of motives. Were man left in this situation, he
would be the sport of blind impulses. There seems to be a necessity for a
balance, as well as some arbiter of moral action. The power of reasoning, by
which he combines, compares, distinguishes, and marks the result, has, by some
ethical writers, been considered as being to man, the balance of his moral
powers, and the arbiter of his actions. I think this is not the office of
reason. Reason is rather the hand that adjusts the balance, limits and extends
it, than the balance itself. However nice and metaphysical this distinction may
seem, I promise, that it will lead to some important consequences in the
economy of man.

It may be asked, What is, to man, the arbiter of his actions? What the balance
of his moral powers? I answer, The moral sense is, in all cases, the arbiter of
moral action. Reason is an advocate, to argue, compare, and inform; but to
conscience, or the moral sense, is left the ultimate decision. I believe every
one will be capable, of this distinction. The remaining part of the subject is,
indeed, a little intricate. I do not despair, however of making it intelligible
to those, who will attend to what passes in their own minds.

It was observed above, that man is a being constituted with a great variety of
powers, faculties, passions, and appetites. These are capable, from various
impressions, to which the mind is subjected, of an almost endless variety of
modifications and combinations, which furnish to motives, different directions,
and different degrees of force. To a being thus constituted, some balance, to
prevent the utmost capriciousness of conduct, and give him a command of any
choice in his actions, some constant regulator is necessary. A little attention
to those faculties of the mind, which constitute the reasoning powers; to their
operations; to the manner in which they are affected, influenced, and biassed,
by external impulses, or internal combinations, will discover, that reason,
instead of being qualified to serve as a balance, has, itself, need of a
balance, a steady principal for its regulation. Nature, always equal to her
wants, has provided such a principle. This is a sense of accountability found
in the breast of every rational being. Mention was made of this sense, in a
former section; but I find it necessary to examine it with a little more
attention.

Whether the sense of accountability be a distinct sense, a branch of the moral
sense, or a certain state of the mind, produced by the moral sense, in a
perception of certain moral relations, and in a view of certain objects, is not
easy to determine. I am, however, inclined to believe the latter. In examining
this principle of our nature, it will be necessary to keep in view the moral
sense; the sense, by which we discern moral relations.

Man has, as was observed in a former section, a passion, a desire, an
appetite, call it by what name we please, for the approbation of others. He
extends it to all intelligent beings, whom he conceives to be, in any way,
conusant of his actions; and its force is increased, or diminished, in
proportion to the relation, or connection, in which he conceives himself
placed, in respect to such beings. In the same extent, and in the same
proportion he dreads their disapprobation, or censure. When the moral sense
informs him, that his actions are right, he is conscious, that he deserves
their approbation. On the contrary, when he has done wrong, he is conscious,
that he is deserving of their censure. He is conscious to himself of a feeling
of approbation, and disapprobation of the conduct of others, as he views it to
be right, or wrong. Judging from his own feelings, and the expressions he meets
in others, he rightly expects to find the same sentiments in all. Thus man
finds himself bound to his duty by a three fold cord of accountability, -- to
God -- to himself -- and to his fellow men. Thus the moral sense, and the sense
of accountability, constantly operating, though not exempt from the
imperfections incident to the nature of man, constitute the balance of his
moral powers, and a steady principle for the regulation of his actions. Reason,
by comparing circumstances, marking the result, and detecting the impositions,
to which all the senses, as well external, as internal, are, more or less
liable, is qualified to adjust the balance. Here we may again observe, that
neither the moral sense, the sense of accountability, or the reasoning powers,
are given in perfection to man. They are but plants in the germ, the growth and
improvement of which is to be expected only from a proper cultivation.

I cannot but flatter myself, that the distinctions, which I have endeavored to
make, are intelligible, and the principles fully ascertained. By the assistance
of these principles, we may, perhaps, be able to throw some light on the
question concerning the origin of so universal an abuse of power.

The propriety of a man's conduct, will depend, principally, on a just
discernment of moral relations, an accurate perception of what is right and
what is wrong in moral action; on the means of information, the strength of his
reasoning powers, and a full sense of his accountability, to his Maker, to
himself, and to his fellow men. In proportion as there is a deficiency in one,
or all of these, he will be exposed to a vicious conduct. Every deviation from
right, by changing the force of habit to the weaker side, strengthens and
confirms the bias. He, therefore, who, in life and action, would persevere in
virtue, must beware, how he indulges any deception upon the moral sense, any
bias, upon his reason, or a relaxation of his sense of accountability. Free a
man from his sense of accountability only, he is left to the dominion of the
passions and appetites, and driven precipitately into vice; as if, from a watch
in motion, you were suddenly to detach the balance. That branch of the sense of
accountability, by which man perceives his actions, of right, subjected to the
approbation, or censure of his fellow men, is not the least efficacious in
preserving the balance of his moral powers. Yet this sense, so necessary to the
moral being, may, as it regards mankind, be wholly suppressed, merely by the
situation of the man. Place a man either above, or below the regard of mankind,
and he will no longer feel himself accountable to them for his actions. He,
who, in such a situation, can maintain the guard of his virtue, and
successfully resist the solicitations of his passions and appetites; the covert
approaches, and the open attacks of vice, is something more than human Such is
the original adjustment of human nature, its parts, connections, and
dependencies, mutually supporting and supported, from which result the laws of
moral action, that not a pin can be loosened, without endangering a derangment
of the whole structure.

That political situation, which places a man, in any degree of independence on
those, over whom he exercises a power, in the same degree cherishes the
emotions of pride. It transforms that, which, before, was only a laudable
contempt of what is low, mean, and unworthy the man, into haughtiness, under
the name of grandeur. It excites a contempt for men, and suppresses those
sentiments, which subjected him to their approbation, or censure. Such has
been, more or less, the situation of all hereditary Monarchs on the globe; of
all aristocrats, and aristocratical bodies; of all men in power, who have had,
or conceived themselves to have the ability of continuing their power,
independent of those, over whom it was exercised; in a word, of all those, who
hold their power in contempt of the people. A situation, not indulged to man,
by the laws of his nature, and which Providence has, often, hitherto with
little effect, warned him, by the pernicious consequences, not to entrust to
any one of the race. The wonder is, not, that men, in such a situation, should
have been guilty of so many vices, but that they should have exhibited even a
few virtues. Could we strip the actions of Princes and Nobles, of the eclat of
character, how few have been these virtues, we should be informed, in every
page of their history.

Instances of constant and flagrant abuse of power, by men, thus situated,
demonstrably prove, that it is dangerous to exceed the limits of our nature, to
step beyond the reach of its laws; but they prove no original malignity in man.
In a different situation, within the limits assigned by the laws of human
nature, men have administered the powers of government, with the greatest
abilities, and the most exalted virtues, for the sole good of the community.
May we not instance more than one example in the United States of America? In
situations, in which rulers have held themselves fully accountable to the
sentiments of the people, for the exercise of the powers, with which they were
entrusted, they have conducted with as much integrity and virtue as have been
exhibited in the more private scenes of life. It must be allowed, indeed, that
few such situations have yet been devised by political wisdom. When a people
are capable of forming a constitution of government upon natural principles,
and establishing a power of administration within the limits assigned to man by
the laws of his nature, they will be secure against the danger of any
exorbitant abuse. Care must always be taken to guard against all independence
in the rulers, on the sentiments of the people, and to provide, that they shall
administer, not their own power, but the powers of government.

If these observations be just, whatever human institutions may have done,
nature has not disqualified man for any of the functions of civil government.

SECTION V. Of the Necessity of Civil Laws and Government.
AGREEABLY to the plan of the present Sketch, one question only remains for
discussion. Whence arises the necessity upon man of adopting civil laws and
government? -- As was before observed, some have thought, that the necessity
arose from the perverseness solely of human nature. They assert, that men have,
inherent in their nature, a relish for vice, an original propensity to evil; to
restrain the malignity of which, they were laid under a necessity of civil
government; that true virtue, genuine benevolence, would have led them,
happily, through the most complicated scenes, which could have fallen to their
lot in society. How the account stands between them and their Maker, it is not
my present purpose to enquire. I shall only observe, that their civil and
political conduct, does not avow a consciousness of such depravity of nature.
They appear, in all cases, where no particular bias of passion or interest is
discoverable, to have full reliance on the justice, integrity, and veracity of
each other.

Some, who have had less gloomy views of human nature, have holden, that the
necessity arises from the weakness, only, of individuals, requiring mutual aid,
for supplying their mutual wants. This would, however, lead no farther, than
the social state. It would not, alone, induce the necessity of civil
government. We have seen, that man, by his natural constitution, was intended
for the latter state. We shall now find, arising from his nature, a necessity
for adopting it; but a necessity of a very different kind from any thing, which
has been suggested.

Men have a relish for society. It is the scene of their improvements, and the
great source of their happiness. Still no goodness of heart can enable them to
enjoy its benefits, without an establishment of laws.

Perception, conciousness, and volition, or those powers, which originate, and
direct external action in men, belong to them, individually. A society
consisting of any number of individuals, can have no common united perception,
consciousness, or volition. Could this be the case, a society might will, and
with a single act of volition, direct, and control the actions of all, and
every member, with the same ease and regularity, with which an individual
directs, and controuls the motions of his own body, and its members. But this
is denied to man in the aggregate, and in every combination of society. The
will of a society is made up of the individual wills of its members.

Had man been formed with faculties, which might have enabled him, with an
intuitive glance, to penetrate, and comprehend as they arise, the individual
wills of all the members of the society, and of all, whose conduct, might in
any way affect it; to penetrate and comprehend the passions, appetites, and
pursuits, of every individual; in a word, to comprehend all the causes, by
which God governs the actions of moral agents; were he endued with reason,
sufficient to arrange the whole, so as to prevent any individual interference;
goodness of heart and firmness of mind, to enable him to pursue the
arrangement; in such a state, both of knowledge and disposition, he would stand
in no need of civil laws, or rules prescribed by common consent, for the
regulation of social conduct. But such a state falls not to the lot of any
finite being.

Our positive knowledge is, only partial, of the present and past, depending on
actual and accurate observation. There is, however, given us some clue to the
future. We are able to perceive certain relations of cause and effect. As far
as experience leads, we find a uniformity in the course of nature. We discover
some of the causes, and some of the laws, by which physical effects are
produced in a regular chain. Of others, we are wholly ignorant, or have, at
best, but an imperfect glimpse. Much more imperfect is our knowledge of the
causes, which produce and vary human actions, subjected to the influence of
motives, to the choice of the agent, and to those laws, by which they are
governed in a train. In an extensive society, individuals can have but a
limited knowledge, even of the present actions of the whole. Their knowledge of
the intentions and causes, upon which the future actions depend, is much more
limited. We are able to gain some knowledge of the leading principles of
actions, of the motives which generally prevail, and the species of action,
which they will produce, in certain characters, and in certain situations. To
descend to every situation, every character, and thence to learn fully, the
particular influence of motives and the individual actions, which will follow,
in each, is beyond the reach of human sagacity. In a society composed of any
considerable number of individuals, and in a state of any considerable
activity, there will be many, and very different situations. The influence of
motives upon individuals, will be very different. They will have a variety of
distinct interests, and pursuits, and those, not at all, or very imperfectly
known to each other in their origin. However innocent and right, those
interests and pursuits may be, when considered separately, they will, by
frequent, though unintentional interferences, and oppositions, form a scene too
intricate for the powers of the human mind to evolve. Could we suppose every
person in the society to be actuated, by principles of the most disinterested
benevolence, and the most accommodating spirit, the whole time must be consumed
in compromise. None could be left for action.

Without a social perception, consciousness, and volition, with any goodness,
and with any wisdom, short of infinite, the state of society would, at best, be
a scene of inextricable confusion. To Remedy this confusion, nature has pointed
out to man, the necessity of civil establishments, and the promulgation of
laws. Here is a provision analagous to his nature. By the establishent of laws,
which the individuals of the community have submitted to observe, as the rules
of their future conduct, they are enabled, with a sufficient degree of
certainty, to foresee the future interests and pursuits of each. By following
the line prescribed, they can avoid every considerable interference, or by
applying the rule, may remedy the inconvenience. In no other way, is it
possible to connect a community, either in sentiments, or interests; to unite
the public force; to direct it to the attainment of any common good, or to the
avoiding or repelling of any common evil. In no other way is it possible to
give any security to public or private rights.

Still men are imperfect. They will be guilty of deviations from the rule,
transgressions of the law, and infringements of each other's rights. This will
happen, some times, through ignorance of the law, or of the right; an ignorance,
which arises from weakness in judging, or inattention in examining. Sometimes,
it will happen through the prevalence of interest, or the violence of passion.
Therefore, to give the laws a compulsory force, and to secure a general
observance, they must be so calculated, that every member of the community
shall find a convenience, in the observance, and a certain inconvenience, in
the neglect or violation. Hence arises the necessity of penalties. These
penalties are, from the weakness of men in discerning tendencies, and their
consequent liability to vice, necessarily enhanced. Hence also arises the
necessity of subordination, and of civil rulers, to give activity and
efficiency to the laws. In a state of greater perfection, than is to be found,
in the present state of society, a greater perfection of knowledge and virtue,
penalties may make a less formidable appearance; but, in every state, the
necessity of penalties will equally exist.

In a community composed of a few individuals, in a simple state of manners,
and of property, the motives to action are few; consequently, there is little
activity of individuals. A few simple rules, mostly adopted and supported by
custom, and frequent consultations, upon present emergences, supply the place
of a more regular polity. They are the first rude essays in civil institutions.
Still, in every state of morals and manners, a necessity of known and
established rules equally exists. On the whole, we may safely conclude, that no
order of beings, short of infinite perfection, in wisdom, as well as goodness,
can subsist in society, without an establishment of government and laws.

SKETCH IV. OF THE CONSTITUTION AND ORGANIZATION OF GOVERNMENT.
SECTION I. Different Degrees of Improvement introduce different Forms of
Government. -- A source of false Reasoning. -- Brief View of the Rights of Man.
-- An Inaccuracy of Mr. PAIN, in treating of this Subject.
ALL our reasonings, drawn from the nature of man, induce the most satisfactory
conclusion, that he was intended for society, and coincide, in the largest
sense, with the divine enunciation of his Maker, "It i^not good, that man
should be alone." ^easoning from the same source, it is equally clear, that he
was intended for civil government, and laid under a physical necessity of
adopting it. Men have generally been struck with the necessity, long before
they were able to discover, and arrange those laws of their nature, which lead
to a safe and happy establishment, upon natural principles. It has passed into
a proverb, that any government is preferable to anarchy -- a state of
individual independence.

The general circumstances and manners of the age have prevailed to general
establishments, in forms of government. The general circumstances and manners
of a people, have prevailed to particular establishments. In the very early
stages of society, while simplicity in manners, in knowledge, in wants, and in
means, prevails, there is, always, a great degree of equality among men. The
passions, which, in some of the following stages, lead to inequality, rarely
exerted, hold, nearly an equal tenor. Every thing is enjoyed in common. This
state is a kind of natural republic, suited to the infant state of humanity. It
has been observed, that this is a state of nature; but the nature of man points
him to improvement. A perpetual continuance of a nation in this state, would be
as unnatural, as perpetual infancy to an individual.

In the progress toward maturity, the avenues to knowledge are discovered, by
circumstances, accidental to man. He cannot, from the limitation of his powers
and faculties, proceed on generals. His progress is in particulars. One
discovery opens an unexpected avenue to others. Proceeding thus by particulars,
it is clear, that the progress of knowledge must be slow, and the views
exhibited to the mind necessarily partial. Objects, in the progress, arising
singly, and surprising by their novelty, have a powerful effect upon an
unimproved mind. Accordingly the few passions, which they are calculated to
excite, are powerfully inflamed. The moral sense, and the reasoning powers can
never be in advance. They, necessarily, pursue at a distance. Such is the
progress to improvement; such the boisterous youth of humanity; such the
difficult passage from ignorance to the knowledge of truth, through a wilderness
of errors. Hence the moral balance is, frequently lost, and a violent state of
the passions, which gives a peculiarity to the manner^, succeeds. Both the
vices and the virtues are more prominent. There happens a frequent change of
manners, but seldom for the better. The change arises from the prevalence of
one kind of passion or appetite, and a succession of different objects of
gratification. It is a change from one mode of violence to another. Violence is
still the great characteristic. Hence, we find a resemblance of monarchy and
aristocracy, in the passions. In this state of society, men almost unavoidably,
fall into a monarchy, or an aristocracy in government; institutions of
violence, for the restraint of violent passions.

Men proceeding, gradually, in improvement, though, with frequent digressions,
and retrogradations, to what may be called a state of social manhood, the
natural passions, from a more general acquaintance of the mind with objects,
are brought more equally into exercise, and form a mutual check on the violence
of each other. The reasoning powers, by constant and extensive employment,
acquire acuteness, comprehension, and strength. The moral sense, and the sense
of accountability, acquire a greater degree of ascendency. It is perceived,
that happiness consists, not in excess, but in equable enjoyment; and, that the
violent indulgence of one passion, excludes the gratification of the rest.
Hence proceeds a moderation. In this state, there is more gratification, and
less violence. The happiness, which men experience, in social intercourse; a
more extensive knowledge of the original constitution, and destination of their
being, and the harmony of general laws, thence resulting, open a new scene in
society, and prepare them, in a good measure, to rejoice in a reciprocation of
rights, and a mutual compromise of interests.

Such a state of society and manners, gives a more general operation to the
laws of social nature, which I have endeavored to elucidate, and suggests the
establishment of government upon the sure basis of natural principles.

Is it not probable, that certain degrees of improvement, in science, in
morals, in manners, and sentiments, will tend to an abolition of every other
form of government; and to the establishment of Democratic Republics, By
Democratic Republic, in these Sketches, is, generally, meant, a Representative
Democracy.
in which alone, we have reason to believe, from the observations made above,
natural principles can have any general operation? Not, indeed, because such a
state will directly suggest these principles; but it will lead the people to a
discovery of their rights as men, and the abuses, which they have suffered from
arbitrary, and tyrannical impositions, continued from institutions, which were
provisions of necessity during their pupilage. Such a discovery will lead them
to a discussion of original principles, and suggest, as the only means of
securing a free and equal enjoyment of their rights, the necessity of placing
the exercise of the powers of government, within the limits, which the God of
nature has prescribed.

In a different state of society, before men had arrived at these general and
equal improvements, an impatience under all restraints, added to frequent
oppressions, has suggested a wish for popular government; but whenever, in this
state, it has been introduced, the violence of the passions, manners and
sentiments, have rendered the government violent, fluctuating, and almost
constantly tending to its own dissolution.

By tracing into exercise, in governmental establishments, those principles,
which have been discussed in the preceding Sketches, and marking their
operations, we shall be able to discover their coincidence with the rights of
man. We may, likewise, be able to discover and prevent the admission of
principles, which are not derived from the constitution of nature, but have
their origin, in adventitious circumstances; in ignorance, violence, or
corruption.

The science of government has shared the same missfortune, which has so much
perplexed the science of divinity, and the science of morals. Men have
generally began the two latter, where they should have ended them. Dr. Price
has, I think, somewhere, a similar observation concerning religion.
For many centuries divines and moralists assumed at pleasure, attributes and
counsels for deity, according to the systems which they were engaged to
support; and from what he ought to do, according to their various assumptions,
determined what he has done, and what he will do, in the moral government of
man. The great truths of religion and morality have been subjected to their
opinions. Had they, instead of reasoning from their assumptions, a priori,
began with man, and the things which have been made, and from what has been
done, and is still doing, in the natural and moral world, searched for the
creator, they might have prepared the way for some knowledge of God, his
attributes and moral government, and as far as it concerns man, have caught
some glimpse of his counsels. If the expression in this passage should appear
to any one liable to exception, let him remember, that the doctrine is not new.
It is fully asserted by one, whose authority will not be doubted, at least by
such as may be disposed to object -- "That which may be known of God, is
manifest in them (the Gentiles) for God has showed it unto them; for the
invisible things of him from the creation of the world, are clearly seen, being
understood from the things which were made, even his eternal power and Godhead;
so that they are without excuse." -- ^A^E to the Romans.


In the science of government, politicians, in like manner, universally began
with the Rulers. For them they assumed all power, all right, and transferred
all duty to the part of the subject. Agreeably to their doctrines, every
enjoyment on the part of the subject, was an indulgence flowing from the
clemency of the Prince. They have considered, that he was the source, the sole
proprietor of all right, of all honor, of all justice; and dealt them out to
the subject at his sovereign pleasure.

The revolutions, which have happened, among the nations of the earth, in
knowledge and in government, have, by degrees, opened the eyes of mankind. They
have, in some instances, learnt, and have even dared to assert, that all
legitimate government is founded in the rights of the people; that it is an
institution for their convenience and happiness; that the ruler has no right as
a man, beyond that of every individual; and that the power, which he exercises,
is not his power, but the power and right of the people, entrusted for their
benefit. A ruler may be a benevolent man. He may discover his benevolence, in
the exercise of the power, with which he is entrusted. It may give a luster to
his character, a facility to his administration, and render him more worthy of
the trust. But he can never indulge to the people a right, of which they are
not the original proprietors. The time seems to be at hand, when, among many
nations, the clemency of the Prince will become as contemptible, as the
dispensing power of the Pope, and will be deemed equally an insult on the
common sense of mankind.

Before we proceed to treat of the organization of government, it may be
necessary to take a summary view of those rights of man, to secure the free,
equal, and legitimate enjoyment of which, is the principal object of civil
institutions.

I shall take the liberty to use the words of Mr. Pain, to which I shall add a
short comment of my own:

Natural rights are those, which appertain to man in right of his existence. Of
this kind are all the intellectual rights, or rights of the mind. And also all
those rights of acting as an individual for his own comfort and happiness,
which are not injurious to the natural rights of others. Civil rights are
those, which appertain to man in right of his being a member of society. Every
civil right has some natural right preexisting in the individual; but to which
his individual power is not, in all cases, sufficiently competent. Of this kind
are all those, which relate to security and protection.

He then goes on to distinguish between the natural rights, which man retains,
after entering into society, and those, which he deposits, according to his
view, in the common stock, as a member of the society.

The natural rights, which he retains, are all those, in which the power to
execute is as perfect in the individual as the right itself: Among this class
are, as is before mentioned, all intellectual rights, or rights of the mind;
consequently, Religion is one of those rights. The natural rights, which are
not retained, are all those, which, though they are perfect in the individual,
the power to execute them is defective. They answer not his purpose. A man has
a natural right to judge in his own cause; and so far as the right of the mind
is concerned, he never surrenders it. But what avails it him to judge, if he
has not the power to redress? He therefore deposits this right in the common
stock of society, and takes the arm of society, of which he is a part, in
preference and addition to his own arm. Society grants him nothing. Every man
is a proprietor in society, and draws on the capital, as a matter of right.

These observations are, in a general view, excellent. They are not, however,
in every point, just. Mr. Paine's genius does not, always, admit of accurate
reasoning, either in discovering principles, or in tracing consequences. But
what is often of more value, he seizes his object by an intuitive glance, and
is generally happy in exhibiting it to others in a striking point of light.

The business of judging is relative to the rights of justice, and comes in for
the sake of those rights. Men have, reciprocally, a right to demand justice of
each other, and are reciprocally bound, in duty, to make an adequate
satisfaction for injuries. The right of judging amounts to a right of deciding,
what is just between one individual and another; a right of determining, what
satisfaction ought to be made for injuries, and in what manner. The judge is
equally bound to judge justly. But, such we know, for a general rule, is the
nature of man, that he is incapable of judging justly, that is, impartially, in
his own cause. In all matters, which depend on a right of mutual compromise, he
is the only judge of his own interest, and an actor in his own cause. In
repelling present injuries, a present invasion of his own rights, he has a
right to judge, both of the means, and the measure of defense; and this from
necessity. But he must judge rightly, that is, agreeably to the occasion, at
the peril of becoming an aggressor. The right is not independent, and without
appeal.

There is, therefore, a deficiency in point of capacity to judge, as well as in
point of power to execute. From a little consideration, it will be evident,
that this right of judging in his own cause, is a temporary right, entrusted to
man from necessity only, until he shall have arrived at a maturity to be
capable of comprehending and carrying into full operation that law of his
nature, which makes him accountable to the judgment of others, and which
dictates, in all controversies, a submission to an impartial judge. Every one,
as well the party injuring, as the party injured, has a right to an impartial
and just decision; and nature has pointed out the means of obtaining it. The
right of justice is perpetual. The right of judging, with a view of compelling
satisfaction, is only incidental, and comes in, lest there should be a failure
of the former. When men become capable of providing for a regular
administration of justice in government, that right, which was designed to be
temporary, so far as such provision is made, ceases of course. It cannot be
said, with propriety, to be given up, by any act of the individual, or thrown
into the common stock of society. Such rights may, as it respects society, be
well denominated juvenile rights. In the progress of society toward maturity,
the same thing happens to these rights, which happens to the juvenile passions
and appetites of an individual. Many little passions and appetites exist in
infancy, and in early youth, which, though proper and necessary to that state,
are nevertheless unbecoming the state of manhood. They are never given up, by
any specific act of the mind, but agreeably to the constitution of nature, they
give place, in the progress of the individual, to passions and appetites proper
and necessary to an advanced state, and one after another become extinct.

I am apprehensive that the legal notion of the necessity of a consideration to
the validity of a contract, first introduced, or at least, has supported the
opinion, that men, on entering into society, give up a part of their rights, as
a consideration for the security of the remainder. Writers on government have
been anxious, on the part of the people, to discover a consideration given for
the right of protection, and the right of justice. While government was
supposed to depend on a compact, not between the individuals of a people, but
between the people and the rulers, this was a point of great consequence. But
it can be of no consequence, when it is understood, that government is produced
by the individuals entering into a compact among themselves for that purpose.
We have no occasion to look for any consideration for the duty of obedience to
the laws, on the one side, or, an equal and just administration, on the other,
but the inviolable obligation arising from the laws of social nature.

Nature has pointed out civil government as a mean, not an end; a mean of
securing the greatest quantity of happiness to all, with the least possible
inconvenience to individuals. Formed as man is by nature, for society and civil
government, he is in a solitary state, or a state of independence, too
emphatically, called the state of nature, excluded the benefit of most of the
laws of his nature; the free enjoyment of almost the whole of his natural
rights, excepting those, which are connected with his individual existence.

The greater part of his rights are not exclusively, and independently, in
himself. They arise in society, and are relative to it. Antecedently to that
state, they could exist only potentially. The rights of all have a reciprocal
relation to the rights of each, and can never be rightly apprehended, distinct
from that relation. Those rights, which Mr. Pain calls the natural rights of
man, are more independent, more immediately united to his being, like the
consciousness of his individual existence. -- Those, which he calls the civil
rights of man, are the children of his nature, the issue of the social union,
to which he is directed, invited, and impelled, by the laws of his creation.
Both are natural rights, and equally guaranteed to him by the laws of his
nature. The difference is, that those which he calls natural rights, are
independently perfect, and the enjoyment full in the individual. Those, which
he calls civil rights, are relative. They arise from the union of men in
society. The more perfect the union, the more legitimately natural are those
rights, and the more full the enjoyment.

That society, in the administration of right, grants nothing to any of its
members; that every man is a proprietor, and draws on the capital, as a matter
of right, is one of those high and immutable truths, which are allowed to be
taught, in their full extent, only in a democratic republic. In a monarchical,
or aristocratical government, the very thought would be deemed a species of
treason.

SECTION II. Few Governments formed by an actual Compact. -- Instability of
ancient Governments -- Social Compact in the Formation of a legitimate
Government. -- Civil Powers. -- Division and Limitation.
FEW governments, ancient or modern, have been constituted by an actual compact
among the people. The powers of government, have, in most instances, been
blindly conferred upon one, or a few individuals. They have been assumed by
fraud, or violence; or through a succession of ages, have been suffered to
accumulate in certain families, and become sacred in their hands. Thus the
powers of government came to be considered, as the right and privilege of the
rulers, inherent, distinct, and paramount to the rights of the people. Men have
conducted as though whatever of right, whatever of good was enjoyed, by the
subject, was to be derived from the condescension of rulers, a mere concession
of clemency. Doctrines like these have, in all ages, by the interested policy
of the ambiti^us few, been artfully, and but too successfully inculcated on the
people. From this source has been derived the doctrine, of the present
perfection of government, the infallibility of rulers, and the divine right of
Kings.

On the other hand, the people, from a dread of the horrid oppression, which
universally, accompanies such absurd conceptions of power, have, at times,
plunged into the extremes of anarchy and popular violence. They have been
driven to a feeling, rather than a rational investigation of their rights. They
have found it difficult to distinguish clearly, in the exercise of power,
between a personal right, and a mere betrustment. They have found it still more
difficult to establish any laws of accountability, which might operate to
prevent a constant abuse, without a constant resort to violent measures. Thus
embarrassed, they have frequently balanced between the horrors of tyranny, and
the licentiousness of faction. Hence were experienced, at Athens, at Rome, and
in many other governments, perpetual vibrations between the violence of the
rulers and the violence of the people.

Neither the Greeks nor the Romans had any accurate notions of liberty, and the
natural rights of man; of those relations, from which result the sacred laws of
his nature. From the ignorance of their lawgivers in these points, which was,
indeed, the ignorance of the age, there were always radical defects in their
governments. In all their systems, they made little or no distinction, between
the laws of the constitution, by which the state is organized, and its
efficient powers directed and limited, and the laws of property and personal
rights. And yet, without a nice attention to this distinction, liberty can
never be permanently secured.

An examination of the various constitutions of government, which have existed,
or still do exist in the world, falls not directly within my present plan. My
design is to attempt a sketch, only, of the constitutional principles of
government; as founded in the principles of natural law, in the moral and
social nature of man; and to point out the general operation and tendency of
these principles in exercise.

Whenever men happen in society, they, naturally, and from an unavoidable
necessity, the nature of which has been explained, fall into some kind of
government. Nature, however, produces few things in perfection to man. Much is
left to his choice, and the improvement of his rational powers. Whatever may
have been the mode of originating and establishing government, in the infancy
of societies, and of knowledge, it is now, in every free and enlightened nation,
admitted as fundamental, that all legitimate government originates in the free
consent of the people; that to produce a rightful government, the people, among
themselves, must enter into a mutual compact for that end. Not that we are to
suppose it necessary to its validity, that each individual, in the proposed
community, should consent to every article of the compact. Men are by nature
social beings. In determining the mode, in which any people shall enjoy the
benefits of their social nature, it is clearly a principle of natural law,
that, upon a fair discussion, the minority, if they choose to continue within
the limits of the society, shall be bound by the decisions of the majority.

In the exercise of this right of free consent by the people, agreeably to the
principles now laid down, constitutions of government are formed. The
constitution is no other than the fundamental laws made and ratified by such
compact, for the purpose of organizing the government, and establishing the
necessary powers. The intent of these laws is to direct, in what manner, and to
what end, the constituted powers shall be exercised; how those, to whom the
exercise is entrusted, shall be holden accountable; and to limit those powers,
by precisely marking the rights, which are inherent, and unalienable in the
social nature of man, the mutual enjoyment and exercise of which does not
interfere with individual rights, or obstruct the due exercise of the powers of
government, for the common good. This has been found necessary, not because the
people are presumed to have submitted to the constituted powers every right,
not expressly reserved, but because it has been found difficult, if not
impossible, to mark the powers themselves, with precise, unequivocal limits.

The laws of the constitution, as Mr. Pain has justly observed, are to the
government what the laws made by the government, that is the civil laws, are to
a court of judicature. A court of judicature is bound by the laws, but has not
the power, either to make or alter them. In like manner, the government, that
is, those organized bodies, who are entrusted with the powers of government,
are bound by the constitution, but have no power, in themselves, to make,
alter, or control, any of its laws.

The necessity of laws, for the happy regulation of social and civil
intercourse, has already been observed. In a scene, where there is a
complication of rights, to be reconciled and secured, a great variety of
passions, to to be restrained and directed, the necessity of constitutional
laws, agreeably to which the powers of government shall be exercised, are no
less obviously necessary.

The constitutional laws ought to have a certain relation to the laws of
nature, and to be founded in principles derived solely from those laws. From
the same source are to be derived the operative principles, of the constituted
powers, and those principles, by which they are limited, restrained, and
directed to the ends of their institution. To give activity to these powers,
the constitution ought to designate, not the persons, who shall be entrusted
with the exercise, but the mode of their appointment, and in what manner they
shall be amenable for their conduct in the administration. From the manner in
which the constituted powers are exercised, and the immediate objects of their
exertion, naturally arises a division into a legislative, executive, and
judiciary. It is the business of the legislative to form such laws as may, in a
due proportion, direct the actions of the whole, to the pursuit of public
measures, and interests; as may unite the forces of the community, and direct
them to the attainment of those important objects of public utility, or public
necessity, to which the united force of the whole is alone adequate. It is
their province to enact such laws, for the regulation of individual conduct, as
may prevent an interference of individual claims and interests, and secure
right and justice to the citizens in their private intercourse. Under the same
head comes a provision, for the ascertainment and reparation of injuries,
whether public or private, and for securing a general observance of the laws,
by adequate sanctions, by penalties to be inflicted for every neglect or
violation.

The business of the judiciary is to decide on the laws, by interpreting, and
applying them to particular cases, and to give precise information, upon whom,
in what degree and manner, and to what purposes the executive power shall be
exercised, either for the reparation of injuries, or the punishment of
offenders.

It is the business of the executive to carry into effect, the decisions of the
judiciary, in the manner prescribed by the legislature, and the constitutional
laws. To this branch it belongs, in like manner, to carry into effect many
regulations, both of the legislature and of the constitution; and to represent
the individuality of the community in public transactions.

There are very obvious reasons, why these powers should be committed to
separate departments in the state, and not be entrusted unitedly to one man, or
body of men. Different abilities are necessary for the making, judging, and
executing of laws. They require the exercise of different powers, faculties,
and knowledge. No one man ever had a sufficient extent of abilities, or
versatility of genius, to attend to the duties of all, at one time, or in a
quick succession. Such a union must frequently occasion a confusion of
principles, and remediless violation of rights. To commit their exercise to a
single man, or body of men, essentially constitutes a monarchy, or aristocracy,
for the time being. By giving them the power of avoiding all constitutional
enquiry, it places them above a sense of accountability for their conduct. They
have it in their power, eith^r in the enacting, the interpretation, or the
execution of the laws, to skreen themselves, and every member of their body,
from account or punishment. The situation itself suggests to them, views and
interests, different from those of the people, and leaves no common judge
between them. It places them, in respect to the people, in that state of
independence, which is often called a state of nature. In such case, the
people, hopeless under oppression, sink into a state of abject slavery, or
roused to a sense of their injuries, assume their natural right, in such
situation, oppose violence to violence, and take exemplary vengeance of their
oppressors. In a government so constituted, the frequency of elections, can
only aggravate the evil. The rulers, with all the powers of government in their
hands, will find every instrument of corruption and factious violence devoted
to their service. They will always have a hope of continuing themselves in
administration. Should there happen a change of men, a change of measures, if
attempted, would be of short continuance; the same situation, and the same
motives, would, sooner or later, produce the same fatal effects.

To enter on a public investigation of the conduct of their predecessors, would
be to set an example against themselves. The history of the revolutions in the
British Ministry, who, in this respect, are in nearly the some situation,
confirms the truth of these remarks
In such a confusion of powers, should any regular attempt be made to call the
rulers to account, the immediate agents, and the immediate causes of the evils,
would prove of difficult investigation. Mutual recriminations and powerful
intrigues, would generally divert the enquiry from the proper objects, and
devote only the innocent or the feeble to the vengeance of the law.

A separation and precise limitation of the legislative, judiciary, and
executive powers, with frequent, free, and uncorrupted elections, is the only
remedy for these evils. Those who exercise the legislative power, must be
subjected to their own laws, and amenable for a violation, equally with the
plainest citizen. They must, by the express provision of the constitution, be
confined to the consideration of general laws, and forever excluded the right
of enacting particular penalties, privileges, or exemptions. Such partial laws
are the first beginnings of an attack on the equal rights of man, and a
violation of the laws of nature. This provision, however, should not extend to
prevent the establishment of companies, by act of legislation, for the purpose
of transacting certain business, or of prosecuting certain enterprises, to
which the powers of individuals, from the nature of the thing, are incompetent.
In the establishment of companies for such purposes only, a new power is
created, but the right of no individual is infringed. Neither should it extend
to a prohibition of forming laws for the encouragement of useful knowledge.
Authors of books, by which useful knowledge is disseminated, and of those
inventions, which facilitate the labors of life, are entitled to the fruit of
their own industry, and of the application of their powers, equally, with other
citizens. But such is the nature of their productions, that, without a
legislative interference in their favor, they must remain wholly at the mercy
of others.

The legislature may proceed to the declaration of tyrannical laws; the
judiciary to the pronouncing of unjust decisions; the executive furnishes the
immediate instruments of tyranny and injustice. The executive is, in all cases,
the ultimately efficient power. It is, therefore, very necessary, that the
executive should be limited, with as much precision, as the nature of the power
will permit, and the acts of all its ministers, rendered as conspicuous, as may
possibly be, or, at least, of easy investigation, and the ministers themselves
made amenable to the ordinary, or constitutional tribunals, for every abuse.

To prevent both legislative and executive abuses, the intervention of an
independent judiciary is of no small importance. To the judges, the ministers
of this power, it belongs to interpret all acts of the legislature, agreeably
to the true principles of the constitution, as founded in the principles of
natural law, and to make an impar^^al application, in all cases of disputed
^^ght. By this provision, the rights and ^^terests of the legislative and
executive branches will be kept in union with the rights and interests of the
individual citizens. All will be equally exposed by the same unjust laws, or
amenable for an arbitrary execution. The members of the legislature, cannot,
from the nature of their functions, be amenable, in their legislative
character, to any tribunal, but that of public sentiment. The case is different
with the members of the executive and judiciary. They may, with propriety, be
subjected to trial, for a violation of their trust, at the bar of a
constitutional tribunal.

It may be observed, that a separation, and precise limitation of the powers of
government simplifies the duties of its ministers. All their acts are, thereby,
rendered distinct. Enquiry is facilitated, and abuses readily traced to their
criminal causes, the particular agents. In addition to this, it gives a degree
of energy to the public sentiment. Public approbation and censure. when
directed to a number of men, of whom some are known to have acted well, or ill,
but the particular agents are concealed, lose much of their force. The guilty
hide their blushes in the crowd. Guilt, or rather the sense of guilt, is
diminished in proportion to the number of associates.

The better to secure the accountability of the individuals in the great
departments of the government, not only ought the powers of the several
departments to be, precisely, and distinctly, limited; but the several members
ought to be incapable of holding a place in more than one of the departments,
at the same time. The members of one department may be eligible to a place in
another; but the acceptance of the latter ought to vacate the former. A
separation into distinct bodies, will be of little avai^ if those bodies may be
composed, principally, of the same individual members. The division and
limitation of powers, will, in this case, be merely matter of form. They will
remain, substantially, united.

If the above observations are well founded, the executive branch ought not to
have a negative, or any directing power, in the act of passing laws. The
executive may, however, within certain limits, well have a deliberative voice.
Those, who are conversant in the execution of the laws, will be the center of
information upon that subject. They will, more readily than others, foresee any
difficulty, which may arise in the execution. Of such information the
legislature ought to be availed.

The same observations, nearly, will hold true of the judiciary. The judges,
from the nature of their official employment, are informed of the difficulties,
which arise in the interpretation of the laws, and of those cases, in which
they prove deficient, unequal, or unjust in their operation. Such information
is highly necessary to the legislative body. The principal members of the
judiciary, may, when the particular duties of their office will permit, be,
with propriety, united with the head of the executive department, to form a
council of revision upon all laws proposed to be passed by the legislature. The
business of this council should be confined, solely, to objections. It should
be their duty to give information of all difficulties, which they foresee will
arise, either in the interpretation, the application, or the execution of the
law; and to notice all inconsistencies, either in the laws themselves, or as
they relate to the principles of the constitution. They should be allowed, in
no instance, to propose any amendments, or to make any leading propositions, in
the enacting of laws; but simply to state to the legislature, such objections,
as they find to any law, with their reasons in writing.

The information to be derived from this source, may enable the legislature to
give a regular consistence to the laws, and a facility to their administration,
not otherwise to be expected. Still, the legislature must be the sole judges,
whether the information given coincides with the general interest of the
community, and the principles of the government, or is dictated by particular
views, or particular interests.

SECTION III. Of a Balance constituted by an Opposition of Powers. -- Locke's
Constitution of Carolina. -- Of other Checks.
MOST of the political writers of modern times, who have had any idea of a free
government, have contended for a division of the legislative power. They would
have, in the legislature, one body of men, representing the commonalty; a
senate, representing the wealthy and more honorable part of the community, and
the head of the executive, whether King, President, or Governor, representing
the individuality or sovereignty of the state. These bodies, for the purpose of
maintaining an exact balance of the several interests in the state, are to have
a mutual negative in passing all laws. The balance is to be supported, and the
happiness of the people secured, by a mutual opposition of rights, interests,
and powers.

Before we proceed to the head of Elections, let us attend, carefully, to
examine this point.

To admit the necessity of such a balance, is to admit, that the laws of nature
have indulged to certain classes of men different rights, and given them
distinct interests in those rights, and that the maintenance of such rights,
and interests, distinct, and inviolable, is indispensibly necessary to the
happiness of the whole. This position is, upon our principles, wholly
inadmissible. There are, indeed, inequalities among men. Some are stronger than
others. Some have greater powers of mind. Hence proceeds an inequality of
acquisitions, both in power, and in property. The strong have it in their power
to trample on the weak; the cunning, to circumvent the simple. But will any one
pretend that they have a right to do this? The rights of acquisition are equal
and common to all. The laws of natural justice have laid it under this
restri^tion, so use your own right, that you injure not the right of another.
Sic u^cre tuo, ut alienum non laedas.
My right of property, which originally, depends on my right of acquisition, is
not injured, because my neighbor, by the application of greater abilities, or
industry, has brought more of the goods of fortune within his right. If the law
should give him a monopoly of riches, of power, of honor, and secure them to
him in perpetuity, against my claims of justice and of merit, it would be a
diminution, an unjust violation of my right. These are the darling principles
of monarchy and aristocracy. Men are capable of these principles. They are
capable of many vices. The former contribute no more to perfection in
government, than the latter in moral conduct. It is, surely, much better, in
the formation of a government, to prevent their very germination, than to
maintain a constant struggle against their evil tendency.

In Great Britain, the balance of power, in three branches, preserves, what of
liberty is to be found among the people. That government consists of a
monarchy, an aristocracy, and a democracy: that is, two powers, with distinct,
and exclusive rights. These rights, as far as they are claimed to extend, place
the claimants beyond the reach of one branch of the laws of nature, the law of
accountability to man. If these orders have been established in a state, and
are to be supported, they must be placed in an equal balance. Power must be
opposed to power; authority to equal authority, as a mean of self-defence in
each. The prerogative of the crown, and the privileges of the nobles, are
ingrossments on the rights of the people. They are hereditary, and deemed to be
inherent in the very blood. Their honors, their privileges, and their crimes,
as rulers, and as men, are held to be above the judgment of the people. The
powers of the monarch, and of the nobles, which are exercised upon the same
subject, the people, often interfere. The restraint of one, is the enlargement
of the other. Both are equally out of nature. It is rightly considered as a
matter of indifference to the people, who has the exercise. Their claims of
right and of power are placed in opposition; and mutual enmity is the natural
consequence. Every compromise of their interests, every temporary union of
their powers, is a conspiracy against the people; who, at times, are justly
provoked to assert their injured rights, against the usurpations of both. As
the rights of the monarch, and of the nobles, are hostile to the rights of the
people, the people are naturally and justly enemies to both^ (...) thus there
is constituted in the government, a perpetual war of each against the other, or
at least, an armed truce; a truce attended with constant negociations and
shifting combinations, to prevent mutual destruction. Each party, in rotation,
unites with its enemy, for mutual defense against a more powerful enemy.

The history of the English government, from William the Conqueror, down to the
present time, is an incontestible proof of these truths. It is little more than
the history of the usurpation of the king, and the nobles, upon the rights of
the people; struggles between the king and the nobles, for the greatest share
in the usurpation, and the opposition of the people to both. What a scene of
treachery, faction, and all the horrors of civil war, the legitimate offspring
of such a government, does their history constantly exhibit to our view! From
the improvement of the social virtues, these contests have, indeed, lost much
of their ferocity. They have assumed a milder tone. What was formerly attempted
by open violence, is now effected by the more silent, though not less fatal
means of corruption. It is, as the pestilence that walks in darkness
succeeding to the destruction which wastes at noonday.

The democratic branch, the representatives of the people, are the depository,
and from their interest, the sole guardians of the rights of the people. But
with these, from a fatality attending the nature of the government, and the
frailty of human nature, temptations to betray their trust, and to desert to
the enemies of the people, too often prevail. False notions of greatness,
universally adopted; hope of rising to the higher orders; and the desire of
riches, which are the necessary scaffolding of false greatness, open wide the
door to corruption. Hence means are found to silence the boldest champion for
liberty, and to lay prostrate the stubborn virtues of the patriot. Why should
the people go so miserably out of the way, to erect powers hostile to each
other? which cannot subsist with the common liberty, and which are dangerous to
virtue itself?

It has long been a subject of wonder to the philosopher, and a matter of
triumph to the friends of despotism, that those writers, who have gone farthest
in their researches into the nature of man, and in discovering the true
principles of civil and religious liberty, have found their theories incapable
of being reduced to practice, in new establishments.

Lock, who was one of the first philosophers of his age, and the champion of
liberty, was employed by the Lords Proprietors of Carolina, to form the plan of
a constitution for their government. Though the friend of liberty, and of
mankind, he had conceived no idea of any other security to the enjoyment of
liberty, than what was to be found in the constitution of England. He seems not
to have reflected, that hereditary prejudices, in favor of ancient customs, and
even of ancient names: a habit of thinking and acting in a certain train, in
measures, to which men are familiarised, render those things easy, in an
establishment, venerable for its antiquity, which are utterly impracticable in
new institutions. He, therefore, with a view of establishing and securing that
liberty, which he esteemed the greatest happiness of a government, created an
opposition of powers and interests under names and titles, different from
those, to which the people had been accustomed in England. The Lords
Proprietors were the Sovereign; the newly created Nobility constituted an
hereditary House of Peers, and the people had their Representatives in a House
of Commons.

The exotic and unaccustomed names of Landgrave and Cacique, conferred on the
Nobility, instead of Earl and Baron, to which habit had annexed a degree of
veneration, had an influence to prevent their attaining any portion of that
dignity, which the Peerage, under the shadow of the Monarch, enjoy in England.
In this new situation, the opposition of interest, which had been established,
instead of proving a security to liberty, produced nothing but violent
animosity among the contending parties, and a grievous oppression of the
people. The event soon discovered the system to be out of nature, and wholly
impracticable in its operation. Had Lock been fully acquainted with the laws
of accountability, and the means of giving them effect in the administration of
government, would he have fallen into such impracticable absurdities, in his
constitution of Carolina? It is possible, however, that he might have been
embarrassed by the particular views of his employers, the Lords Proprietors.

In the difficult passage from error to truth, perhaps, the state, which
succeeds the almost total ignorance of savages, and which precedes a more
general knowledge of the relations of nature; a state, in which the infant and
feeble voice of the moral sense, is frequently lost amid the violence of
contending passions and appetites, may require, at least, it may endure a
government founded in violence, and supported by opposition. The history of
Athens, of Sparta, of Rome, and of many of the more modern states, exhibits the
bulk of mankind in this character. A few men have arisen in every nation, great
beyond their age, the instruments of Providence for the improvement of the
world. To these, modern times are indebted for the first dawnings of science.
As the benefactors of mankind, their names will be had in perpetual
remembrance; but the history of their times informs us, that they were able to
communicate little of their knowledge to the body of the people; to moderate the
passions, or to influence, in any considerable degree, the general sentiment.
The governments of those times were as ill balanced, as the passions of the
people, and for the same reason. People, in such a state, are keenly sensible
of the present. They are, in general, little capable of adjusting combinations,
or of discovering any, but the most obvious relations and tendencies. From the
character of those times, we have reason to conclude, that the violence of
government, and the violence of the people, who often destroyed one set of
tyrants, to make room for another, and were often guilty of greater abuses,
than those, which they attempted to reform, did not proceed from the want of a
balance in government. It proceeded from a want of knowledge, from the violence
of the passions and appetites, the weakness of the moral sense, and
consequently the sense of accountability, which rendered it difficult, if not
impossible, to fix any sufficient barrier against the tyranny of rulers, or the
licentiousness of the people. Certainly, arguments, drawn from such a state of
society, and of manners, in favor of a balance, constituted by an opposition of
powers and interests, ought, with caution, to be applied to the present state;
which is, in so many respects, very widely different.

At this day, great improvements in science, in manners, and in morals, have
taken place. The art of Printing has rendered the means of diffusing knowledge,
almost universal. Science is no longer confined to the recluse. Useful
knowledge, and useful science, are attainable by the mass of the people.
Improvements have literally begotten improvements. The knowledge of many
things, which, in former times, was the fruit of long and laborious
application, is now imbibed almost with the milk in infancy. Many an ancient
sage, in the warmth of his philanthropy, would have exulted, could he have
foreseen, that in America, and in many nations of Europe, the plain husbandman
would, at this day, possess more knowledge, applicable in human life, more
useful science, than was to be found in all the schools of antiquity.

In this state of imperfection, the abuse of power will never be wholly
prevented; but, when the idea of inherent powers, exclusive rights, and
separate interests, shall, in the mode of betrustment, and the conduct required
of rulers, be no longer suggested to their minds, temptations to abuse will be,
in a great measure, removed.

A frequent rotation in all the offices of government, has, by some statesmen,
of no inconsiderable authority, been esteemed one of the most effectual
provisions against an abuse of power. The advocates for this institution urge,
that a rotation in offices has a powerful tendency to prevent the danger, which
constantly arises from an inveterate habit in the exercise of power, in any
man, family, or set of men, on the one hand, and the habit, which the people,
on the other, are too prone to acquire, of directing their obedience to
particular men or families, rather than to the laws and ordinances of
government; that these habits become inveterate, in any way, are not
sufficiently checked by the frequency of elections, and always counteract the
true principles of a representative republic. The experiment, though often made
in the republics of ancient Greece, and of modern Italy, has never succeeded in
preventing the abuse of power. On the contrary, an established rotation of
offices has served rather to increase the rapacity of rulers, and to render the
government but the more insupportable. The reasons of this effect, I think, are
obvious. Where a rotation is established, there frequently will, in those, who
are brought forward to office, be discovered the want of a thorough knowledge of
the business of their trust, and a want of dexterity, which is unavoidable to
persons in new employments. But this is of less importance.

An interest in the approbation of the people, and a strong sense of
accountability to them, in all official conduct is the greatest, or rather, the
only effectual security against abuses in those, who exercise the powers of
government. An institution, agreeably to which the greatest wisdom, the most
distinguished patriotism, the highest integrity of conduct in a ruler, cannot
entitle him to the proper reward of his virtue, an expression of the
approbation of his fellow citizens, in his re-election to office, diminishes
the most flattering interest, which he ought to have in their favor, and in the
same degree relaxes his sense of accountability to the tribunal of public
sentiment. His interest is seen diverted into another channel. He no longer
looks for a public reward, but hopes, either, that his crimes may escape
detection, or that his rapacity and acts of oppression will furnish the means
of stifling future enquiry. An enquiry will soon be found to be pursued with
less zeal, among a set of people, who, while they succeed to the same offices,
succeed to the same views, and the same interests. In a representative
republic, every institution ought to be avoided, which has a tendency to
deprive the citizens of a right of employing, at their election, except in
cases of present incompatibility, in offices, men of known abilities, and
experienced integrity, or which tends to diminish in the rulers, a strong sense
of accountability, a perpetual interest in the approbation of the people.

Truth is but one. Errors are infinite. The knowledge of truth tends to
unanimity of sentiment. Errors tend to endless divisions and factions. Banish
mystery from politics; open every channel of information; call for
investigation; tempt a discussion of measures, and the public sentiment will be
the best criterion of what is right, and what is wrong in government. Make the
members, both of the legislative and executive amenable to this tribunal.
Subject them, by elections, as frequently as the nature of the case will
permit, to the approbation or censure of the people. It will then be found
unnecessary to have recourse to a rotation of offices, or to create hostile
powers and interests among the rulers, that the people may watch in quiet,
while their Lords are contending for the prize.

Although an opposition of powers and interests seems not to be admissible,
upon any rational ground; yet that there should be a division of the
Legislature, into a Senate and house of Representatives, is undoubtedly an
excellent provision. Public dis^ssion and mature deliberation, in the enact^ of
laws, are indispensibly necessary. The Senate and house Representatives, should
have equal powers. No law should pass without the concurrence of both.

Should one body^ through the prevalence of some secre^ fluence, or of popular
prejudice, pass too ^tily upon measures, the other might ca^ly arrest the
decision, and prevent the da^, which might arise from too tran^ient, or (...)
partial a view of the subject.

There is another advantage, which may arise from a division of the legislative
body, independent of the above consideration. That man, or body of men, who
have formed any plan, are, in some measure, incapable of correcting the errors,
and mistakes, which may, at first, have intervened. Their ideas, when arranged,
flow easily and almost unavoidably in the same channel. Those errors and
mistakes, will be much more readily detected by others. This I apprehend to be
a very important consideration, in the legislative institution. Still the
negative power between the two Houses, is not to be esteemed a direct power of
control, for the purposes of mutual defense. It is designed to produce
amicable discusion, and a more thorough investigation of public measures, and a
general accommodation of the laws, to the manners, sentiments, and interests of
the people. It is claimed by the citizens, to be interposed for their sake
only, not for the sake of the rulers. It is necessary, that each body be
satisfied of the goodness of a measure, before it be adopted. If either be
dissatisfied, it is to be no farther pursued.

This is the natural consequence, when two bodies have equal powers. Whenever
they disagree, there must be a mutual negative. If one can finally determine a
measure, against the opinion of the other, their powers are no longer equal.
Their deliberations will not be mutual, nor will they long continue to be
amicable. The superior body will bear a difference of opinion, with a degree of
impatience. Sic volo, It is my pleasure.
will always be the most ready, the most decisive answer.

SECTION IV. Of the Election of the Members of the Legislature. --
Qualifications of Electors, and Candidates. -- Accountability of the
Legislature -- how secured.
THE exercise of the legislative power by representation, is an improvement of
modern times. In all the republics of ancient Greece, and in Rome itself, where
the citizens had a share in legislation, every freeman was a member of the
legislature, and gave his suffrage personally, in the great assemblies of the
people. This brought together a body too unwieldy, even in the smallest states.
In states of greater extent, where the citizens were almost innumerable, with
the peculiar manners, the limited knowledge, and partial views of their times,
they formed a heterogeneous assemblage of sentiments, passions, and interests,
which bade defiance to all hope of compromise, by means of rational discussion.

Those, who are little conversant in reasoning, are yet capable of feeling.
Accordingly, we find, in the public harrangues of their most celebrated
orators, and statesmen, very little attention to investigation. All their
powers of eloquence, were directed to the passions, and sentiments of the
audience. The whole vigor of the soul was collected to this point. The
instructions contained in their public orations, serves principally to mark the
state of knowledge, the manners, and public sentiments of the times. The glow of
imagination, which they discover; the propriety and irresistible force of
sentiment and expression, which wraps the whole soul in attention, have justly
rendered them the admiration of succeeding ages. All this well accounts for the
fluctuation of measures, in ancient popular governments. They have often, and
with propriety, been compared to fluctuations of the boisterous element. A
republican government upon this model, must, in a large state, be very
inconvenient, and exposed to perpetual revolutions.

It has been the opinion of many writers, that a democracy can be adequate only
to the government of a small territory. They have held, that in this species of
government, population must be stinted, or the number of citizens, who have the
right of suffrage, limited. The first is a very discouraging consideration to
society. The latter constitutes a more or less numerous aristocracy.
Montesquieu has adopted this opinion. He seems not to have conceived, that a
government purely democratic, could act wholly by representation. In his time,
I believe an instance of this kind had not existed in any independent state.
The colonial governments of Connecticut and Rhode Island, before the late
revolution, were, in their internal administration, pure representative
democracies.


Speaking of the constitution of England, the same author observes, "The great
advantage of representatives, is, their being capable of discussing affairs.
For this, the people at large are very unfit, which is one of the greatest
inconveniences of a democracy." Representatives, chosen from the various parts
of the community, agreeably to a just apportionment, are, not only, capable of
discussing the affairs of the nation, be it ever so extensive or numerous, but
they bring to the discussion more knowledge of the general and particular
manners, interests, and sentiments of the people, whose happiness is alone
concerned in their deliberations, and dispositions more congenial to those
manners, interests and sentiments, than can be found in any other body of men.

The rights and interests of monarchy and aristocracy, ever exclusive of the
rights and interests of the people, ever in opposition, are not less so in a
large, than in a small state. In a large state, the objects of their
oppressions and exactions are more numerous, and may, sometimes, by dividing,
lessen the burden. But whether the state be great or small, the same exclusive
rights, the same opposition of interests, the same oppressions, and exactions,
exist in kind.

The first thing to be considered, in forming a legislative body, is the
qualifications of electors, and the number and qualifications of
representatives. These are not points of easy discussion. They have never been
precisely determined. Some have insisted on a qualification in property. Others
have extended the right of suffrage and of eligibility, to every acknowleged
citizen.

In a democratic republic, in which every thing ought to tend to a certain kind
of equality, property seems not to be a just criterion. The individual and
social rights of man, are the subjects of legislative discussion, and to these,
the interests of the community are to be referred. The right of property is one
of those rights, and gives rise to a very extensive interest among men. It is a
right, however, which, if it meet a too partial indulgence, tends to a
dangerous inequality of influence, and with the power and interest, suggests to
the proprietor the idea of infringing the rights of others with impunity. The
interest of science, of industry, of commerce, and of the mechanic arts, have
an equal claim on society. The proper encouragement of these, tends to a more
equal distribution of the goods of fortune, and to correct the unequal
influence of wealth. In a state where, through the prevalence of corrupt
principles, the whole property is accumulated, and perpetuated in the hands of
a few; where the great mass of the people are reduced to a state of dependence,
servility, and meanness, from which they can never hope to emerge, but by the
destruction of their oppressors, a general right of suffrage, would be
dangerous to the few, and for a time, even to the people themselves. In most,
if not all the governments of the United States of America, where the law
equally regards the rights of the rich and the poor; where few are to be found
without property, and fewer still without a well grounded hope of obtaining it;
where industry and economy rarely fa^l to procure a competence, and often lead
to opulence, no ill consequences are to be feared from a general right of
suffrage.

Disqualifications will, however, in some cases, be found necessary. It will,
at least, be found expedient to exclude, both from the right of suffrage, and
eligibility, those, who, for want of age, may be supposed to be wanting in
discretion. Certainly the interests of virtue and of the public require, that
those should be excluded, who, by their crimes, have manifested a disposition
totally corrupt, and by their conduct declared to the world, that they are no
longer to be trusted.

I am unable to persuade myself, that any distinction, in point of
qualifications, ought to be made, between electors and candidates. I say in
general, for a distinction of ^ge, which to abilities adds experience and
maturity of judgment, may well be admited. There is nothing invidious in the
distinction. It is an honor yielded by mankind, to a certain degree, with a
conscious approbation of virtue. Other qualifications are mostly invidious.
They introduce, in some measure, a distinction of classes. They excite a degree
of haughtiness in the candidates. The electors feel themselves degraded, and
that their class, notwithstanding their right of suffrage, is unrepresented. If
a character for integrity and abilities are the only qualifications for a
candidate, they will be more affiduously cultivated. These are qualifications,
which alone are useful to the people, and of these the people are the only
competent judges. The choice of a worthy character, reflects honor upon
themselves, which they enjoy with the more satisfaction, as they are sensible
of no restraint or limitation in their choice. From these considerations, I
apprehend, that the right of suffrage and of eligibility ought to be the same,
and limited by no qualification but that of age. If, in any state, other
qualifications shall be found necessary in either, the necessity must have
arisen from some antecedent defect in the constitution and laws.

The number of representatives seems less capable of a precise limitation. The
extremes are very discernible, but they are very distant. Too numerous a
representation verges toward the inconvenience of an assembly of the people.
It incumbers discussion, and gives an ascendency to particular passions, which
often, in a numerous assembly, through a sympathetic impulse, pervade the whole
body, like a shock of electricity, and irresistably influence the decisions of
the moment. On the other hand, if the representative body are too few in
number, their measures are liable to be dictated by limited views and partial
interests. Possibly we can go no farther than to say, that it ought to be
sufficiently numerous to probably comprehend all the passions, sentiments, and
interests, which have a national influence.

These observations apply equally to the House of Representatives and the
Senate. The better to equalize the representation for the House, the State
ought to be divided into as many districts as there are representatives to be
chosen. Where no local, or more powerful reason opposes such division, the
districts should be apportioned by the number of inhabitants. This will, in
general, give the most equal representation of interests. The voters too will
act understandingly, and with a personal knowledge of the candidates. Where a
number of representatives are assigned to a district of greater extent, every
engine of intrigue is commonly put in motion and the representatives are
chosen, by the prevailing interest of the district, to the exclusion of every
other interest. The mode of election proposed for the House of Representatives,
gives opportunity for an advantageous modification in the election of a Senate.
The Senators are to be representatives of the people, no less, in fact, than
the members of the other house. It is a very good idea, that the Senate shall
be considered as a national council. This suggests a distinction of age, to
give maturity to their deliberations. Public measures, before they are adopted,
ought to be considered in every point of light, in which they can affect the
passions, the morals, sentiments, and interests of the community, both general
and particular. While they provide for present accommodation, they ought not to
lose sight of future improvements. To secure a more deliberate discussion, and
a more calm investigation, not only ought the warmth and inexperience of youth
to be excluded from the Senate, but the members should be fewer in number, than
those of the House of Representatives. While the House of Representatives,
actuated by all the passions and sentiments, in turn, give a vig^ and national
spirit to the measures of government, any precipitation into which they might
fall, will be prevented by the firm composure of the Senate. In proportion as
they are fewer in number, they will be chosen by larger districts. This will
produce a different combination of the interests, which they represent, and
exhibit a different and more collected view of the objects of legislation.

To prevent, in the members of the legislature, every idea of an independent
power, or of property in their appointments, they must be chosen for a limited
time. A period must be fixed, when their exercise of power shall cease, and
leave them only that pre-eminence above their fellow-citizens, which they
derive from the public approbation. The period must be sufficiently long for
completing the ordinary rotine of business. A year may, in general, be the most
convenient time. Perhaps, in larger states, the nature of the ordinary
business, the magnitude of the objects which demand the attention of the
legislatures, and the subjects to be discussed, may require a longer period.
Reasons may likewise exist for fixing different periods for the members of the
Senate, and the members of the House of Representatives. In each, some period
ought to be fixed, beyond the power of the Legislature to alter. Such a
provision will, on every occasion, recall their attention to the interests and
happiness of the people. It will place their accountability, constantly, in
view. It will fix them in a dread of the censure, and give them a most
flattering interest in the approbation of the people.

To render the public sentiment a more rational, and a more powerful check upon
every department of government, it is essential, that there be, in the
constitution of every free state, an effectual provision for the dissemination
of useful knowledge. No knowledge can be more useful to a people, than that,
which enables them to manage, or, at least, to judge, with propriety, of their
own and the public interests. "Let liberty be attended with knowledge." It
removes the temptation to abuse, by taking away the hope of successful
imposition. To this end, common schools, as well as public seminaries, should
be considered as an important object of legislative attention. Let it also be a
sacred stipulation, that all debates in the Legislature shall be open. Let
effectual measures be taken to facilitate their publication in course, and to
procure them a speedy circulation among the people. Let there be no restraint
upon the liberty of the Press, no check upon public or private discussion, but
what is imposed by the manners, morals, taste, and good sense of the age.

SECTION V. Of the appointment and accountability of the Executive and
Judiciary.
THE executive is the ultimately efficient power in government. For the sake of
dispatch, of unity of action, and of representing the individuality of the
state, in transactions with other nations, this power ought to be vested in one
person, whom, for distinction, we will call the President.

Some have thought, that the election of the President might, with the greatest
safety, be entrusted to the Legislature. Others have held, that it should be
the sacred right of the people. There are unanswerable objections to the
exercise of this right by the Legislature. It gives an idea of dependence of
the President on the Legislature, and intercepts his accountability to the
people. All elections by the representative body, are liable to intrigues and
coalitions, which greatly influence public measures. This evil is increased, in
proportion to the importance of the election.

An upright discharge of the duties of the executive, is the most honorable of
any in the state; an abuse the most dangerous, and in none, are the temptations
so powerful. It ought, therefore, to be guarded against with every rational
check. At the same time, it must not be so incumbered as to clogg its necessary
activity. The good or bad conduct of the executive is, in most instances of
internal administration, immediately felt by the people. To prevent any hurtful
coalition, between the executive and the legislative body, and to subject the
President to the control of public sentiment, his appointment should be by
periodical elections of the people. In more extensive and complicated
governments such as that of the United States, this mode of electing the
President, may be inconvenient, or even impracticable. When this shall appear,
some other provision must be made; but care must be taken, to prevent all
legislative interference, in the appointments, unless, which will sometimes
happen, no choice shall have been made, in the mode prescribed, and to make it
depend as much as possible, on the sentiments of the people.

The business of the executive, is too extensive and various to be performed by
one man. Many of its duties must be performed by subordinate Ministers, who are
to be considered as assistants to the President. The appointment of these
properly falls within his province. He will be responsible to the public, for
their character and abilities, though not for their crimes. He ought,
therefore, ordinarily, to be entrusted with their removal.

Besides the duties of the executive, already mentioned, there are other
duties, very necessary to an orderly and economical arrangement of public
measures. It will, at all times, be the duty of the President, to inform the
Legislature of the situation of public affairs, of the event of measures, which
have been adopted, and to recommend to their consideration those subjects,
which demand their more immediate, or more particular attention.

According to the ordinary rotine of official business, it will be the duty of
the subordinate Ministers of the executive, when required by the Legislature,
to give a clear and just account of the affairs of their several departments,
to make proper arrangements in those matters, which are committed to their
charge, and to accompany them with all the necessary information, which may
assist that body to adopt and pursue a regular system, in their internal
economy, and to conduct with propriety and good faith, as well toward
individual citizens, as in their intercourse with foreign powers.

Happily for mankind, it has been found that the exercise of the executive
power, is sufficiently capable of precise limitation, by known and established
laws. Its Ministers may, therefore, be subjected to trial, before a constituent
tribunal, to removal and punishment, for maladministration. Impunity should,
on no account, be annexed to office or dignity, So far from consisting with the
good of the community, it is directly opposed to its interest and safety. A
strict adherence to these principles, in the constitution and administration of
government, will secure as great a check upon the abuse of power, as the
imperfection of human institutions will admit. It cannot be too often
inculcated, that, to indulge, or rather to create an opposition of interests,
on which to found an opposition of powers, will, if we may rely on the
experience of the present and past ages, always prove ineffectual to the end of
restraint, and in a greater or less degree, subersive of the rights and
liberties of the people.

An executive council, whose advice may assist the President, in matters of
general importance, or doubtful issue, appears to be a wise and necessary
institution. From this council, the members of the judiciary are carefully to
be excluded. For this exclusion there are two substantial reasons. The first
has already been mentioned; the necessity of a separation between the
legislative, executive, and judiciary, that each may be rendered distinctly
accountable. The second is, that their advice will pre-occupy questions
concerning the legal and constitutional rights of the citizens, in which the
administration of the executive may be involved, and of which, in their
official capacity, they are the only proper judges for redress.

There are nearly similar reasons against the admission of either branch, or
any member of the Legislature, to this council. The objections are, that it
blends those powers, which, as we have seen, ought to be kept distinctly
separate. It shifts the responsibility from one to the other, and leaves it
less clear, who is to be accountable. It is of importance, that there should be
an enquiry into the conduct of public officers; that prosecutions should be
brought forward against the guilty; and that there should, somewhere, exist a
constitutional court for their trial. The enquiry, prosecution, and trial,
ought, from their importance to the community, and the character and situation
of the parties, to be more public and solemn, than those, which are established
in the case of common offenders. The National Representatives have been thought
the most proper board to institute such enquiry, and to bring forward the
accusations of the public; and the Senate the most proper court for the trial
of such accusations. Though this appears not perfectly consistent; yet probably
no better provision can be made. The introduction of an independent tribunal,
for the trial of impeachments, would have greater inconveniences, and lead to
endless consequences. If such be the provision for the accusation and trial of
executive officers, certainly it is not very consistent, that the same men, or
the same body of men, should advise, and afterward, on trial, decide upon the
conduct, which had been adopted and pursued in consequence of their advice. It
will often be proper for the Legislature to advise and direct the Executive to
the pursuit of some national measures, which may be necessary, or expedient.
Their previous approbation may give weight to the measures, and a facility to
the execution. This advice, however, should be general, or, in matters, which
are considered as discretionary, with the Executive. It should never extend to
those particular instances of conduct, which may become the ground of an
impeachment. Upon these considerations, would it not, if an Executive Council
be necessary, be more consistent, that it should be composed of a distinct
body, elected in the same manner as the President, and in like manner amenable
for their conduct?

The situation of the Judges, or Ministers of the Judiciary department, is
somewhat different from that of the others. The integrity of their conduct has
a great influence upon government. It is indispensibly necessary to an
impartial administration of law, and the security of public and private rights.
Their decisions are, mostly, local, and of individual rights; but the
precedents established by their decisions, become general rules for the
interpretation and application of the laws, which follow the principles of the
government. In republican governments, the law is to be interpreted, with a
spirit of equity, impartiality, and moderation.

In the mode of performing the duties of the Legislative and Judiciary, there
is a very material difference. In making laws, a great regard must be had to
the circumstances, manners, and sentiments of the people, as well as to the
principles of the constitution. The laws must be the best, which the people can
bear. In judging, whether between individuals of the people, or between private
persons and public officers, a strict regard is to be had to the very right and
justice of the case, agreeably to the principles of the constitution, and the
laws of the land. The Judges ought not to stand in awe of the frowns of power,
or to be influenced by temporary smiles of popular favor. The abilities,
integrity, and independence of the Judges, is a shield, both to the rulers, and
to the people. They give a steady nerve to the mild energy of government, and
ultimate security to private rights. That kind of accountability, therefore,
which is supported by popular elections, and which is proper for the members of
the Legislature, is not proper for a Judge. From the interest, which men of
property and influence might expect in future decisions, the people would, in
the choice, be liable to be mislead in their judgment of characters. The same
observations will hold of a legislative appointment, in addition to what was
above observed of elections, in general, by the Legislature, that they give
rise to intrigues and coalitions hurtful to public measures. In popular
appointments, no one holds himself responsible for the character of the person
appointed. In the Legislature, responsibility is, in a great degree, lost among
numbers.

The appointment, or at least the public nomination, of the Judges, ought to be
entrusted to the President, or the head of the executive. His conduct is
constantly, and singly, exposed to the public view. He will hold himself fully
responsible for the character and abilities of those, whom he appoints to
office.

To secure them in that degree of independence, which shall place them above
the temptation of a bias, they should hold their office during good behavior.
Their salaries should be fixed beyond the power of the Legislature to alter, at
least to diminish, during their continuance in office. For corruption, or
maladministration in office, let them be liable to removal by impeachment in
a constitutional way.

There may, however, be some things, in the conduct of a Judge, which go to his
character, and destroy that respect and public confidence so necessary in
securing a ready acquiescence in the decision of the Judiciary, and a prompt
obedience to the laws. They may, nevertheless, be of such a nature, that they
cannot be made the subject of an impeachment. To remedy this evil, which is,
sometimes, a matter of great consequence in government, and to impress on the
minds of the Judges, a sense of the necessity of an unblemished integrity of
conduct, they might be removable on an address to the Executive, from both
branches of the legislature. To prevent the effect of envy, of intrigues, and
the popular frenzy of the moment, it should be made a matter of deliberation.
Let it be necessary, that two thirds, at least, of each branch concur in the
address. These provisions, I apprehend, will hold the Judges sufficiently
accountable. As was hinted above, their situation, different from that of other
rulers, does not require, or even admit, of the same kind of accountability.
Their unjust decisions may render them odious, may subject them to trial,
punishment, and removal; but can add very little to their own emolument or
power.

SECTION VI. Of Juries.
THE institution of Juries is of great anticquity. The Selecti Judices Selecti
Judices -- Select Judges -- At Rome, a certain number of citizens, were, by the
consent of the parties, selected to judge in each cause. The Judges decided on
facts only. Questions of law were referred to the Tribunal of Decemvirs, who
presided in trials, under the direction of the Praetor.
of the Romans, and the Dicastae and Heliastae The (...) and (...) were judges
in several comes at Athens, in which the Archons, who were called Thesmothe^ae,
or Presidents of Justice, presided. All citizens of Athens had a right, on
taking the oath prescribed, to judge in these courts and the number of judges
in a cause, sometimes amounted to 500.
of the Greeks, had in several respects, a near resemblance to modern juries.
They subsisted in one form or another, among all the northern nations of
Europe, and were by them introduced into all the governments of their
conquests. They have, however, been preserved in very few. They are a powerful
support of civil liberty, and cannot long exist in a government wholly
arbitrary.

Among the English, their history does not reach the antiquity of the
institution. It has there been improved, and with the democratic branch of the
government, continues the grand paladium of their liberties. From them it is
derived to the federal Americans, and makes an important part of their civil
constitutions.

In mixed governments, like that of Great Britain, the intervention of juries,
both in the prosecution of crimes, and in decision of private rights, is a
principal security to the subject, against the dangerous power and influence of
the monarchical and aristocratic branches. It is equally necessary in a
republic, but for reasons somewhat different.

In a republic, the powers of government are supported, not by force, but by
the sentiments of the people. It is necessary to cultivate a sentimental
attachment to the government. The powers of government are visible only in the
exercise. The mode, in which they are exercised, either invigorates or weakens
the sentiment. The exercise of power is not, in general, directly agreeable to
those, who are the subjects of it. The administration of justice, without a
view to the consequences, is rather austere and forbidding, than amitable and
attractive. Justice, when considered as a private virtue, that is, the
rendering to every one his honest due, is directly amitable; when considered in
the distribution of punishments, it is not so. The mind is reconciled to it,
and acquiesces in it, from a view of the consequences merely, unless, when the
passion of revenge excites a desire of retaliation.
As more men are capable of feeling, than reasoning, and all feel before they
reason, the first view is rather unamitable. The Ministers of justice are the
objects of these feelings. The ideas of unamitable severity daily impressed on
the minds of the people, are not easily corrected by reasoning on the
consequences. Hangmen and public executioners are universally detested. The
first impressions, which their actions make on the mind, impressions of
inhumanity, and cruelty, are never effaced by reasoning on the justice of their
actions, or their necessity to society.


Justice is administered for the redress of some evil, either public, or
private. The evil is past, and sometimes uncertain, or at least of difficult
investigation. The evil, which is inflicted by the sentence of the Ministers of
the law, is present and certain. The people cannot, consistent with an
impartial administration, have a direct control over them. These
considerations have, more, or less, a tendency to diminish that sentiment of
attachment, which is so necessary in a republic. The institution of juries
provides an adequate remedy. In this institution, I comprehend both the grand
jury, who are to pass on the accusation, and find it supported, before any
person accused, can be put on his trial, and the petit jury, who pass on the
final trial, all questions, civil and criminal.

In the administration of criminal law, the institution of a grand jury has a
very leading influence, in a free government. I do not recollect any
institution among the ancients, similar to that of a grand jury; nor do I
recollect to have met with it in any of the mode^n governments, that of the
English excepted. It was established among them before the conquest. Black.
Com. iv. 302.
To guard the innocent from the infamy and oppression of a public accusation;
and without partiality, without favor, to bring forward the guilty to trial for
their crimes, constitutes the principal duty of a grand jury. Taken from the
body of the people, and having, in the prosecution of offenses, no interests
but the peace and welfare of the community, as far as they are secured by the
prevention of crimes, they are placed as a shield between the accused, and the
interested passions, or malicious attempts of private prosecutors. This
intervention between the people and the officers of the law, who, from the
nature of their office, may, sometimes, be suspected of interested views, or at
least of a want of feeling, gives a facility to the execution of criminal law,
and reconciles to the sentiments of the people, the necessary punishment of
offenders. The punishment of the guilty, if, from an oppressive partiality in
the prosecution, or an undue rigor in the execution, it meets not the
acquiescence of the people, can have no salutary effect in society.

It may be made a question, how far persons injured, ought to be admitted to
prosecute for the end of punishing. I apprehend, this will depend much on the
state of manners, and the principles of the government. In a government,
supported, in a great measure, by force, and in a state of manners, in which
the mind is highly inflamed by private injuries, and the passion of revenge, is
satisfied with nothing short of personal retaliation, it may be necessary to
permit the person injured to prosecute his revenge, at law, to prevent the
fatal consequences of private malice. To restrain personal revenge, and subject
it to general laws, is a great point in the progress of society. Still, as
prosecutions for the end of punishment, by the party injured, have a direct
tendency to perpetuate a resentment of injuries, and to make the law
instrumental in the exercise of personal enmity, the practice, by no means
agrees with a general refinement of manners, By refinement of manners, is not
meant the etiquette of politeness merely, which may consist with many traits of
barbarous manners. It consists with the modern point of honor; the practice of
duelling to revenge personal affront^ and imaginary injuries; a practice which
still disgraces some of the American states. We ought rather to place a
refinement of manners in the sentiments of humanity, and a general spirit of
accommodation.
or the humane principle of a democratic republic. Persons injured ought to
rest satisfied with a full security in the right of reparation. The right of
punishing ought to be exercised solely for the prevention of crimes, and to be
permitted to those only, who are appointed and selected by law for that
purpose, and who are supposed to be capable of candor and moderation in their
proceedings. The practice of admitting common informers, who are to receive a
share of the penalty, as a reward for prosecuting, is still less to be
justified. The practice can never be necessary, in any state of manners. In
this case, the plea of preventing a greater evil by the admission of a less,
wholly fails. It often serves the purpose of private malice; always to
cultivate a spirit of revenge, and to disseminate jealousies, and private
animosities among the citizens. It is calculated for those governments only, in
which the rulers foresee the punishment of their own crimes in the unanimity of
the people. Can we then hesitate to pronounce, that in the United States of
America, the institution of criminal prosecutions, in the name, and under the
direction of private persons, is contrary to the present state of manners, and
the principles of their governments? And that the intervention of a grand jury
ought to be secured in every constitution, as the sacred right of the people,
in prosecutions for crimes?

The observations made on the institution of grand juries, who, by their
intervention between the ministers of the law, and the people, and their
approbation of prosecutions, remove the odium of severity, and reconcile the
execution of criminal law, to the sentiments of the people, apply with more
force to petit juries, in proportion as the condemnation is of more consequence
than the accusation. This is not all. The institution is the best which has
been devised, and probably, which can be devised by human wisdom, for obtaining
substantial justice, in trials, both criminal and civil.

The particular province of a jury is to weigh evidence, and to decide upon
facts. It is true, that, in every question, justice results from a combination
of law and facts. It is true, also, that in a complicated state of society, the
law may become intricate, and its application not a little difficult. This,
however, can happen, in questions only of a civil nature. No crimes are to be
made out by a construction of dubious facts, or a doubtful application of law.
It is the province of the Judges to explain and apply the law, when it is
submitted to them, by the Jury, on a statement of facts. To such statement the
Jury are fully competent.

Will it be thought strange to assert, that professional and systematic
knowledge is less competent to judge of proofs of fact, than plain sense,
conversant only in the common business of life, and the common characters of
men? And yet, to the mortification of the great and the learned, experience has
established this to be generally true. It is not without reason, that men
acquiesce more readily in the verdict of a Jury, than in the opinion of the
Judges, in matters of fact. At the same time, there is another consideration of
nearly equal weight. The Judges are viewed as a distinct class, placed above
the common interest and common feelings of the citizens. Hence arises an idea,
though often ill founded, of a distinct interest, and a general bias upon
certain questions. Juries are, or ought to be, taken from the substantial class
of citizens. Effectual provision should be made to guard against every inlet to
the corruption of Juries, and against the admission of those on trial, who may
be subject to prejudice, or interested views in their decisions. With these
precautions, the justice of their decisions will be attributed to the
excellence of the administration. If, at any time, they shoud prove unjust, it
will be attributed to the imperfections of humanity. It will be viewed as a
temporary inconvenience, for which the laws are not answerable; while unjust
decisions made by the Judges, are considered as dictated by standing, official
prejudices, by interest, or secret corruption, which, however dangerous, are
not easily removed.

From this brief view, it appears, that the institution, in which I comprehend
both Grand and Petit Juries, is intimately connected with the principles of a
free government. It sufficiently obviates any danger, which might be supposed
to arise from the independence of the Judges, and secures the administration of
justice, in the spirit of impartiality and moderation, the true spirit of a
free government.

SKETCH V. OF EQUALITY.
It is proposed, in this Sketch, to enquire, In what sense men are born equal?
-- In what sense they are said to have equal rights? -- Of the nature of
equality in Republics -- And of the right and equality of descents.

SECTION I. In what sense Men are born equal -- And in what sense they are said
to have equal Rights.
IT has been said, and justly, that there are natural inequalities among men.
Some are stronger, others are weaker. They differ no less in their mental
powers. These differences frequently depend on the structure and organization
of the body, and arise from causes, which began their operation antecedent to
the birth. They are, sometimes, derived through a long line of ancestors. Men
therefore, are not born equal. There are, likewise, adventitious inequalities.
The same object, whether physical or moral, cannot be exhibited to every one,
at all times, in the same point of view. The minds of all are not alike
susceptible of impressions from the same object.

Nature has opened a great variety of pursuits, which are lawful, and which
are, more, or less, necessary to men. Different men are necessitated to
different pursuits. No one man is equal to the task of all, nor do his
occasions require it. The convenience of all, mutual interest, and mutual
accommodation, dictate to each, a certain degree of limitation in his pursuits.
Different pursuits require different degrees of exercise, which produce
different degrees of bodily strength. The different objects, exhibited in the
variety of pursuits, produce different degrees of knowledge. These causes,
sometimes, correct, but more frequently, increase the original inequalities,
both of body and mind.

When therefore, it is said, that men are born equal, it cannot be understood,
that they are born with equal powers and faculties, or an equal facility of
improvement; or that the laws of their nature admit, in practice, of equal
acquisitions. Can it mean any thing more than, that all men are born equally
free, and have an equal right to follow the laws of their nature, comprehending
all its relations? So far men are equal in rights. Power and right are not
convertible terms. Rights are the result of certain relations. They do not, for
their existence, essentially, or principally depend on power. Power is
necessary to the present exercise only, to the full enjoyment. They are
sanctioned by the laws of our nature, and are as immutable as the laws
themselves. A man may, by force, be deprived of the present exercise and
enjoyment of his rights; but he is not, therefore, deprived of the rights
themselves. Are the laws of nature, are civil laws destroyed, because they are
violated? Certainly they are not.

Rights may be divided into general, or primary, and particular, or secondary
rights. General rights are, first, those which are purely the rghts of the
mind, or intellectual rights. These can never justly be subject to civil
regulations, or to the control of external power. Secondly, a right (...) use
our own powers and faculties, natural and acquired for our own convenience and
happiness. This comprehends all those rights which Judge Blackstone has reduced
to three principal articles -- "The right of personal security -- the right of
personal liberty -- and the right of private property," or the right of making
and enjoying acquisitions.

Black. Com. I. 129.
The use, however, must be in a just compromise with the convenience and
happiness of others, agreeably to the laws of social nature, and such
combinations and regulations, a^ are clearly derived from those laws. Under the
last head, comes the general right of making acquisitions. The exercise of this
right, therefore, is subject to particular modifications. Particular rights are
found in certain relations to something external. They are the title, which a
man derives from the exercise of his powers and faculties, in any just and
lawful mode of appropriation, to the exclusive enjoyment of those things, which
he has brought within his general right of acquisition. The general right of
acquisition, is the foundation of particular rights. The latter are derived
from the former. They do not stand in opposition, but in perfect harmony.
Without the particular right, by which men are secured in the enjoyment of
their several acquisitions, a general right to acquire would be of no avail.
The general rights, however a part of them, to render them universally
reciprocal in society, may be subjected to certain modifications, can never
justly be abridged, or suffer any dim^nution, either directly or by
consequence. Particular rights exist in certain relations between a man and
particular subjects. These relations are liable to various alterations and
modifications. The man may cease, and with him all his rights. The subject may
cease. The right to the subject may be forfeited by the laws of society. It may
be transferred, enlarged, or diminished.

Of property it is universally true, that he, who has the full right of
enjoyment, has likewise the right of disposal. The right of disposal is
co-extensive with the right of acquisition. Although one may have a present,
exclusive right of property in a certain subject, it is nevertheless open to
another's right of acquisition, by mutual compromise. In this consists the
harmony and reciprocity of the general right of acquisition with the general
rights of property. Different powers may give, greater or less extent to
particular rights, or to the subject of those rights. The greater the powers
and faculties of an individual, the more things he may bring within his
particular rights. The result of all this is, that general rights alone are
permanent, are equally and fully attendant upon every individual. So far all
are equal in rights. Particular rights are, for the mutual accommodation, and
happiness of men, subjected to their occasions and necessities. Indeed, were
not this the case, the sense of property must be fallacious; arts must cease;
industry could have no reward; economy would be of no avail to the individual,
and liberty itself would be but the dream of the visionary.

SECTION II. Of the Nature of Equality in Republics.
SOME of the most eminent writers on government, have supposed an equality of
property, as well as of rights to be necessary in a republic. They have,
therefore, prescribed limits to individual acquisition. The Reason given is,
that riches give power to those who possess them, and that those who possess
power, will always abuse it to the oppression of others. If this be a good
reason for limiting the acquisition of riches, there is equal reason for
limiting the improvement of bodily strength and mental abilities. Such a step
would be an abridgement of the primary rights of man, and counteract almost all
the laws of his nature. It would, perhaps, could it be reduced to practice,
place the whole human race in a state of fearless quietude; but it would be a
state of tasteless enjoyment, of stupid inactivity, not to be envied by the
lowest tribes of the animal creation.

If such be the principles of a republican government, it is a government out
of nature. Those have made a wiser choice, who have submitted to the less
tyranical principles of absolute monarchy. These are not the principles of a
republic. They are the principles of anarchy, and of popular tyranny.

We have just now enquired into the nature of equality among men, and have seen
in what it consists; a free and equal enjoyment of the primary rights, which
are, the intellectual rights, and the right which men have of using their
powers and faculties, under certain reciprocal modifications, for their own
convenience and happiness. The equality necessary in a republic, requires
nothing more, than this equality of primary rights. I shall here instance in
the right of acquisition only, as being sufficient for my present purpose.

To the security of this right, certain regulations, as to the modes and
conditions of enjoying the secondary rights, or in other words, of holding
property, are necessary. Not, indeed, as to the quantity, but the freedom of
acquisition, use, and disposal. To give to any individual, or class of men, a
monopoly, an exclusive right of acquisition in those things, which nature has
made the subjects of property, to perpetuate, and render them unalienable in
their hands, is an exclusion of the rights of others. It is a violation of the
equal rights of man. Of this nature are all exclusive privileges; all
perpetuities of riches and honor, and all the pretended rights of
primogeniture. Inequality of property, in the possession of individuals, is not
directly, nor by inevitable consequence, subversive of genuine liberty. Those
laws are, indeed, subversive of liberty, which, by establishing perpetuities,
deprive the owner of a right of disposal, and others, so far as they extend, of
the right of acquisition; which annex privileges to property, and by making it
a qualification in government, create a powerful aristocracy.

Riches are the fruit of industry. Honor the fruit of merit. Both ought, as to
their continuance, and the influence which attends them, to be lest to the
conduct of the possessor. If a man, who, by industry and economy, has acquired
riches, become indolent, or profligate, let him sink into poverty. Let those
who are still industrious and economical, succeed to his enjoyments, as to
their just reward. If a man, who, by noble and virtuous actions, has acquired
honor, the esteem of mankind, will behave infamously, let him sink into
contempt. To exclude the meritorious from riches and honors, and to perpetuate
either to the undeserving, are equally injurious to the rights of man in
society. In both it is to counteract the laws of nature, which have, by the
connection of cause and effect, annexed the proper rewards and punishments to
the actions of men. Wealth, or at least, a competency, is the reward, provided
by the laws of nature, for prudent industry; want, the punishment of idleness
and profligacy.

If we make equality of property necessary in a society, we must employ force,
against both the industrious and the indolent. On the one hand, the industrious
must be restrained, from every exertion, which may exceed the power, or
inclination of common capacities; on the other hand, the indolent must be
forcibly stimulated to common exertions. This would be acting the fable of
Procrustes who, by stretching, or lopping to his iron bedstead, would reduce
every man to his own standard length.

If this method should be deemed ineligible, the only alternative will be,
either by open violence, or the secret fraud of the law, to turn a certain
portion of the well-earned acquisitions of the vigilant and industrious, to the
use of the indolent and neglectful.

Let us not, in a Republic, attempt the extreme of equality: It verges on the
extreme of tyranny. Mont. Sp. L. B. viii. C. ^.
Guarantee to every man, the full enjoyment of his natural rights. Banish all
exclusive privileges; all perpetuities of riches and honors. Leave free the
acquisition and disposal of property to supply the occasions of the owner, and
to answer all claims of right, both of the society, and of individuals. To give
a stimulus to industry, to provide solace and assistance, in the last helpless
stages of life, and a reward for the attentions of humanity, confirm to the
owner the power of directing, who shall succeed to his right of property, after
his death; but let it be without any limitation, or restraint upon the future
use, or disposal. Divert not the consequences of actions, as to the individual
actors, from their proper course. Let no preference be given to any one in
government, but what his conduct can secure, from the sentiments of his fellow
citizens. Of property, left to the disposal of the law, let a descent from
parents to children, in equal portions, be held a sacred principle of the
constitution. Secure but these, and every thing will flow in the channel
intended by nature. The operation of the equal laws of nature, tend to exclude,
or correct every dangerous excess.

Thus industry will be excited; arts will flourish, and virtuous conduct meet
its just reward, the esteem and confidence of mankind. Am I deceived? or are
these the true principles of equality in a democratic republic? Principles,
which will secure its prosperity, and, if any thing in this stage of existence
can be durable, its perpetual duration.

SECTION III. Of the Right and Equality of Descents.
IN every nation, among whom property, as a provision for the future, has
become an object of pursuit, except under the most arbitrary governments, the
right of children to inherit the estates and interests of their parents, has
been adopted in their civil institutions. It has been a question, whether this
be a dictate of the law of nature, or whether it be a regulation of civil
policy merely.

Those, who maintain, that private property is a creature of municipal law
only, and that its right originates in civil institutions, do well to suppose,
that every rightful mode of acquisition and disposal, the transfer of the
right, and every mode, by which it can pass from one to another, originate in
the same institutions. If, however, the right of property, as, I think, has
been, clearly, shown, be an establishment of natural law; if it result from
certain relations of nature, and be discovered by an internal sense, an
intuitive perception, it will be but a reasonable conclusion, that the laws of
nature, likewise, reach the acquisition and disposal. Such laws there
undoubtedly are; and I am persuaded, it will, on enquiry, be found, that, in
these laws, originates the right of the heirs in the estate of their ancestors.
Civil institutions have only modified, and confirmed the right. It is not,
indeed, an absolute, but a qualified and subordinate right, subjected to the
right and occasions of the ancestor.

The union of parents and children forms a society, of all the most intimate,
and the most purely natural. The reciprocal rights and duties, parental and
filial, are derived purely from the relations of nature. They are, in their
origin, independent of the modifications of art or civil policy. Not only
members of the several families, but others, distinctly, and forcibly perceive,
what I have ventured to call the individuality of these little communities of
nature. The perception resembles that of the members united to form the body.
All the members of these little communities are perceptively conscious of the
warmest and tenderest interest, in the good or evil, moral or natural, which
befalls each other. No man hesitates, when he observes an instance of a contrary
disposition, boldly to pronounce it to be unnatural.

When a child is arrived at maturity, and ready, as a new stock, to branch into
a new family, it is, from the subsisting relations, perceived to be the duty of
the parent, according to his ability, and with a due regard to the subsisting
or growing relations of the other members of the family, to contribute to the
advancement of such child. Should a parent, in common cases of this kind,
neglect to contribute, every one perceives him to be guilty, though not of a
civil, yet of a moral crime. He is, at once, believed to be under the
prevailing influence of avarice, or some other too selfish passion, which has
stifled the voice of nature.

The claim of the child, arises not from any quid pro quo, any legal
consideration, advanced on his part, in which the duty, on the part of the
parent, originates. Did the duty originate in any such consideration, the duty
and the consideration would be commensurate. The child, who had contributed
least to the benefit of his parent, during minority, would have the least claim
upon the parent for advancement. Where there has been a criminal neglect, or
disobedience, on the part of the child, this is truly the case. When it has
happened through a natural imbecility, the misfortune, and not the crime of the
child, the obligation of the parent is rather inhanced, than diminished. This
is clearly a dictate of nature, and designed to maintain a degree of equality
among the members of the same family, by apportioning the provision to the
unavoidable exigences of each. These duties, consistently with the right of the
parent, with his authority, and the harmony of the family union, can be very
little, if at all, subjected to civil rules. They must be left to the law of
moral obligation.

I think the truth of these observations cannot be doubted. Hence it clearly
follows, that the children, resulting from the relations of nature, in their
connection, have a lien on the property of the parent; subjected nevertheless to
the full right of the parent. It as clearly follows that, when the right of the
parent ceases, by his death the right of the children takes f^ll effect, as
surviving members of the connection. The law, which confirms it to them, does
nothing more, than perform the last natural duty of the parent.

Where there is no immediate descendants, the same relations, different only in
degree, appear to extend to collaterals. In proportion to the distance, the
relations are less strongly marked, and the perception of right more faint. It
is not easily determined, at what precise point they wholly cease. It has
generally, in the best ordered states, been agreed to carry the right, as far,
as the relations can be traced. The relations, however remote, clearly carry a
right preferable to that of a total stranger.

It may be thought, that if the right of the children, as has been contended,
be founded in the laws of nature, those laws are immutable, and consequently
the right; that it will, therefore, abridge, or wholly supersede the parent's
right of disposal. It is true of the laws of nature, when considered
abstractly, that they are, immutable; but it is not true, in the application.
The laws of nature result from certain relations. These relations, remaining
under the same combinations and modifications, the result, consequently the
law, will be invariably the same. The relations are subject to different
arrangements. They may be enlarged, or diminished. They may partially or wholly
cease. In all these cases, the result, and consequently the law, as to its
application, will vary, precisely as the relations themselves.

The parent during his life, has a full right to direct the use and disposal of
his property. That he is under a natural obligation to provide for his
household, and to advance his children with his property, as his occasions
admit, and their circumstances require, no more affects the freedom of his
right, than any moral obligation affects the freedom of action. On the death of
the parent, his right, and the relation in which he stood, while living,
ceases. The relation of the children, as far as it respects the property, of
which no disposition had been made, still remains. Their right, which was only
a contingent right, and, indeed nothing more than a moral claim, is perfected
and realized.

It may likewise be thought, that if the right of the children be thus
established, it militates against the right of the parent to make any
testamentary dispositions of his property. It has been observed, in effect,
that the right of the children, during the life of the parent, is founded in
claims of a moral nature. Of their admission and extent, he is, by nature,
constituted the sole judge. There are other claims upon him and his property,
besides those of his children. His property is subjected, civilly, to all
claims of right, both of the public and of individuals, with whom be may be
connected. It is subjected to other claims of a moral nature, of which he is,
likewise, the sole judge. He may think it his duty to give some of his property
for public use, or for the encouragement of virtue, the reward of humanity, or
exemplary instances of filial piety. It is subject, during his life, to his
occasions, natural, civil, and moral; and a disposition, to take effect after
his death, is no more inconsistent with the right of the children, than a
transfer while he is living. In such dispositions, the parent may misjudge; he
may have done wrong; but it is, generally, an affair of too much delicacy, to
endure the decision of the civil law.

After the death of the parent, when his rights are finished, and the just
claims of others answered, the children have an equal claim, and equal right,
in the property of their common ancestor. If nature dictate any preference, it
is in favor of the younger, and not of the elder branches. I^ appears not
unreasonable, that, when any of the children have been left, in a state of he
pless infancy, the common property of the parent should assist in making that
provision for their support and education, which the parent, were he alive,
would consider, not as an advancement, but an indispensible duty of nature,

Thus from a careful examination of the right of descents, upon natural
principles, we find no intimation of the right of primogeniture, no preference
in successions, but those, which tend to an equal enjoyment of the goods of
fortune. We may repeat it, that the equal laws of nature, if rightly understood
and practiced in a government, tend to prevent, or correct every dangerous
excess. The more we examine these laws, the more will appear their coincidence
with the nicest moral feelings of the human heart, and the genuine principles
of equal laws and government.

SKETCH VI. OF THE RIGHTS OF PUNISHMENT AND TAXATION.
THE exercise of these rights, by government, the right of punishment, and the
right of taxation, are necessary to its support, and even to its very
existence. The exercise, however, would seem, on a cursory view, to be an
infringement of personal liberty, and to approach a violation of private right.
Accordingly, it has been held by some, that they originate in that necesity, by
which they have supposed men to be compelled, on entering into civil society,
to give up a part of their natural liberty. It is proposed in this Sketch, to
consider more particularly, the origin, mode of exercise, and limitation of
these rights.

SECTION I. Of the Right of Punishment.
THE right to punish individuals for crimes against society, is not an
arbitrary institution of civil policy, nor is it originally, and independently
inherent, in any particular organ of government. It is founded in the moral and
social nature of man, and is derived to government through that channel. We
have already seen, that man was not formed for individual independence, but for
society, for civil union in government. All the liberty of an individual, all
his right, which can affect the rights and liberties of others, is placed in an
accommodation, a mutual compromise with the rights and liberties of all, and
every member of the society. To facilitate this accommodation, and to render a
compromise of rights practicable, mutual, and safe, is the great object of all
civil institutions and laws.

If man be by nature a social being, it is an obvious conclusion, that it is
his duty to forbear to injure the society, of which he is a member; and that
the violation of this duty is a violation of the laws of his nature. It may
here, perhaps, be thought sufficient to say, that rights and duties are
reciprocal; every society must have a right corresponding with the duty of the
individual; if the individual violate his duty to the society, the society have
clearly a right to take satisfaction. But, as this subject is of great
importance in national jurisprudence, I shall be more particular in the
investigation, by attempting to analise the right, and trace it to its source
in the nature of man.

Deity, in the constitution of nature, has not done every thing for man. He has
established certain relations, from which result the laws, which ought to
govern, both moral and social actions. He has given man powers and faculties,
for discovering these relations, and the laws, which result from them. The mode
of giving these laws their full effect, is left to his sagacity, to the
exercise of his reasoning powers. This is not all. To enable him more steadily
to pursue them, and to give them a greater effect, he is furnished with a sense
of right and wrong, and a sense of merit and demerit, attending the observance
or non-observance; the moral sense, and the sense of accountability. These
senses, when rightly informed, extend their authority to every moral, every
social, and every civil action. Hence, on the perpetration of a crime, arise in
the mind of the perpetrator the feelings of guilt, and a consciousness of a
desert of punishment. These sentiments are common to men, both in a review of
their actions, and in passing judgment upon the actions of others. What might
at first seem to contradict that universal desire of happiness, which goes to
the nature of every individual, is, that guilt is, sometimes, attended with a
strong desire of punishment. This is what we, generally, call remorse. If
punishment be inflicted by no other hand, self punishment is well known to be
the gratification provided by nature, for the violent emotion of remorse. From
this view of the subject, the right of punishing the guilty, is clearly
perceived to be derived from the relations of men in society. It was not alone
from an extraordinary impression of the divine anger on the mind of Cain, after
the murder of his brother, but from a perception of these relations, and a
right resulting from them, that he is made to say, "Whosoever finds me shall slay
me."

The Marquis Beccaria has founded the right of punishment, on the same
principles. Let us (says he) consult the human heart; and there we shall find
the foundation of the sovereign's right to punish; for no advantage in civil
policy can be lasting, which is not founded in the indelible sentiments of the
heart of man. Essay on Crimes and Punishments. Chapter ii.


In cases of mere private injury, the right is perceived to belong to the party
injured. He has a right to demand reparation for the injury, and a caution
against the like injury in future. The mode of obtaining both is to be
regulated by a consideration of the present nature of social rights. Where the
right cannot be exercised, by the party injured, without danger to the social
rights of others, the laws of social nature dictate a submission to an
impartial tribunal: a provision, which can be made, and enforced, in the union
of civil society only. When a person is guilty of a violation of those social
rights, which more immediately affect the interest and happiness of the whole,
the right of demanding reparation and caution is perceived to belong to the
community. The perception is facilitated, by means of the social sense,
mentioned in a former sketch; the sense, by which each member perceives a kind
of individuality in the whole, comprehending himself.

In a state of any considerable degree of social and civil improvement, men
endure with reluctance the exercise of the right of punishment, by the party
injured. This happens, not because men are more unfit, in this state, for the
exercise; but because they have a nicer sense of right and wrong. Their social
feelings are extended and refined. The security and happiness of each
individual member, becomes the interest, as it affects the happiness of the
whole. They perceive, not only the inhumanity, to which the practice tends, but
the injustice of which it is, in almost every instance, productive. They
perceive, that the power of punishing can, in almost no case, be exercised by
the party injured, without a perpetual violation of other's rights, of the
obligations of morality, and the danger of a total annihilation of social
happiness. Hence it becomes, the right, interest, and duty of every civil
community, to punish by way of caution, all those injuries which disturb, or
tend to disturb their happiness, or to render it insecure. And it will extend
to whatever the common sentiment has connected with the public happiness. It is
evident then, that the appropriate right of government, to punish, by way of
caution, the crimes of its members, is not an arbitrary institution of civil
society, nor does it originate in necessity only; but in the sentiments of the
human heart, the existing relations of men in society, and has the full
sanction of the laws of nature.

The organ, by which the right of punishment shall be exercised in government,
is a consideration of propriety, safety, and convenience. A flight attention to
the subject, will discover it to be a branch of the right of legislation, or in
propriety ultimately connected with the duties of that branch. Without the
right of punishment for the violation of a law, the right of legislation would
be perfectly nugatory.

There is a threefold division of the right of punishment, or rather of the
exercise of the right, corresponding with the general division of the powers of
government. (...) 1. The decreeing of penalties, which shall be incurred by the
breach of any law. This involves a consideration of the importance of the law,
to the interests of the state, and corresponds with the right of legislation.
To that branch therefore, it will, with propriety, be entrusted. 2. The
application of the law to particular cases, for the purpose of determining
whether it has been violated, and who has incurred the penalty. This is
clearly, the proper business of the judiciary. 3. The execution of the sentence
upon the criminal, which falls to the province of the executive.

The right of punishing is, in practice, frequently limited, only by the will
of the legislature, and the decisions of the judiciary; but the laws of nature
have not left it arbitrary. They have assigned certain limits, beyond which the
right ceases, and the exercise of the power becomes a crime against society.
These limits are not, in every sense, permanent and invariable. It is
universally true, that it is limited by the end of preventing crimes, and
securing obedience to the laws. It is also true, that the penalties, which, in
one state of society and manners, are adequate to that end, may, in a different
state, be wholly inadequate.

Not only the state of manners, but the principles of the government affect the
severity of punishments. Where the support of the reigning powers, without any
regard to the good of the people, is the sole end of every measure of state,
fear, which is inculcated by the severity of punishments, is the only principle
of obedience. Such governments admit of limits, neither to crimes, nor to the
severity of punishments. No actions are considered to be criminal, because they
are injurious to the people, or even against the laws of nature; but because
they are conceived to be dangerous to the reigning power, and a contempt of its
authority. In proportion as governments have ascended to natural principles,
and made the happiness of the people the end of their institutions, crimes and
punishments have admitted of more definite limits. It has been perceived and
acknowleged, that, in a civil view, those actions only are criminal, which are
injurious to the community, or to individuals, whose rights and happiness the
community is bound to protect, and secure; that the prevention of crimes is the
sole end of punishments; and that all beyond this is the spirit of revenge, or
of wanton cruelty.

It is worthy of remark, that in the progress of society, no science has
received so little improvement as that of criminal jurisprudence. The world is
more indebted to the Marquis Beccaria, for his little treatise on Crimes and
Punishments, than to all other writers on the subject.
It is true, that many circumstances of outrageous violence, with which capital
and other punishments were inflicted, have, in some nations, been abolished;
but it may, with equal truth, be observed, that among those nations, who boast
the highest refinement, the greatest degree of improvement in their civil
policy, the number of capital punishments, has been increased out of all
proportion to the reform in point of cruelty. The British government, which in
civil improvements, and the humanity of its laws, has gone beyond most other
European nations, has proceeded with a degree of wantonness, in the enacting of
capital punishments. One hundred and sixty crimes, declared to be worthy of
immediate death, hardly complete the murderous catalogue.

Several causes have concurred to prevent any considerable improvement in the
criminal code. Men appear, often, to have entertained an idea of justice, as of
a physical power, or something which really exists; Beccari^, on Crimes and
Punishments. C. ii.
whereas, it is only the result of certain relations. Civil justice results
wholly from the relations of men in civil society. Beyond these it has no
relation, nor even mental existence. This notion has done infinite mischief in
the world. It has represented justice, as really offended, in proportion to the
crime committed, and inexorably demanding satisfaction by a certain,
determinate punishment to be inflicted on the offender; like the malevolent
deities of some nations, who are to be conciliated with human sacrifices only.
By considering a satisfaction to justice as the principal end of punishment,
and disregarding its utility to society, the only safe and certain criterion of
the real justice and propriety of any class of civil or social actions, it has
served to reconcile people, in other respects, of a refined sensibility, to an
excess of cruelty, in the enacting, and in the execution of laws.

A punishment annexed to a crime is, by the force of habitual association,
viewed in connection with the crime, and often serves as a measure for the
degree of its guilt, which arises only from its relation to society. When, from
any cause, the perpetration of a particular species of crimes has become
frequent, the minds of legislators are irritated against the perpet^^tors, and
against the crime. Determined to apply an effectual remedy, they are too prone,
without adverting to the caus^ (...) the evil, to enhance the penalty, which
soon becomes a new measure for the guilt of the crime.

It is, however, for the interest of humanity, an excellent disposition of
Providence, that in a state of any considerable degree of refinement,
sanguinary laws always defeat the end of their institution. If the penalty
annexe^ (...) the law, to a crime, rise above the demerit of the crime, in the
estimation of the people, whose sentiments are in this case the best criterion,
the law is rarely executed. Humanity, whose dictates are more readily obeyed,
than the requisitions of law, is interested in the escape, or acquital of the
criminal. When the severity of the punishment excites the pity of the people,
the effect of punishment is more than lost. While they pity the criminal, they
forget his crime, or diminish its guilt, and conceive an abhor^ence of the law.
If the criminal be detected, and condemned, he is viewed as unfortunate, rather
than guilty.

From an attention to the state of crime^ in different societies, we shall
find, that* in those governments, whose legislators have ^welled the list of
capital offenses, and by applying the same ultimate punishment to crimes of
very different dies, have confounded all degrees of guilt, the same crimes are
more frequently committed, than in those governments, where the laws are
enacted with more mildness, and different degrees of guilt distinguished by
different degrees of punishment. The punishment ought never to exceed, but
rather to fall short of the demerit of the crime in the sentiments of the
people. Where this is the case, humanity is engaged on the side of the laws,
and punishment is rendered as certain, as the perpetration of the crime. This
adds a mild, but effectual and irresistible energy to the execution of the
laws. It is universally true, that certainty of punishment has a much more
powerful effect, than severity, in the prevention of crimes. Indeed, the
resentment and contempt of mankind, which always pursue the perpetrators of a
crime, if not converted into compassion, by the severity of the law, constitute
a punishment of no inconsiderable efficacy.

I add, with entire satisfaction, that in no government, is a certain degree of
mildness more requisite, in none is it more effectual, to the prevention of
crimes, than in a democratic republic. An equible moderation in punishment,
while it exhibits the powers of government, in the amiable light of humanity,
cherishes and envigorates the only efficient principle in such republic, a
sentimental attachment to its institutions and laws.

SECTION II. Of the Right of Taxation.
THE Right of Taxation is, no more than the right of punishment, an arbitrary
institution of civil policy, or originally and independently inherent in any
particular organ of the government. Wherever it is placed, it is a betrusted
right. The right itself, like all legitimate, social, and civil rights, is
derived from the relations of men in society.

It is perceived, even by the most simple, that from the relations of men in
civil society, there results a duty upon them, not only to forbear to injure
the society, but also to contribute to its support, and prosperity. The social
sense, which has several times been mentioned, has no inconsiderable effect in
rendering the perception distinct, and in collecting and fixing the object of
this duty. The duty may be called, the duty of contribution on the one hand,
from which, on the other, results to the society the right of taxation. The
right of taxation is nothing more than a right to enforce the duty of
contribution, to which every member of the community is originally bound. The
duty and the right, wherever it resides, are reciprocal. The duty is the same
upon every individual member, as to the reality, not as to the quantity of the
contribution.

No civil duty, perhaps, can less be trusted to the voluntary conduct of
individuals. None more needs a provision of general rules, to secure equal
justice, both to individuals and to the community. The utility of the community
cannot be opposed to the utility of the individual members in general.
Nevertheless the latter, from its being more immediate, so far outweighs the
former, that they are often viewed in opposition. The duty, therefore, would
never be performed, unless there existed, somewhere, a right, with authority to
enforce it, as well as to apportion the quantity. The end of this duty is the
utility of the community; not indeed, in an absolute sense; but in a certain
relation, proportion and agreement with the utility of individuals.

The right of apportioning and enforcing this duty, which is the right of
taxation, is originally, in the community, considered as an aggregate body. The
organ, by which it shall be exercised, is, as in the case of punishment, a
consideration of propriety, convenience, and safety. The apportionment must be
made by general and equal rules, and the demand enforced by the sanctions of
law. It is, therefore, with propriety and convenience entrusted to the
legislative body. If such body be composed of a full and equal representation
of the several national, as well as particular interests, the betrustment is
safe. The power and right of taxation can be entrusted to no man, or body of
men, who are not amenable to the people for the exercise, and who do not
equally share the burdens, which they impose, without a moral certainty, of
oppression, the total subversion of liberty, and all security of private
property. Thus it comes out, that the great question about taxation and
representation, is a question about modes, rather than rights; a mere
consideration of safety to the rights of the people. It is indeed, a most
important consideration; but it does not reach the original right, founded in
the duty of contribution. The representation of any part in the national
legislature, is a proof of an intimate civil connection, which undoubtedly
subjects them to the duty of contribution; but if the people choose to entrust
the right of taxation, in any other mode, or to any other body, the exercise
may be equally legitimate.

It is not easy, perhaps, to ascertain with precision, what degree of social
union, among individuals, will incur the duty of contribution. It is, however,
clear, that one community can have no right to tax, personally, the members of
another community, where the citizens of both are not united ultimately, by an
internal, reciprocal, civil connection. States in league may, as far as the
league extends, incur, one to the other, the duty of contribution; but the duty
is demandable against the States collectively, not against particular members
Each state has a demand against the other, and the several states have a demand
against their citizens individually, to enable them to fulfill their
engagements. Between the several states, the right to enforce the duty resides
equally in every part, till, by mutual agreement, a body is formed for its
exercise. Till this has taken place, it remains, like that of independent
individuals, a voluntary duty; or to be enforced only by an appeal to the law
of nations -- the right of the sword.

So different are the interests, both general and particular, in different
states, that no universal rules can be prescribed, as to the particular mode of
taxation, which shall be equally applicable to all. It will ever be a
consideration of public convenience and private equity. The lawful interest of
no citizen, or class of citizens, can, without injustice, and a violation of
equal rights, be sacrificed to that of another, or even to that of the whole.
That mode ought to be adopted, which, as far as general rules can extend, will
operate agreeably to the principles of mutual compromise. A rule, very general,
indeed, which has been applied in ethics, may, with great propriety, be applied
in this case. Requisition shall be made of a man, according to that, which he
has, and not according to that, which he has not. Taxes, therefore ought not
to be apportioned upon persons, but upon things; upon property possessed or
used by individuals. Its valuation, however, ought not to be according to the
estimated value in market, but according to the ordinary revenue, which it may
afford.

It has been usual to apportion taxes upon a valuation of the property or thing
taxed. This will be just and equal, provided the valuation be made, not
according to the market rates, but according to the income, which it may
produce, with ordinary management. There are yet some exceptions, which will
occur in their place.

Protection has, by many, been held, to be the consideration, on the one side,
in which is founded the right of taxation, on the other. If it were so,
protection should serve as a measure for the apportionment of taxes to
individuals. But this is not the case. The duty of contribution, and
consequently the right of taxation, arises from the whole relations, in which
men stand in society. The same thing is true of every civil right and duty. The
general relations are connected, and form a certain internal relation among
themselves. If we take away one relation, it deranges the connection, varies
the mutual relations, and, of course, the result. In those governments, in
which the rights of the sovereign are supposed to be original, and independent
of the rights of the people, it is in perfect consistency with the principles
of the government, to derive the sovereign's right of taxation from the
protection afforded to the subject, as a consideration. Where, as in democratic
republics, those who exercise the sovereign power, are only constituted organs,
and exercise only the power of the people associated in civil government, the
consideration between the sovereign and the people does not exist. The
sovereign power, the whole right, is the power and the right of the people,
thus associated, not individually, but collectively.

It is very true, that the laws of nature, from which result all legitimate
civil rights and duties, are always calculated to attain some useful end; but
the useful end to be attained, is the criterion, by which to judge of their
authenticity, rather, than the consideration, or foundation of the duty
imposed; the final, not the efficient cause. The right of the citizen to civil
protection, is independent of any such consideration; and any apportionment of
taxes, upon that principle, would be grossly unequal, and oppressive. It would
make the poor and the weak the greatest debtors to the state, for contributors
they could not be. It would, at once, be destructive of itself, by turning
protection into oppression.

The consideration of abstract relations, and abstract rights, fabrications of
the mind only, which may, or may not, justly comprehend the relations and
rights of nature, and are, perhaps, never precisely the same, in the conception
of any two individuals, cannot furnish sufficient data for the apportionment of
takes. It is necessary to find something more fixed and certain, and to take
real quantities, as well in the data as in the product.

The only plausible theory, and which is capable of being reduced to practice,
by the application of real quantities, is, that every individual in any
community shall contribute to its support, in proportion to his enjoyments, as
a member of that community. In this, however, no regard is to be had to mental,
but to apparent and sensible enjoyments. Upon this principle the possession,
and the use of property become the data for apportioning taxes to individuals.
I have added the use, which will comprehend the consumption, at least beyond
what is common and necessary to every class; because some will place the
enjoyment in the use of consumption, rather than of profit in the possession.
They may choose, while others hoard or use for profit, to spend their
acquisitions in the gratification of their passions and appetites.

Taxes ought to be assessed according to a general valuation. This mode will be
subject ^o some inequalities; but the inequalities will not be greater, than
what will always, happen in particular assessments. If taxes should happen to
fall more equally in the latter mode, yet they have, in the former, great
advantages, from being known and certain; a very important consideration in the
levying of taxes. It is, perhaps, a consideration of equal weight, that men
are, generally, less dissatisfied with the inequalities of fortune, than those,
which are imposed upon them by the ignorance, prejudice, or caprice of their
fellow citizens. If, from the nature and situation of any species of property,
which is a subject of taxation, great inequalities will unavoidably intervene,
such property should be taxed with a degree of moderation proportioned to the
inequality. It is a great alleviation, in such cases, that none are
oppressively overburthened, though some may pay less than their just proportion.

Taxes ought not only to be equal, but, as far as the reasonable exigencies of
the state require, and general rules can extend, to be apportioned to the
visible means of the citizens, both collectively and individually. This,
however, must be understood with some limitation. They ought not to be
apportioned upon the means of living, but upon the means of payment, or what,
on an ordinary calculation, ought to be the means of payment. This object can
be attained only by an extensive knowledge of the different interests,
employments, modes, and necessary expense of living, with the different classes
of citizens. With such knowledge the legislators may, in the general mode of
valuation, and with a particular attention to the subjects of taxation, in a
great measure, if not altogether, exempt from the burden of taxes, the
necessary means of subsistence to the p^orer class of citizens, who, though
they may contribute nothing, directly, to the support of government, are far
from being the least useful class in the state.

The exigences of the state must limit the aggregate sum to be demanded in
taxes. But the demand ought never, for any continuance, to equal the sum of
private revenues; much less ought it to be suffered to diminish the capital
stock. Were government, by thus anticipating the revenue of its citizens, to
deprive them of every comfortable prospect in a provision for the future, it
would take away all incitement to enterprise, and even the spirit of private
industry and economy. If in addition to this, the enormity of the demand,
should constantly diminish the capital stock, nothing would be presented to
view, but the gloomy prospect of inevitable poverty and distress; a situation
in which a government cannot long subsist, without the most violent commotions.
The same observations will apply to those burthen^, which, I through the
unequal mode of apportionment, fall upon particular classes only.

The mode of apportionment, ought not to be directed by any single class of
citizens, but by the interest of the whole, which consists in a certain ratio
of the particular interests. If in the political consideration of taxes, the
interest of the state, by which is generally meant, nothing more, than the
interest of the majority, comes in competition with the interest of any class
of the citizens, in their lawful pursuits, their interest ought not to be
wholly sacrifised to that of the state, much less to that of another class.
Every affair of this nature should be conducted upon the principles of a
compromise of interests. In adjusting the compromise, however, the magnitude of
the interests in competition is not to be adopted as the only rule of
preference: Such rule would frequently prove a total sacrifice of the minor
interest. Where it is demanded of particular persons or classes that they give
up their interest for public service, they are as fully, as in causes which
arise in cases between individuals only, entitled to a compensation for all
that, which exceeds their particular proportion. Such interferences will,
however, rarely happen, unless taxation is applied to other purposes, than
those merely of raising a public revenue.

In modern times taxes, besides their financical purposes, have been employed
as a principal engine of state, for directing the industry of the citizens into
those particular channels of arts, manufactures, or commerce, which are deemed
to be most for the present interest of the community. A British writer
observes, that taxes may be so contrived, as to rival bounties, in promoting
industry, manufactures, and commerce. Kaims's Sketches, B. II. Sk. viii. Sec. 1.
That they can have the effect to promote industry in general, is not very
obvious. They may certainly be so contrived, as to promote it in particular
channels; but perhaps, this is generally, if not always, done, by diverting it
from others.

The application of taxes, to these purposes may, within certain limits, be
highly beneficial to a community. Nations do not always make equal progress in
those arts, which furnish the necessaries, conveniences, and elegancies of
life. Sometimes permanent, but commonly accidental, and temporary causes have
directed their industry into different channels. Habits of life, de^terity in
old occupations, unskilfulness and the risk of failure in those, which are new,
frequently prevent or delay the introducton of the most useful arts. Where this
is the case, it may be a happy contrivance to exempt the home productions of a
manufacture from taxes, and to impose a duty upon foreign productions of the
same kind. It may enable the home manufacturer, by the advanced price of his
goods, to indemnify himself, in a good measure, for the risk and expense of a
new undertaking. But it is easily perceived, that in a regulation of this kind,
whatever the manufacturer gains by the advanced price of his goods, is really a
tax upon the consumer; and as it has a tendency to exclude competitors, it is
necessary to proceed with caution, lest it degenerate into a system of
monopoly, one of the greatest evils in civil policy. there is, likewise, danger
lest those, who are already engaged in lawful pursuits, and entitled to equal
right, though, perhaps, not to equal favor, should, by an over burden, be too
much deprived of their reasonable gains, and, perhaps, be too hastily forced
into different pursuits, without the same prospect of an indemnification for
their risk and experience. I believe, it not unfrequently happens, that from a
zeal for new improvement, and a too sanguine expectation of their public
utility, old employments are burdened out of proportion to any advantage, which
may be derived from the new.

The limits of these sketches do not permit me to enter into a detail upon this
subject. My object is only general principles. Those who wish to see the
justice and policy of different kinds of taxes fully investigated, will find an
excellent treatise upon this subject in Dr. Smith's enquiry into the nature and
causes of the wealth of nations.

SKETCH VII. OF THE MORAL OBLIGATION OF CIVIL LAWS.
SECTION I. Judge Blackstone's opinion examined. -- Civil Laws are binding on
Conscience, when they accord with the principles of a Free Government, and the
present state of Social Improvements.
THE learned Judge Blackstone, in his Commentaries says, It has been holden,
and very justly, by the principal of our ethical writers, that human laws are
binding on men's consciences. But afterward he says, True as this principle
is, it must be understood with some restrictions. It holds, I apprehend, as to
rights: and that when the law has determined the field to belong to Titius, it
is matter of conscience no longer to withhold or invade. So also, in regard to
natural duties, and such offenses, as are maloe in se. Wrong in themselves.
Here we are bound in conscience, because we are bound by superior laws, before
those human laws were in being, to perform the one, and to abstain from the
other. But in regard to those laws, which enjoin only positive duties, and
forbid only such things, which are not mala in se, but mala prohibita (...)
prohibited.
merely, annexing a penalty to the noncompliance, here I apprehend conscience
is no farther concerned, than by directing a submission to the penalty, in case
of our breach of those laws. For otherwise the multitude of penal laws in a
state, would not only be looked upon as impolitic, but would also be a very
wicked thing, if every breach of such laws were made a snare for men's
consciences. But in these cases, the alternative is offered to every man,
either to do this, or submit to the penalty, and his conscience is safe, which
ever side of the alternative he sees fit to take.

Judge Blackstone seems to have been drawn into this conclusion from the state
of criminal law in Great Britain. It was not his design to improve the laws of
England; but to facilitate the study; not to write a criticism, or examine
their merits, but to give the elements of a system, which was already formed.
Had his subject led him to a close attention to the nature of laws, as ^ounded
in the principles of society, in a free government, and the only end, which can
be admitted in penal laws, he would probably have found reason for a different
opinion; especially, as far as respects the performance of those positive
duties, which the general good of a well constituted society, in civil
government, requires.

We have before seen, that man was formed for a state of civil government, and
furnished with a disposition and principles which both allure and impel him to
that state. Government may be originally formed upon different models; and
each, in a course of improvement, may receive many and great alterations. There
are, however, principles common to all, arising from their general nature. From
a variety of circumstances, situation of country, and different degrees of
improvement, in arts, sciences, and manners, they may have particular
principles arising from the particular nature of each.

When any individual acts in conformity to the laws of his nature, as
constituted by the author of his being, taking in all connexions and
dependencies, for every thing is relative, nothing stands alone, the actions of
that individual are right and fit; so far as he deviates from those laws, they
are wrong, or vicious. From the nature of man, it is impossible, that a society
should, like an individual direct its actions by any common united volition. It
must be done by rules or laws, by which the actions of every individual, as
they concern the society at large, are to be directed. The same criterion holds
here, as in the case of an individual. Those actions are right in any society,
constituted upon natural principles, which are conformable to the principles
and nature of that society. The actions of a society, which we call civil or
political actions, are made up of the actions of individual members. It
therefore clearly follows, that those are good laws, which require such actions
of individuals as, taken together in all their connexions, are conformable to
the principles and nature of the society; and those are bad laws, which deviate
from this end. The foregoing observations may be extended as well to the
fundamental laws or laws of the constitution, as to the municipal laws of the
state. Both ought to be equally adapted to the state of society, and of social
improvements.
Let it be observed here, that under action I comprehend both performance and
forbearance.

Judge Blackstone, in another passage, defines municipal law to be, "a rule of
civil conduct, commanding what is right, and prohibiting what is wrong."
Commentaries, vol. i. p. 44. "Municipal law is defined to be a rule of civil
conduct, prescribed by the supreme power in the state, commanding what is
right, and prohibiting what is wrong."
If laws command or prohibit that, which is absolutely indifferent to the
state, they deviate from the true spirit and principles of legislation in a
free government. They are arbitrary. They agree not with the definition, which
is a good one, of "commanding what is right, and prohibiting what is wrong." If
they go farther, and command the violation, or forbid the performance of any
moral duty, they become tyrannically unjust. In the former instance, instead of
feeling an obligation, we feel ourselves insulted; in the latter we are filled
with the utmost abhorrence of the laws. When laws coincide with the principles
above laid down, when they fully agree with the above definition, they are
strictly binding on the consciences of men. They ought not to allow themselves
an alternative.

The objection, that in this light the multiplicity of penal laws would become
a snare for men's consciences, does not appear to me to be well founded. It
lies with equal weight against the moral obligation to the greater part of
social duties. Previous to a state of society, if man may be supposed ever to
have existed in such state, the duties of the solitary individual must have
been very few and simple. In the first stages of society, in a simple state of
property, and a state of manners no less simple, duties must be confined within
very narrow limits. Still they would greatly exceed those of the solitary
individual. In the progress of society, the complex state of property, great
improvements, numerous connections, and extensive intercourse, introduce a
great variety of social duties. These are left to be discovered, as the result
of situation, circumstances, and relations; nor is the^ discovery and
performance thought to be a task too difficult. In matters which become the
subject of civil laws, the case is easier. Many actions are considered as evil,
only when they are forbidden. Hence the duty of individuals arises on the
requisition of the law, and is explained in the law itself. We are not,
however, to suppose, that civil laws constitute the ultimate fitness or
morality of actions, in a strict sense; but as an individual may allow others
to reap advantage from the use of his property, so government may allow the
individual members to do those things for their private advantage, which it is
fitting should be the right of the public. In the former case, if the
individual prohibit to others the farther use of his property, it is their duty
to forbear; to persist in the use, will become a private injury. In the latter,
if government prohibit the doing of those things for private advantage, which,
though before allowable, by tacit consent, yet come within the claim and right
of the public, the actions, for prohibited become wrong; morally so. It is to
be observed here, that we are upon general rules or laws, and that the right of
government is the right of the whole, not of any particular class, as distinct
from the people.

To erect crimes upon actions wholly indifferent to society; to gratify the
pride and caprice of one class of citizens, by allowing them what is forbidden
to others; to inflict penalties to support a system of monopoly, or for fiscal
purposes rather, then the purpose of preventing crimes, is to confound every
idea of right and wrong in a criminal code. All this is to be found in a great
variety of instances, in the laws of England. We need to instance only in the
forest laws, the laws for the preservation of the game, and the penalties for
not burying in woolen. In such cases, unable to find any moral restraint, men
learn to make a distinction, between what is morally, and what is only
politically wrong Amid a great variety of laws, some arbitrary and some not,
their minds are wearied with discriminations. They will readily adopt the
distinction made above, and refer the violation of the primary duties in
government, to the class of mala in se; the others to the class of mata
prohibita. Probably, however, no two persons in any government would agree in
classing.

Few actions, considered simply, are evil in themselves. They are relatively
good or bad. They take their qualities from situation and circumstances.
Reverence to the Supreme Being is, unchangeably, a duty. Such duties, however
important, are few in number. Most actions of men are of the former kind.
Murder for instance is one of the most heinous crimes in society. Yet to kill a
man is not always wrong. To kill one, who by violence and wrong attempts my
life, is, when the only probable means of saving it, in fact justifiable. We
conceive an officer to do his duty, when he executes a criminal condemned to
death, by the sentence of the laws. Should a private person, without authority,
kill a criminal, though under a legal and just sentence of death, be would, by
common consent, as well as by the laws of the land, be deemed guilty of murder.
In every country, in the early stages of society, when any person is murdered,
it is held to be the duty of the next of kin to avenge the blood of the st^in,
to put the manslayer to death. This, in the ruder state of men in society, is
right. It is, in such state, the only known, or practicable made of punishment,
or mean of restraint. In the progress of social improvement, this mode of
punishment is accompanied with evils, which tend to sap the very foundation of
society, and dissolve every bond of general union. The sole right therefore, of
judging and punishing offenders, for the prevention of crimes, is at length
entrusted with government. I^ then becomes a crime in the kindred, who had been
called the avengers of blood, to attempt such punishment, by their own
authority. These are instances, in which, not only the political, if I may use
the expression, but the moral quality of the action is altered, and even
reversed, by a change of social and political circumstances. If those only are
to be esteemed natural duties, which arise antecedently to society, and
idependently of any relation to it, and their violation offenses mala in se;
they will be found, not only few in number, but the greater part will be found
to be unnoticed by municipal laws, as being sufficiently guarded by the moral
sense and the common principles of humanity. The principal of these are the
duties of religion and self-preservation; and though men are to be protected
and secured in the observance of these duties, the observance cannot be
enforced by human laws.

The laws of nature are not thus limited. When applied to man, the laws of
nature are the laws of social nature. As, I have before shown, man is formed
for a state of society and civil government. He is furnished with appetites,
passions, and faculties, which in no other state have either gratification or
use. In society, in civil society only, can man act agreeably to the laws of
his nature. It is the state pointed out in his formation; the state, to which
most of his passions, appetites, faculties, and powers are directed. It is, in
truth, his ultimate state of nature. The more perfect this state is, the more
it harmonizes with the whole state of man; or rather, the more general
operation it gives to the laws of his nature.

If society and civil government be founded in natural principles, the laws,
which naturally and certainly result from such state, are laws of nature. There
are certain principles, and relations, which are common to all societies, and
governments, in the earliest and rudest state, and continue unchanged, through
every successive degree of improvement. From these principles and relations
result laws and duties, which, with one consent, are denomominated, by way of
eminence, laws of nature and natural duties. This eminence they have derived
from their permanency and universality. In the progress of society, in the
natural course of improvement, new and different connexions are formed; new
principles and new relations arise. Hence result new laws, and a different
class of duties. These laws and these duties will vary, or rather, they will
exist in one society, and not in another, according to the various degrees of
improvement in each. Still if they result from principles, relations, and
connexions, which arise in a natural course of improvement, they are, with the
former, equally laws of nature, and natural duties. They both, in fact, result
from a state of society, the natural state of man. Human laws, I here
comprehend, as well the laws of the constitution, as civil or municipal laws.
founded in these principles, as they arise in society will have the force of
moral obligation. Arbitrary laws; laws, which violate the principles of the
society, for which they were made, will be obeyed with reluctance. Obedience,
in such cases, will, sometimes, be considered as a matter of prudence, never as
a matter of conscience.

Men would be in a deplorable condition, if the moral sense enforced obedience,
alike, to every act of legislation. The worst laws, when once enacted, would be
received with a degree of veneration. The facility of execution would supersede
the necessity of repeated examination, and frequent recurrence to the
principles of the government, and the rights, interest, and sentiments of the
people, without which the best intentions of a legislature, can afford no
security against the danger of tyrannical laws.

SECTION II. Different Modes, in which Obligation is sometimes discovered --
have concurred to introduce a Distinction between moral and civil Obligation.
IT is not, perhaps, difficult to account for the different views, which have
been entertained of civil and moral obligation. The nature and principles of a
government may be such as to confound many moral and natural relations. In the
best constituted governments, men may be led to conceive a difference between
moral and civil obligation, from the different modes, which they, sometimes,
necessarily take to attain the knowledge of public and private duties. The mode
of discovery is frequently different; but the efficient cause of obligation,
is, in both, the same.

In all cases, the efficient cause of moral obligation arises from the
relations, general and particular, in which man is placed; the sense, by which
he discerns these relations, and a perception of the duty thence resulting.

The utility of the action to be performed, is not the efficient, but the small
cause, the end, for which the duty is imposed. These are not set at variance,
but in perfect harmony. Hence it is, that the general tendency of any class of
actions becomes a safe criterion to decide, whether the performance or
forbearance be a duty.

The approbation, which a person feels, of his own conduct, arises from a
direct perception of right in his actions, or, that they coincide with his
duty. As a social being, he finds the pleasure enhanced, from a perception of
their utility to society. The utility, which arises to society from his
actions, becomes a practical proof of the justness of his moral perceptions,
and a farther confirmation of his duty. In the common actions of life, the duty
is discovered by a direct perception. This is not always the case, in the more
general and extensive concerns of social and civil life. The situation is too
intricate, the relations too numerous to be at once discovered and comprehended
by a direct perception. This often happens in the enacting of laws,
particularly in those situations, which occur, in the more active and
complicated scenes of civil society. The complicated and various, existing
relations, the result of which ought to point out the duty to be imposed, or
the class of actions to be required, are not to be discovered and arranged with
ease or certainty, by any direct contemplation. It therefore becomes the
principal business of the legislator, to resort to consequences, to examine the
probable operation of the law proposed, the utility of the action to be
required, as the only safe criterion, where the result of the existing
relations is not obvious to a direct perception. If he can discover the actions
intended to be required, to be useful in their general tendency, in a civil,
social, and moral view, he may rest assured, that they will partake of the
nature of original, moral obligation; for moral obligation, and final, social,
and civil utility, ever coincide. The mind, however, frequently occupied with
considerations of utility, is apt to rest satisfied, without seeking any
farther grounds of obligation. This has doubtless concurred with other causes,
to introduce the distinction attempted by our learned author.

SECTION III. That Punishments will have little Effect in the Prevention of
Crimes, unless the Laws are so calculated, that Civil and Moral Obligation
coincide.
THE sole end of punishment is, or certainly ought to be, the prevention of
crimes. Under crimes, I comprehend, not only the doing of those things, which
are directly detrimental, but the omission of those, which are necessary for
the support and happiness of the community. For if man be a social being, it
clearly follows, that he is bound, not only to forbear injuries to the society,
but to contribute an ^qual share to its support and happiness. It is not an
obligation, arising from necessity merely. It is an original indispensible duty.

We have seen, that Deity has, by the strongest and most intimate relation, the
relation of cause and effect, connected happiness with the virtuous actions of
moral agents, misery with their vices. These are the rewards and punishments,
in the government of Providence. To this system, as we have seen, man, by the
original constitution of his nature, is admirably adapted. He is furnished with
a moral sense, by which he perceives the right and the wrong of his actions. He
is also furnished with an appetite for the approbation of others. He has,
consequently, a dread of their censure. Thus he finds himself accountable for
his actions. When he perceives them to be right, he is intuitively conscious,
that he is deserving of approbation, when wrong, of censure, or punishment. In
the same manner he judges of the actions of others.

To this constitution of nature, all civil laws, and political institutions
ought to be adapted. This alone can produce and support a coincidence between
civil and moral obligation. Upon no other principles will punishments be
perceived to be just and right. Upon no other principles can they have a
salutary effect on the dispositions, life, and manners of men.

If, in a government, the laws constitute crimes of actions indifferent to the
good of society, or require, that, which, in general, is detrimental, fear can
be the only motive for the observance. In the case of a non-observance, there
may be an apprehension of punishment, but there will be no consciousness of
desert. The suffering delinquent will consider himself, not as guilty, but
unfortunate. Others will consider him in the same light. They will be disposed
rather to pity his misfortune than to censure his conduct, unless it be for a
degree of impudence. In such case, punishment tends not to a general or
particular prevention of crimes, by a sentimental reformation, the only end,
which can justify punishments inflicted by human laws. The direct tendency of
such arbitrary laws is to introduce sophistical evasions, and to confound every
idea of social duty.

The opinion that such arbitrary laws, for they certainly merit no better
appellation, are admissible in government, affords a pretext, for considering
all laws in the same point of view, and referring all social obligation to
authority, not to right. The pernicious consequences are obvious.

It is true that from the weakness of legislators, from their ignorance, and
even from their knowledge, which may have thrown mankind at a distance, laws
will, sometimes, be adopted, which are not founded in the principles of the
society, for which they are made. But such are not the laws contemplated in the
passage cited from Judge Blackstone He supposes no laws to be directly binding
on the consciences of men, but such as are founded in the permanent, universal
principles above mentioned; that the laws founded in principles, which arise
from a meliorated state of society, have not, generally, this obligatory force.

SECTION IV. Of Principles of government as they affect the moral obligation of
laws. -- Their difference in this respect. -- The British Government. -- The
Government of the United States.
FROM the different nature or constitution of governments, their principles and
the spirit of their laws will be different. Fear, supported by the terror of
punishment, or a superstitious veneration for the reigning family, or both, are
the principles, that is, the great object of the laws, and the sole motive of
obedience, in a despotic government. Monarchy does not lose sight of the
principle of fear, but blends with it, chiefly in regard to the order of
nobility, the principle of honor, as it is there understood, a sentiment merely
personal, and devoted to all the caprices of opinion. The principle of an
aristocracy, as it relates to the subject, differs little from despotism. A
republic, or rather a democratic republic has for its principle, that is, the
end of its institution, and the motive of observance, a rational and
sentimental attachment of the people to the community, its laws, and
government. A mixed government partakes of all the principles, each of which
predominates, in proportion to the prevalence of one or other of its
constituent parts.

Where fear is the governing motive of every social action, all happiness in
social intercourse, all social improvements, are not neglected only, but are
opposed by the genius of the government. Blended with fear, however, honor,
that principle of all the most capricious, sometimes irradiates, but more
frequently obscures the social horizon. Neither of them have any principal
regard to the happiness of the citizens, or to the interests of morality.

The principle of a democratic republic, a sentimental attachment to the
community, its institution and laws, needs not, neither can it endure, the
intervention of the other two principles; principles which regard the whole
society, as constituted to gratify the passions and appetites of one, or a few
individuals. Such a mixture of heterogeneous principles in a government must,
of necessity, have a very general effect upon its legislation, upon the
interpretation, and execution of its laws. It will unavoidably dictate many
acts and rules of civil conduct, which can, in no view, claim the sanction of
the moral sense. Such is the government of Great Britain.

The spirit of laws is directed by the effective principle; the principle, by
the constitution, or nature of the government. Perhaps, the laws of Great
Britain are, in general, the best, which can consist with the heterogeneous
principles of that government If this be true, Judge Blackstone's distinction
between those laws, which are morally, and those which are only politically
binding, is so far as it applies to those laws, just and necessary. Still it is
a severe, though an undesigned stroke at the principles of that government.

Can there be a more sure, a more safe criterion for deciding the goodness of
any government, than the tendency of its principles in legislation? That
government, that constitution of society, the principles of which dictate those
laws, and those only, which are adapted to the present state of men and
manners, and tend to social improvement, which are influenced by a sense of
moral obligation, and sanctioned by the laws of nature not of savage solitary
nature, but of social nature in its improved and improvable state, is
uncontrovertibly good So far as it deviates, it is clearly faulty Upon a candid
examination, upon a fair comparison, it will be found, that a democratic
republic is alone capable of this preeminence of principle.

It is true, that in any government, circumstances foreign to its principles,
may, and in this state of imperfection, frequently will, concur to the adoption
of bad laws. But if the constitution and principles be good, such laws will not
have a long continuance.

The governments of the several American states, as well as that of the Union,
are of the democratic republican kind. We ought to know their principles, to
study well their tendency, and to be able both in theory and practice to
exclude all foreign principles.

Judge Blackstone was a British subject, highly in favor with the government.
He was enamoured with its principles. He (...) blazoned them with all his
rhetoric, and not the least those, which are the most faulty. Probably to
these, not withstanding his great abilities, he was chiefly indebted for his
preeminence. Unhappily, his Commentaries are the only treatise of law, to which
the law students, in these states, have access. In every section of the
criminal code, and no less, in every question of a civil nature, where the
prerogative of the Crown, or the privilege of the Peers intervene, the
principles of the British government have given a cast to his reasonings. I
wish not to detract from the merit of the author, as a British subject; a
writer who has, in a masterly manner, delineated the laws and jurisprudence of
a foreign nation, under a government very different from our own.

There are many things in his Commentaries, which accord with the principles of
the American governments, and which are founded in the universal principles of
jurisprudence. These, however, will be found to be derived from the democratic
part of the British constitution. The student should carefully learn to
distinguish those principles, which are peculiar to that government, or
governments of a similar constitution; to distinguish the reasonings, which are
accommodated to those principles, or solely dictated by them He ought to know,
that they are not universal: that in a democratic republic, they are wholly in
admissible. This is not enough. He should b^ led through a system of laws
applicable to our governments, and a train of reasoning congenial to their
principles. Such a system we yet want. Surely genius is not wanting in America.
Can none be found equal to the arduous, the important task? Perhaps, we are not
yet fully ripe for the undertaking. Years may be necessary for its completion.
But he who shall only prepare the rudiments, will deserve highly of his country.

SKETCH VIII. OF THE GOVERNMENT OF THE UNITED STATES OF AMERICA.
SECTION I. Political situation of the States, previous to the establishment of
the present Federal Government.
THE government of the United States of America exhibits a new scene in the
political history of the world; a number of integral republics, each claiming
and exercising all the powers of internal sovereignty, within the limits of
their respective jurisdictions, formed into one general government, with powers
of legislation for all national purposes, and the power of executing all their
laws, within the several states, on the individual citizens, and that
independently of the local authority. The experiment was new, and the success
has, hitherto, exceeded the most sanguine expectation of its advocates. A
situation so complicated, so different from that of simple governments, which
have been the subject of these sketches, will have an effect, if not upon the
laws of nature, from which the general principles are ultimately derived, yet
to give a different modification to those principles, owing to the different
combinations and relative circumstances of the constituent parts; and will have
an influence on its organization, and the execution of its laws.

To examine these principles, and the several excellences and defects to be
found in them, and the national government, to which they have given rise, is a
subject of importance to every citizen of the Union. The novelty of the
subject, in which the example of other nations furnish little or no light of
experience, and in which sufficient time has not yet been allowed for a full
maturity of observation on the effects of this system in operation, renders it
a task of difficulty, and of dubious success. I do not aspire to a perfect
system, to a full investigation of the subject. Mine is a humbler task. I aim
only at sketches.

The several American States, while colonies, or provinces of the British
empire, had, in general, no direct connection, or governmental dependence on
each other. They were, though situated in the same vicinity, and professing
allegiance to the same common sovereign, connected only through the government
of Great Britain, the common head. There existed a similarity of manners, which
might well be called national. There were, indeed, provincial differences; not
greater, however, than are to be found in the island of Great Britain, or even
in England alone. As Americans, they had little national sentiment. It was by
different channels centred in Great Britain. Any collected, permanent, national
sentiment was opposed by their foreign connection. It was the policy of the
British government to foment divisions in the colonies, to a certain degree,
and to cherish their local prejudices. The similarity of their circumstances,
however, in the difficulties of making settlements in a wild, uncultivated
country, at a great remove from any part of the civilized world, produced some
degree of direct attachment. This was increased by the necessity of defense
against a common enemy. Bloody wars waged against them by the savages, who were
instigated and assisted by the French, the ancient enemies of the English,
suggested the expediency of common counsels, and united excitions.
Consultations were held, by Delegates from the several provinces; measures for
the common defense were devised, and afterward executed, in pursuance of their
mutual counsels. This was the germ of that general u^ of (...) and sentiments,
which produced the American revolution.

It for a time acquired its utmost force from the oppressive measures of the
British government, which equally affected the liberties of all the colonies,
now the United States of America. The first inhabitants had brought with them
all the democratic principles of the British government and had communicated
them, nearly free and unmixed, to their descendants. Their love of liberty, and
a knowledge of their rights, was not a little increased, both by an equal
enjoyment of rights and property under mild and equitable laws, mostly formed
by themselves, and by the disputes, to which extraordinary claims of power, on
the part of Great Britain, had given occasion. The principles of Monarchy and
Aristocracy, had, however, prevailed, more, or less, in almost all the colonial
governments. They were, in form, epitomes, of the British government. In each,
there was a Governor, representing the King; a Council, representing the House
of Lords; and an Assembly, composed of the Representatives of the People, the
Commons of America. In most of the colonies, the Governor and Council were mere
creatures of the Crown. They were wholly dependent on the King. He appointed
and removed them, as well as the Judges, at pleasure. This created a powerful
aristocratical influence, altogether hostile to the liberties and interests of
the people. Happily, the plan of establishing a hereditary Nobility in America,
was never adopted. Had such an establishment been made, at an early day, it
would, by securing a permanent interest in the principles of the British
government, and by holding out the tempting bait of honors to the more wealthy
and influential characters, have firmly, perhaps durably, riveted the shackles
of slavery on the Americans.

When the measures, which gave rise to the American revolution, were adopted by
the government of Britain, the body of the people had not been corrupted by
these principles. The sentiments of attachment, which originated in their
descent from a common stock, and was cherished by a similarity of circumstances
and adventures, had been strengthened by their common counsels, and common
exertions, in a long and bloody war. These common exertions had given them an
opinion of their united importance. A more general acquaintance had been
introduced, and a reciprocation of counsels and good offices, tended to soften
and remove those local prejudices, which had intervened, and which had been
artfully fomented, by the jealous temper of the mother government. A similarity
of situation, and a similarity of danger, from the same quarter, united their
interests and sentiments, and suggested the idea of again uniting their
counsels, to obtain redress. This produced the first Congress. A number of
delegates from the several colonies assembled for mutual council, on the common
situation, in which they were placed, by the oppressive measures of the British
government, and laid the foundation of the American republic.

A second Congress was met, when Great Britain commenced her military
operations against what she termed her rebellious colonies. From that time, a
Congress directed the affairs of America. The fourth of July, 1776, the
thirteen colonies were, with their general consent, declared by Congress, Free
and independent States. The several states, now independent, adopted or
continued republican forms of government, and entered into articles of
confederation for their mutual defense, and the direction of national measures.
The national government which was to be in a Congress of delegates from the
several states, had little more than the power of a diplomatic body. They were
invested with neither the power, nor the means of carrying their ordinances
into execution. The states governments retained the only efficient power within
their several jurisdictions. Common danger, pressing from every quarter, for a
time, united their councils, and supplied a degree of energy to their measures,
which carried them triumphantly through the war, and secured their
independence; but the principle of this energy was wholly foreign to the
government. No ^ooner was the war ended, than the total inefficiency of the
federal government was discovered. An enormous debt had been contracted, and
public credit was in the lowest and most humiliating state of depreciation.
Congress found themselves, in effect, possessed of neither legislative nor
executive powers. Their ordinances were disregarded. Many states neglected or
refused to furnish their quotas of the national expenditures, the price of
their liberty and independence. In some states, the treaties made with foreign
nations, particularly with Great Britain, were disregarded, or openly violated.
The authority of Congress was wholly lost. The states had, in effect, become so
many independent nations. There was no more a national sentiment, or the
pursuit of a national interest. Ancient prejudices, which had subsided, during
the struggle for liberty, were rapidly reviving. Each state pursuing its local
and separate interests, seemed to bid defiance to any national union. The
effect of this situation began to be apparent in the manners of the people, and
in the administration of the states governments. They were verging toward the
situation of small, independent tribes in the same vicinity. This situation
visibly contracted the views of the people, and formed them to a spirit of
faction. The states governments were mostly incapable of pursuing any energetic
system of administration. The whole country was clearly in a state of civil and
political retrogradation.

The effect on the minds of the people was no less moral than political. A want
of public credit, and its concomitant evil, a depreciating paper currency, had
nearly ruined their morals, their industry, and their commerce, as well as
private credit. Many other causes, not necessary here to enumerate, concurred
to heighten the evil. Dangerous insurrections actually existed in some states,
and others trembled in expectation of the like event. Many began to suppose
that the liberty, for which they had risked so much blood and treasure, was but
a phantom of the imagination; that an equal enjoyment of rights was, under any
arangement, incompatible with political happiness. The wisest and best citizens
had conceived, that an energetic system of national government, could alone
give any reasonable hope of reviving the ruined state of commerce, of restoring
public and private credit, of giving any degree of nationality to the Union, of
securing the faith of public treaties, and in a word, of preventing or
repelling the numerous impending evils, which threatened to plunge the country
into anarchy, and all the horrors of a civil war. Congress, who were fully
sensible of the inefficiency of their powers, to any national purpose,
recommended it to the states to meet in Convention, by their Delegates, to
deliberate on a plan of national government, which might be equal to the
exigencies of the states. The present constitution of the United States of
America, was the result of their deliberations. This constitution, as a unique
in federal politics, originated in an actual, deliberate agreement between the
states, and was ratified by the free consent of the people of each state, by
their Representatives, chosen for that purpose.

Briefly to examine the principles of this government, both in its organization
and operation, and to enquire how far it is adapted to the situation of the
country, already divided into separate states, will be the subject of the
following sections.

SECTION II. Difficulties in forming an efficient Federal Government. --
Summary view of the two principal Forms, which have heretofore been adopted,
that of ancient Greece, and the United Provinces of the Netherlands, with their
Defects. -- A concise view of the present Federal Government of the United
States of America.
THE political situation of the American States, occasioned many anxious
apprehensions, as to the practicability or expediency of constituting an
efficient, national government. It created numerous difficulties, which
experience alone could obviate. It was by many apprehended, that an efficient,
national government could not consist with any considerable degree of
authority, in the states governments; that it would encounter all the
absurdities of a sovereignty within a sovereignty; and that one, in the end,
must be annihilated by the other. According to the various opinions concerning
the utility and necessity of an energetic, national government, some warmly
supported, while others deprecated the idea of a collected sovereignty. The
magnitude of the object excited the anxiety of every class. Many dreaded an
arbitrary power in a general government, uncontrouled, by the authority of the
states. Some, alarmed at the danger, which threatened a dissolution of all
national union, and willing to risk a desperate remedy, which, they imagined,
could alone prove effectual, would readily have sacrificed the whole authority
of the states, to a national legislature. They wished a consolidation of the
whole into one efficient government.

Others, from a more happy train of thought, or more mature reflection,
conceived the plan of reconciling the general and particular powers, not so
much by a subordination of one to the other, as by a precise limitation, in
respect to their several objects, and rendering them mutually subservient, and
even necessary to each other's efficiency. They perceived, that it was not
practicable, perhaps, not even desirable that the same regulations, the same
mode of holding property, and conducting internal policy, should take place
through the whole. They perceived, that in a country so extensive, soil,
climate, and circumstances, at first, accidental, had introduced local
differences of manners, habits, interests, and pursuits; that these differences
were, generally, limited by the limits of the several states; that they might
give rise to an emulation in arts and industry, and lay the foundation of an
extensive national intercourse, by way of exchange; but, that it would be
impossible to comprehend them under any general regulations and uniform
national laws. There were local legislatures already established, equal to all
local occasions. They perceived, that the national interest was not concerned
to interfere in matters of this nature. The objects of the national ^vernment
would be more general. The great idea was to give a national individuality to
the states collectively. It was apprehended, that the different interests,
properly represented, might be modified, compromised, and directed, in such
manner, that instead of those interferences and irreconcilable oppositions,
which must frequently arise from too great a degree of independence among the
several states, they might be bro't to coalesce, and add no less to the
individual, than national prosperity. The point of great difficulty was, to
render the acting members of the federal government, accountable, as well to
the states governments, as to the people; and to constitute the federal
government, sufficiently energetic, to carry into execution, by an authority
delegated for that purpose, every necessary, national measure; and yet, so to
limit the authority, in exercise, that no danger might reasonably be
apprehended to the rights of the people, or the states in their particular
jurisdictions.

Several instances occur, both in ancient and modern times, of small states
confederated, with a view to a general union, in the pursuit of national
measures. The great end in view, and which has always been a desideratum in
federal politics, was to bring the people to have a sense of a national
interest, and all the states of the confederacy, effectually to act in concert,
in those measures, which relate immediately to the good of the whole. We may
now reckon three principal modes, in which this has been attempted.

The first, because the most ancient mode, is by a council empowered to
legislate upon the several states composing the confederacy. Of this kind was
the Council of the Amphictyons, at the head of the confederated states of
ancient Greece. In this case, as none but states can refuse to obey, a
delinquent can be nothing less than a state, already provided with arms and
councils for a formidable opposition. To enforce the decrees of the confederate
council, which we may call the laws of the union, it becomes necessary, in case
of a refusal of any part, to draw out the forces of the complying states, and
to compel obedience by dint of arms. The history of ancient Greece is, for many
years, infamous for a succession of such wars. Such were the Sacred, and many
other wars. The famous Peloponnesian war, which raged with almost unabated fury
nearly thirty years, may, in a great measure, be attributed to the same cause,
the want of an efficient power in the national council. Such ever have been,
and such ever will be the effects of this kind of government, unless, like the
late Congress of the United States of America, they suffer their laws and
ordinances to be violated with impunity; and in this case, the consequences
will be the same; the government will soon sink to the lowest point of
degradation, and tremble on the brink of evanescence.

The second mode is, by a council, empowered to propose measures to the
confederated states, subject to the ratification of the states individually,
before they acquire the force of laws, or can be carried into execution by the
general authority. The government of the United Provinces of the Netherlands,
furnishes us with an example of this second m^de. The State General are the
grand council of the confederacy. This council, though pompously styled THEIR
HIGH MIGHTINESSES, have, in all matters of national concern, whether of greater
or less moment, a power to propose only. The several states have reserved to
themselves the right of ratification. No law can be constitutionally binding,
until it have been ratified by each. The veto of a single state, and even, in
some instances, of a single corporation, may disconcert, and actually has
disconcerted the national counsels, in measures of pressing necessity.
Frequently, on great emergencies, such has been the delay, before all the
states could be brought to agree, that the opportunity of acting has been
wholly lost. This has induced the States General, aided by the hereditary
Prince of Orange, who, as Stadtholder, administers the republic, and whose
power and influence are great, sometimes to act without the authority of the
smaller states, and even against their determinations. Such a disregard to the
constitutional principles of their union, has, among that people, not
remarkable for a spirit of faction, produced high domestic violences, and
convulsed the government, with dangerous insurrections.

The third mode is by an organized government, empowered, in all matters, which
relate to the collective interests and prosperity of the confederacy, to
legislate upon the citizens of the several states, as citizens of the Union,
and to carry the laws into execution, by ministerial officers of the same
government. Of this form of federal government, we have the first complete
example, in the present constitution of the United States of America. In this
government, the National Legislature, in all matters, which come within the
sphere of their constitutional authority, legislate, not upon the states
collectively, but upon the citizens of the union. Their measures and laws are
valid and binding, without any ratification beyond their own act. The
constitution, and all acts of authority, warranted by the constitution, are the
supreme law of the land, and binding in all decisions, as well in the courts of
the several states, as in the federal courts. To prevent different
constructions, which might arise in different tribunals, under the bias of
local authority, influence, or prejudice, the judiciary, for all cases arising
under the constitution and laws of the Union, and those cases of public or
private controversy, to which the state jurisdictions are incompetent, or,
unavoidably liable to a partiality dangerous to general justice, hold their
offices by appointment of the supreme power of the confederacy, and are
amenable only to that power, and their decisions are carried into effect by
ministerial officers appointed under the same authority.

While the federal government is vested with the supreme authority, in all
matters, which involve the general welfare of the Union, considered in a
national view, the states governments, within the limits of their several
jurisdictions, retain, as sovereign, all those powers, which, in their due
administration, most endear the civil state to mankind. To them it belongs,
among their own citizens, to regulate the mode of acquiring, and to secure the
acquisition of property, to animadvert upon morals, and to restrain and punish
those crimes, which attack private property, violate personal security, or in
any way, disturb the peace of their communities.

SECTION III. Organization and Powers of the Federal Government. -- Limitation
of its Powers. -- Principles of Accountability. -- Brief View of its effects in
Practice.
THE government of the United States of America is constituted with
legislative, judicial, and executive powers, vested in distinct and separate
departments. The legislative power is vested in a Congress, consisting of a
Senate, and House of Representatives, whose powers in legislation are mutual.
The Representatives are chosen by the people of the several states, every
second year, and are apportioned by the number of people in each state, to be
ascertained by an actual enumeration, taken once in every ten years.

The qualifications for the Electors of the Representatives are not reduced to
a uniform rule throughout the Union; but are to be the same in each state, as
for the electors of the most numerous branch of the state legislature. To be
eligible, as a representative, three qualifications are necessary, neither of
which introduce any odious distinction of classes. To be eligible, a person,
must have attained the age of twenty-five years, have been seven years a
citizen of the United States, and at the time of his being elected, an
inhabitant of the state, for which he is elected. Property is, in most of the
states, a qualification, both of electors and candidates; so far it is a
qualification for the electors of the federal representatives; but not for
candidates. Hence it may happen, that a person may be elected, who has not a
right of suffrage in the election. This is, at least, a slight inconsistency,
which it would have been desirable to have avoided, by extending, more equally
and uniformly, the right of suffrage. It is probable, however, that
difficulties, on this point, would have arisen from an attachment to local
usages.

The Senate of the United States is composed of two Senators from each state,
chosen by the Legislature. The Senators are divided into three classes. The
seats of one class are vacated every second year, and the vacancies supplied by
the legislatures of the states, to which the senators of such class
respectively belong. Their election is, therefore, in reality, sexennial, and
the senate can never be composed of more than one third new members. There are
three qualifications for a senator -- He must have attained the age of thirty
years, have been nine years a citizen of the United States, and at the time of
his election, be an inhabitant of the state, for which he is chosen.

We may, with satisfaction observe, that in the qualifications of the senators,
there is no feature of aristocracy, nothing, which tends to a distinction of
ranks. The qualifications, both of the senators and representatives, tend only
to secure in the federal legislature, a maturity of experience and abilities,
an attachment to the national interest, and the interests of the respective
states.

Each House choose their own officers, except, that the Vice President of the
United States, for the time being, is President of the Senate, and are sole
judges of the elections, returns, and qualifications of their own members. The
times and places of holding elections for senators are prescribed by the
legislature of each state; but Congress have power, by law, to make, or alter
such regulations, except, as to the place of electing senators. This exception
was made, that Congress might not have it in their power to remove the state
legislatures from place to place, at their pleasure. Would it not have tended
to secure a more equal representation of the national interests, and a more
ready acquiescence in the laws of the Union, had a constitutional provision
been made, for a division of each state, in the election of representatives,
into districts, agreeably to a just apportionment? I apprehend it to be of
sufficient importance to claim a place among the laws of the constitution.
Congress are to assemble, at least, once in every year. Each House is to keep a
journal of its proceedings; and to publish the same from time to time, with the
yeas and nays, which are to be taken and entered on every question, if desired
by one fifth of the members present.

Beside the ordinary powers of legislation, the house of representatives have
the sole power, in the national government, of bringing impeachments, and the
senate have the sole power of trying such impeachments.

No bill can pass into a law, without the concurrence of both houses, and bills
may indifferently originate in either. There is, indeed, one exception, and
that a wise one, relative to bills for raising a revenue. These must originate
in the house of representatives. The revenue is to be raised upon the people,
to whom the representatives are amenable, not upon the states collectively.

To provide against a servile dependence, and to remove temptations to
corruption, both the senators and representative^ are to receive a compensation
for their services, to be ascertained by law. The^ enjoy certain privileges,
and are subjected to certain disabilities. They are, except in eases of
treason, felony, and breaches of the peace, privileged from arrests, during
their attendance on the business of their appointment. To prevent an undue
influence, in any measure or department of government, senators and
representatives, during the time, for which they are elected, are incapable of
being appointed to any office, under the United States, which has been erected,
or the emoluments of which have been increased, during that time; nor can a
person, holding any office under the United States, be a member of either
house, during his continuance in office.

In the legislative sunctions of government, the President has a deliberative
voice, but not a final negative upon any act^ Every bill, which shall have
passed the Senate and House of Representatives, must, before it becomes a law,
be laid before the President. If he approve, he signs it, and then it has all
the force of a law. If he disapprove, he returns it, with his objections in
writing, to that House, in which it originated. If two thirds of each House, on
reconsideration, still adhere to their former opinion, it becomes a law,
notwithstanding such objections. If the President neglect to return a bill for
ten days after it shall be laid before him, it becomes a law, in the same
manner as if he had approved and signed it, unless the return be prevented, by
the adjournment of Congress. The same proceedings, under the same regulations,
are necessary to the validity of every order, resolution, or vote, to which the
concurrence of both Houses are required, except in cases of adjournment.

For the purpose of directing and limiting the powers of Congress to those
objects only, which are of national necessity, or utility; of drawing a line
between the several branches, and to prevent, in the exercise of their proper
functions, any interference between the federal and the states governments, the
constitution has pointed out generally the objects of federal legislation, and
has limited and modified the several powers of the general government, as well
as the powers of the individual states.

Congress are, by the constitution, empowered to lay and collect taxes, duties,
imposts, and excises, for the purpose of paying the debts of the Union, and
providing for the common defense and welfare of the United States; to borrow
money on the faith of the Union; to regulate commerce, both external and
internal; to establish a uniform rule of naturalization, and uniform laws upon
the subject of bankruptcies; to coin money, regulate the value of coins, fix a
standard of weights and measures, and to provide for the punishment of
counterfeiting the securities and current coins of the Union. They are
empowered to facilitate and secure an extensive national communication, by an
establishment of post-roads and post-offices; to promote the progress of
science and useful arts, by securing, for a limited time, to the authors and
inventors, an exclusive right to their respective writings and discoveries. To
this body it is referred to define and punish piracies on the high seas, and
offenses against the laws of nations. They have the power of declaring war,
granting letters of marque, and reprisal, and of making rules concerning
captures on land and water; to raise and support armies, with this restriction,
that no money shall be appropriated to that use for a longer term, than two
years; to provide and maintain a navy; to make rules for the government both of
the land and naval forces; to provide for calling forth the militia to execute
the laws of the Union; to suppress insurrections and repel invasions; to
provide for organizing, arming, and training the militia; and for their
government, while in actual service. The States, however, have the appointment
of the officers, and the authority of training the militia, according to the
discipline prescribed by Congress. Congress are, finally, empowered, to make
all laws necessary and proper for carrying into effect, in the government, or
any department, or office of the United States, all the powers, with which they
are invested, by the constitution.

Such are the general powers, with which they are entrusted, for the purposes
of national government.

To render these powers, in exercise, equal in every part of the Union; to
prevent any preference of one state to another; to guard against the dangers of
oppression; of profligacy in the national expenditures; of peculation in its
officers, and, if possible, to avert every tendency to corruption, in the
principles of the government, certain restrictions and limitations are
provided. It is expressly provided, that all taxes, duties, imposts, and
excises, shall be uniform throughout the United States; that no preference
shall be given, by any regulalation of commerce, or revenue, to the ports of
one state, over those of another, nor the commerce of any state be impeded, by
obliging the vessels bound to or from one state, to enter, clear, or pay duties
in another.

Congress may not suspend the privilege of the writ, of Habeas Corpus, unless
when in times of invasion, or actual rebellion, the public safety shall require
it. No bill of attainder, the oppressive engine of state, in many governments,
can be passed by the federal legislature. No capitation, or direct tax can be
laid, unless it be in proportion to the census of the inhabitants of the
several states. No money is to be drawn from the national treasury, but in
consequence of appropriations made by law; and an account of the receipt and
expenditures of public moneys is directed to be published, from time to time,
for the information of the people, The national government are prohibited to
grant any title of nobility: and to exclude an undue, foreign influence, in
measures of government, no person holding any office of profit, or trust, under
the United States, may, without the consent of Congress, accept of any present,
emolument, office, or title whatever, from any king, prince, or foreign state.

It is provided that no state in the Union shall enter into any treaty of
alliance, or confederation; grant letters of marque and reprisal; coin money;
emit bills of credit, make any thing but gold and silver coin a tender in the
payment of debts; pass any bill of attainder, ex post facto law, or law
impairing the obilgation of contracts, or grant any title of nobility. No state
may, without the consent of Congress, lay imposts, or duties on imports, or
exports, except what shall be absolutely necessary for executing its inspection
laws; and the nett produce of all duties, and imposts, laid by the several
states, are to be to the use of the United States, and all laws, for that
purpose, are subjected to the revision and control of Congress. No state,
without the consent of Congress, may lay any duty of tonnage, keep troops or
ships of war, in times of peace, or enter into any agreement, or compact with
another state, or with a foreign power, or engage in war, unless actually
invaded, or in such imminent danger, as not to admit of delay.

The executive power is vested in a President of the United States, who holds
his office for the term of four years. For the election of the President, each
state is to appoint, in such a manner as its legislature shall direct, a number
of electors, equal to the whole number of representatives, to which such state
is entitled. No person is capable of being appointed an elector, who, at the
time shall be a senator, or representative in Congress, or hold any office of
profit, or trust, under the United States. Congress have power to determine the
time of choosing the electors, and the day of giving their votes, which is to be
the same in every state. The electors are to meet in their several states, and
to vote, by ballot, for two persons, one of whom, at least, shall not be of the
same state with themselves. The votes of the electors are to be transmitted,
sealed, to the President of the senate, at the seat of government of the United
States, and to be counted in presence of the senate and house of
representatives. The person, who shall have the greatest number of votes, being
a majority of the whole number of electors, is appointed President. If there be
more than one, who have such majority, and have an equal number of votes, the
house of representatives are immediately to choose, by ballot; one of them for
President; and if no person have a majority, the same house are to choose a
President from the five highest on the list. For this purpose the votes are to
be taken by states, and a majority of all the states is necessary to a choice.
After the choice of a President, the person having the greatest number of votes
of the electors, is the Vice President. If there be, in this case, two, who
have an equal number of votes, the senate are, by ballot, to choose one of them
for a Vice President.

The qualifications for the office of President, are, that he be a natural born
citizen, or a citizen of the United States, at the time, when the constitution
was adopted; that he have attained the age of thirty-five years, and have been
fourteen years resident within the United States. In case of the removal of the
President from office, or of his death, resignation, or disability to discharge
the powers and duties of his office, the same devolve on the Vice President;
and Congress are empowered to make provision to supply the place, both of the
President, and Vice President, by declaring, what officer shall supply the
office, in such case.

The President is to receive a compensation for his services, which can neither
be increased nor diminished, during the time, for which he shall have been
elected; nor may he, during that period, receive any other emolument from the
United States, or either of them. He is commander in chief of the army, navy,
and of the militia, when in actual service. He is entrusted with the power of
granting reprieves and pardons, except in cases of impeachment. He has the
power of making treaties. In this, however, he must have the advice of the
senate, in which two-thirds of the senators present must concur. He is,
likewise, subject to the advice of the senate, entrusted with the power of
appointing ambassadors, other public ministers, and consuls, judges of the
supreme court, and all other officers of the United States, whose appointment
is not otherwise provided for by the constitution, or established by law. The
President is to fill all vacancies, which shall happen, in the recess of the
senate, by filling up commissions, which shall expire at the end of the next
session.

It is made the duty of the President to give to Congress information of the
state of the Union, and to recommend to their consideration such measures as he
shall judge necessary and expedient. He has the power to convene both houses,
or either of them, upon extraordinary occasions; but he has no power to
prorogue or adjourn them, unless the two houses disagree, in respect to the
time of adjournment. He is to receive ambassadors, and other public ministers,
to take measures for the faithful execution of the laws, and to commission all
officers of the United States.

The President, Vice President, and all civil officers of the United States,
are removable from office, on impeachment and conviction of treason, bribery,
and other crimes and misdemeanors, and are further liable to indictment, trial,
and punishment, according to law.

The judicial power of the United States is vested in one supreme court, and
such inferior courts, as Congress shall, from time to time, ordain and appoint.
The judges of all the courts hold their offices during good behavior; and at
stated times, are to receive for their services a compensation, which may not
be diminished, during their continuance in office.

The judicial authority is extended to all cases, in law and equity, arising
under the constitution, and laws of the United States, and treaties made under
the same authority; to all cases of admiralty and maritime jurisdiction; To
controversies to which the United States shall be a party; to controversies
between two or more states; between a state and the citizens of another state;
between citizens of different states; between citizens of the same state,
claiming lands under grants of different states, and between a state and its
citizens, and foreign states, citizens or subjects.

Where a dispute shall arise between two or more states, which cannot be
compromised by the parties, it is doubtless eligible to refer the decision to
the national authority. The danger, which may arise from an attempt to execute
the laws of the Union, in this case, upon a whole state, is less to be dreaded,
than the remaining alternative, an appeal to force, between the states in
controversy. But this mode of executing the laws of the Union, ought not to be
hazarded, unless to avoid a greater inconvenience. Individual claims upon any
of the states, should be submitted to the laws, or the equity of the state. The
case may, indeed, happen, that an individual will be injured, without redress.
Should this case happen more frequently, than it probably will, it can never be
of a magnitude sufficient to justify a degradation of the authority of a state,
or to risk the peace of the Union, by attempting to execute its laws on the
states collectively.

Ample provision is made to secure among the several states a mutual
confidence; to establish, among the citizens of the whole a reciprocal
enjoyment of rights, in their public and private intercourse: to cultivate and
extend a national sentiment, in every part of the Union, and to prevent those
injuries, which arise from local law and custom*

Full faith and credit is to be given, in each state, to the public acts,
records, and judicial proceedings, of every other state. The citizens of each
state are entitled to the privileges and immunities of citizens in every state.
A person charged, in any state, with treason, felony, or other crime, and
flying from justice, shall, if found in any other state, be delivered up, to be
removed to the state having jurisdiction of the crime. No person holden to
service or labor in one state, under its laws, escaping into another state,
shall in consequence of any law, or regulation in that state, be discharged
from such service or labor; but shall be delivered up, on claim of the person
to whom such service or labor may be due.

New states may be admitted by Congress, into the Union, but no new state may
be erected or formed, within the jurisdiction of any other state, nor any state
formed by the junction of two, or more states, or parts of states, without the
consent of the states concerned, as well as of Congress. The United States are
holden to guarantee to each state in the Union a republican form of government,
and to protect each against invasions, and on application of the legislature,
or, in certain cases, of the executive, against domestic violence.

There are other clauses, which are intended as a declaration of rights, to
guard against an undue exercise of power, in the administration of the federal
government, as it may affect the rights of the several states, or individual
citizens.

It is declared that treason against the United States, shall consist only in
levying war against them, or adhering to their enemies, giving them aid and
comfort; that no person shall be convicted of treason, unless on the testimony
of two witnesses to the same overt act; or on confession in open court.
Congress have the power to declare the punishment of treason; but no attainder
of treason shall work a corruption of blood, or forfeiture, except during the
life of the person attained. They can make no law respecting the establishment
of religion, or prohibiting its free exercise; no law which may abridge the
freedom of speech, or of the Press, or the right of the people freely to
assemble and petition government for a redress of grievances, or infringe the
right of the people to bear arms.

Provision is made to prevent oppression from quartering soldiers on the
people, and from unreasonable search, or seizure, on general warrants, without
probable cause, supported by oath o^ affirmation. No person may, for the same
offense, be twice put in jeopardy of life or limb, be compelled, in any
criminal cause, to witness against himself, or be deprived of life, liberty, or
property, without due process of law. Private property may not be taken for
public use, without due compensation.

It is particularly provided, that no person shall be holden to answer for a
capital, or otherwise infamous offense, unless, on a presentment or indictment
of a grandjury, except, in cases arising in the land or naval forces, or in the
militia, when in actual service, in time of war, or public danger; that in
criminal prosecutions, the accused shall enjoy the right of a speedy public
trial, by a jury of the state and district, where the crime shall have been
committed, if committed within the limits of any state; to be confronted with
witnesses against him; to have compulsory process for witnesses in his favor,
and to have the assistance of council.

In trials at common law, when the value in controversy exceeds twenty dollars,
the right of trial by jury is preserved. Here let us reflect. In a matter of so
much consequence, as the trial by jury, would it not have been better to have
guaranteed it to the citizens, in every issue of fact, at common law, without
any discrimination of the value of their demand?

Excessive fines may not be imposed, nor cruel and unusual punishments
inflicted. It is finally declared, that the enumeration of certain rights, in
the constitution, shall not be construed to deny or disparage others retained
by the people, and that the powers not delegated to the United States, by the
constitution, nor prohibited by it to the states, are reserved to the states
respectively, or to the people.

In simple governments, an express limitation of powers is necessary, on the
part of the rulers only. The limitations on the part of the constituent
members, are implied in the duty of obedience to the constitutional acts of
government. In the federal government, the situation of the constituent
members, more involved, than in simple governments, rendered a different
provision necessary.

The members of the federal government, though consisting ultimately of the
same individuals, may be considered in two distinct views; individually, as
citizens of the Union, and collectively, as formed into several states, each,
within its own limits, vested with rights and powers of legislation, adequate
to every civil regulation, merely internal. The state legislatures might,
either in the objects, or the subject matter of their regulations, interfere
with that authority, which the collective national interests, the peace,
happiness, and prosperity of the whole require should be exercised by the
national government alone. To prevent an evil, of a tendency so fatal, in a
national view, is apparently the principal end of all the limitations on the
powers of the several states, and their legislative bodies. The federal
government, designed to embrace only general, and national objects, and not
extend to the merely internal regulations and policy of the individual states,
it was found, in respect to its objects, to be less involved, and its powers
capable of a more precise enumeration and definition. For this reason few, and
those pretty general limitations of the powers of the federal government, are
inserted. Instead of particular, enumerated instances, in which its powers are
limited, the same end is more fully attainted, by a declaration, which, in
effect, denies to Congress, the exercise of any farther, or other powers, than
those, which are delegated by the constitution, and reserves to the states and
the people, all those powers and rights, which are not so delegated. This, as
it takes away every pretense for claiming constructive powers, in derogation of
the powers of the states, and the rights of their respective citizens, if not
the only effectual, is clearly the safest mode of limiting the powers of a
government thus constituted.

The accountability of the rulers is a prominent feature, in the federal
constitution. In securing this important object, great attention has been paid
to the peculiarity of the situation of the constituent members, both as states,
and as citizens. The senators of the United States, appointed by the
legislatures of the several states, and from time to time amenable to them, may
well be considered as guardians of the rights of their respective states
against all eneroachments of the national government.

The representatives in Congress, elected by the people, and accountable to
them, through the means of biennial elections, are bound by all the ties of
interest and affection, to watch over the rights of the citizens, and the
rights of the several states, with which their electors are more immediately
connected.

The right which once in four years, devolves on the legislatures of the
several states, of appointing the electors of the President and Vice President
of the United States, or of directing their appointment by the people, secures
to the states and to the people, a powerful check on the executive of the
federal government.

The judges, appointed by the President, with the advice of the senate, to hold
their offices during good behavior, secure of their compensation, without the
fear of diminution, and subjected with all other officers of the national
government, to removal by impeachment, and punishment by the laws of the land,
for maladministration, are placed in a state of accountability, blended with
a degree of independence, from which can alone be expected an inflexible
integrity of conduct, in that department.

This constitution of government, founded in the same principles as the
constitutions of the several states in the Union, as nearly as the relative
situations admit, and formed on the same plan, exhibits, in theory, the most
beautiful system, which has yet been devised by the wisdom of man. It is true,
that this form of federal government is a new phenomenon in the political
world. Hardly a shadow of such principles and powers, as it relates to the
practice and execution, in a federal union of states, is to be found in the
history of ancient or modern politics. In this age of improvements, no less in
the science of government, than in other sciences, its novelty will not be made
a serious objection; yet it must be acknowleged, that the consistency of these
principles in operation, and their efficiency, in point of practice, might
still be considered as problematical, had they not, in a good measure, been
evinced by actual experiment. Solely an impression of the efficiency of the
federal government, favored, perhaps, by its national magnitude and importance,
added, at the instant of its organization, a degree of energy to the states
governments, and put an end to those factions and turbulent commotions, which
made some of them tremble for their political existence. The legislatures of
the several states, under the auspices of this government, appear to have
exploded their former systems of local and temporary expediency, and founding
themselves more generally on the basis of moral and national justice, have
given a force and consistency to their laws, and inspired a confidence among
the citizens, the want of which had almost annihilated private credit. The
authority of the federal government rendered this confidence general and
reciprocal. Its beneficial influence was not confined to the limits of the
Union. It extended to distant countries, and produced the happiest effects in
the commercial intercourse of the citizens with foreign nations.

The administration of this government, by discovering the national resources,
uniting and directing them to the proper objects, by an almost instantaneous
impulse, restored public credit and national faith, which had long been in a
state bordering on desperation, to a degree of respectability, of which few
examples are to be found in the history of nations. These operations afforded
means, and added vigor to industry among every class of citizens. Agriculture,
commerce, arts, and manufactures, have felt a new, and more powerful stimulus.
The spirit of enterprise, without which nothing great is ever to be expected,
has, by the extensiveness of the prospects, and the magnitude of the objects
presented, been productive of effects, of which the Americans had, before,
hardly entertained a conception. In such a change of circumstances, such a
novelty of prospects and security of hope, an intemperance in the spirit of
enterprise was, in some measure, to be expected. Accordingly, in too many
instances, it degenerated into speculating projects, the influence of which on
morals were, for the moment, no less pernicious, than the depreciating system,
which preceded. This ought, however, to be attributed to its proper cause, the
former extent and degraded state of paper credit. In applying a remedy to an
evil, so universally inveterate, this effect ought to be considered, rather as
the last malignant effort of the evil, than an indication of the unsuitableness
of the remedy.

The wisdom, justice, and equality of the laws enacted under the federal
government, and consequently the beneficial influence of its principles, are
strongly evinced by the prompt observance of a free and enlightened people.
Compared with the extent and variety of transactions, which, since the adoption
of this government, have employed every class of citizens, the courts of the
Union have in few instances, been called to animadvert on a breach of its laws.

The experience, which we have already had, is sufficient to found a
confidence, not only in the efficiency of the federal government; but in the
coincidence of its principles, with the laws of civil and social nature, and
the present state of manners and knowledge.

SECTION IV Observations on the Tendency in Government to a Corruption of its
Principles, Degeneracy, and Dissolution. -- Plan of Reformation incorporated in
the Federal Government. -- Probable Effect in perpetuating the Government.
MONTESQUIEU, speaking of that kind of government, which was established
through Europe, by the conquerors of the Roman empire, says, "It was a good
government, that had in itself a capacity of growing better." Sp. I. B. ix. Chapter
8. in the note.
This capacity of growing better, was not the effect of any direct intention of
the founders, nor, if perceived, was it ever pursued. Accordingly we have seen
this kind of government, almost universally, degenerating into a species of
despotism. If any government have admited improvements, these improvements have
never been deliberately made, in consequence of any fixed plan of reformation
adopted in the constitution. They have been constantly introduced by viole^e,
or in a concurrence of circumstances, ^le if at all intended or foreseen.

Notwithstanding the foregoing observation of Montesquieu, he appears to join
in an opinion, which has very generally prevailed, that governments, like men,
from a necessity of nature, carry in themselves, from their very origin, the
feeds of dissolution; that man is fatally incapable of forming any system,
which shall endure without degenerating. This opinion seems to be countenanced
by the experience of ages. I am apprehensive, however, that on enquiry, we
shall find reason for a different opinion. A more general developement of the
laws of human nature, may discover, that, though in the infancy of mankind,
from which, perhaps those nations, who have made the greatest advances, have
hardly emerged, this may be true; yet man is, by nature, capable of
improvements, which may render an amelioration in government as easy and
familiar as in any science. The same fate has attended all sciences of more
difficult investigation. Their establishment and improvement have generally
been attempted by reasonings a priori, in which imagination is the principal
agent. It has fared in the same manner with the various systems of natural
philosophy, morality, and theology, which have succeeded each other in the
world.

Within little more than a century, experimental reasonings have banished
almost innumerable absurdities, and in many sciences, seem to have laid a
foundation of knowledge, as fixed and as durable, as the course of nature. It is
at length perceived, that the operations of nature are subjected to certain
laws, established by Deity, in the constitution of things; and, that nothing
can be durable, which is calculated to thwart those laws, or divert them from
their course. Man, and all the works of man, no less than inert matter, are
subjected to those laws. States, kingdoms and empires, if they admit
principles, which thwart the established laws of nature, like heaps of sand,
opposed to the resistless force of a torrent, are inevitably swept into the
gulf of dissolution.

The laws of nature, we have before observed, are immutable; not so the
relations, from which they result; or the particular situations, in which those
laws were designed to operate. This may need some illustration.

Matter is found existing, under modifications infinitely various, and is
denominated of different kinds. Different kinds of matter, endued with what we
call different powers, are found to have certain relations to each other, as
well in the more simple, as in the more intricate and comprehensive
combinations. In all the variety of ways, in which they may be combined, each
particular combination, invariably produces the same particular effect. If the
combination be changed, the relations are changed. It comes under a different
law, and a different effect is produced. All kinds of inert matter are
incapable, from any internal power, which they possess, of changing their
combination, or of altering the present existing relations. If any change or
alteration be made, it must arise from something external. Hence, in the
natural world, the course of effects is uniform, because the relations and
situations of themselves continue uniform. In the moral world it is different.
Man has both active and passive powers; both intelligence and volition to
direct their operations. He is capable of changing the relative situation of
things, both in respect to himself, and in respect to the different kinds of
matter, which are subjected to his operations. Hence the relative situation,
being less uniform, effects and events, both natural and moral, as they relate
to him, will be less uniform. The relations of matter, and the laws of its
operation, are to the material agents, irresistible; not so the laws of moral
action. The laws of moral action respect the design of the agent, in connection
with the means and the end, both general and particular. The laws of matter
have no respect to the design of the material agents. The one is obligatory,
and precedes the action: the other is necessary, and accompanies the operation.

For these, among other reasons, the laws of moral agents, by which their
actions are produced and governed, and the events, which respect them,
directed, are not so easily understood, or so fully comprehended, as the laws
of matter.

To an omniscient Being, indeed, the former are as perfectly intelligible as
the latter. We know likewise, that men are capable of acquiring much knowledge
on the subject, and that some of more comprehensive minds, and closer
observation, are capable of tracing the laws of human actions, even in many
very intricate combinations, and of calculating upon their general operations,
in given situations, with no inconsiderable degree of certainty. This is,
indeed, the only solid foundation of political science. Political and civil
laws are designed to regulate the future actions of men, as they arise in
society, and to produce such relations, as are dictated by the laws of social
nature. Knowledge equal to this task is the result, only of accumulated
experience. But a necessity for civil institutions arises antecedent to
experience. Civil institutions have generally been the rude productions of
necessity, and the form originally imposed by fraud, violence, or what, to men,
are the mere suggestions of chance. Men have commonly regarded only some of the
most obvious, the most predominant, existing relations, with little knowledge of
the change in the present relations, which would be the necessary effect of
their institutions, or of the future improvement of the species. Indeed, could
every individual in society, have an intuitive prescience of the changes, as
they were to arise, in their order, it would still, perhaps, be impossible to
form any human institution, which should accommodate itself to every situation
in the progress. Interest, with some, an habitual veneration for ancient
establishments, with all, an opinion of the present perfection of government,
and a dread of encouraging a spirit of innovation, the bane of a well regulated
society, have concured to prevent any regular plan of fundamental reformation
in government, and to continue, as unalterably perfect, those institutions,
which were adapted only to the weakness, ignorance, and barbarous manners of an
infant people.

By the force of habit, and inveterate national prejudices, abuses are rendered
sacred, and not unfrequently, come to be considered as rightful privileges; and
those institutions, which were the offspring of chance or violence, to be
extolled as the most perfect productions of reason, founded in the original and
unalterable principles of nature. Such was the British government, and such has
been the force of habitual prejudice upon the people of that kingdom. That
government has, indeed, received, many improvements, with the improvements of
the age; but they have generally been wrested by force from the reigning
powers, or interposed in a revolution of the crown. Many respectable characters
long considered them as so many violations of the most sacred rights. The
greater part of the nation appear fully persuaded, that all farther
improvements are impracticable, and that because their government was once the
best, perhaps, which existed in the world, it must, through all the progressive
advances in knowledge, in morals, and in manners, continue the best, a pattern
of unchanging perfection, though, in its principles, it is much too limited for
the present^^^te. It is probable that all improvement (...) will be opposed and
prevented by those in power, who are interested in the present order of things,
till the improvements of an enlightened age, shall produce a violent concussion
in the combat with ancient prejudices, and struggle through a scene of tumult,
outrage, and perhaps civil war, to arrive at some inconsiderable amelioration,
in their constitution.

In the progress of social improvements, there usually arises a repugnancy,
between the principles of the government, and the present morals and manners of
the people. Hence we may learn to account for the constant superiority, in most
nations, of private to political morality, as practiced by the same
individuals. The principles of a government, adapted to the limited occasions
of a simple and infant state of society, tend in opposition to the progress of
improvement, or to divert it into partial and devious channels. This must have
a very pernicious effect, as well upon the administration of the government, as
upon the morals, habits, and manners of the people. From this source,
principally, has proceeded that corruption in the administration of government,
that degeneracy in the manners of the people, which has perpetually proved the
ruin of the most celebrated civil institutions.

The consining of a people, who have arrived at a highly improved state of
society, to the forms and principles of a government, which originated in a
simple, if not barbarous state of men and manners, may not unaptly be compared
to a custom, which prevails among the Chinese. A small foot being reckoned the
highest point of beauty, it is the universal practice with them, to confine the
feet of their female infants, to prevent their growth. When arrived at
maturity, the feet of the Chinese women, it is said, do not exceed in size
those of an infant of six months old; so that from the disproportion of those
members to the weight of the body, they appear rather to totter than walk. No
less aukwardness of situation, no less perversion of nature must take place, in
a nation, where the improvement of its civil and political institutions are
limited, and not suffered to proceed in any degree of equality with the general
improvements of the people.

In this point, the constitution of the United States of America, is
distinguished from all other national establishment. It is not pretended to
have attained the ^chme of perfection, to the exclusion of future improvements.
It is calculated to admit amendments, corresponding with the progress of the
citizens in social improvements, and political science. The idea of
incorporating, in the constitution itself, a plan of reformation, which,
without encouraging a spirit of innovation, the parent of anarchy and final
despotism, might enable the people, with deliberation, and more mature
experience, to correct what should be, at any time, found wrong in the form,
principles, or operation of the government, was first adopted, in practice, in
some of the individual states of the confederacy. It had been found, not only
practicable and safe in the exercise, but its happy effect in ameliorating the
fundamental principles of the government, had, in several instances, been fully
evinced. This idea was taken up and pursued in framing the constitution of
government for the United States. It is made a fundamental article of that
constitution, that "Congress, whenever two thirds of both houses shall deem it
necessary, shall propose amendments to the constitution, or on application of
two thirds of the several states, shall call a convention for proposing
amendments, which in either case shall be valid to all intents and purposes, as
parts of the constitution, when ratified by the legislatures of three fourths
of the several states, or by conventions in three fourths thereof, as the one,
or the other mode of ratification may be proposed by Congress." There are some
restrictions on the power of making amendments. Among other things it is
provided, that no state shall, without its consent, be deprived of its equal
suffrage in the senate.

In virtue of the power vested in Congress, and reserved to the people and the
states, by this article, several important amendments have already been adopted
in the federal constitution; and we have reason to believe, that whatever, on
experience, shall be found deficient in principle, will be added; whatever
shall be found dangerous to the rights of the people or the states, or
impracticable in operation, will be retrenched and corrected. The wisdom, which
formed it, aided and matured by experience, may, not only extend its
principles, with the progress of social improvements, but carry it to a greater
degree of practical perfection than any thing, which has yet been known in
government.

Let us not, then, rashly, or from the pride of a prophetic spirit, conclude
that this beautiful system is, with the crazy empires of antiquity, destined to
a speedy dissolution; or that it must in time, through the degeneracy of the
people, and a corruption of its principles, of necessity give place to a system
of remediless tyranny and oppression. Let us rather, while we conceive a
rational hope, that it will endure as long as the successive generations of
men, attend, with the calmness of philosophy, and the persevering zeal of
patriotism, to the enjoyment of its blessings, and the improvement of its
principles. To an ardent wish for its perpetual duration, let us add the only
means of securing it. Let us endeavor to diffuse, extensively, the principles
of useful knowledge, and to impress, indelibly, on the minds of the rising
generation, the sentiments of liberal virtue, and genuine patriotism.

THE END.

