A DESCRIPTION OF THE Malignant, Infectious Fever PREVAILING AT PRESENT IN
PHILADELPHIA; WITH AN ACCOUNT OF THE MEANS TO PREVENT INFECTION, AND THE
REMEDIES AND METHOD OF TREATMENT, WHICH HAVE BEEN FOUND MOST SUCCESSFUL.

BY WILLIAM CURRIE, Fellow of the College of Physicians of Philadelphia.

PHILADELPHIA: PRINTED BY T. DOBSON, NO. 41, SOUTH SECOND-STREET.

MDCCXCIII.

DESCRIPTION, etc.
The Influenza made its appearance here the last week in July, and the first
case of the Malignant Fever that has been observed was about the 3d of August,
in Water-street, between Arch and Race-streets, where it has since raged with
greater violence, and occasioned a much greater proportion of mortality than in
any other part of the city.
THE Fever at present prevailing in the city of Philadelphia (which is highly
infectious and malignant) generally begins with, and may be distinguished from
every other species or form of fever, by the following symptoms, viz.

THE patient first complains of weariness and weakness, which, in a few hours,
is succeeded by a sense of chilliness, and an oppressive dull pain and
giddiness in the head, an oppressive weight and stricture about the breast,
particularly at the region of the heart, as if the space was too narrow for its
pulsations. The breathing is performed with quickness and uneasiness.

THESE symptoms in most cases, are soon succeeded by a frequent propensity to
puke, and this by a quick, full, but soft and irregular pulse; great heat about
the head, neck, and breast; the skin generally hot and moist about the neck and
forehead, but dry, and but little increase of heat about the feet and legs. The
violence of the symptoms generally remit every morning.


IF, to these symptoms, we add an extraordinary prostration of strength or
sudden debility in the animal functions of the body, we have a perfect
description of the fever under consideration, from the first day of its attack
to the third of its progress.

WHEN no amendment takes place by the 3d or 4th day, most of the recited
symptoms become more distressing and alarming, with the pulse low and sunk.
Frequent vomiting of matter resembling coffee grounds in color and
consistence, generally occurs before the disease terminates, when it proves
mortal, together with a cadaverous appearance of the countenance, succeeded by
a deep yellow or leaden color of the skin and nails; the eyes become suffused
with blood, and the countenance appears like that of one strangled; but no
signs of jaundice appear, either in the urine or feces. In some cases, a
profuse discharge of blood from the nose, concludes the catastrophe -- A hiccup
is a very frequent but not a constant symptom, nor does vomiting always occur.
The tongue is seldom very soul or dry, nor does the patient always crave drink.
His intellects, though always confused, are seldom so much disordered as to
amount to a delirium -- Subsultus tendinum are very rare.

WHEN the disease terminates favorably, the symptoms generally abate on the
third or fourth day, accompanied by a profuse sweat. When it ends fatally, it
is generally between the fifth and eighth day, though some have survived the
tenth, and died afterward.

THE characteristic or leading symptoms of the disease, as has already been
observed, are sudden debility in the voluntary powers, oppressive pain,
giddiness and sense of fullness and distention in the vessels of the forepart
of the head, and an oppressive weight, or an inexpressible sensation of
tightness about the heart and lungs, accompanied with excruciating anguish and
restlessness.

THIS fever, like all other varieties of putrid fever, arises from, and is
produced by specific contagion, and may be communicated from those laboring
under the disease, to persons in the most perfect state of health.

How the disease was introduced into the city, whether imported from some other
country, in consequence of the contagion adhering to goods or to the apparel of
diseased persons, which is the most common source from whence infectious
diseases are communicated, or generated in the low and filthy apartments of
some of the inhabitants of Water-street, can only be determined by a collection
and faithful statement of facts, and must be left for future investigation.

IT ought, however, to afford us much consolation, when we are assured, (and on
this assurance we may rely with the most perfect security) that the disease
under consideration, though certainly infectious is nevertheless only
communicable under particular circumstances. Those circumstances removed, no
infection can possibly take place.

To suppose that the air in the streets can be contaminated by the contagion so
as to communicate the disease through that medium, is contrary to, and is
contradicted by, the observations and experience of the learned of the faculty
of every age and country; and any apprehension of an infectious disease from
that source, can only be excused in those who have not had suitable
opportunities of better information.

BURNING heaps of odorous and noisome substances in the streets is therefore not
only useless, but injurious, as it not only consumes or changes the quality of
the pure or vital air of the atmosphere, but conveys into it from the burning
materials, a proportionable quantity of deleterious gas, commonly called fixed
air.

PEOPLE in walking the streets, are by no means in any danger of infection, as
the miasmata, or contagious exhalations from the bodies of the diseased have
never been known to be conveyed by the air many feet beyond the chamber of the
sick, except by means of clothes or other porous substances which have been in
contact with, or very near to, the body of one laboring under the disease.

THE principal, and perhaps the only circumstances which render the present
fever communicable, if analogy and past experirience are to have any weight,
are the following, viz. Confinement for any length of time in the bedchamber
of the sick, especially when the apartment is not large, and freely ventilated
-- coming in immediate contact with the patient, his body, or bed-clothes, or
those of the nurse or other attendants before they have been for some time
exposed to the action of the open air, or by receiving the breath, or the scent
of the several excretions of the sick. Exposure of the apparel of the infected
to the open air some days, and afterward baking it in an oven for a few hours
effectually removes any risk of disease from that source.


IF people rigorously shun the above circumstances, pay a strict attention to
cleanliness; to constant ventilation of their own as well as the apartments of
the sick; take moderate and frequent exercise in the open air when dry and
serene; make moderate use of relishing aliment copiously seasoned with salt and
culinary spices, and drink wine or other strong liquors more liberally than
customary; avoiding intemperance of every description; but above all, the
monstrous and abominable vice of getting drunk -- I venture to pronounce with
the most positive confidence, that the disease will not, cannot spread.

WITH respect to the various expedients made use of by all classes to preserve
themselves from infection, such as camphor bags, amulets of dried frogs, tarred
ropes, sponge dipped in the vinegar of the four thieves, the salt of spices (as
it is vulgarly called) the smoking of segars -- they are productive of more
evil than good, because they continually attract the mind to one melancholy
object, and serve to keep alive fearful apprehensions, which might otherwise be
diverted by other objects and a succession of new ideas.

THE best, and I believe I may say the only neutralizer or corrector of
contagion yet discovered, is the pure vital air of the atmosphere. The putrid
noxious effluvia confined in tombs and vaults (than which few things are more
suddenly fatal to life) has been rendered perfectly innocent by the copious
admixture of vital air, or that portion of the atmosphere which serves the
purpose of respiration and combustion.

THIS salubrious aeriform fluid may therefore be most usefully employed for
restoring to health the unfortunate sufferers under the present malignant
disorder.

SICK rooms may at least be purified and rendered much more comfortable to the
patient and safe to the attendants by frequently deflagrating nitre on burning
charcoal in different parts of the apartment: this is known to evolve
considerable quantities of this vivifying air. Pouring vinegar upon a hot iron
produces the same effect in an inferior degree, as it undergoes a partial
decomposition, and a quantity of vital air, one of its constituent parts, is
thereby set at liberty. The contaminated air may be also removed by frequently
kindling fires in the chimney of the chamber of the sick; the air thus rarefied
in the chimney ascends, being compressed and followed by that in the chamber,
and the place, which the contaminated air has left, is immediately occupied by
a fresh supply of that which is pure.

WHITE-WASHING the walls of the chamber has been found by the late humane and
benevolent Mr. Howard, highly conducive to the removal of infection, and is
strongly recommended by Dr. Blane.

ALL kinds of plants in a state of vegetation furnish more or less pure air, at
the same time that they absorb and correct that which is contaminated. Vessels
of fresh water therefore with cotton steeped in them, and the seed of pepper
grass sown upon it, which will immediately vegetate, may with propriety be
placed in different parts of the chamber, with this caution that they be
removed during the night, and the water renewed every morning.

MANY melancholy examples of a fever, with a complexion and features, nearly
resembling the one under consideration occurred during the late war, between
United America and Great Britain, in the military hospitals and prison ships.

THAT a contagious fever may be generated in any situation where fresh air is
excluded, and cleanliness neglected, especially in the winter season; and that
the contagion or miasmata so generated, is rendered active by the summer's heat
in such confined and filthy places, is now generally admitted by the most
accurate observers: The account given of the periodical rise, progress and
decline, of the plague at Aleppo by Dr. Russel, renders this a matter of
certainty. The miasma or contagion thus generated, is propagated and spread by
infection.

IT is also generally admitted, that the contagion by which putrid fevers are
produced, is not like that of many other diseases permanent and constantly
existing, but in the circumstances just related, it is occasionally generated
and propagated. At the same time it is a rational inference to suppose, that
all fevers arising in such circumstances are of the same specific nature,
however they may differ in the number and violence of their symptoms, and that
such difference may be imputed to the circumstances of climate, season, soil
and constitution, concurring with the contagion and modifying its force.

How far the fever at present prevalent here may be combined with, or modified
by the contagion of the influenza, which has also for some time past, been very
epidemic, is a question that I shall not at present enter into the discussion
of. A physician under the signature of Quaestor Veritatis, in the Federal
Gazette of the 28th of August, asserts that the present malignant fever is only
a modification of the influenza, and has attempted to support his opinion in
the following manner: "That the long continued heat and drought have relaxed,
debilitated and disposed the bodies of persons who lead indolent lives, are
employed in sedentary occupations, or accustomed to intemperance, to fevers
attended with symptoms of putrefaction must be obvious to every person
acquainted with the animal economy, and that diseases of the most inflammatory
nature will, in their progress, produce the most unequivocal symptoms of
putrefaction, or a gangrenous tendency of the solids under such circumstances,
is well known to every person conversant with the records of medicine.

It is under such circumstances that the small pox and meazles become highly
putrid and malignant, and it is in persons of this description, that the
scarlatina anginosa assumes the form and features of the cynanche maligna.

It is however said, that as a greater proportion of people have died in
water-street, than in any other street of the city, there must be some local
source of specific contagion. But this may be explained more rationally from
there being a less portion of pure air there than in any other parts of the
city, owing to the situation of the houses on the west side, being half buried
under ground, the number of sailor taverns and huxter's shops, which are
receptacles of all kinds of filth, dirt and nastiness, and which from their
situation are excluded from the benefit of free ventilation, etc. Air deprived
of free circulation and frequently respired, is robbed of its vivifying
principle, for want of which life can not be supported, nor fires kindled."

If upon a dispassionate enquiry, it shall be found that those affected with
typhous and malignant symptoms, have communicated the disease to those residing
in other parts of the city, who came to visit them, or being themselves removed
to other parts, communicated it to their attendants, who were not previously
affected with the typhous diathesis, or had been previously affected with the
influenza or other disease, the opinion of this anonimous writer will be
completely subverted. But on the contrary, if it shall appear, that those
circumstanced as above mentioned, who have not had the influenza, have been
attacked by it soon after intercourse with those laboring under the symptoms
of malignant fever, it is a strong presumption in favor of his opinion. This
is a question which can only be decided by a collection and accurate statement
of facts, and till such collection and statement is made, every physician whose
object is truth, will suspend his judgment.

From the scrutiny which has been made by different physicians, and
particularly by Dr. Hutchinson, the physician of the port, there has not been
found evidence sufficient to afford any suspicion that the disease was imported
by the French emigrants from the west indies, or generated on board any of
their vessels.

And as there are no examples on record, since physicians became acquainted
with the constituent parts and qualities of the atmosphere, of putrid fevers
being produced by the effluvia of vegetable substances putrefying in the open
air, but by the effluvia of living animals under certain circumstances, I am
sorry thus publicly to differ in opinion, on the present subject, from some of
my fellow practitioners, for whose judgments and talents I entertain the
highest veneration




The following method of cure has been hitherto found more successful than any
other, which I hope will plead my apology for communicating it at this early
period.

In the treatment of this formidable disease, much sagacity and caution are
requisite.

The activity of the pulse and heat of the skin in its first stage, certainly
call for the antiphlogistic regimen, and such medicines as abate arterial
action. As a state of debility very soon and constantly follows this state of
increased action and apparent power in the arterial system, I have with others
been deterred from employing blood letting. But have substituted purging, which
diminishes arterial tension in a flower and safer manner. Some of my medical
friends have informed me, that they have found calomel answer this purpose
better than any other purgative.

Some patients in the first stage of the disease have found more relief from
wearing a linen turban on their heads (previously shaved) frequently wet with
cold vinegar; and from affusions of cold water over their heads and shoulders,
than from warm fomentations.

So soon as the activity of the pulse, heat of the skin, and praecordial
anxiety are moderated, the cortex and elexir of vitriol are the most certain
remedies that can be employed, with the addition of wine, especially claret, in
such quantities as to prevent the vital powers from sinking too much.

Should the vigor of the system, the anxiety and restlessness suddenly
increase, immediate recourse should be had to blisters, to the unlimitted use
of strong Madeira wine, volatile salts, and every other cordial and exciting
power that can be devised, provided there be no haemorrhagy.


The early exhibition of half a grain of tartar emetic every half hour, in
barley water or camomile tea, till it operates either upwards or downwards,
succeeded next day by a mild purgative occasionally repeated, a sudorific
anodyne at night, with copious dilution, for the purpose of promoting a free
perspiration, generally affords some alleviation of the most distressing
symptoms. The patient, if his stomach will admit and retain it, may also take a
spoonful of camphorated vinegar, or a solution of salt of tartar in lime juice,
in a draught of barley water or gruel, every two hours, rather cold than warm,
and should drink copiously of lime juice, or tamarind beverage, to encourage
perspiration; his feet and hands being at the same time frequently immersed in,
or fomented with, clothes dipped in cool vinegar and water, and wiped very dry
with a warm cloth; his body and bed linen to be changed regularly twice a day,
previously immersed in vinegar, and afterward gradually dried, so as to be
perfectly free from moisture. His bed to be in the middle of the floor, without
curtains, all the windows, as well as the doors of the chamber to be kept open,
and where practicable, he should be removed to the high lands in the country,
upon the first attack of the disease. Perhaps lying in a tent placed in a dry
verdant field would be preferable to the most spacious chamber.

So soon as the violent determination to the head is diminished, which may be
known by the abatement in the action of the carotid and temporal arteries, the
patient may take every night at bed time, half a grain of tartar emetic, mixed
in a peppermint or cinnamon draught, with 25 drops of laudanum, and 2 drachms
or 3 of acetated ammonia, increasing or diminishing the proportion of the
laudanum, according to circumstances. This composition has generally the most
pleasing effect in procuring rest, and promoting perspiration, particularly
when the impetus of the blood in the vessels of the head is moderate.

WHEN the propensity to puke in the early period of the disease is urgent, it
may frequently be relieved by giving six or eight grains of calomel For this
method of exhibiting mercurial purgatives I am indebted to the writings of Dr.
Clarke of New Castle.
combined with one or two grains of solid opium (made into a bolus with common
syrup) every three or four hours, till it produces a copious discharge from the
intestines; repeating the anodyne in an effervescing neutral mixture at bed
time.

IF notwithstanding the use of these means the disease does not give way, but
on the contrary the patient's strength evidently declines, or sooner if the
activity of the pulse is considerably reduced, recourse should be had to
blisters; one to be applied between the shoulders, and two to the legs. The
sudorific anodyne should also be given at night, and the red bark should be
exhibited in as large doses as the stomach can be made to retain it, and in
substance if possible. Wine should also now be exhibited (and not before)
beginning with a small quantity, and gradually increasing it as it is found to
agree. When it aggravates the pain in the head, and distressing anguish at the
breast, it should be diminished or discontinued for a time. The elixir of
vitriol has been exhibited in some cases from the beginning, with evident
benefit.


IF the pulse becomes feeble, or the throbbing of the arteries in the neck and
temples, languid, the stomach irritable, and disposed to reject every thing, a
cataplasm of mustard and vinegar should be applied warm to the stomach and
feet, and occasionally repeated. At the same time the bark and wine, or where
wine disagrees, the bark mixed with a strong peppermint julep, with the
addition of a small quantity of thebaic tincture should be almost constantly
given When the bark disagrees, the best substitute is elixir vitriol given to
the quantity of 20 drops in a cold infu^ion of the bark every hour.
.

WINE and volatiles, as well as large doses of opium, given at the commencement
of the disease, have proved highly injurious, and appear, in some instances, to
have occasioned, or at least to have increased the profuse haemorrhages from
the nose. But elixir of vitriol has produced more salutary effects.

WINE and volatiles under such circumstances, appear to render the action of
the system disproportioned to its state of power, for there must be a certain
degree of strength, to bear the action excited by stimulating and cordial
medicines, and regimen: For nothing is more pernicious, or even fatal, than
that any part or function should be forced to make exertions incompatible with
its strength; and there is the more danger of ill-timed remedies in the present
fever, as with the state of weakness there is conjoined a state of excessive
irritability for the first two or three days.

In the latter stage of this fever, at which time the most common symptoms are
great weakness, restlessness, anxiety and impaired sensibility, nothing seemed
to retard the fatal event so effectually, as a volatile aromatic julep, with
the addition of laudanum and the essence of peppermint and the moderate use of
claret or port wine.

EVERY case where the skin became yellow, and the countenance appeared
cadaverous, has hitherto proved mortal.

I not this the same as the synochus of Dr. Cullen? The treatment which has
succeeded best seems to indicate that it is.

WHEN treating of the synochus, Dr. Cullen expresses himself in the following
terms: "In the synochus a violent reaction and phlogistic diathesis appear, and
prevail during some part of the course of the disease; while at the same time,
these circumstances do not constitute the principal part of the disease, nor
are to be expected to continue during the whole course of it; and it is well
known, that, in many cases, the state of violent reaction is to be succeeded
sooner or later, by a state of debility, from the excess of which the danger of
the disease is chiefly to arise. It is therefore necessary, that in many cases
blood letting is to be avoided; and even although during the inflammatory state
of the disease, it may be proper, it will be necessary to take care that the
evacuation be not so large as to increase the state of debility which is to
follow."

THE fever however which I have been describing, differs from the synochus of
Doctor Cullen, in the time of its duration, as well as in the violence of its
symptoms. "It is rare," says that great reformer of medicine, "in this climate
[Scotland] that cases either of typhus or synochus, terminate before the
eleventh day; and when they do terminate on this day, it is for the most part
fatally.

WHEN they are protracted beyond this time, I have very constantly found that
their terminations were upon the 14th, 17th, or 20th day."

Cullen's first lines, vol. 1st. SINCE the above was written, I have taken
particular pains to investigate the origin of the fever, described in the
preceding pages, and have discovered that the first case of it occurred at
Richard Dennie's, who kept a lodging-house in Water-street, nearly opposite to
Dr. Hodge's. A man and his wife of the name of Parkinson, passengers in the
brig Ann and Mary, from Dublin, took lodgings there the latter end of June.
They had one Englishman lodging with them at that time. Two young Frenchmen
afterward took lodgings in the same house. The rest of the family consisted of
Richard Parkinson, his wife and two daughters. On the 3d. of August Dr.
Cathrall visited Mrs. Parkinson, laboring under a highly malignant fever, as
will appear by the annexed letter.

ON the 4th of the same month, Dr. Physic, at the request of the overseers,
visited the Englishman, who died suddenly the same night. The next day he
opened the body, but could discover nothing except some derangement in the
colon and vessica fellis, that could lead to a discovery of the nature of the
disease or the cause of his death. On opening his head, he found the vessels of
the brain uncommonly distended, and turgid with blood.

MRS. PARKINSON died on the 7th of August. One of the French lads was taken ill
soon after Mrs. Parkinson -- was attended by a French physician who lodged at
Mrs. Sage's in Front-street: but I was not able to ascertain the day of his
death.

SOON after the death of the French lad, Mr. Dennie was attacked by the fever,
and his wife two days after. They were both buried the same day -- He survived
the attack seven, and she only five days.

MRS. PARKINSON's husband, and Mr. Dennie's two daughters escaped the
infection, but the other French lad who took fresh lodgings higher up
Water-street, died a few days after.

ONE of the young women from whom I received the most circumstantial part of
the above account, now resides at Dr. Hodge's who has humanely afforded her and
her sister an asylum in their distress.

THE most material parts of the above circumstances have also been confirmed by
the Rev. Mr. Keating.

TWO of the family next door to the lodging-house, died soon after of the same
complaint. Dr. Hodge's maidservant, a young woman from the country, and his
little daughter, have also died since of the same complaint; and a number of
others in the same neighborhood.

IT is also said, but for this I cannot vouch, that a carpenter in Kensington,
who assisted in breaking open the sheathing of the cabin of Mr. Steinmetz's
brig, which had 117 French West-Indians on board, was soon after attacked with
feverish symptoms; of which he died in a few days; and that several Danish
sailors have been affected by the same disease at Kensington.

THAT the disease made its first appearance in the house already mentioned, is
clearly established; but whether it was imported and introduced there by the
Irish family, or by the French lads, or was generated there, I have not been
able to collect a sufficiency of evidence to determine.

September 3d. 1793.
Copy of a Letter from Dr. Cathrall.
In compliance with your request, I now send you the case of Mrs. P.
transcribed from my Journal.

AUGUST 3d. 1793, Mrs. P. was taken chilly, succeeded by violent pain in the
head and back, increase of heat, much thirst, etc. On the morning of the 4th I
saw her, found her complaining of great sickness at stomach, with frequent
vomiting, tightness across the lower part of the chest, attended with heavy
sighing, bowels costive, tongue dry and black, particularly in the middle, and
brown toward the edges; heat and thirst much augmented, pulse quick and
feeble, urine small in quantity, and of a high color. -- 5th. Rested ill last
night; symptoms much as yesterday, excepting, has had several very offensive
stools. -- 6th. Has been very delirious during the night, but rational at
present; still vomits every substance received into the stomach; a number of
crimson colored spots appeared on her neck, breast, and arms; has frequent
stools which are very putrid; tongue much cleaner than before; pulse slower;
heat diminished; pain in the head and back very considerable -- 7th. Passed a
very restless night, though not delirious; tongue black; spots of a livid
color, attended with slight yellowness of the skin; eyes heavy, with dimness
of vision; complains of much soreness of the throat, and difficulty in
swallowing. Diarrhoea and vomiting continue; is now delirious, accompanied with
singultus, etc. Died at 11 at night.

I am, etc. J. CATHRALL.

IT appears from authentic documents, that the same kind of fever as the one
which I have described in the preceding pages, has been prevalent in
Philadelphia at two different periods. The first, A. D. 1740; supposed to have
been introduced by means of a quantity of wearing apparel brought in a trunk
from Barbados, belonging to a gentleman who died of it in that Island.

THE second time of its appearance was A. D. 1762, introduced by a mariner, who
arrived sick with it from the Havanna, and communicated it to the family where
he lodged; from whence it spread rapidly from house to house as families had
intercourse with one another.

ACCORDING to the notes of Dr. Redman, the worthy President of the Philadelphia
College of Physicians (who has favored me with the privilege of making use of
them) it made its appearance the latter end of August of the year last
mentioned. About the 20th or 25th of September, its progress seems to have
arrived to its height. From the 27th it gradually declined, so that by the 10th
of October, instead of 18 or 20 patients of a day, which Dr. Redman had before
attended in it, he had now only two or three.

THE fever at that period was circumscribed between Pine-street, northerly, and
three or four squares from thence southerly, and extended from Water-street, to
Third or Fourth-street westerly. Its first and greatest ravages were about the
New Market, which lay near the source of the contagion. The fever as it
appeared at that time, is thus described by Dr. Redman in a communication just
presented to, and read in the College of Physicians.

THE patients were generally seized with a sudden and severe pain in the head
and eye balls, which frequently appeared a little inflamed, or had a reddish
cast, great pain in the back and limbs, and much dejection of spirits. A sick
stomach generally attended, but in various degrees of violence, with frequent
vomiting, more or less of green or yellowbile, and was distinguished from the
cholera morbus by not having a purging with it. There was also a kind of
cardialgia, or burning heat about the scrobiculus cordis, with great
oppression; but if I remember right, not much pain like a colic; nor do I
recollect any chill generally preceding the above symptoms -- however, it might
be with some. The skin was dry with a disagreeable burning heat in it, sensible
to the hand of others. The tongue was not very dry at first, but rather moist,
and covered with whitish mucus. The pulse was not generally either full or
tense, but very quick in the beginning, by which the degree of fever was
chiefly designated. Yet in some persons previously very plethoric from high
living and other circumstances, some fullness without tension was observed in
the pulse in the first stage; after which in many, the pulse became so moderate
in every respect, as to be scarcely distinguishable from that of a person in
health. Though very restless and often tossing about, or changing position from
oppression at the praecordia, I think they were but seldom very delirious; but
if the disease continued to increase, and resist the power of medicines, they
rather grew comatose, which was a bad symptom, and generally continued till
death, unless, the black vomiting came on and occasionally roused them. But
even those who were comatose, when roused appeared quite sensible, though not
capable of preserving a regular connection of ideas on any one subject for any
length of time. They soon became yellow in their eyes and skin universally,
which became extreme in some before, and in almost all after death: and in
those that recovered, it continued during the whole convalescent state, and in
some, a great part of the cuticle peeled off.

"WHEN the disease terminated fatally, it was generally on the 4th, 5th or 6th
day; some few later; but after the 7th day, or even sooner if the pulse became
much calmer and slower without a coma, and the patient inclined to a natural
easy sleep, though short, with a moist skin and tongue, etc. we were encouraged
to hope, and promise much, and generally succeeded in our prognostications,"
etc.

THE method of treatment adopted by the most sagacious physicians at that time
in the city, was nearly similar to that recommended in the text of the
preceding pages; except that they were more reserved in the use of emetics, but
more liberal in that of saline cathartics. They never employed blisters except
when the patients were affected with coma, and then seldom with much benefit.

Sept. 4, 1793.
THE END.

